[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte1-7) [Next](tte2-001)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span id="page_83">p. 83</span>

### INTRODUCTION TO THE TALES AND TRADITIONS.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

T<span class="small">HE</span> tales and traditions, the relation of
which forms one of the principal amusements and entertainments of the
Greenlanders, appear to be instructive, and not without signification in
regard to the study of the origin and development of traditions in
general.

Firstly, it must be observed that the natives themselves divide their
tales into two classes—the ancient tales, called **oĸalugtuat** (plural
of **oĸalugtuaĸ**), and the more recent ones, called **oĸalualârutit**
(plural of **oĸalualârut**). The first kind may be more or less
considered the property of the whole nation, at least of the greater
part of its tribes; while the tales included under the second are, on
the other hand, limited to certain parts of the country, or even to
certain people related to each other, thus presenting the character of
family records. The Eskimo are, more than any other nation, spread over
a wide extent of country, only occupied by themselves, and thus are
little acted upon by alien settlers. The inhabitants of their extreme
western bounds, with their native means of transport, would have to
traverse somewhere about five thousand miles before reaching the
dwellings of their countrymen in the farthest east, <span
id="page_84">p. 84</span> and in this journey would meet only with
scanty little bands of their own tribes settled here and there,
generally consisting of less than a hundred souls. Their little hamlets
are severed from each other by desolate tracts of ten to twenty—nay,
even hundreds of miles. Though there is every probability that the
various tribes of these vast regions have originated from one common
home, their present intercourse is very limited; and it may without
exaggeration be asserted that the inhabitants of Greenland and Labrador,
and those of the shores of Behring Strait, cannot in any likelihood have
communicated with each other for a thousand years or more, nor have they
any idea of their mutual existence.<span
id="page_84_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_84_note_1) In accordance with this
isolation, a closer study of the traditions will also show how wide a
space of time must be supposed to exist between the origin of the two
classes of tales. The greater part of the ancient tales probably date
from a far remoter period than one thousand years; the invention of the
more recent traditions, on the other hand, must be supposed in most
cases not even to go back so far as two hundred years, and they chiefly
comprise events concerning families living in the very district where
they are told. It may, however, be taken for granted, that in days of
yore such new tales may have appeared at any time; but after a short
existence they were gradually forgotten, giving place to others, and so
on, continuously alternating during the lapse of ages: while the ancient
tales have been preserved unchanged, like some precious heirlooms which
it would have been sacrilege to have touched. The definition we have
here tried to give of the two classes is, however, by no means
exhaustive, nor without exceptions. In our collection will be found
stories which undoubtedly must have originated between the two <span
id="page_85">p. 85</span> periods described, and therefore should form
an intermediate or exceptional class, if the division were to be
complete and fully carried out. There are, moreover, many others which
we are at a loss how to classify.

The art of story-telling is in Greenland practised by certain persons
specially gifted in this respect; and among a hundred people there may
generally be found one or two particularly favoured with the art of the
*raconteur*, besides several less tolerable narrators. The art requires
the ancient tales to be related as nearly as possible in the words of
the original version, with only a few arbitrary reiterations, and
otherwise only varied according to the individual talents of the
narrator, as to the mode of recitation, gesture, &c. The only real
discretionary power allowed by the audience to the narrator is the
insertion of a few peculiar passages from some other traditions; but
even in that case no alteration of these original or elementary
materials used in the composition of tales is admissible. Generally,
even the smallest deviation from the original version will be taken
notice of and corrected, if any intelligent person happens to be
present. This circumstance accounts for their existence in an unaltered
shape through ages; for had there been the slightest tendency to
variation on the part of the narrator, or relish for it on that of the
audience, every similarity of these tales, told in such widely-separated
countries, would certainly have been lost in the course of centuries. It
would also appear that it is the same narrators who compose the more
recent stories by picking up the occurrences and adventures of their
latest ancestors, handed down occasionally by some old members of the
family, and connecting and embellishing them by a large addition of the
supernatural, for which purpose resort is always had to the same
traditional and mystical elements of the ancient folk-lore. Undoubtedly
the ancient tales have originally been invented in a similar way, but at
a time when the <span id="page_86">p. 86</span> different tribes were
living in closer connection with each other and perhaps endowed with
greater originality. It is to be supposed that the real or principal
traditions, with the power of continuance through many centuries, are
only produced after long intervals, and at certain periods peculiarly
qualified for their production. As regards the Greenlanders, probably a
new era of this kind may have arisen from the time of their being
Christianised, many of the recent tales exhibiting considerable
similarity to Christian legends. The elementary parts used in composing
all kinds of tales being very numerous, it may be seen from the
collection itself that, notwithstanding the stability and limited number
of the ancient tales, the narrators, by help of the interpolations
mentioned, and by their power of manufacturing modern tales, possess
means for an almost unlimited variety at their story-telling
entertainments.

The traditional tales, or rather the traditional elements of the ancient
as well as the more recent tales, would never have been able to
withstand the influence of centuries among these scattered and isolated
bands if they had not been one of the most important means of
maintaining their national life. Generally, all sorts of mythical
traditions are looked upon chiefly as materials to aid in the search for
historical facts. But with regard to a stage of culture like that of the
Greenland Eskimo before their conversion to Christianity,<span
id="page_86_fr_1"></span>[1](#page_86_note_1) the traditions in reality
may be said to comprise the whole national store of intellectual or
moral property—viz., religion, science, and poetry at once, these
manifestations of culture being but very imperfectly represented
separately in a more specialised form.

In the first place, the traditions are to be considered as including a
system of religion and morals as well as of laws and rules for social
life. Such knowledge as <span id="page_87">p. 87</span> they convey is
unconsciously imbibed by the native from his earliest childhood through
listening to the story-tellers, exactly as a child learns to speak. And
when the Greenlander nowadays is in doubt about any question regarding
the superstitions or customs of his ancestors, he will try to find an
answer by looking for some sample out of his tales, ancient or modern,
the latter also containing elementary parts of ancient origin kept up in
this manner by succeeding generations. The information used for our
introductory remarks has also been chiefly derived from this source.

Ethnologists and travellers will find themselves mistaken if they expect
to discover traditions that might supply direct information regarding
the origin and history of the Eskimo. The more recent tales only may be
said to include such real historical material, and that merely relating
to family matters and events going back as far as four or six
generations. The author has often made inquiries among the natives about
events that have taken place two or three hundred years ago, and more
especially about such occurrences as might be supposed to have impressed
themselves deepest upon the memory of the population,—as, for instance,
the first arrival of European ships, or even the terrible smallpox
epidemic of comparatively recent date—viz., 1733-34. But these attempts
have been almost entirely without result; and, as already said, the
tales dating from an intermediate period are either very scanty, or at
least must be supposed devoid of any historical interest. It may be
considered certain that the present tribes of the nation have not the
remotest idea of their common original home, nor of the migrations and
rovings by which their ancestors have peopled the territories now
occupied by them. Still, it may be supposed that at least a part of
their oldest tales have originated in true historical events—are, in a
word, "myths of observation;" but in order to extract any reliable
historical information <span id="page_88">p. 88</span> from this source,
the following precautions have to be observed:—

Firstly, it not unfrequently seems that a series of occurrences
happening within a limited period of time, and bearing some resemblance
to each other, have in various cases been reduced to a single record
which, so to speak, represents them all in one. This is confirmed by one
of the few stories which undoubtedly dates from a period intermediate
between ancient and modern times. When the Eskimo invaded the southern
part of Greenland, they soon commenced hostilities with the ancient
Scandinavian settlers, who were at length defeated, or totally
disappeared. Among the generations immediately succeeding these events,
there must doubtless have existed several traditions about the numerous
feuds which must be supposed to have occurred between the parties; but
by-and-by they were forgotten, with the exception of one or two which
had perhaps been preferred to the rest, and listened to with most
satisfaction. Of these, two tales still remain. The most remarkable one
is now claimed as belonging to both the districts in which the ruins of
the old colonies are found, each of which claims to be the homestead of
the heroes mentioned in the tale. Among the older and most widely-spread
tales, we need only refer to one treating of a man who wished to cross
the frozen ocean, and for this purpose caught different wild beasts,
which he trained to pull his sledge. It is not improbable that this
story represents a whole series of similar tales, originating from the
period when the Eskimo got their first dogs by domesticating some
species of wild animal, such as the wolf.

Next, it must be remembered that no tale could maintain its existence
unless it was entertaining to the audiences to whom it was related from
time to time, and especially unless it was easy to comprehend without
any elaborate explanation. For this purpose <span id="page_89">p.
89</span> the tales had to be localised, or adapted to the different
countries in which the tribes in course of time came to settle down,
carrying their original traditions with them—as, for instance, when told
in Greenland, their heroes were described as inhabitants not only of
Greenland, but even of various districts of the country, according to
the location of the narrator and his listeners. And, moreover, when
foreign nations and animals unknown in Greenland happened to be
mentioned in the ancient tales, they were generally, as time went on,
transformed into supernatural beings, with which the imagination of the
Greenlanders forthwith peopled the vast interior of their land, as well
as the adjacent sea.

Besides religion and history, these traditional tales also represent the
poetry of the inhabitants of the frozen North; and this element has
mainly inspired their listeners with that love for them which still
continues. They present a true picture of what is likely to have formed
the principal objects of the people's imagination, of what is considered
great and delightful on one side, and hateful and dreadful on the other,
in human life as well as in nature. They continually picture to us the
great struggle for existence, which has caused personal courage and
strength to be acknowledged and admired as the first condition of
happiness; and *per contra*, the idea of improving and securing the
comforts of life by the aid of property is only very scantily developed
in them. Not even to the almost universal sentiment of love do we find
the poetry of Greenland affording much room. No wonder that such a
scarcity of objects, and such simplicity of passions and feelings in
these details of human life, render them uniform and rather fatiguing to
us; but, on the other hand, we cannot but admit that their inventors
have exhibited a peculiar skill in producing effect and variety with the
help of such very scanty materials. Closer examination will scarcely
fail <span id="page_90">p. 90</span> to discover real poetical feeling
in their way of causing the highest perfection to be developed from the
very smallest beginnings, as well as in their art of holding forth the
dangers on one side and the means of overcoming them on the other, just
as it might suit the narrator's object of arresting the attention of
their audience. The poetical elements are also closely connected with
the religious contents, and many religious opinions may further be
regarded as emblematical or poetical. Such, for example, are expressions
for certain ideas—such as, for instance, certain human qualities, the
voice of conscience, an invisible ruling justice, and several powers of
nature in their relation to mankind. A tendency to figurative expression
is also shown in their habit of representing mankind in different stages
of sexes and ages as personifications of certain common human qualities.
For instance, the old bachelors always represent some ridiculous oddity;
the wife is in general represented as with no care but of providing for
her household, or how best she can economise; the poor widow is
represented as especially excelling in benevolence and mercy; a band of
five brothers, generally called "a lot of" brothers or men, represent
haughtiness and brutality, and "the middlemost" of them, moreover, mean
envy.

The materials upon which the author has founded this collection have
been written down partly by natives, partly by Europeans, from the
verbal recital of the natives, and in the latter case to a large extent
by the author himself. The manuscripts collected in this manner amounted
to upwards of five hundred sheets or two thousand pages, and could be
referred to about fifty native narrators or story-tellers. Several
difficulties were met with in collecting these materials. The mode most
generally adopted by travellers when making inquiries among a so-called
barbarous or foreign people about their traditions is that of selecting
certain facts as subjects <span id="page_91">p. 91</span> for
questioning them upon, such as how their country was originally peopled,
if their first ancestors came from the West or from the East, if they
happened to know anything about a great deluge, &c. By this mode of
inquiry the natives most likely, finding that they have no real
information to offer, in order to satisfy the questioner and get rid of
the trouble he causes them, will be influenced in their answers chiefly
by what they think the questioner would best like to hear. The only way
to acquire the information wanted is simply to make the natives relate
what forms the principal subject of the stories told at their own
assemblies. To make them understand that this was all we desired caused,
however, the first difficulty. The next arose from their fear of being
accused of heathenish superstition by revealing those superstitious
tales to strangers. In consequence of these hindrances, several
Europeans whom the author had specially requested to make investigations
among the natives with whom they lived, came to the erroneous conclusion
that no traditions at all, or only the most trifling ones, existed in
the country. Lastly, it may easily be imagined that part of the
manuscripts forwarded to him were in an incomplete and exceedingly
illegible condition—some of them, indeed, conveying no meaning whatever.

The principal tales have for the most part been collated from more than
one version, and all the variations have been most carefully examined
and compared for the purpose of composing a text such as might agree
best with the supposed original and most popular mode of telling the
same story. In the first and principal part of the collection, the tales
are in general to be considered as a nearly literal rendering of the
verbal narratives, with only the omission of the more arbitrary
reiterations and interpolations already referred to.

The natives who have contributed to this collection <span
id="page_92">p. 92</span> were inhabitants of the following parts of
Eskimo-land:—

South Greenland; or the west coast of Greenland up to 67° N.L.

North Greenland, or the same coast from 67° up to 74° N.L.

East Greenland, and

Labrador.

Of these regions South Greenland, in which the author chiefly resided,
has supplied the lion's share; while, on the contrary, the east coast
has furnished us with only a few tales, which are not even written down
in that part of the country, but were picked up on the west coast from
east-coast people who had wandered round Cape Farewell into the Danish
settlement. From Labrador only sixteen tales have been obtained, from
materials written down by Moravian missionaries resident in that country
in the years 1861-63, and one half of those are undoubtedly identical
with Greenland tales, some passages of them even exhibiting the most
striking verbal conformity. Besides the tales written down in North
Greenland in 1861-63, the author was furnished with a very valuable
collection written down by natives there in the years 1823-28, but never
published.

It has generally been an easy task to make out whether the written
relations had the character of true folk-lore, or might have been of
foreign origin—*i.e.*,either from European sources or to be traced to
mere individual invention. Only a few instances of this still remain
doubtful.

The entire collection of manuscripts consisted of more than five hundred
tales, which, however, by uniting those which were judged to be
identical, have been diminished to less than three hundred. Of that
number, in this edition a great many have been omitted or given in an
abridged form, as being more or less of only local interest.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-001)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Footnotes

<span id="footnotes_page_84">p. 84</span>

<span id="page_84_note_1"></span>[1](#page_84_fr_1) When Dr Kane first
visited the small tribe of Eskimo living in Smith's Sound, they were
apparently astonished to find that they were not the only people on the
face of the earth.

<span id="footnotes_page_86">p. 86</span>

<span id="page_86_note_1"></span>[1](#page_86_fr_1) The last pagan died
in Danish Greenland only a few years ago.

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
