[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-008) [Next](tte2-010.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### 9. THE BROTHERS VISIT THEIR SISTER.

<span class="small">\[This tale is very popular in Greenland. Traces of
it are also found mixed up with other tales from Greenland, and with one
from Labrador. Here the text is very nearly a literal translation from a
single manuscript, by a native of South Greenland.\]</span>

A MAN had three children; the eldest was a daughter. She married a man
from a far-away place in the south while her brothers were still little
children. In their boyhood they were not aware of their having a sister,
because their father purposely never mentioned it to them. At last they
had become quite grown up, and began to catch seals, and still they had
never heard of their sister, until one day the mother said, "I think ye
don't even know that ye have got a sister!" Upon which they immediately
began asking about her place of abode; to which the mother replied,
"Look there; do you see the high mountains yonder to the south of us?
Beyond these is the winter station of your sister, whose hair, strange
to say, is quite white on one side. However, ye <span id="page_129">p.
129</span> must not think of going there, for the people she is living
among are all cannibals." On hearing this the eldest brother changed his
mind, and gave up the idea of going; but the younger one still longed as
much as before to see his sister. The mother tried to dissuade him, but
he wanted to go more than ever. The following day the brothers set out
on their journey, but the parents warned them, saying, "If ye reach the
country yonder in the day-time ye must wait the fall of night, and not
go near them until they are all asleep, lest ye should be murdered by
them." And when they had gone away the parents gave them up for lost.
The travellers reached the high mountains in the south, and began to
examine the land below, in order to discover houses. At length the
eldest brother said, "When people are found to be living at the foot of
the mountains, the ravens will be sure to be soaring in the air above."
At last they observed a craggy hill, above which a great number of
ravens were flying. The brothers now turned away from the frozen sea and
made for the shore, where they at length secured their sledges, and
waited the fall of night. But when it had become quite dark, and when
they supposed the inhabitants to have gone to bed, they again drew
nearer. They were now in sight of many houses, the first of which had
three windows; and having gone close up to it, they cautiously mounted
the roof and looked down the vent-hole; and saw a nasty-looking man
sitting in front of the lamp beside his wife, who seemed in the act of
picking the lice off him, and who appeared to be quite white on one side
of her head. The eldest brother now got up and said, "Were we not told
that our sister was to be white-haired on one side of her head? do come
and see!" The younger brother now looked down, and perceiving her,
exclaimed in great consternation, "Why, that must surely be our sister
sitting down there! Just spit down through the hole, before the lamp,
and when they notice that, some one will probably <span id="page_130">p.
130</span> come out." The moment he spat down, the woman gave the man a
push, and said, "Somebody must have come from afar to see us; do make
haste and get up!" On which he instantly rose, took up his bow, and went
outside. When they saw him emerge from the house-passage, carrying the
bow ready bent in his hand, the eldest brother accosted him before he
had set eyes upon them, saying, "We have come here to visit our sister,
and have been told that she is quite white on one side of her head." The
other answered him in a whisper, "Your sister is within; please go in."
On entering he at once played the part of a brother-in-law to them, and
ordered a meal to be prepared. The wife put on her boots, and told some
of the children to assist her; and the guests soon understood that the
only housemates of their sister were her children. The beams for
boot-drying were hung all over with boots and skin-stockings, according
to their several sizes, the biggest outermost. Sometime afterwards a
large tub of berries mingled with blubber was set before them, and their
sister asked them to partake of the meal. The brothers were almost
beginning to feel at ease, and were just going to help themselves, when
suddenly, in the bottom of the tub, they caught sight of a human hand,
cut off at the wrist, clutching the berries, and very much shrunk. They
merely said, "We don't eat such food as this;" but she only drew the tub
closer to herself, and began to eat along with the children. When she
took hold of the hand, and had taken a bite of the thumb, the children
all cried, "Mother, do let us have some too!" The eldest brother now got
up, and went close beside her, saying, "Hast thou also turned cannibal?"
and giving her husband a pull, she answered, "This nasty fellow has made
me one." Meanwhile the brother-in-law ordered something separate to be
cooked for them on the lamp, but cautiously added, "Mind ye don't let it
burn <span id="page_131">p. 131</span> too high, lest our neighbours
should detect us, and make a row about it." Suspending the pot above the
lamp, and at the same time addressing her brothers, his wife now put in,
"When our people caught a whale last winter, and it was brought ashore
to be cut up and flensed, a man happened to have a fall, and was cut up
with it." Before the meal was ready the host whispered to his children,
"Go out and cut asunder all the lashings of our neighbours' sledges, but
beware of making a noise." The children all went out immediately, and
when they came back he inquired of them, "Have ye done as I told ye to
all of them?" "Yes," they answered, "we have." But still they had
forgotten one of them. When the meat was boiled, and they had commenced
eating, the host said, "As soon as ye have finished I shall accompany
you a little way off; but as soon as ye have left the mainland I'll give
a shout, and ye'll just see what will happen." On their departure, after
supper, he addressed them, saying, "Ye now know our place of abode; do
come back and visit your sister." Upon which he saw them off in their
sledges, and away they fled; but as soon as they turned out upon the ice
he gave a great shout, and cried out aloud, "The visitors are setting
off—the visitors are going to leave!" and when they looked around, the
place was black with people, crowding the doorways and windows. Some had
just caught hold of their clothes, and others were quite naked, and in
this state they all hastened off to their sledges; but when they were
about to start, the sledges all broke down. Meanwhile the travellers had
taken fright, and urged on their dogs as fast as possible; but turning
round they perceived one sledge to be following them, and apparently
gaining upon them. The brother-in-law having likewise observed it,
hastened to pursue it, and killed the driver, besides a number of the
other people, and afterwards filled his sledge with human limbs; and
thus <span id="page_132">p. 132</span> freighted, he returned to his
house. But the brothers reached home late at night, and reported how
their sister had turned a cannibal, and how they had barely escaped
death through the aid of their brother-in-law. But they never saw their
sister again.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-010.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
