[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-110) [Next](tte2-112.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

111\. S<span class="small">INGAJUK AND HIS</span> D<span
class="small">ESCENDANTS</span>.—Singajuk was a celebrated hunter living
in Kangek (near Godthaab). His wife miscarried, and brought forth a poor
little wretch of a child, that was swaddled in the skin of an
eider-duck, and had to be fostered with the utmost care to keep it
alive. This child was called Mangilak, and became one of the most
powerful of men. His first deed was killing an ingnersuak. Afterwards he
was once caught in a gale of wind at sea, but espying a solitary spot of
smooth water and a gull swimming in it, by dint of listening to its
voice he learned a spell for procuring a calm; and from that time he was
not to be equalled in kayaking. His mother then persuaded him to marry,
and he took a wife, who, however, shortly afterwards died. Being almost
an angakok, he used to visit her grave and talk with the deceased, and
on one occasion she gave him a mussel-shell containing a drink to endow
him with angakok wisdom. Mangilak married a second wife, and got a son,
called Akajarok, whose daughter became the grandmother of the man who
related this story (to the author). Akajarok died a Christian. Mangilak
also was baptised, and named Moses, but was too full of angakok wisdom
to become more than a nominal Christian.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-112.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
