[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-138) [Next](tte2-140)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

139\. I<span class="small">SIGARSIGAK AND HIS</span> S<span
class="small">ISTER</span> were frightened from home by the angakok
tricks of their mother, and fled to the south, travelling on for three
years in order to reach the end (of the land ?). Meanwhile, Isigarsigak
perceived his stomach to swell up, so as to make him unfit for kayaking.
In crossing a frozen firth, he once saw two ravens coming from the
interior, which as they came nearer looked like women hurrying towards
the sea; and having caught two seals, they took them on their shoulders
and hastened back to the inland. Guided by them, Isigarsigak came to a
house, where an old woman offered to cure his stomach. She then examined
him by *head-lifting*, and found out that on leaving his mother he had
forgotten some hunting-bladders. Cutting open his stomach she brought
forth the bladders, which would otherwise have made him burst, she said,
if they had been allowed to remain much longer. At that instant a woman
appeared at the entrance, armed with a knife; and they warned him to
make haste if he would <span id="page_468">p. 468</span> escape her,
because it was she who had killed the men of the house. Having returned
safely to his sister, he took a fancy to trace the passage of the birds
in autumn. He travelled in his kayak until the sky became so low that he
could reach it with his paddle-oar. It had two large holes, beyond which
he discovered a sea, and was obliged to turn back.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-140)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
