[Sacred-Texts](../../../index.md) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index.md)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-086) [Next](tte2-088.md)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

<span class="small">\[N<span class="small">OTE</span>.—Of the following
Tales only the principal parts have been selected, and are given here in
a very fragmentary form.\]</span>

87\. S<span class="small">ANGIAK, OR</span> N<span
class="small">ERNGAJORAK</span>.—A man whose wife could beget no
children was advised by an old wise man to set off in his kayak, and go
out to the open sea, and when he heard a voice like that of a child
crying, he was to proceed in that direction, and would then find a worm,
which he was to take home and throw upon the body of his wife. Having
done it, the worm disappeared in the body of his wife, who soon gave
birth to a son, whom they called Sangiak. While he was yet a small
child, he asked his father for a kayak; and when following his father
out to sea, he surprised him by hitting two seals, though he only threw
his harpoon once. He acquired the art of always taking the whole flock
of seals by only throwing at one of them. At last his father hardly knew
how to bring home all the seals he captured. Once Sangiak happened to
get acquainted with another seal-hunter, who could also <span
id="page_438">p. 438</span> take two seals at a time, but only by means
of two harpoons, which he threw one with each hand at once. This
double-armed kayaker being much beloved by his companions, Sangiak grew
envious of him; and once when he went out alone with him to sea, he
picked a quarrel with him, and killed him. He then told his father what
had happened, and that he would give the relatives of the double-armed
notice of the murder. The relatives would fain have avenged it; but he
took flight in his kayak, which, though his enemies had cut holes in its
bottom, did not sink. Having filled his kayak with stones, he stopped
the holes with them, and returned to his father safe and sound.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-088.md)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
