[Sacred-Texts](../../../index) [Native
American](../../index) [Inuit](../index)  
[Index](index) [Previous](tte2-098) [Next](tte2-100)

------------------------------------------------------------------------

99\. A<span class="small">MONG THE LAST</span> A<span
class="small">NGAKUT AT</span> K<span
class="small">ANGERDLUGSUATSIAK</span> (Greenland) was a man named
Kapiarsuk, and a woman called Avangnanersuak, who every day during the
whole winter used to go out together to catch partridges, but never
brought any home, and never were seen to eat anything at all. At last a
child, who was anxious as to their doings, one day asked leave to
accompany them, and soon observed that they never looked for any
partridges at all; but having come a good way up the country, Kapiarsuak
commenced to strike a flat rock with his staff, and murmuring certain
words, an opening appeared in the ground, out of which they went on
angling and hauling up different kinds of food, allowing the child to
partake of the good fare. On going home they gave it a small fish to
swallow, after which it lost all remembrance of what it had seen. Not
until he was full grown, many years after, did he suddenly recollect the
event and narrate it.

Another angakok of the same place, named Kuvatsiak, had two brothers,
Usuinak and Igpak, of whom the former, having gone out kayaking, did not
return, and entirely disappeared. In the evening they saw the clothes of
the missing brother moving about by themselves. Kuvatsiak forthwith
began to conjure, by means <span id="page_447">p. 447</span> of which he
found out that he had been seized by the ingnersuit. Kuvatsiak had a
dream somewhat like that of Akamalik; and when he began growing old he
often met with his deceased brother out at sea. He observed some black
thing lying on the top of his brother's kayak, who laboured in vain to
rid himself of it, saying that that was the only impediment hindering
him from leaving the under-world people and returning to the land of the
living. When the first missionary came to the country Kuvatsiak had a
dream that induced him to get baptised.

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next](tte2-100)

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 

 
