<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act027)  [Next](rom000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001)

[Acts 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 28:1</span></span>

And when they were escaped,.... From the danger they were exposed to by
shipwreck, and were got safe to land; this is omitted in the Syriac
version:

then they knew that the island was called Melita; an island toward the
African shore, where it is placed both by Pliny (g), and Ptolomy (h); in
which, the latter says, was the city Melita: it lies between Sicily and
Tripolis of Barbary, and is now called Malta: it was famous for the
knights of Rhodes, which are now called the knights of Malta: it has its
name from "to escape", it being formerly a refuge to the Phoenicians,
especially in stormy weather, in their long voyage from Tyre to Gades;
and was indeed a place of escape to the Apostle Paul, and those that
were with him. And perhaps it might be so called from its being a refuge
for pirates; for Cicero (i) says, here pirates used to winter almost
every year, and yet did not spoil the temple of Juno, as Verres did:
though some say it was so called from the great abundance of honey found
in it; for it was a very pleasant and fruitful island, bringing forth
great plenty of wheat, rye, flax, cummin, cotton, figs, wine, roses,
thyme, lavender, and many other sweet and delightful herbs, from whence
bees did gather great plenty of honey. It was, according to Pliny,
distant from Camerina eighty four miles, and from Lilybaeum a hundred
and thirteen; and it is said to be distant from the promontory of Sicily
an hundred miles, though others say sixty; and that it was so far from
Syracuse, which is the next place the apostle came to in this voyage,
was from Africa an hundred and ninety miles. On the east side, a little
from the chief city of it, now called Malta, was a famous temple of
Juno, spoiled by Verres, as before observed; and on the south side
another of Hercules, the ruins of both which are yet to be seen. The
compass of the island is about sixty miles, the length twenty, and the
breadth twelve, and has in it five ports, and about sixty villages.

\(g\) Nat. Hist. l 3. c. 8. (h) Geograph. l. 4. c. 3. (i) Orat. 9. in
Verrem, c. 17.

[Acts 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 28:2</span></span>

And the barbarous people showed us no little kindness,.... The
inhabitants of this island are called barbarians, not from the country
of Barbary, near to which they were; nor so much on account of their
manners, for, though Heathens, they were a civil and cultivated people,
being, as appears from the name of the chief man of the island, under
the Roman government; but because of their language, see [Co1
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#011), it being neither Hebrew, Greek,
nor Latin; for as the inhabitants were originally a colony of the
Phoenicians, they spoke their language; and now though it is inhabited
by such as are called Christians, they speak the Saracen or Arabic
language, and little different from the old Punic or Phoenician
language: however, though the inhabitants could not understand their
language, they understood their case, and were very civil and humane to
them, and showed them extraordinary kindness:

for they kindled a fire; or set fire to a large pile of wood; for a
large fire it must be to be of service to such a number of people, in
such a condition as they were:

and received us everyone: though their number were two hundred
threescore and sixteen;

because of the present rain, and because of the cold; for a violent rain
fell on them, as is usual upon a storm, and much wetted them, so that a
fire was very necessary; and it being winter or near it, it was cold
weather; and especially they having been so long in a storm, and now
shipwrecked; and some having thrown themselves into the sea, and swam to
the island; and others having been obliged to put themselves on boards
and planks, and get ashore, and were no doubt both wet and cold; so that
nothing was more needful and more agreeable to them than a large fire.

[Acts 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 28:3</span></span>

And when Paul had gathered a bundle of sticks,.... Had picked up some
sticks, and put them in a bundle fit for the fire, as everyone was busy
to assist in this extremity; nor did the apostle think such an action
below him, who in all things was a man of great humility and
condescension:

and laid them on the fire; to increase it:

there came a viper out of the heat: a viper is a kind of serpent, which
brings forth its young living, to the number of twenty, only one in a
day, which come forth wrapped up in thin skins, which break on the third
day, and set them at liberty; and so is reckoned among viviparous
animals, from whence it seems to have its name, whereas other serpents
lay eggs and hatch them. It is said (k), that this remarkable reptile
has the biggest and flattest head of all the serpent kind; its usual
length is about half an ell, and its thickness an inch; its snout is not
unlike that of a hog; it has sixteen small immovable teeth in each jaw,
besides two other large, sharp, hooked, hollow, transparent, canine
teeth, situate at each side of the upper jaw, which are those that do
the mischief: these are flexible in their articulation, and are
ordinarily laid flat along the jaw, the animal never raising them but
when it would bite The roots or bases of these teeth, or fangs, are
encompassed with a vesicle or bladder, containing the quantity of a
large drop of a yellow insipid salivous juice.--It has only one row of
teeth, whereas all other serpents have two; its body is not at all
fetid, whereas the inner parts of the bodies of other serpents are
intolerable.--It creeps very slowly, and never leaps like other
serpents, though it is nimble enough to bite when provoked.--Its body is
of two colours, ash coloured or yellow, and the ground speckled with
longish brown spots; the scales under its belly are of the colour of
well polished steel. Its bite is exceeding venomous, and its poison the
most dangerous. Now when this viper here is said to come out of the
heat, the meaning is, that it came out from the sticks, which were laid
upon the fire, being forced from thence by the heat of it: and so the
Syriac version renders it, "there came out of them" (the sticks) "a
viper, because of the heat of the fire"; it lay quiet among the sticks,
among which, and such like things, this creature often lies; but when
the fire began to heat it, it sprung out:

and fastened on his hand; or wrapped itself about his hand: the Syriac
and Arabic versions render it, "bit his hand"; but that does not seem so
likely, since he felt no harm by it; the Ethiopic version, "hung upon
his hand"; which agrees with what follows; nor is it inconsistent with
its wrapping itself about his hand, which is the more proper
signification of the word used.

\(k\) Chambers's Cyclopaedia in the word "Viper".

[Acts 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 28:4</span></span>

And when the barbarians saw the venomous beast,.... The viper is called
"Therion", a beast, it being of the viviparous kind; and hence comes
"Theriaca", or "Venice treacle", the foundation of which composition is
vipers' flesh; and it is called venomous, because it is of all serpents
the most venomous: this when the country people saw

hang on his hand, having wrapped itself about it,

they said among themselves, no doubt this man is a murderer: they might
see he was a prisoner by his chain, or might learn it from some of the
company, and therefore took it for granted he had been guilty of some
crime; and by the viper's fastening on him, they concluded it was murder
he was guilty of; for the same notion might obtain among them, as among
the Jews, that a murderer that could not be legally convicted, was
sometimes punished this way.

"Says R. Simeon ben Shetach (l), may I never see the consolation, if I
did not see one run after his friend into a desert place; and I ran
after him, and I saw the sword in his hand, and the blood dropping, and
he that was slain panting; and I said to him, O wicked man, who has
slain this? either I or thou; but what shall I do? for thy blood is not
delivered into my hand; "for the law says, by the mouth of two or three
witnesses he shall surely die" (\#De 17:6): may he that knows the
thoughts take vengeance on that man that slew his friend; they say, they
did not remove from thence, , "till a serpent came", and bit him, and he
died.''

So the Jews observe, that when the execution of capital punishments was
taken away from them, yet such who deserved them were punished by God in
a way equivalent to them: so for instance, if a man committed a crime,
for which he deserved to be burnt, either he fell into the fire, or , "a
serpent bit him" (m); or if he deserved to be strangled, either he was
drowned in a river, or died of a quinsy. There is a kind of an asp which
the Egyptians call "Thermuthis", which they reckon sacred, and worship:
this they say will not hurt good men, but destroys the wicked; and if
so, says the historian, then "vengeance", or justice has honoured this
creature, to be so sharp sighted as to discern the good from the bad;
and they say, Isis sends it to the most wicked (n). Agreeably to which
these men reason,

whom though he hath escaped the sea: has not been drowned there, when
shipwrecked,

yet vengeance suffereth not to live. The Greek word "Dice" rendered
"vengeance", is the name of a goddess among the Heathens, said to be the
daughter of Jupiter and Themis (o). She is represented as sitting by her
father Jupiter; and when anyone does injury to another, informs him of
it (p). She is painted sorrowful, and with a contracted forehead, a
grave countenance, and a rough aspect, to strike terror in unrighteous
persons, and give confidence to righteous ones (q), agreeably to her
name, which signifies "justice". This deity the barbarians supposed
pursued Paul; and though she let him escape the sea, she will not suffer
him to live any longer; for they looked upon the viper's fastening on
him, as to be sent by her, so to be immediate death to him.

\(l\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 37. 2. & Shebuot, fol. 34. 1. (m) Bemidbar
Rabba, fol. 214. 2. & T. Bab. Sanhedrin, ib. & Sota, fol. 8. 2. (n)
Aelian de Animal l. 10. c. 31. (o) Apollodarus de Deorurn Origon. l. 1.
p. 6. Phurnutus de Natura Deorum, p. 80. (p) Hesiod Opera, &c. v. 254,
255. (q) Chrysippus apud Geilium, l. 14. c. 4.

[Acts 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 28:5</span></span>

And he shook off the beast into the fire,.... Having held it a while,
and as being master of it, and as not being afraid of it, though it was
the ready way to provoke it to fasten on him again:

and felt no harm; it having not bit him, nor infected him with its
poison; and hereby was fulfilled what our Lord promised to his
disciples, [Mar 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018);

[Acts 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 28:6</span></span>

Howbeit they looked when he should have swollen,.... With the venomous
bite of the viper; swelling is one of the symptoms following the bite of
this creature; and if the bite does not issue in death, yet the swelling
continues inflamed for some time. The symptoms following the bite of a
viper are said to be (r) an acute pain in the place wounded; swelling,
first red, afterwards livid, spreading by degrees; great faintness; a
quick, low, and sometimes interrupted pulse; sickness at the stomach;
bilious convulsions: vomiting; cold sweats; sometimes pains about the
navel; and death itself, if the strength of the patient, or the
slightness of the bite, do not overcome it: if he does overcome it, the
swelling continues inflamed for some time; and the symptoms abating,
from the wound runs a sanious liquor, little pustules are raised about
it, and the colour of the skin is as if the patient were icterical or
jaundice; or had the jaundice: the Arabic and Ethiopic versions render
it, "that he should burn", or "burnt"; that is, inflamed, for the bite
of the viper causes an inflammation, a hot swelling, which rises up in
pustules or blisters:

or fallen down dead suddenly; for immediate death is sometimes the
effect of such poison. Pliny (s) relates, that the Scythians dip their
arrows in the sanies or corrupt matter of vipers, and in human blood,
which by the least touch causes immediate death; and Pausanias (t)
reports from a certain Phoenician, that a man fleeing from a viper got
up into a tree, where the viper could not reach him, but it blew, or
breathed out its poison on the tree, and the man immediately died:
though the force of this creature's poison does not always, and in all
places, and in all persons operate alike; some die within a few hours,
and others live some days, some to the third day, and some to the
seventh (u):

but after they had looked a great while; upon the apostle, to observe
whether any inflammation or swelling arose, or death ensued, as they
expected: when they had waited some time, perhaps an hour or two,

and saw no harm come to him; that he was neither inflamed, nor swelled,
nor dead; that it had no manner of effect upon him, and no evil of
punishment was inflicted on him hereby, from whence they could conclude
that he was guilty of any notorious crime:

they changed their minds, and said that he was a god: before they took
him to be a murderer, and now they even ascribe deity to him, as was
usual with the Gentiles, when anything extraordinary was performed by
men: so the Lystrians took Paul for Mercury, and Barnabas for Jupiter,
upon the apostle's curing the cripple, [Act
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011); but what god the inhabitants of
Melita thought him to be, is not certain; some think Hercules, who was
worshipped in this island. The inhabitants of this island now believe
that the apostle expelled all poison and venom out of it when he was
there; and it is reported, that the children born in this place fear not
any snakes, neither are hurt by anything that is venomous, insomuch that
they will take scorpions, and eat them without danger; although, in all
other parts of the world, those kind of creatures are most pernicious,
and yet do no manner of hurt to men in this island; yea, it is affirmed,
that there is a sort of earth found here, which kills serpents: as for
the eating of them, the viper itself may be eaten; most authors agree
(w), that there is no part, humour, or excrement, not even the gall
itself, of a viper, but may be swallowed without much harm; accordingly
the ancients, and, as several authors assure us, the Indians at this
day, both of the east and west, eat them as we do eels--viper's flesh
either roasted or boiled, physicians unanimously prescribe as an
excellent restorative, particularly in the elephantiasis, incurable
consumptions, leprosy, &c.

\(r\) Chambers's Cyclopaedia, ut supra. (the word "Viper") (s) L. 11. c.
53. (t) Boeotica, vel, l. 9. p. 583. (u) Alberus de Animal. l. 25. c.
ult. (w) Chambers's Cyclopaedia, ut supra. (the word "Viper")

[Acts 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 28:7</span></span>

In the same quarters were possessions of the chief man of the
island,.... Or "the first man of the island"; so the governor of Melita
used to be called, as appears by an inscription mentioned by Bochart,
wherein a Roman knight is called , "the first of the Melitians"; for
this island was under the Roman government, and the very name of this
chief man shows it: it was first in the hands of the Africans, when Dido
built Carthage, which was eight or nine hundred years before the time of
Christ: Battus was king of this island, from whom it was taken by
Hiarbas king of Lybia, or of the Getulians, and who also conquered
Carthage; and it continued under the power of the Carthaginians, until
they were conquered by the Romans; and then it was taken by Titus
Sempronius, above two hundred years before Christ, in whose hands it was
when the apostle was here; since then it has been taken by the
Saracenes, though they held it not, being taken from them by Roger earl
of Sicily, in the year 1090; and so it remained in the hands of the
Sicilians, until the knights of Rhodes were driven out of that island by
the Turks, in 1522; and then this was given them by the Emperor Charles
the Fifth seven years after, on condition they would oppose the Turks,
and defend that part of Christendom, which they bravely did: in the year
1565, it was besieged by Pialis Bassa, but without success (x); and it
is said to be so well fortified, as that it is impossible it should be
taken, unless through treachery or famine; it is now in the hands of the
said knights: but whether this man was governor of the island or not, it
may be reasonably thought that he was the richest man in the island, and
in the greatest honour and dignity; and had near the shore, where the
ship's company landed, many houses and much land, and farms and
vineyards, and the like:

whose name was Publius; or Poplius, as some copies, and the Syriac
version read. Publius was a name common with the Romans; it was with
them a forename, by which such were called, who were "pupilli", or
fatherless, for it is a contraction of "Popilius". There was one of this
name who was bishop of Athens, said to succeed Dionysius the Areopagite
there; who is thought by some to be the same here mentioned; who they
say was first bishop in his own country, which through mistake they make
to be Miletus, instead of Melita; and afterwards bishop of Athens, where
he suffered martyrdom: but this is not likely, for even though he might
be converted by the apostle, of which we have no account; and also
became a preacher of the Gospel, of which there is no proof; it is not
probable that he should leave his own country, and go to Athens, and
take upon him the care of that church there: but whether he was
afterwards converted or not, he was very kind to the apostle and the
ship's company, as follows:

who received us, and lodged us three days courteously; this was a very
considerable instance of humanity and hospitality, to receive so many
strangers at once into his houses, as two hundred three score and
sixteen; and give them food and lodging, for three days together, and
that in such a kind, friendly, and cheerful manner: and thus, as Abraham
and Lot, by receiving strangers, entertained angels at unawares, so
Publius, though ignorant of it, entertained an apostle of Christ among
those strangers; the benefit of which he afterwards enjoyed, and which
was a compensation for his liberality and beneficence.

\(x\) Petav. Rationar. Temp. par. 1. l. 9. c. 11. & 12. p. 501, 507.

[Acts 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 28:8</span></span>

And it came to pass that the father of Publius,.... So that Publius was
not an old man, though of so much dignity and wealth: the Arabic
version, contrary to all copies, and other versions, reads, "the son of
Publius":

lay sick of a fever; or fevers, of different sorts, a complication of
them, which sometimes is the case; unless this was an intermitting
fever, and the several fits of it are intended; or rather the plural
number is put for the singular, to denote the vehemence of it, and which
was attended with another disorder, and might be brought on by it:

and of a bloody flux; or dysentery, a pain of the bowels, as the Syriac
version renders it; or an ulceration of the bowels, as the Arabic
version; which occasioned a discharge of blood, so that his case was
very threatening. This disease, according to modern writers (y), is
attended with a fever. The word "dysentery" here used properly signifies
that kind of flux of the belly, characterized by the frequency of
stools, or dejections, mixed with blood, and accompanied with gripes:
the fever, ulcer, &c. which attend it, are not essential to the disease;
though many both of the ancients and moderns think the ulcer is.--There
are three kinds of "dysenteries"; the "first" when a laudable blood is
evacuated from a mere plethora, or plenitude, without any disorder of
the intestines, as in the haemorrhoidal flux; the "second" when a thin
watery blood is evacuated, called the "hepatic" flux, though really
arising from haemorrhoidal vessels; the "third" kind, which is that that
is properly called the dysentery, is when blood is cast out, mixed with
a purulent matter in the excrements: this is either "benign", i.e.
without a fever, and not contagious; or "malignant", which is attended
with a pestilential fever, and frequently ravages whole cities and
provinces, happening most commonly in armies; in the last stage, a sort
of caruncles are frequently ejected along with the purulent matter,
which are difficult to be accounted for, unless from an excoriation and
ulceration of the intestines: sometimes the intestines are even
gangrened: this seems to have been the case of the father of Publius,
which makes the following cure the more remarkable:

to whom Paul entered in; into the room where he was, no doubt with the
consent and leave, if not at the request of Publius; the Ethiopic
version adds, "and he entreated him to put his hand upon him"; that is,
either Publius asked this favour of the apostle for his father, having
heard of the affair of the viper, from whence he concluded there was
something divine and extraordinary in him; or the father of Publius
asked this for himself:

and prayed and laid his hands on him, and healed him; when Paul had
entered the room, and found in what a bad condition the sick man was, he
either kneeled down and prayed by him, or stood and prayed over him, and
for him, that God would restore him to his health; and this he did, to
let them know that he himself was not a god; and that the cure that
would now be wrought would be from God, and not from himself, and
therefore all the glory should be given to God; and he laid his hands on
him, as a sign or symbol, or rite that was used in extraordinary cases,
and agreeably to the direction and promise of Christ, [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018); and upon this a cure followed;
both the diseases left him at once, and he was restored to health.

\(y\) See Chambers's Cyclopaedia in the word "Dysentery".

[Acts 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 28:9</span></span>

So when this was done,.... This miracle was wrought, and the fame of it
spread over the island:

others also which had diseases in the island came: from all parts of it,
to the apostle:

and were healed; of whatsoever diseases they were afflicted with.

[Acts 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 28:10</span></span>

Who also honoured us with many honours,.... Not with divine honours,
with religious adorations, as if they had been so many deities; for
these they would not have received, nor have recorded them, to the
commendation of the inhabitants; but civil honours, expressions of
respect and gratitude; and particularly gifts and presents, large and
valuable, in which sense the phrase is used by Jewish writers; so upon
those words in [Jdg 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#017). "What is
thy name, that when the sayings come to pass, we may do thee honour?"
they make this paraphrase (z),

"Manoah said to him (the angel), tell me thy name, that I may inquire
where to find thee, when thy prophecy is fulfilled, and give thee "a
gift", , "for there is no honour but a present", or "offering"; or
wherever this phrase is used, it signifies nothing else but a gift, as
it is said, [Num 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#017). "For honouring
I will honour thee":''

that is, with money and gifts, as Balaam's answer in the next verse
shows, and so the Jewish commentators interpret it (a); See Gill on [Ti1
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017);

And when we departed; from the island, which was not till three months
from their first coming ashore:

they laded us with such things as were necessary; that is, for the
voyage: they provided a proper supply of food for them, which they put
into the strip, for their use in their voyage; by which they expressed
their gratitude for the favours they received from Paul; for whose sake
not only his company, but the whole ship's company fared the better: and
very likely many of them were converted under the apostle's ministry;
for it can hardly be thought that the apostle should be on this island
three months, as he was, and not preach the Gospel to the inhabitants of
it, in which he always met with success, more or less; and the great
respect shown him at his departure seems to confirm this; though we meet
with no account of any church, or churches, or preachers of the word in
this place, in ecclesiastical history, until the "sixth" century, when
mention is made of a bishop of the island of Melita (b); indeed in the
"fourth" century, Optatus Milevitanus is said by some, through mistake;
to be bishop of Melita, when he was bishop of Milevis, a city in Africa
upon the continent; and, through a like mistake, this island is said to
be famous for a council held in it under Pope Innocent, against
Pelagius, in the beginning of the "fifth" century; when the council was
held at the above place Milevis, and not at Melita, from whence it was
called the Milevitan council.

\(z\) Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 10. fol. 199. 1. Vid. Laniado in Judg. xvii.
13. (a) Jarchi & Aben Ezra in loc. (b) Magdeburg. Eccl. Hist. cent. 6.
c. 2. p. 5.

[Acts 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 28:11</span></span>

And after three months we departed,.... From Melita; here they stayed
the three winter months, which were unseasonable for navigation; but now
the spring coming on, and the weather agreeable, they left the island,
and sailed

in a ship of Alexandria; See Gill on [Act
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#006);

which had wintered in the isle; perhaps all the said three months, for
the same reason:

whose sign was Castor and Pollux; or Dioscuri, that is, the sons of
Jupiter; for Castor and Pollux were his sons, by Leda: these are placed
among the constellations in the Zodiac, and go by the name of Gemini, or
the twins; and these were supposed to have a power of saving men in
danger at sea: wherefore such as were about to go to sea, first paid
their devoirs, and made vows to them; which they performed when they
returned, and were delivered from shipwreck; and when they were in
danger at sea, they used to pray unto them: the fiery exhalations that
sometimes appear at sea, they took for them; and when only one appeared,
it was looked on as a bad omen; but when both, it was reckoned to
portend a prosperous voyage; hence they were considered as sea deities;
and the Ethiopic version accordingly renders it here "Dioscoura", and
adds, "who is the god of the mariners": now the images of these two
brothers were sometimes set at the head, or forepart of the ship, as
they were in this, from whence the ship took its name; as it is very
common for the names of ships to be the same with the pictures or images
that are placed at the head of them: whether the centurion chose this
ship because of its sign, imagining there might be more safety in it, he
having suffered shipwreck already; or whether this was the only one in
the island, that was going for Italy, is not certain, nor very material:
the Arabic version takes the word rendered Castor and Pollux, to be the
name of a man, who was the owner of the ship; for it reads the words
thus, "in a ship of Alexandria", that belonged "to a man of Alexandria,
called Dioscorides".

[Acts 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 28:12</span></span>

And landing at Syracuse,.... A famous city in the isle of Sicily, now
called Saragossa: it is placed by Ptolomy (c) on the east side of the
island, in the Adriatic sea; it was 180 furlongs, or two and twenty
miles and a half in circuit, and formerly had a marble haven and triple
wall, and as many towers; the founder of it was Archias, a Corinthian;
Pliny says (d), that it is never so cloudy weather, but the sun is seen
in it, at one time or another of the day: Cicero (e) calls it the
greatest and most beautiful of all the cities of Greece; it is such a
city, he says, that it may be said to consist of four large cities;
"one" part of it is called "the island", which has two ports to it;
"another" was called Acradina, in which were a large market, beautiful
porticos, &c. the "third", Tiche, in which was the ancient temple of
Fortune; and the "fourth", which because it was last built, was called
Neapolis: it is a very ancient city, being built more than seven hundred
years before the birth of Christ; it was a colony of the Corinthians;
here reigned two tyrants, whose names were Dionysius; it was attacked by
the Carthaginians, but without success, being delivered from the siege
by Pyrrhus king of Epirus (f); it was again assaulted by the Athenians,
who were repulsed, and entirely conquered, about the year before Christ
413: after that it was taken by Marcellus, the Roman consul, about the
year of the city of Rome 542 (g), after a three years' siege; during
which time it was defended, and preserved by the means of the famous
mathematician Archimedes; who by his invention of warlike machines,
baffled all the attempts of the Romans; but was killed by a soldier, as
he was intent upon his studies, not knowing that the city was taken; and
it continued in the hands of the Romans, until it was taken and
plundered by the Saracens, in the year of Christ 675; and was retaken by
Roger king of Apulia, about the year 1090, and is now under the
government of Don Carlos, king of the two Sicilies;

we tarried there three days; on what account it is not said, whether on
account of merchandise, or for the sake of the conversation of
Christians here: it is certain there were churches in Sicily very early;
we read of them in the "second" and "third" centuries; in the time of
Constantine, at the beginning of the "fourth" century, there was a
church at Syracuse, of which Chrestus was bishop, to whom the emperor
wrote a letter himself, which is still extant in Eusebius (h): in the
"fifth" century, Hilarius, a teacher at Syracuse, wrote from thence to
Augustine, concerning the Pelagian heresy, to whom he gave an answer: in
the "sixth" century, Maximinianus, bishop of this church, had the
inspection of all the churches in Sicily committed to him, by Gregory;
who was wonderfully preserved in a shipwreck, as he was returning from
Rome; in this same age lived John, bishop of Syracuse, and Trajanus a
presbyter, and Felix a deacon of the same church: in the seventh century
there was one George bishop of this place, to whom Pope Vitalian wrote a
letter; and in the same century a bishop of this church was in the sixth
council at Constantinople (i).

\(c\) Geogr. l. 3. c. 4. (d) Nat. Hist. l. 2. c. 62. (e) Orat. 9. in
Verrem, l. 4. p. 566. (f) Pausanius, l. 1. p. 22. (g) Petav. Rationar.
Temp. par. 1. l. 3. c. 9. p. 108. & l. 4. c. 2. p. 137. (h) Eccl. Hist.
l. 10. c. 5. (i) Magdeburg. Eccl. Hist. cent. 2. c. 2. p. 4. cent. 3. c.
2. p. 3. cent. 4. c. 2. p. 5. cent. 5. c. 2. p. 6. c. 10. p. 664. cent.
6. c. 2. p. 6. c. 10. p. 346. c. 13. p. 436. cent. 7. c. 2. p. 4. c. 10.
p. 358.

[Acts 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 28:13</span></span>

And from thence we fetched a compass,.... About the isle of Sicily, from
Syracuse to Pachinus, the promontory of the island:

and came to Rhegium; a city in Calabria, called by Ptolomy (k) Regium
Julium; it was built, as Solinus (l) says, by the Chalcidensians, and
was formerly a city of the Brutians (m); it is now called Reggio: it is
said (n) to have its name from its being broken off from the main
continent, for it lies in the straits of Sicily; and formerly Sicily was
joined to Italy, but was separated from it by the violence of the sea at
this place:

and after one day the south wind blew; they stayed one day at Rhegium,
and when they departed from thence, they had a south wind, which was
favourable to them: whether the apostle preached here, or no, is not
certain, since his stay was so short; some Popish writers tell some idle
stories about the apostle's preaching; how that the fishes came to the
shore to hear him; that the grasshoppers were commanded by him to be
silent, and have never been seen in that place since; that a stone
pillar was set on fire by the flame of a candle, by which miracle the
inhabitants present were converted and baptized; and one Stephen, that
was in company, was made by him their first bishop: but in
ecclesiastical history we meet with no account of any church in this
place, until the fifth century; when the bishop of it, with others,
subscribed a letter of Leo the First, sent into the east; and about the
year 440, there was a synod of thirteen bishops convened in this place,
on account of a certain ordination; and in the "seventh" century, a
bishop of the church at Rhegium was present in the sixth council at
Constantinople; in the "eighth", Constantine, bishop of Rhegium, was in
the Nicene synod (o):

and we came the next day to Puteoli; the Syriac version adds, "a city of
Italy"; it was formerly called Dicearchia (p), from the strict justice
used in the government of it: it had its name of Puteoli, either "a
putore", from the rankness and ill smell of the waters of it, through
the "sulphur" and "alum" in them; or "a puteis", from the wells about
it, the waters of which, by Pausanias, are said (q) to be so hot, as in
time to melt the leaden pipes through which they flow, who calls it a
town of the Tyrrhenians; by Pliny (r) it is placed in Campania, and so
Jerom (s) says, Puteoli a city, a colony of Campania, the same that is
called Dicearchia. Josephus (t) also speaks of it as in the same
country; for he says, that Herod and Herodias both came to Dicearchia,
(or Puteoli), and found Caius (the emperor) at Baiai, which is a little
town in Campania, about five furlongs from Dicearchia; and he also in
another (u) place says, the Italians call Dicearchia, "Potioli"; which
is the same word the apostle here uses, and which is the Latin "Puteoli"
corrupted; it is said to be first built by the Samians: frequent mention
is made by writers (w), of "pulvis Puteolanus", the dust of Puteoli;
which being touched by the sea water, hardens into a stone; and was
therefore used to bank the sea, break the waves, and repel the force of
them: that it was a place by the sea side, may be learned from the sea
being called after its name, "mare Puteolanum" (x), the sea of Puteoli;
so Apollonius Tyaneus is said (y) to sail from this place to Rome,
whither he came in three days; to this port the ships of Alexandria
particularly used to come, and hither persons were wont to go to take
shipping for Alexandria (z); it is now called by the Italians Pozzuolo,
and lies about eight miles from Naples; and according to the following
story of the Jews', must be an hundred and twenty miles from Rome; who
tell us (a), that

"Rabban Gamaliel, and R. Eleazar ben Azariah, and R. Joshua, and R.
Akiba, went to Rome, and they heard the noise of the multitude at Rome,
from Puteoli, an hundred and twenty miles:''

the story is a fable designed to signify the vast number of people at
Rome, and the noise, hurry, and tumult there; but perhaps the distance
between the two places may not be far from truth: and as fabulous is the
account which R. Benjamin (b) gives of this place Puteoli, when he says
it was called Surentum, a great city which Tzintzan Hadarezer built,
when he fled for fear of David.

\(k\) Geograph. l. 3. c. 1. (l) Polyhistor. c. 8. (m) Mela, l. 2. c. 11.
(n) Philo quod mundus, &c. p. 963. & de mundo, p. 1171. Vid. Justin. l.
4. c. 1. & Sallust. fragment. p. 147. (o) Ib. cent. 5. c. 2. p. 7. c. 9.
p. 508. cent. 7. c. 2. p. 5. cent. 8. c. 2. p. 5. (p) Plin. l. 3. c. 5.
(q) Pausan. Messenica vel. 1. 4. p. 285. & Arcadica vel. l. 8. p. 465.
(r) Nat. Hist. l. 31. c. 2. (s) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 76. G. (t)
Antiqu. l. 18. c. 8. sect. 2. (u) In Vita sua, sect. 3. p. 905. (w)
Plin. l. 35. c. 13. Alex. ab Alex. l. 5. c. 9. Isidor. de origin l. 16.
c. 1. p. 135. (x) A. Gell. noct. Attic. l. 7. c. 9. (y) Philostrat. Vit.
Apollon. l. 7. c. 8. (z) Philo in Flaccum, p. 968. & de leg. ad Caium,
p. 1018. Senec. cp. 77. (a) Echa Rabbati, fol. 59. 4. & T. Bab. Maccot,
fol. 24. 1. (b) Itinerar. p. 14.

[Acts 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 28:14</span></span>

Where we found brethren,.... Christians; which is not to be wondered at,
since it was a port much frequented, and where many came and went, of
different countries and nations; particularly there were many Jews here,
to whom the Gospel was first preached, and to some of them it was the
power of God unto salvation in many places, and doubtless was so here:
Josephus (c) speaks of Jews in this place, who were deceived by a false
Alexander, who pretended to be the son of Herod, a prince of their
nation. Patrobulus, the same with Patrobas in [Rom
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#014); who is reckoned one of the
seventy disciples, is said to be bishop of this place; See Gill on [Luk
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001); though we have no account of its
church state until the "fifth" century, when a bishop of the church at
Puteoli is said to be in the council held at Ephesus against Eutyches,
and sustained the place of Leo, pope of Rome: in the "sixth" century, a
bishop of this church was in a council held at Rome, under Symmachus: in
the seventh century, the bishop of Puteoli was in the sixth council at
Constantinople (d):

and were desired to tarry with them seven days; that is, the Christians
at Puteoli desired the apostle, and those that were with him, to stay a
week with them, that they might have the advantage of a day of public
worship together, and might enjoy much of their Christian conversation;
and accordingly they did stay that time, no doubt by the leave, and with
the consent of Julius the centurion; and which shows, that he used the
apostle with great civility and courteousness, and was very ready to
grant him favours; if he was not in this voyage converted by him, which
is not unlikely, considering the whole of his conduct:

and so we went toward Rome; after they had stayed seven days at Puteoli,
they set forward on their journey to Rome; for from hence they went
thither on foot, though they might have gone from hence to Rome by sea,
as Apollonius Tyaneus did; See Gill on [Act
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#013); and so likewise Titus the son
of Vespasian, who went from Rhegium to Puteoli in a merchant ship, and
from thence to Rome (e); but it may be the ship unloaded here, and there
was no other going for Rome at that time: Rome was the metropolis of
Italy, the seat of the empire, and mistress of the whole world; it is so
well known, as not to need describing: it was built on seven hills, and
had its name either from Romulus the founder of it; or from the Greek
word which signifies "strength" (f), from whence Romulus is supposed to
have his name; with the Hebrews it has its name from its sublimity,
height, and glory, from the word which signifies to be high and exalted:
some say it had its name from Roma, a daughter of Italus, who first laid
the foundation of it, though Romulus and Remus brought it into the form
of a city; it was built seven hundred and fifty years, and upwards,
before the birth of Christ. The Jews make it to be of an earlier date;
they say (g), that at the time Solomon married Pharaoh's daughter,
Gabriel descended and fixed a reed in the sea, and brought up clay, and
with it was built the great city, which is Rome; and in another place
(h) it is said, in the day in which Jeroboam set up the two calves, one
at Dan, and the other at Bethel, was built a certain cottage, which is
Italy of Greece, that is, Rome; for it is elsewhere observed (i), Italy
of Greece, this is the great city of Rome; and again (k), on the day in
which Jeroboam set up the two calves, Remus and Romulus came and built
two cottages in Rome.

\(c\) Antiqu. l. 17. c. 14. sect. 1. (d) Magdeburg. Eccl. Hist. cent. 5.
c. 2. p. 7. cent. 6. c. 2. p. 8. cent. 7. c. 2. p. 5. (e) Sueton. Vita
Titi, c. 5. (f) Aur. Victor. Origo Gent. Rom. p. 233. (g) T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 21. 2. (h) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 56. 2. (i) T. Bab.
Megilia, fol. 6. 1. (k) T. Hicros. Avoda Zara, fol. 39. 3. Vid.
Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 6. 2.

[Acts 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 28:15</span></span>

And from thence,.... That is, from Rome, whither they were going:

when the brethren heard of us; when the Christians at Rome heard that
the apostle and his friends were landed at Puteoli, and were on their
journey to Rome: these were the members of the church at Rome; for there
was a church state here before this time. The apostle had before this
written a letter to them, called the Epistle to the Romans, in which he
treats them as a church. The Papists say that the Apostle Peter was the
first bishop of it, and pretend an uninterrupted succession from him;
though it is questionable whether he ever was at Rome; and if he was, it
is not probable that he should take upon him the care of a single
church, which was not consistent with his office as an apostle: in the
"first" century, the bishops or pastors of this church were as follow;
after the martyrdom of Paul and Peter, Eusebius (l) says, Linus was the
first bishop of it, the same that is mentioned in [Ti2
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#021) and according to the same writer
(m), Anencletus succeeded him, and then Clement, a fellow labourer of
the Apostle Paul's, [Phi 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003); who
wrote two epistles to the Corinthians, which are still extant; though
Eusebius (n), not consistent with himself, makes Clement in another
place to succeed Linus; and some make Clement even to be before him; and
some place one Cletus before Anencletus and him: such an uncertainty is
there, and such a puzzle attends the first account of this uninterrupted
succession; and which seems designed in Providence to bring it into
contempt: in the "second" century, Euarestus succeeded Clement; and then
followed him Alexander, Sixtus, or Xystus, Telesphorus, Hyginus, Pius,
Anicetus, Soter, Eleutherius, and Victor: in the "third" century, Victor
was succeeded by Zephyrinus; and after him were Calixtus, Urbanus,
Pontianus, Anterus, Fabianus, Cornelius, Lucius, Stephanus, Sixtus, or
Xystus II, Dionysius, Felix, Eutychianus, and Gaius: in the "fourth"
century, Marcellinus succeeded Gaius; who was followed by Marcellus,
Eusebius, Miltiades, Sylvester, Julius, Liberius, Felix II, Damasus, and
Siricius (o); and further than this age, it is not worth while to follow
them; the man of sin began to grow apace, and in a century or two
afterwards, proclaimed himself universal bishop:

they came to meet us as far as Appii Forum and the Three Taverns; these
were both of them towns that lay in the Appian way to Rome; the former
of these Horace (p) makes mention of, in the account of his journey from
Rome to Brundusium; first he says, he came to Aricia, or Rizza, which is
about 160 furlongs, or 21 miles from Rome, and from thence to Appii
Forum: that Appii Forum was further from Rome than the Three Taverns,
appears from what Cicero says (q), who dates his letter to Atticus from
Appii Forum, at four o'clock, and tells him, that be had sent him
another a little before from "Tres Tabernae", or the Three Taverns; and
indeed, Appii Forum was one and fifty miles from Rome, and the Three
Taverns but three and thirty: so that the sense must be, that some of
the brethren from Rome came as far as the Three Taverns, and others as
far as Appii Forum; which, as before observed, were two towns upon the
road: hence the former of these was not a statue of Appius, near the
city of Rome, as some have (r) said; nor a market in the city itself, as
says Jerom (s), or a writer under his name; whose words are, Appii Forum
is the name of a market at Rome, from Appius, formerly a consul, and
from whom the Appian way had its name: but this was a town at some
distance; there were several towns in Italy of a like appellation; as
Julii Forum, Cornelii Forum, now Imola, Livii Forum, now Forli: Pliny
(t) makes mention of an Appii Forum; and there was a town in Calabria,
called Taberna: and as the one was not a mere market place, so the other
does not design three houses for public entertainment; for the words
should not be translated "three taverns", nor indeed translated at all;
nor are they by Luke, who retains the Latin name, as the name of a
place; and here it was that Severus, the Roman emperor, was killed by
Herculius Maximianus (u); and this, in Constantine's time, was the seat
of a bishop; for among the bishops assembled on account of Donatus,
mention is made of one "Felix a Tribus Tabernis" (w), or Felix bishop of
Tres Tabernae, the same place we call "the Three Taverns":

whom when Paul saw, he thanked God and took courage; that is, when he
saw the brethren that came to meet him, he gave thanks to God for the
sight of them, which he had so much desired; and he took heart and
courage, and went on cheerfully, and in high spirits, towards Rome; in
hope of seeing the rest, and believing that God had some work for him to
do there.

\(l\) Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 2. (m) Ib. c. 13. (n) Ib. c. 4. 15. (o)
Magdeburg. Eccl. Hist. cent. 2. c. 10. p. 165, &c. cent. 3. c. 10. 193,
&c. cent. 4. c. 10. p. 736, &c. (p) Sermonum, l. 1. Satyr 5. (q) Ad
Atticum, l. 2. ep. 11. (r) Isidor. Pelusiot. Ep. l. 1. ep. 337. (s) De
locis Hebraicis, fol. 95. K. (t) Nat. Hist. l. 14. c. 6. (u) Aurel.
Victor. Epitome, p. 346. (w) Optat. de Schism Donat. l. 1. p. 26.

[Acts 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 28:16</span></span>

And when we came to Rome,.... To the city itself:

the centurion delivered the prisoners to the captain of the guard; or
general of the army; or, as some think, the governor of the "praetorian"
band of soldiers, who attended the emperor as his guards: his name is
thought to have been Burrhus Afranius; to him Julius the centurion
delivered all the prisoners he brought from Caesarea, excepting Paul, to
be disposed of by him, in the several prisons, or jails, to whom it
belonged to take care of such persons: this clause is wanting in the
Alexandrian copy, and in the Vulgate Latin and Syriac versions:

but Paul was suffered to dwell by himself with a soldier that kept him:
this was owing, either to the letter which Festus sent to Rome
concerning him, and his case; by which it appeared, that he was no
malefactor, and therefore to be used in a different manner from the rest
of the prisoners; or rather to the intercession of the centurion, who
had all along used him in a very civil and courteous manner; who
requesting this favour had it granted, that Paul should not be put into
the common prison with the rest, but should dwell in an apartment by
himself; or, as the Ethiopic version renders it, "at his own will";
where he himself pleased, for he dwelt in his own hired house, [Act
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030); only he was under the care and
custody of a soldier, who constantly attended him wherever he went; and
which could not be otherwise, seeing he was chained, as in [Act
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#020) and his chain was put on his
right hand, and fastened to the left hand of the soldier, that had him
under his keeping; so that wherever he was or went, the soldier must be
likewise: hence that passage in Seneca (x),

"as the same chain joins together the prisoner and the soldier, so those
things which are unlike go together; fear follows hope.''

\(x\) Epist. 5.

[Acts 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 28:17</span></span>

And it came to pass, that after three days,.... From his first coming to
Rome, when he had hired himself a house, or lodging, and was settled in
it, and was rested from the fatigue of his voyage and journey:

Paul called the chief of the Jews together: he sent to the principal men
among them; for though the Jews, were expelled from Rome in the reign of
Claudius, they were now returned, and had their liberty of residing
there; very likely by means of Poppea, Nero's concubine, who favoured
the Jews: but whether they had a synagogue, and these men were the chief
and leading men in it, the doctors, rulers, and officers of it, are
things not certain; however, these the apostle desired to come to him
where he was, for whether he had the liberty of going about where he
would, the soldier attending him, is not so clear a point:

and when they were come together; to his house, or lodging:

he said unto them, men and brethren: which was the usual form of address
with the Jews; see [Act 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002).

Though I have committed nothing against the people and customs of our
fathers; meaning he had said nothing disrespectfully of the people of
the Jews; nor had done anything to the prejudice of their temporal,
spiritual, and eternal good, but just the reverse; nor had he said or
done anything contrary to the laws and customs enjoined the Jews by
Moses, even those that were of a ceremonial nature; for though he had
everywhere declared that the Gentiles were not obliged to an obedience
to them, yet he did not dissuade the Jews from the use of them; and
oftentimes complied with them himself, things he had been charged with:

yet was I delivered prisoner from Jerusalem into the hands of the
Romans; he was first seized by the Jews in the temple of Jerusalem, and
then fell into the hands of Lysias, the chief captain; who bound him,
and by whom he was sent to Caesarea, where he was retained a prisoner
both by Felix and Festus, Roman governors.

[Acts 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 28:18</span></span>

Who when they had examined me,.... About the things laid to his charge,
had heard what his accusers had to object to him, and the defence he
made for himself:

would have let me go; released him from his bonds, and set him at
liberty to go where he pleased:

because there was no cause of death in me; no crime proved upon him,
which was worthy of death; and this was the sense of Lysias the chief
captain, and of Felix and Festus the Roman governors, and of King
Agrippa.

[Acts 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 28:19</span></span>

But when the Jews spake against it,.... His being cleared and dismissed,
and desired he might be sent back to Jerusalem, to be tried and judged
there, to which Festus seemed inclined:

I was constrained to appeal to Caesar; to prevent the design of the Jews
upon him, which was to way lay him and kill him, or by what ways they
could, right or wrong, take away his life; and to provide for his own
safety:

not that I had ought to accuse my nation of; meaning, that he had no ill
design in this appeal against his country, to expose them, and bring
them under reproach and censure, but to vindicate himself, defend his
own innocence, and preserve his character and life; suggesting, that
what he did was not of choice, but by constraint, and with reluctance;
being no friend to Heathen tribunals, nor any enemy to the Jewish
nation.

[Acts 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 28:20</span></span>

For this cause therefore have I called for you,.... To let them know the
true state of his case; that though he was a prisoner, it was not for
any crime he had done, much less any of a capital nature; and that as he
was no scandal to his country, so neither did he intend to raise any
against it, or say or do anything which might bring it into contempt and
danger: as well as

to see you and speak with you; and keep up and maintain a free and
friendly conversation together:

because that for the hope of Israel I am bound with this chain; which
was then upon him, and he pointed to; the true reason of which was,
because he had preached that the Messiah the tribes of Israel were
hoping and waiting for, and who is the only solid foundation of the hope
of eternal life and salvation, was already come; and that he had
suffered and died, and rose again from the dead, and that Jesus of
Nazareth was he; see [Jer 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#008). And
this title well agrees with Jesus Christ, who in the New Testament is
called "our hope", and "the hope of glory", [Ti1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001), and he is the hope of every
Israelite indeed, of every sensible sinner, of every regenerated person,
whether Jew or Gentile; and such are encouraged to hope in him for grace
here, and glory hereafter: and whereas they see themselves lost and
undone, and that there is no salvation for them by their own works, and
that there is salvation in Christ, they are directed and encouraged to
hope in him for it; because it is a work finished by him, and is
complete in him; it is of free grace and favour bestowed; it is wrought
out for the chief of sinners; and such as they themselves are, are
invited by himself to look to him for it; and the Gospel declaration is,
that whoever believes in him shall be saved: they see themselves to be
sinners, and that there is no hope of the forgiveness of their sins from
an absolute God, or the absolute mercy of God out of Christ, but that
the blood of Christ was shed for the remission of sins, and that God,
for Christ's sake, does forgive sins: wherefore they hope in him for it;
to which they are encouraged by the proclamation of the grace of God, as
a forgiving God in Christ; by the promises of forgiveness in the
covenant of grace; by the Gospel declaration of it; by its being
entirely of free grace, through the blood of Christ; and by the many
instances of the worst of sinners who have been favoured with it: these
Israelites, indeed, also see themselves unrighteous creatures, and that
they cannot be justified before God by works of righteousness done by
them; but that there is a righteousness wrought out by Christ, which is
acceptable and well pleasing to God; is freely bestowed on men, and is
imputed to all sorts of men, even to the ungodly; wherefore they hope in
him for it, and lay hold on this object of hope set before them: in a
word, they have hope of eternal life on his account, that being the gift
of God through him; and it being the will of God, that whoever believes
in him should have it; and it being in the power and right of Christ to
bestow it; and they having also his Spirit as the earnest and pledge of
it; as well as have his righteousness as their title to it, his grace as
their meetness for it, and have a share both in his intercession and in
his preparations of it: moreover, the apostle taught that there would be
a general resurrection of the dead, upon which would succeed a state of
everlasting happiness for the righteous; and which was the hope of the
tribes of Israel in common, especially of every Israelite indeed: now
these things had irritated the carnal Jews against him, who could not
rest till they had been the means of bringing him into the condition he
now was; nor were they content with this, without having his life.

[Acts 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 28:21</span></span>

And they said unto him,.... That is, the chief men of the Jews at Rome,
whom Paul had called together, replied; either in a lying and
dissembling way, or as expressing matter of fact; which last may be
allowed:

we neither received letters out of Judea concerning thee: which was very
much, that the high priest and sanhedrim had not wrote to the principal
men of their religion at Rome; giving an account of the apostle, and his
case unto them, in order to prejudice them against him, and to furnish
them with charges and accusations; which if they could not prevail by
them, so as to get him condemned by the emperor, yet might be a means of
preventing any of their nation giving heed unto him, and embracing his
sentiments and notions concerning Jesus of Nazareth:

neither any of the brethren that came from Jerusalem; or any part of
Judea, to Rome; meaning not the Christian Jews, for these they would not
call brethren; but those who were of the same religion as well as
nation, whom it was usual with the Jews to call brethren:

shewed or spake any harm of thee; so that it looks as if they did make
mention of him, but did not charge him with anything that was wicked and
criminal: this they said, to show that they were not prejudiced against
him by any person or means; and which carried in it a very considerable
testimony of the apostle's innocence.

[Acts 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 28:22</span></span>

But we desire to hear of thee what thou thinkest,.... What was his
opinion and judgment, concerning the Messiah, whether he was come or
not, and whether Jesus of Nazareth was he; and concerning other
principles relating to him, embraced by the Christians; and what he had
to say for the clearing up, proving, and confirming his sentiments about
these things:

for as concerning this sect; or heresy, meaning the Christian religion:
in saying so, they reproached it; for the Gospel, or Christian religion,
is not an human device, the choice and option of man's free will, and
what he pleases himself with, as an opinion and invention of his own, or
of other men, as "heresy" signifies; but it is of God, and by revelation
of Jesus Christ, and is a doctrine of the highest wisdom: nor does it
deny or take away any fundamental article of true religion; either
natural, as known by the Gentiles, or as revealed, with which the Jews
were made acquainted, under the former dispensation; but establishes
every such article, as the unity of the divine Being; the worship of the
one only and true God of Israel, in a spiritual manner; the doctrine of
the Messiah, his person, office, and grace; the resurrection of the
dead, and eternal judgment; and therefore could not be chargeable with
heresy: nor was it set up for any worldly gain, or popular applause,
which are the things that authors and abettors of heresy have in view;
nor was it designed to divide and separate persons from the true church
of God, but to bring them to it, and unite them together in it; see [Act
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#014).

We know that everywhere it is spoken against; this they knew, both by
letters they received, and by persons who came from different parts of
the world; and which was fact, and was no other than what was foretold
concerning Christ, that he should be a sign that should be spoken
against, [Luk 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034); and which the
apostle found true of the Gospel preached by him, both among Jews and
Greeks; it being to the one a stumblingblock, and to the other
foolishness, [Co1 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023), and especially
it was contradicted and blasphemed everywhere by the Jews; these in all
places opposed themselves to it, and spoke evil of it, and of its
preachers and professors: Christ, the author, sum, and subject of the
Christian religion, was spoken against in his person; his deity and
divine sonship were denied, as they still are; and his offices, as
prophet, priest, and King; yea, his actions, even his works of mercy to
the bodies of men, by healing their diseases, his conversing with
sinners for the good of their souls, the several miracles he wrought,
and the whole series of his life and conversation, were blasphemed and
evil spoken of: the doctrines of the Gospel in general were
contradicted, as they now are by many, as absurd and irrational, and as
tending to licentiousness; and in particular those which respect the
Father of Christ, as being the Father of Christ, his everlasting love to
the elect in him, and his distinguishing grace in the choice of them;
and those which relate to Christ, as that he is truly God, and the Son
of God, and to his sacrifice, satisfaction, and imputed righteousness;
and also which concern the Spirit of God, as his deity and personality,
and his operations on the souls of men; and such as relate to a future
state, the resurrection of all the dead, and judgment to come: likewise
the ordinances of the Christian religion, baptism and the Lord's supper,
were despised and spoken against, and the professors of it treated as
fools and wicked men; the reasons of all this are, because the Christian
religion, and the doctrines of it, are not of men, are contrary to the
lusts of men, and particularly to the pride of men; they subject them to
reproach and persecution, and gather men out from among them.

[Acts 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 28:23</span></span>

And when they had appointed him a day,.... When they should meet
together, and when both sides might be better prepared to enter into a
conversation on the subject of Christianity; and when there might be an
opportunity for a more numerous assembly to hear:

there came many to him into his lodging; the same very likely with his
own hired house, [Act 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030); hither a
large number came at the time appointed, more than those whom Paul first
sent for:

to whom he expounded; the Scriptures, the writings of Moses, and the
prophets; and particularly such parts of them as concerned the Messiah;
so our Lord expounded to his disciples in all the Scriptures, the things
concerning himself, [Luk 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#027).

And testified the kingdom of God; or the kingdom of the Messiah, which
oftentimes signifies the Gospel, and the Gospel dispensation: he
produced full and sufficient proofs and testimonies from prophecies,
miracles, and facts, that the kingdom of the Messiah was come; which
consisted not in outward pompous things, in temporal riches and honours,
as they expected; but in the ministration of the Gospel, and in the
administration of its ordinances; and in righteousness and holiness,
which give the one a right unto, and the other a meetness for, the
kingdom of heaven: and of this he testified, that it is the kingdom of
God, of his preparing and of his giving, and is what he calls his people
unto, and makes them meet for; and in which they shall reign with him,
and enjoy him for ever: and the apostle could testify and make it
evident, that there was such a kingdom, and such a future glorious
state; from the promise of God, to which the twelve tribes of Israel
hoped to come; from the prophecies of the Old Testament, which speak of
everlasting life, and of the resurrection of the dead unto it; from the
expectations of the saints of the former dispensation, who all died in
the faith of it; and from the coming of the Messiah, his sufferings and
death, and ascension to heaven, whereby he had brought life and
immortality to the clearest light:

persuading them concerning Jesus; endeavouring to persuade them, that
Jesus was the true Messiah; that he was truly God, and the Son of God,
as well as man; that he was born of a virgin, and wrought miracles, and
yielded perfect obedience to the law; that he laid down his life as a
sacrifice for sin, and to make reconciliation and atonement for it; that
he brought in an everlasting righteousness; that he rose again from the
dead for justification; that he was ascended up to heaven, and was set
down at the right hand of God, where he ever lives to make intercession,
and will come again a second time to judge both quick and dead: these
are some of "the things concerning Jesus", as the words may be rendered,
which the apostle endeavoured to persuade the Jews into a belief of; as
also the blessings of grace which come by him, such as peace and pardon
through his blood, reconciliation and atonement by his sacrifice,
justification by his righteousness, and complete salvation in him:
concerning these he persuaded the Jews, setting things in a clear light,
using strong arguments to convince them, and giving full proof, as the
nature of them would admit of; and which is no other than moral
persuasion, and is of itself ineffectual; efficacious persuasion is only
of God; it is he that opens the heart to attend to these things, and
gives faith to receive and embrace them: however, it is the duty of
Gospel ministers to make use of arguments, and by them to endeavour to
persuade men of their need of Christ, and of salvation by him, as the
apostle did; see [Co2 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#011).

Both out off the law of Moses: not the law of the ten commandments,
given on Mount Sinai to Moses, who delivered it to the children of
Israel, and is opposed to the doctrine of grace and truth, which came by
Jesus Christ, [Joh 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017); that accuses
and convinces of sin, and pronounces guilty, and curses for it; but does
not reveal Jesus Christ as a Saviour from it; no proof can be taken from
thence of the things concerning Jesus; but the five books of Moses are
here meant, in which he wrote of Christ, as our Lord himself says, [Joh
5:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#046) as he did particularly in [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); also the types and sacrifices,
recorded in his writings, might be made use of in proof of Jesus, and
the things of him:

and out of the prophets: such as [Psa
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#015) [Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014); with many others: and in this
work he continued,

from morning till evening; not that we are to suppose, that he carried
on one continued discourse upon these subjects, without any
intermission; but that he was all the day employed, either in
expounding: the Scriptures, proving that the kingdom of the Messiah was
come, and using strong and persuasive arguments, to show that Jesus was
he; or in answering the cavils and objections of the Jews, to what he
said.

[Acts 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 28:24</span></span>

And some believed the things which were spoken,.... By him, concerning
the kingdom of God and Jesus Christ; even as many as were ordained unto
eternal life, and to whom it was given to believe; for faith is the gift
of God, and which comes by hearing of the word, when it is attended with
a divine power; and then it is not only notionally understood, and
barely assented to as truth, but is cordially believed and embraced, and
cheerfully professed, and steadily held fast: this was not a mere
historical faith, or a bare assent to the truth of the things spoken,
nor a mere profession of faith in them, but a believing in Christ with
the heart, the sum and substance of them; as they heard these things,
their understandings were enlightened, and they saw their need of
Christ, and the things of Christ, which were held forth in the ministry
of the word; and so approved of them, savoured, relished, and fed upon
them; and until this is the case, none can, nor will believe aright:

and some believed not: notwithstanding the full proof, and clear
evidence produced by the apostle: these were not of Christ's sheep,
their eyes were blinded, and their hearts were hardened, as was
prophesied of them, and therefore they could not believe; they were
given up to a judicial blindness and hardness of heart, and were left
under the power of obstinate and invincible unbelief: their disbelief of
these things arose from the prejudices they had conceived about a
worldly kingdom; from the sufferings and death of Jesus Christ, they
imagining the Messiah would not die, but abide for ever; from the carnal
reasonings of their minds, about divine and spiritual things; and from
the ignorance that was in them, because of the obduracy of their hearts.
The kingdom the apostle testified of was not an Utopian kingdom, nor any
of the real kingdoms of this world, but the kingdom of the Messiah they
were expecting; but that which he described, being not such an one as
they imagined, they believed him not: the things he said concerning
Jesus were not trivial, speculative, and indifferent things; but of the
greatest moment and importance, and of which there was full proof in
their own writings; and though spoken by Paul, were no other than the
word of God; and besides, were good news, and glad tidings, and yet they
believed them not: this difference among them, some believing and some
not believing, was not owing to the power and free will of man, as if
some of themselves would, and did believe, and others would not, but to
the distinguishing grace of God; for faith is not of man, it is the gift
of God, it is the fruit of electing grace, and is given in consequence
of it: nor is this any unusual thing, under the same ministration of the
word, for one to believe, and another not believe: this is a common
case, and is the usual success the Gospel meets with; so it always has
been, and so it is, and will be; so it was in the times of Noah, he was
a preacher of righteousness to the old world, even of the righteousness
of faith, many were disobedient, few believed; and so it fared with the
evangelical prophet Isaiah, and with Jeremiah, Ezekiel, Zechariah, and
other prophets of the Old Testament; and with John the Baptist, the
forerunner of Christ, and with Christ himself, as well as with our
apostle; and this has been the case ever since his time, now is, and
will be, as long as the Gospel is preached.

[Acts 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 28:25</span></span>

And when they agreed not among themselves,.... One part believing what
was said, and the other disbelieving; and such a division is the usual
effect of the Gospel ministry; see [Luk
12:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#051). Or this may be understood of
the unbelieving party, who though they agreed in the main that Jesus was
not the Messiah, yet might have different sentiments of the apostle; of
the manner of his reasoning, and the nature of his proofs and arguments;
and of some things which he delivered, which some might assent to, and
others deny; as the Pharisees and Sadducees in the sanhedrim at
Jerusalem disagreed about the doctrine of the resurrection: and the
rather this may be thought to be the sense, because they not only
departed, when very likely those that believed might stay longer, but
because at their departure the apostle says something very cutting and
stinging, and which he would not say in common of them all, of the
believers; and besides, they are afterwards said to reason among
themselves, [Act 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#029).

They departed; from the apostle's lodging to their own houses, or to
some other place, where they could call over, and debate among
themselves, the things they had heard:

after that Paul had spoken one word; a very remarkable one, and full to
the purpose, and which he gave them just at parting with them:

well spake the Holy Ghost by Esaias the prophet unto our fathers; the
passage referred to is in [Isa 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#009),
which the prophet Isaiah delivered under the influence and by the
inspiration of the Holy Ghost, being moved by him, as all the holy men
of God were; and which was very appropriate, not only to the Jewish
fathers in the times of Isaiah, but to their posterity in succeeding
ages, in the times of Christ and his apostles; see [Mat
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#010); and were exceeding applicable
to the present unbelieving Jews, who had been disputing with the
apostle, and were now departing from him, in unbelief: and from hence it
appears, that since it was the Holy Ghost that spake by Isaiah the
prophet, and he that spoke to him and by him, was the Adon, Jehovah, and
Lord of hosts, as is clear from [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001); it follows, that the Holy Ghost
is a divine person, truly God, and equal with the Father and the Son.

[Acts 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 28:26</span></span>

Saying, go unto this people, and say,.... A message sent in wrath and
judgment to the people of Israel, rejected from being the people of God,
a "lo ammi" being written upon them; and therefore God does not call
them "his", but "this" people: and this message was sent by an
evangelical prophet, who foretold, in the clearest manner, the Messiah's
incarnation, and birth of a virgin, the work he was to do, the
sufferings he should undergo, and the glory that should follow; and that
after he had seen in a vision the glory of the King Messiah, the
perfections of deity filling the temple of his human nature, him exalted
on a throne, and attended and worshipped by angels; after he had had
such a view of his beauty and excellency, that laid him low in his own
sight, and humbled him under a sense of his own impurity and
unworthiness; and after he had had a comfortable discovery and
application of pardoning grace; and after he had expressed such a
readiness and willingness to go on the Lord's errand: which one might
have thought would have been of a different nature; and that he would
have been sent, and have been made useful, to set forth the glories and
excellencies of Christ's person, office, and grace, he had had such a
view of; and to preach the comfortable doctrine of pardoning grace to
men, which he had just now such a gracious experience of; but on the
contrary, he is bid to say,

hearing ye shall hear; with bodily ears, the Gospel preached by the
Messiah and his apostles:

and shall not understand, spiritually and experimentally, what they
heard: to have an opportunity of hearing the Gospel, is a great
blessing; seeing it is good news, glad tidings of good things, a joyful
sound, and the voice of Christ himself; it is a distinguishing favour,
and what all men at all times have not; when it is attended with a
divine energy, the Spirit of God is received through it, regeneration,
quickening and sanctifying grace are by it; faith comes by hearing it,
and Christ is found under the ministration of it; and, generally
speaking, the understanding and knowledge of divine things, are by means
of it: men are naturally without the understanding of spiritual things,
and where the Gospel is not, they remain so; the ministers of the
Gospel, and the word preached by them, are the means of leading men into
a spiritual understanding of things, though only as, and when attended
with the Spirit of God, who is a Spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the
knowledge of Christ: and a special mercy it is when persons, whilst
hearing the word, understand what they hear, and can distinguish truth
from error; and approve of the truth, receive the love of it, feel the
power, and taste the sweetness of it; find it and eat it, believe,
embrace, and profess it, and bring forth fruits worthy of it: but on the
contrary, when it is heard and not understood, it is an awful
dispensation; for hence either they content themselves with bare
hearing, and depend upon it for salvation; or they despise and speak
evil of what they do not understand; and so their hearing, instead of
being a blessing, is an aggravation of their condemnation:

and seeing ye shall see: miracles wrought:

and not perceive; them to be proofs of the things, for which they are
wrought: so Jarchi expounds those words,

"ye shall see the wonders, or miracles I have done for you, and shall
not set your hearts to know me''

from whence it appears that the Gospel preached in the clearest and most
powerful manner, and even miracles wrought in confirmation of it, are
insufficient for conversion; and nothing will effect it, but efficacious
grace.

[Acts 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 28:27</span></span>

For the heart of this people is waxed gross,.... Or fat; stupefied with
notions of carnal and temporal things, and become hardened against, and
unsusceptible of, divine and spiritual things:

and their ears are dull of hearing; the Gospel, and its joyful sound; to
which they stop their cars, as the deaf adder to the voice of the
charmer:

and their eyes have they closed; and wilfully shut, against all evidence
from facts, miracles, prophecies, and preaching:

lest they should see with their eyes, and hear with their ears,

and understand with their heart, and should be converted; that is, see
the evidence of miracles, take in the truth of doctrine, understand the
meaning of prophecy, and so be turned from darkness, ignorance, and
unbelief, to light, knowledge, and faith:

and I should heal them; or "have mercy on them", as the Ethiopic version
renders it; that is, forgive their sins: hearing the Gospel preached, is
the ordinary means of understanding spiritual things; and the
understanding being enlightened through the ministry of the word, by the
Spirit of God, whereby the sinner sees his lost state by nature, his
impurity and impotency, the danger he is in, and the destruction that is
imminent on him, and he is liable to, and also his need of Christ, and
salvation by him; this issues in conversion, in the turning of a man
from the evil of his ways, to believe in Christ, walk on in him, and
worthy of him; when he is healed of the diseases of his soul, which are
many, are natural, and hereditary, mortal and incurable, but by Christ
the great physician; by whose stripes, wounds, and blood, there is
healing, that is, pardon; for healing diseases, and pardoning
iniquities, are one and the same; see [Psa
103:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#003); and at conversion, when a soul
is enlightened, and made sensible of the evil of sin, and that there is
no cure of this disease, by anything that he or any creature can do, or
prescribe for him, but only by the blood of Christ; a discovery of
pardoning grace is made unto him; and he is made whole, and cured of
every disease that attended him; from whence spring joy, peace, and
comfort to him:, but when through hearing the word, the understanding is
not enlightened, and conversion does not follow upon it, there is no
healing of the disease of sin, no pardon applied; and consequently such
must be in a most deplorable and miserable condition, as all ignorant
hearers and despisers of the Gospel are; See Gill on

[Acts 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 28:28</span></span>

Be it known therefore unto you,.... Unbelievers and despisers, take this
along with you at parting, and do not say you were never acquainted with
it:

that the salvation of God is sent unto the Gentiles; meaning the Gospel,
which is a publication and declaration of that salvation, which God
contrived from all eternity; made provision for, and secured in the
covenant of grace; which he appointed, called, and sent Christ to
effect, in the fulness of time; and which he has accomplished, by his
obedience, sufferings, and death; even a full, complete, spiritual, and
eternal salvation, from sin, Satan, the world, the curse of the law, and
eternal death; that that Gospel which proclaims this, and is the power
of God unto it, to them that believe, is sent to the Gentile world, by
God himself, who has ordered his ministers to turn to them, upon the
rejection of it by the Jews:

and that they will hear it: and do understand it and obey it, believe it
and profess it: this the apostle could assert upon his own knowledge,
who had preached it in many nations of the world; and could testify how
gladly they heard it, with what pleasure they received it, how readily
they obeyed it, and how cheerfully they professed it, and how steadily
they held it; though the Jews despised and put it away from them,
judging themselves unworthy of everlasting life: this the apostle says,
reproaching them with their folly, stupidity, and infidelity; when the
Gentiles, which knew not God, received the Gospel and are saved.

[Acts 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 28:29</span></span>

And when he had said these words,.... Cited the prophecy of Isaiah, and
declared the mission of the Gospel to the Gentiles, and their calling by
it; both which must greatly gravel and disturb the unbelieving part of
his audience:

the Jews departed; much displeased and uneasy:

and had great reasoning among themselves; not only with them that
believed, but with others, that seemed to incline towards the apostle,
and who espoused and undertook to defend some principles of his, against
the rest, as the doctrine of the resurrection; and particularly they
might take into consideration the passage in Isaiah, the apostle had
recited to them at parting, and which was so appropriate to them; as
well as the account he gave them of the preaching of the Gospel, and the
success of it among the Gentiles, things which must be very grating to
them: this whole verse is wanting in the Alexandrian copy, and in the
Syriac version.

[Acts 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 28:30</span></span>

And Paul dwelt two whole years in his own hired house,.... In a house
which he hired with his own money; in which his friends Luke,
Aristarchus, and others, dwelt with him; where he was guarded by a
soldier: whether at the expiration of these two years he was set at
liberty, and for ten years afterwards travelled into Italy, France, and
Spain, preaching the Gospel, as some think; or whether he then suffered
martyrdom, is not certain; the latter is most probable:

and received all that came in unto him; there, as the Syriac version
reads, that is, into his lodging, as the Ethiopic version expresses it;
which is not to be understood of his hospitality, for it cannot be
thought that he should provide food and lodging for all that came unto
him; but that be admitted all that would to come and hear him, and
freely preached the Gospel to them: it should seem by this, as well as
by what is said [Act 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#023); that many
of the Jews came into his lodging, and heard him expound, that it was a
large house he had hired and dwelt in; and such an one Jerom (y) thinks
it was, like that he supposes he would have Philemon provide for him,
which he desires in his epistle to him, ; namely, a house in the most
noted place in the city, for the conveniency of those that came to him;
large enough to hold many; free from noise and disturbance; and not
situated in a scandalous neighbourhood, nor near to shows and plays; and
that the lodging should rather be on the floor than in an upper room:
and such a house, with all the conditions that Jerom mentions, the
Papists pretend to show at Rome to this day; where, as their tradition
is, Luke composed, or however finished this his history; which, as the
above writer observes (z), reaches to the two years of Paul's stay at
Rome; that is, until the fourth year of Nero; from whence, adds he, we
learn that in the same city this book was composed: and it is certain,
that Luke was with him, when the apostle wrote his second epistle to
Timothy from Rome, and when the time of his martyrdom seemed to himself
to be at hand, [Ti2 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007).

\(y\) Comment in Philemon v. 22. Tom. 9. fol. 116. I. (z) Catalog.
Script. Eccl. sect. 17. fol. 91. C.

[Acts 28:31](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 28:31</span></span>

Preaching the kingdom of God,.... That is, the Gospel, as in [Luk
4:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#043); he preached up Jesus as the King
Messiah, and declared that his kingdom was come, and opened the nature
of it; that it consisted not in meats and drinks, but in righteousness
and peace, and joy in the Holy Ghost; which is the kingdom of grace
here, and is within a man, in his heart, where grace reigns through
righteousness, unto eternal life: and he gave them same account of the
kingdom of glory, and the way unto it; and showed, that without
regeneration and sanctification, no one could be meet for it; and
without the justifying righteousness of Christ, no man could have a
right unto it, or be possessed of it:

and teaching those things which concern the Lord Jesus Christ: his
person, as God and man; his office as Mediator, being prophet, priest,
and King; his incarnation and birth; his life and miracles; his doctrine
and obedience, sufferings and death; his resurrection, ascension,
session at God's right hand; his intercession, and second coming to
judgment; with all the truths of the Gospel, in which he has a concern;
as redemption, peace, reconciliation and pardon, by his blood and
sacrifice, and justification by his righteousness, and salvation and
eternal life through him. These things had been the subject of the
apostle's ministry, throughout the whole of it: he began at Damascus
with preaching Jesus as the Son of God and the true Messiah; and he ends
at Rome, with teaching the things concerning him: at his first setting
out in the work of the Lord, he determined to make known none but
Christ, and him crucified; and in this resolution he continued through
the whole course of his life, and abode by it to the end: and this he
did

with all confidence; with all freedom and liberty in his soul, though he
was bound in his body with a chain; with all plainness, openness, and
faithfulness; and with all courage and boldness, though in the midst of
adversaries:

no man forbidding him; not the Roman emperor, nor the Roman senate, nor
any other magistrate; nor could the Jews hinder him, nor was his mouth
to be stopped by any; nor could the open door of the Gospel be shut, or
its course be impeded; for though the apostle was bound, the word of God
was not, but ran and was glorified; and was made known, and even owned
in Caesar's palace; some say Nero's cupbearer, and Poppea his concubine,
were converted by him: and he not only continued preaching the Gospel
during the two years of his imprisonment at Rome, but also wrote several
epistles to churches, and particular persons; as the epistles to the
Galatians, Ephesians, Philippians, Colossians, and the Hebrews, and to
Philemon, and the "second" epistle to Timothy: some copies add here,
"Amen"; and at the close of the Alexandrian copy, stand these words,
"the Acts of the holy Apostles"; and at the Syriac version these, "the
End of the Acts of the blessed Apostles, that is, of their Histories".

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Introduction](rom000)

</div>
