<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act013)  [Next](act015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001)

[Acts 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 14:1</span></span>

And it came to pass in Iconium,.... When the apostles were got thither,
and as soon as they were there; at least the first opportunity they had:

that they went both together into the synagogue of the Jews; which was
in Iconium; hither Paul and Barnabas went together, in like manner as
they had done at Antioch:

and so spoke; such words, and doctrines of grace, with so much power,
authority, and demonstration of the Spirit, with so much plainness,
clearness, and evidence, as well as with so much boldness and courage:

that a great multitude, both of the Jews, and also of the Greeks,
believed: the doctrines they preached, and in Christ the sum and
substance of them; and these were not a few, but a great multitude; and
not of one sort, of the Jews only, who expected the Messiah, but of the
Greeks, or Gentiles also, who never heard of any; for by Greeks here are
meant, not Jews born in Greece, speaking the Greek tongue, and using the
Greek Bible, for these were called Hellenists, and not Greeks, but
Heathens. These converts laid the foundation of a Gospel church state in
this place; for that there was a church here, is certain from [Act
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#021) In the "first" century,
Sosipater is said to be bishop, or pastor of this church, and also
Tertius, who are both reckoned among the "seventy" disciples of Christ;
See Gill on [Luk 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001). In the "third"
century, Celsus was bishop of this church; and in the same century,
several synods were held here, about the error of Novatus; and in the
same century, Nicomes bishop of this place, assisted at the council at
Antioch, which condemned the heresy of Samosatenus (f): in the "fourth"
century there was a church in this place, and Amphiius was bishop of it,
of whom Jerom (g) makes mention; and who read to him a book, concerning
the deity and worship of the holy Spirit: in the "fifth" century, it was
the metropolitan church of Lycaonia, and Valerianus and Onesiphorus
presided over it: in the "sixth" century, a bishop of this church was
present at the fifth Roman council under Symmachus: in the "seventh"
century, it bore the character of metropolitan, and a bishop of it
assisted at the sixth council at Constantinople, whose name was Paul: in
the "eighth" century, Leo was bishop of it, who was present at the synod
of Nice (h); and after this we hear no more of it, the place falling
into the hands of the Turks, who are now possessed of it: here,
according to the Roman martyrology, Tryphena and Tryphosa, mentioned in
[Rom 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#012) heard the Apostle Paul
preach; and here the famous virgin and martyr, Thecla, was converted.

\(f\) Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 19. & l. 7. c. 28, 30. (g) Catalog.
Script. Eccles. fol. 102. H. (h) Magdeburg. Hist. Eccles. cent. 5. c. 7.
p. 418. c. 10. p. 596. cent. 6. c. 2. p. 4. cent. 7. c. 2. p. 3. c. 7.
p. 112. c. 10. p. 254. cent. 8. c. 2. p. 4.

[Acts 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 14:2</span></span>

But the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles,.... That part of the
Jews, which continued in unbelief, and rejected the doctrine of the
apostles, concerning Jesus of Nazareth being the Messiah; these stirred
up the Gentiles, who had no knowledge of, nor faith in this matter:

and made their minds evil affected against the brethren; either in
general against all those that embraced the Gospel of Christ; who being
of the same faith and family, having the same God to be their Father,
and equally related to, and interested in Christ Jesus, are called
brethren; or in particular against the Apostles Paul and Barnabas, by
representing them as seditious persons, and of bad designs.

[Acts 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 14:3</span></span>

Long time therefore abode they,.... At Iconium, undaunted and not
discouraged, at the treatment they met with: but continued,

speaking boldly in the Lord; using great freedom of speech, and showing
great courage and intrepidity of mind; speaking out, without fear, the
doctrines of the Gospel, in the name of the Lord, and depending upon
strength, assistance, and support, from him:

which gave testimony unto the word of his grace; the Gospel, so called,
because it is a publication of the grace and favour of God to the sons
of men; in the choice of some of them to everlasting life, in the
mission of his Son to redeem them, in the justification of them by his
righteousness, and in the forgiveness of them through his blood, in the
regeneration of them by his Spirit, in adopting them into his family,
and making them heirs of eternal life; and because it is a means of
implanting his grace in their souls; to this he bore witness, by giving
it success, notwithstanding the opposition made against it, and by
miracles wrought in confirmation of it, as follows:

and granted signs and wonders to be done by their hands; such as healing
the sick, curing the lame, casting out devils; and the like, whereby a
testimony was given to the truth of the doctrine they preached: and it
may be observed, that these miraculous works were not wrought by the
power of the apostles, but by the power of God; they were only
instruments by whom they were done; it was owing to a grant from the
Lord, and to his power, that they were performed.

[Acts 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 14:4</span></span>

But the multitude of the city was divided,.... In their sentiments,
about the apostles, their doctrines, and miracles; some approving them,
others condemning their doctrines as false, and their miracles as
delusions:

and part held with the Jews; that did not believe, but rejected the
apostles, despised their doctrines, and disparaged their miracles:

and part with the apostles; these were the Jews and Greeks, that
believed; which divisions in families, towns, and cities, though the
common consequence of the preaching of the Gospel, are not owing to any
fault in that, but to the depravity and corruption of human nature; and
are what our Lord declared was, and foretold would be the case, [Luk
12:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#051).

[Acts 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 14:5</span></span>

And when there was an assault made,.... Or a strong bias and inclination
were in the minds,

both of the Gentiles, and also of the Jews, with their rulers; who
encouraged them in it:

to use them despitefully, and to stone them; not only to give them
reproachful language, but to smite, buffet, and scourge them, and to
stone them for blasphemy, which was a punishment among the Jews for such
causes.

[Acts 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 14:6</span></span>

They were ware of it,.... They understood it, were apprised of it, and
well weighed it, and considered it in their minds, and what was best to
be done at this juncture:

and fled unto Lystra and Derbe, cities of Lycaonia; according to the
orders and command of Christ, [Mat
10:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#023) not so much to save their lives,
as to spread the Gospel in other parts. Lycaonia was a province in the
lesser Asia, near Phrygia, separated from it by the mountains; on the
east it bordered on Galatia, and had on the west Pamphylia and Pisidia,
and on the south Cilicia, unto Mount Taurus. Some say it had its name
from Lycaon, the son of Pelasgus; others, seeing it was not a Greek
colony, chose to fetch the name of the country from the Syrians, who
used to call their neighbour's country Leikonia, or in the Greek
pronunciation Lycaonia; that is, the country of Iconium, which city was
the metropolis of Lycaonia (i): Lystra is by Ptolomy (k) placed in
Isauria, and so Derbe is said by Strabo (l) to be upon the coast of
Isauria; wherefore the words may be read thus, as they are in the Syriac
and Ethiopic versions, "and they fled to the cities of Lycaonia, and to
Lystra, and to Derbe"; by which reading, they are not necessarily made
the cities of Lycaoma: according to Jerom (m), they were both cities of
Lycaonia. Lystra is the same with "Lehesthera"; which, in the Hebrew and
Syriac languages, signifies "a flock of sheep", or "a city of flocks";
it being a place that abounded with sheep, as the country of Lycaonia in
general did (n). Derbe was sometimes called "Delbia", which, in the
language of the Lycaonians, signifies a "juniper tree"; and Delub, and
Dulbe, with the Targumist (o) and Talmudists (p), signify a chesnut
tree; and with the Arabians, "Dulb" is a plane tree, or poplar; it seems
as if it had its name from one or other of those trees, which might grow
in large quantities near it:

and unto the region that lieth round about; the said cities.

\(i\) Vid. Hiller. Onomasticum Sacrum, p. 870. (k) Geograph. l. 5. c. 4.
(l) Ib. l. 12. (m) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 96. A. D. (n) Vid. Hiller.
ib. p. 870, 871. (o) Targum Onkelos in Gen. xxx. 37. (p) T. Hieros.
Cetubot, fol. 31. 4. T. Bab. Roshhashana, fol. 23. 1. & Succa, fol. 32.
2.

[Acts 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 14:7</span></span>

And there they preached the Gospel. They did not sit still, nor hide
themselves in these places; but, as in others, they preached the Gospel,
the good news and glad tidings of the incarnation of Christ, of
redemption, peace, and pardon, through his blood, justification by his
righteousness, and spiritual and eternal salvation through him: in
Beza's most ancient copy, and in one of Stephens's, these words are
added, and which Bede also says were in the Greek copies in his time,
"and the whole multitude were moved at their doctrines, and Paul and
Barnabas continued at Lystra"; which agrees with what follows. It is
very likely that many were converted in each of these cities, and in the
adjacent country, and that churches were raised in these places; this
seems manifest, from [Act 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#020)
Artemas, of whom mention is made in [Tit
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#012) and is said to be one of the
seventy disciples, is reported to be bishop of Lystra; See Gill on [Luk
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001), though we meet with nothing in
ecclesiastical history, concerning the churches in either of these
places, until the "sixth" century; when in the fifth Roman synod under
Symmachus, there were present the bishops of Lystra and Derbe, as also
of Iconium and Larandas, which were likewise cities in Lycaonia (q).

\(q\) Magdeburg. Hist. Eccles. cent. 6. c. 2. p. 4.

[Acts 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 14:8</span></span>

And there sat a certain man at Lystra,.... Where the apostle was
preaching; and perhaps he sat there to beg, where there was a great
concourse of people, and which might be in the open street: this man was

impotent in his feet; so weak, as not to be able to walk, and even to
stand on them, and therefore is said to sit:

being a cripple from his mother's womb; he was born lame, as was the man
cured by Peter, [Act 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#002)

who never had walked; these circumstances are mentioned, to show that
his case was incurable by any human art, and to illustrate the following
miracle.

[Acts 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 14:9</span></span>

The same heard Paul speak,.... That is, preach the Gospel; he was one of
his hearers, and faith came to hint by hearing; the Arabic version adds,
"he cried unto him"; that is, to Paul, whom he heard:

who steadfastly beholding him; not the lame man beholding Paul, but Paul
beholding the lame man, as the Syriac and Ethiopic versions both express
it, as also Beza's ancient copy and others; so Peter looked on the man
he cured, [Act 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#004).

And perceiving that he had faith to be healed; as he might by his looks,
his gestures, his attention in hearing, and it may be by somewhat that
he said, as well as by revelation, or a spirit of discerning, which he
had.

[Acts 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 14:10</span></span>

Said with a loud voice,.... Not only that the man, but that all might
hear and attend to the miracle about to be wrought:

stand upright on thy feet; in five of Beza's manuscripts, and in other
copies, and in the Complutensian edition, and in the Syriac version,
this clause is introduced with these words, "I say unto thee, in the
name of the Lord Jesus Christ"; which is much such a form that Peter
used, [Act 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006) whereby the virtue of
the miracle is ascribed to Christ, and not assumed by the apostle:

and he leaped and walked; he sprung up directly from his seat, and
leaped about for joy, and walked as well as any other man could.

[Acts 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 14:11</span></span>

And when the people saw what Paul had done,.... In curing the lame man
in so marvellous a manner, and concluding it to be a divine work, and
what a mere creature could never perform:

they lift up their voices; not in indignation and wrath, but as persons
astonished:

saying in the speech of Lycaonia; by which it should seem that Lystra
was a city of Lycaonia, since the Lycaonian language was spoken in it;
the Arabic version reads, "in their own tongue"; and the Syriac version,
"in the dialect of the country"; very likely a dialect of the Greek
tongue;

the gods are come down to us in the likeness of men; they had a notion
of deity, though a very wrong one; they thought there were more gods
than one, and they imagined heaven to be the habitation of the gods; and
that they sometimes descended on earth in human shape, as they supposed
they now did.

[Acts 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 14:12</span></span>

And they called Barnabas Jupiter,.... The supreme God; it may be because
that Barnabas was the oldest man, of the tallest stature, and largest
bulk, and made the best figure; whereas Paul was younger, of a low
stature, and mean appearance:

and Paul Mercurius, because he was the chief speaker; Mercury was the
god of eloquence, and the messenger of the gods, and the interpreter of
their will (r); Paul being chiefly concerned in preaching and speaking
to the people, they called him by the name of this God: the Jews had a
doctor in their schools, whom they called , "the chief of the speakers"
(s).

\(r\) Vid Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 17, 19. (s) Juchasin, fol. 45. 2. &
46. 1.

[Acts 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 14:13</span></span>

Then the priest of Jupiter, which was before their city,.... Not that
the priest was before the city, but Jupiter; and the phrase denotes
either his presidency over the city, and so the Arabic version renders
it, "who was the chief god of their city"; or the place where his image
stood, which was out of the city, and so may be said to be before it;
accordingly the Syriac version renders it, "who was without the city";
he who officiated as priest to him:

brought oxen and garlands unto the gates; either "of the city", as the
Arabic and Ethiopic versions add, where was the statue of Jupiter; or
else, and which is most likely, he brought them to the gates of the
house, where Paul and Barnabas were; and to this sense the Syriac
version renders it, "to the door of the dwelling place where they
abode": what the oxen were brought for is easy to conceive, had it not
been expressed; but for what should garlands or crowns be brought? These
were used in sacrifices, for different purposes; sometimes they crowned
the gods (t), to whom they sacrificed, and these might be brought to be
put upon the heads of Paul and Barnabas; and sometimes the priests wore
them (u), and which seems to be in imitation of the mitre, wore by the
high priest among the Jews; and sometimes even those who came to
sacrifice, and implore the assistance of their deities, wore them (w);
likewise the altars on which they offered sacrifice were crowned with
these garlands (x); and the sacrifices themselves, and which last seems
to be the case here: the garlands were brought to be put upon the oxen;
and these were for the most part made of cypress; sometimes of the pine
tree, and sometimes of other leaves and flowers, such as were peculiar
to the gods (y): and there was something like this among the Jews, at
the offerings of their first fruits, which were done in this manner (z);

"they that were nearest (to Jerusalem) brought green figs and grapes;
and they that were more remote brought dried figs and raisins; and an ox
went before them, whose horns were covered with gold, , "and a crown of
olives" on his head; a pipe sounded before them, till they came near to
Jerusalem, and then they sent some before them, who "crowned" their
first fruits.''

And would have done sacrifice with the people; that is, the priest and
the people with him, would have offered sacrifice to Paul and Barnabas,
as to two deities; and the Syriac and Ethiopic versions add, "to them";
to both the apostles, with which agrees the Arabic version.

\(t\) Baruch vi. 9. Justin. Apolog. 2. p. 57. Tertull. de Corona, c. 10.
Alex. ab. Alex. Gen. dier. l. 4. c. 17. (u) Tertull. de Idolatria, c.
18. Alex. ab. Alex. ib. Paschalius de Coronis. l. 4. c. 13. (w) Paschal.
ib. (x) Ovid de Tristibus, l. 3. eleg. 13. (y) Paschal. ib. c. 16. (z)
Misn. Biccurim, c. 3. sect. 3.

[Acts 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 14:14</span></span>

Which when the apostles Barnabas and Paul heard of,.... As they quickly
did, such a multitude being about the doors of the house, where they
were: it may be observed, that Barnabas is here called an apostle, as in
[Act 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#004) and is placed before Paul,
not as being greater than he, but because of the opinion these Heathens
had of him: they rent their clothes; as the Jews did, and were obliged
to do, when they heard any blasphemy; See Gill on [Mat
26:65](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#065).

And ran in among the people; in great haste, showing great concern of
mind, and much indignation and resentment, at what they were about to
do:

crying out; aloud, and with great vehemence, that all might hear, and to
express the greater dislike of the action.

[Acts 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 14:15</span></span>

And saying, Sirs, why do ye these things?.... That is, bring these oxen
and garlands, and attempt to offer sacrifice; this they said, not as
arguing with them calmly and mildly, but with a mixture of indignation,
heat, and zeal, as displeased with, and detesting and abhorring what
they were about to do:

we also are men of like passions with you; men, and not gods; of the
same human nature, and that as corrupted, alike sinful men, and need a
sacrifice better than these; frail mortal men, subject to frailty,
imperfection, afflictions, troubles, diseases, and death itself; and so
very improper objects of worship:

and preach unto you that ye should turn from these vanities; from these
deities, Jupiter and Mercury, and the rest of them; which were vain,
useless, and unprofitable, and could do their votaries no manner of
service; and from the worshipping of them, which were so many acts of
vanity, folly, and weakness, yea, of sin and wickedness: the apostles
were so far from being these gods, that their business was to show men
the sin and folly of adhering to them; and to persuade them to
relinquish the worship of them, and turn

to the living God; who has life in himself, and is the fountain of life
to others; whereas these deities were dead men, and the lifeless images
of them; who neither lived themselves, nor could give life to others, or
do them any service of any kind: but the living God is he,

which hath made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all things that are
therein; which comprehends all created beings, the whole universe, and
all that is in it, angels, men, beasts, fowls, fish, and whatever
exists; and therefore is only deserving of religious worship.

[Acts 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 14:16</span></span>

Who in times past,.... For many hundred years past; even ever since God
chose and separated the people of Israel from the rest of the nations,
to be a peculiar people to himself: from that time he

suffered all nations to walk in their own ways; of ignorance,
superstition, and idolatry; which they devised, and chose, and delighted
in: not that he gave them any licence to walk in these ways, without
being chargeable with sin, or with impunity; but he left them to
themselves, to the dim light and law of nature, and gave them no written
law, nor any external revelation of his mind and will; nor did he send
any prophets or ministers of his unto them, to show them the evil of
their ways, and turn them from them, and direct them to the true God,
and the right way of worshipping him; but left them to take their own
methods, and pursue the imagination of their own hearts: but the apostle
suggests, that the case was now altered, and God had sent them and other
ministers of his, among all nations of the world, to protest against
their superstition and idolatry; and to reclaim them from their evil
ways, and to direct them to the true and living God, and his worship,
and to preach salvation by his Son Jesus Christ.

[Acts 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 14:17</span></span>

Nevertheless, he left not himself without witness,.... Of his kindness
and goodness to them, during this long interval and period of time; for
they had not the written law, yet they were not destitute of the law of
nature; and had, besides, many instances of providential goodness, by
which they might have known God: and should have been thankful to him,
and glorified him as God, and not have worshipped the idols of their own
hands; the goodness of God should have led them to repentance, and not
have been abused to so many wicked purposes as it had been:

in that he did good; in a providential way, to persons very undeserving
of it, of which some particular instances follow:

and gave us rain from heaven, which none of the gods of the Gentiles
could, do, [Jer 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022). So , "the key
of rains", is by the Jews (a) said to be one of the keys which God has
in his own hands, and which he does not commit to any other: and a
wonderful blessing is this to mankind, and which God gives to the just
and to the unjust, and did give to the ignorant and idolatrous Gentiles.
Beza's most ancient copy, and four other ancient copies of his, and some
others, read "you", instead of "us"; which reading seems most agreeable:

and fruitful seasons; spring, summer, harvest, and autumn, at which
several times, different fruits of the earth appear:

filling our hearts with food and gladness; giving a sufficiency of food,
and even an abundance of it, and that for pleasure and delight, as well
as for support and refreshment: the Syriac version reads, "their
hearts"; some copies read, "your hearts".

\(a\) Targum Jerus. in Gen. xxx. 22. & Jon. in Deut. xxviii. 12.

[Acts 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 14:18</span></span>

And with these sayings,.... Concerning themselves, and concerning the
living God, his creation of all things, and his providential goodness:

scarce restrained they the people, that they had not done sacrifice unto
them; so resolute were they upon it, that it was with great difficulty
that they persuaded them from it: in four of Beza's manuscripts, and in
some other copies, it is added, "but everyone went to his own house",
&c.

[Acts 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 14:19</span></span>

And there came thither certain Jews,.... Either just at the same time,
or however whilst the apostles were in this city: in four manuscripts of
Beza's, and in some other copies, it is read, "as they abode there, and
taught, there came", &c. These Jews were inveterate enemies of the
apostles, and seemed to have followed them from place to place, on
purpose to oppose them, and to stir up the people against them, and to
hinder the success of their ministry all they could: for these came

from Antioch; not Antioch in Syria, but in Pisidia: where they had
contradicted and blasphemed the word of God, and was the reason why the
apostles turned to the Gentiles, [Act
13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045).

And Iconium: where also the unbelieving Jews stirred up the Gentiles
against the apostles, and both of them made an assault upon them, to use
them ill, [Act 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#002)

who persuaded the people; in the above manuscripts of Beza's, and in
some other copies, are these words,

"and they disputing confidently, persuaded the people to depart from
them, saying, that they said nothing true, but in all things lied;''

which though they may not be considered as the text, are a good gloss
upon it: they persuaded the people not to hearken to them, told them
that they were deceivers and jugglers, and instead of having honours
conferred upon them, they ought to be severely punished; and to these
Jews they hearkened, as appears by what follows:

and having stoned Paul; even the same persons that just before were for
sacrificing to him as a god; which shows the fickleness and inconstancy
of the populace, and how little they are to be depended on; for they
were the Gentiles that stoned Paul, at the instigation of the Jews;
though the latter might probably join with them in it: a like instance
we have in the conduct of the Jews towards Christ, who cried "Hosanna"
to him one day, and on another, very quickly after, with great
importunity say, Crucify him, Crucify him; of this stoning, the apostle
makes mention, [Co2 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025) When they
had stoned him,

they drew him out of the city, supposing he had been dead; which is an
addition to their barbarity and inhumanity; for they not only stoned him
until he was dead, as they supposed, but they dragged his body through
the streets of their city, in contempt of him, and indignation against
him, and cast him out of it, where they left him as unworthy of a
burial.

[Acts 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 14:20</span></span>

Howbeit as the disciples stood round about him,.... Weeping over him,
and lamenting for him, and it may be praying to God, that he would
restore him to life: however, they got about him, in order to take care
of him, and provide for his interment: these were the young converts at
Lystra, who, under the ministry of the apostles, were now brought to the
faith of Christ; unless it can be thought, that they were such who
followed them from other places, and attended them in their travels; but
the former seems most probable, and which shows their affection to their
spiritual Father, and their constancy in the faith of Christ,
notwithstanding this ill treatment of his servant:

he rose up and came into the city; which was no less than a miracle, and
was no doubt the effect of the mighty power of God, put forth upon him;
for though he was not really dead, yet he was left as such, and thought
to be so by both friends and foes: and when it is considered what wounds
and bruises he must receive by stoning, and his being dragged through
the streets of the city, and left in such a miserable condition without
it, that he should at once rise up in the midst of the disciples, and
walk into the city as one in perfect health and strength, has something
extraordinary and miraculous in it; and it shows great resolution,
courage, and strength of mind, to go into the same city again, where he
had been so ill used; though he did not choose to continue there, nor
were the inhabitants worthy of such a favour:

and the next day he departed with Barnabas to Derbe; where they had been
before, and had preached the Gospel, and whither they fled from Iconium,
when in great danger, [Act 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006).

[Acts 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 14:21</span></span>

And when they had preached the Gospel to that city,.... To the
inhabitants of it, as they did in every place where they came, even the
pure Gospel of Christ, the good news, and glad tidings of life and
salvation by him:

and had taught many; or made them disciples, their ministry being
blessed to bring many to the faith of Christ:

they returned again to Lystra; where Paul had been stoned:

and to Iconium; where both Jews and Gentiles, and the magistrates of the
city, had attempted to use them ill, and to stone them:

and Antioch; that is, in Pisidia, as before; where a persecution was
raised against them, and from the coasts of which place they were
expelled; so fearless were they of danger, and so zealous to promote the
interest of Christ, and the good of souls.

[Acts 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 14:22</span></span>

Confirming the souls of the disciples,.... Not wicked men in their
wickedness, nor self-righteous persons in an opinion of their own
righteousness, as sufficient for justification, both being contrary to
the nature and tendency of the ministry of the word; the Gospel being a
doctrine according to godliness, and a revelation of the righteousness
of Christ; but the disciples and followers of Jesus, whom they had
already made in those places, these they confirmed in the doctrines of
the Gospel, and fortified them against the contradictions and
blasphemies of the Jews, and the reproaches, afflictions, and
persecutions they met with, by which they might be staggered: they did
not confirm the bodies of these disciples, and the health of them, which
is the business of the physician to confirm; nor their estates and civil
property, to secure and defend which belongs to the civil magistrate;
but their souls, their more noble and valuable part, their hearts, which
are apt to be unstable; the frames of their hearts, which are
precarious, and so as not to be too much depressed when disagreeable, or
be too much elated when agreeable, placing too much trust and confidence
in them; and also the graces of the Spirit in their hearts, as to act
and exercise, as faith, hope, and love; and likewise their judgments and
understandings in the truths of the Gospel, in what relates to the love
of God; the covenant of grace, the person of Christ, and their interest
in them:

and exhorting them to continue in the faith: in the exercise of the
grace of faith, and in the doctrine of faith, and in the profession of
both, whatever they might meet with on the account thereof, and which
they were to expect:

and that we must through much tribulation enter into the kingdom of God
either into a Gospel church state, which is sometimes so called, there
being much trouble often attending an entrance into it, both from
within, from the corruption and unbelief of the heart, and from without,
from the temptations of Satan, and from the revilings and insults of
men, and even from friends and relations; or into the heavenly glory,
the way to that lying through many tribulations; and which, though a
rough, is a right way: so it "must" be, there is a necessity of it,
partly on account of the decrees of God, who has appointed afflictions
for his people, and them to afflictions; and partly on account of the
predictions of Christ, who foretold his disciples, that in the world
they should have tribulation; as also, that there might be a conformity
to him, that as he the head must, and did suffer many things, and enter
into his glory, so must they his members: as well as likewise for the
trial and exercise of the several graces of the Spirit, and to make the
saints meet for heaven, and to make that the sweeter to them.

[Acts 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 14:23</span></span>

And when they had ordained them elders in every church,.... As soon as
ever any number of disciples were made, or souls were converted to
Christ in any place, they were at once formed, by the apostles, into a
church state; and as the gifts, as well as the grace of the Holy Ghost,
attended the ministry of the word, so among those that were converted,
there were some that were honoured with ministerial gifts, qualifying
them to preach the Gospel, and take upon them the care of the churches:
these the apostles directed the churches to look out from among
themselves, as in the case of deacons, an inferior office, who by joint
suffrages declared their choice of them by the stretching out, or
lifting up of their hands, as the word here used signifies, and not the
imposition of them; and the apostles presiding in this affair, they were
installed into the office of bishops, elders, or pastors over them;
which expresses the great regard the apostles had to the order, as well
as to the doctrine of the Gospel, and the concern they had for the
welfare of souls converted under their ministry, by making a provision
for them when they were gone.

And had prayed with fasting; for the elders ordained, that they might
have a larger measure of gifts, and might be kept faithful to the trust
committed to them, and be succeeded in their ministry; and for the
members of the church, that they might abide by the truths of the
Gospel, and the ordinances of it, and walk worthy of it in their
conversations, and behave aright in their church state, both to their
elders, and to one another, and that they might persevere to the end:

they commended them to the Lord; both the elders and the churches, to be
blessed by him with fresh supplies of grace, to be kept by his power,
and to be preserved by him safe to his kingdom and glory. The Lord Jesus
Christ seems to be intended by "the Lord", to whom the apostles
commended them; and who is every way qualified, and fully able to answer
such a commendation; see [Act 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032) on
whom they believed; meaning Christ, whom they received by faith, in whom
they trusted, and on whom they believed with the heart for
righteousness, life, and salvation: this was true, both of the apostles,
who commended the elders and churches to the Lord, and was the reason
why they commended them to him, because they believed on him themselves;
and of the churches and elders commended, who could be commended to none
better than to him, on whom they had believed.

[Acts 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 14:24</span></span>

And after they had passed throughout Pisidia,.... The country where
Antioch, the last place mentioned, was; see [Act
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#014) they came to Pamphylia; See Gill
on [Act 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013), [Act
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010)

[Acts 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 14:25</span></span>

And when they had preached the word in Perga,.... A city in Pamphylia,
[Act 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013). The Alexandrian copy, and
others, and three manuscripts of Beza's, read, "the word of the Lord";
as do the Vulgate Latin and Syriac versions: they went down into
"Attalia"; not Italia or Italy, as some Latin copies, and as the Syriac,
Arabic, and Ethiopic versions read; but a city in Pamphylia, bordering
on the sea, as Ptolomy writes (b); as this place did, as appears by what
follows. So Jerom says (c), that Attalia is a city of Pamphylia, on the
sea coast; it was formerly the metropolis of it: it is now in the hands
of the Turks, and is called Sattalia; near it is a bay, called Golfo di
Sattalia, where there is a considerable mart for the whole country: it
is famous for tapestry, which is made in it: it had its name from
Attalus, king of Pergamus, the first founder of it. Beza's ancient copy
here adds, "preaching the Gospel to them"; to the inhabitants of
Attalia, and doubtless with success, though no mention is made of it
here, nor elsewhere, nor of any church in this place; nor do we read of
any in ecclesiastical history until the "sixth" century, when Dionysius,
bishop of Attalia, is said to be present in the fifth synod at Rome (d);
unless Attalia, called a city of Lycia, can be thought to be the same
with this, of which another Dionysius was bishop in the fifth century;
and assisted at the council of Chalcedon (e).

\(b\) Geograh. l. 5, c. 5. (c) De locis Hebraicis. fol. 95. K. (d)
Magdeburg. Hist. Eccles. cent. 6. c. 2. p. 4. (e) Ib. cent. 5. c. 10. p.
589.

[Acts 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 14:26</span></span>

And thence sailed to Antioch,.... In Syria,

from whence they had been recommended to the grace of God; by the
prophets: from this place they first set out on their travels; here they
were separated by the order of the Holy Ghost to the work of the
ministry, and by them they were sent forth, after they had in prayer
commended them to God, and to his grace to assist them, and succeed
them, as well as to fit them

for the work which they fulfilled; that is, for the work of the
ministry, for the preaching of the Gospel in several places; and which
they had now gone through, and finished with great integrity and
faithfulness, and with much success, though through many afflictions and
persecutions.

[Acts 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 14:27</span></span>

And when they were come,.... To Antioch:

and had gathered the church together: which was in that place, and who
came together at their request; for as they were sent out by them, they
judged it proper to call them together; and give them an account of the
issue of their work they were recommended by them to the grace of God to
fulfil: and being come together at their usual place of meeting,

they rehearsed all that God had done with them; and by them, as
instruments; what grace and strength he had given them to preach the
Gospel; what numbers of souls were everywhere converted by it; what
miracles were wrought by them for the confirmation of it; and what
persecutions and sufferings they had endured for the sake of it; and
what deliverances were vouchsafed unto them:

and how he had opened the door of faith unto the Gentiles; the phrase,
"the door of faith", seems to be Jewish; it is to be met with in Jewish
writings: it is said (f),

"there are two women found in the world, that express the praise of God,
so as all the men of the world have not; and who are they? Deborah and
Hannah: Hannah, according to [Sa1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#002)
"there is none holy as the Lord, for there is none beside thee" and all
proclaim that she , "opens the door of faith to the world", as [Act
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#008) "he raiseth up the poor out of
the dust, and lifteth the beggar from the dunghill, lo, the door of
faith; to set them among princes", lo, the faith that is above.''

The sense here seems to be, that God had given an opportunity to the
apostles to preach the doctrine of faith unto the Gentiles, and the
Gentiles had had an opportunity of hearing and embracing it; God had
opened the mouths of his ministers to preach to them, and he had opened
their hearts to attend unto it, and receive it; for it may be understood
of his giving of them the grace of faith, by which they received Christ,
and his Gospel, into their hearts: so a like phrase is used by the
Targumist on [Jer 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#006) who paraphrases
the words thus;

"behold, I will bring unto them healing and redemption, and I will heal
them, and I will reveal, or "open to them", , "the door of
repentance";''

that is, I will give them repentance: so here, when God is said to open
the door of faith to the Gentiles, the sense is, that he had given the
grace of faith to them, which came by hearing the word of the Gospel,
which he sent them; and gave them encouragement to believe in Christ; so
the phrase a door of hope is used in [Hos
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015).

\(f\) Zohar in Lev. fol. 8. 3. & in Deut. fol. 109. 4. Vid. ib. in Gen.
fol. 60. 2. & 68. 2. Vid. Raziel, fol. 39. 2.

[Acts 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 14:28</span></span>

And there they abode long time with the disciples. That is, Paul and
Barnabas continued a considerable time at Antioch with the believers
there, before they set out on another journey; and what might detain
them the longer, might be the disputes they had with some "judaizing"
Christians, concerning the observation of the law; of which, and the
issue of them, an account is given in the next chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 15](act015)

</div>
