<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act005)  [Next](act007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001.md)

[Acts 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 6:1</span></span>

And in those days, when the number of the disciples was multiplied,....
From an hundred and twenty to three thousand more, from thence to five
thousand more, and after that a multitude of men and women were added,
and still they were increasing; see [Act
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#015.md) [Act
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041.md). This increase of the disciples
agrees with what Maimonides says (z), before observed, that

"in the days of Gamaliel, , "the heretics were multiplied in Israel".''

The word "disciples" was a common name to all Christians, to all that
believed in Christ, and was the name they went by, before they were
called Christians, [Act 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026.md)

there arose a murmuring of the Grecians, or Hellenists, against the
Hebrews; by the Hebrews are meant the Jews that dwelt in Judea, and were
the inhabitants of that country, and chiefly of Jerusalem, who spoke the
Hebrew, or rather the Syriac language; and by the Grecians, or
Hellenists, are meant, not the Greeks that were proselyted to the Jewish
religion, though there might be some few among them; but Jews who were
born, and had dwelt, in some parts of Greece, and spoke the Greek
language, and used the Septuagint version of the Bible; between these
two a murmuring arose, a complaint was made by one against the other: so
that, as it appears from the instance of Ananias and Sapphira, that this
first and pure Gospel church was not free from hypocrites; it is also
manifest, that though they were at first so united and harmonious in
their affections and judgments, yet they were not always clear of feuds,
animosities, and contentions; Satan bestirred himself, and got footing
among them, as he commonly does where the Gospel is preached, and there
is an increase of it: the reason of this uneasiness was,

because their widows were neglected in the daily ministration; that is,
they had not that distributed which was necessary for them, nor so much
as the Hebrew widows; they complained of partiality, as if because the
Hebrew widows were the natives of the country, and might be nearly
related to many of the community, that therefore they were more regarded
and better supplied every day, than their widows were, whose husbands
had dwelt in foreign lands, and were not so well known, and had fewer
acquaintance and relations; for it seems the ministration or
distribution was made every day: and such a practice obtained among the
Jews in common, who used to collect every day for the poor, and give it
daily to them. Maimonides (a) speaks of it in this manner;

"they appoint collectors, who receive "every day", from every court, a
piece of bread, or any sort of food, or fruit, or money, from whomsoever
that offers freely for the time; and they divide that which is
collected, "in the evening", among the poor, and they give to every poor
person of it "his daily sustenance"; and this is called "Tamchui", or
"the alms dish".''

And from hence the apostles might take up this custom, and follow it.
The Ethiopic version renders it, "because they saw their widows
minister", or "employed daily"; as if the complaint was, that their
widows were too much made use of, and obliged to more frequent and to
harder service in taking care of the poor, the sick, and helpless, than
the other widows were, who had not their share of labour with them, but
lived more at ease. Though others rather think the murmur was, because
the Grecian widows were not taken into the number, and employed in
taking care of the poor, as the Hebrew widows were; but the sense first
given, of not having so good a share in the distribution, seems to be
the best.

\(z\) Hilchot Tephilla, c. 2. sect. 1. (a) Hilchot Mattanot Annayim, c.
9. sect. 2.

[Acts 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 6:2</span></span>

Then the twelve,.... The twelve apostles, as the Syriac version reads;
for their number was now complete, Matthias being chosen in the room of
Judas: these being informed of the murmur there was between the two
sorts of believers, the Hebrew and thc Hellenistic Jews,

called the multitude of the disciples unto them; either the hundred and
twenty, the original members of the church, which first formed it, and
on whom the Holy Ghost descended on the day of Pentecost; or rather the
whole body of the church: for what the apostles had to say concerned
them all; and they all had an equal right to chose their officers, that
should minister unto them; and when they were convened together, they
addressed them after this manner:

and said, it is not reason; or "it is not pleasing", neither to God, nor
to us; so the Arabic version reads, "this does not please us"; nor could
it be pleasing to the church itself:

that we should leave the word of God the study of the word, meditation
upon it, and preaching it: not that they did relinquish either of these;
but they were sometimes obliged to omit them, or not so frequently
attend them; the care of the poor taking up more of their time, than the
work of the ministry, or preaching of the Gospel would admit of; and
therefore thought it not so right and proper, or so acceptable a thing
to God and man, that they should in the least neglect a work of so great
importance to the souls of men, and cause it to give way to that which
only regarded their bodies:

and serve tables; the tables of the poor, collect for them, inspect into
their several cases, and circumstances, and distribute accordingly to
them; which required a good deal of time, care, thought, and
circumspection, especially in such a church, where the numbers were so
large. From hence we learn what is the business of deacons, who were
afterwards appointed to take this part of the apostles' work off of
their hands, and attend to it; which is to serve tables: the table of
the Lord, by providing the bread and wine for it; receiving both from
the minister, when blessed, and distributing them to the members; and
collecting from them for the poor, and the defraying the charge; and
observing what members are missing at the ordinance, whom they are to
admonish; and if their admonitions are not regarded, to report it to the
church: and they are likewise to serve the minister's table, by taking
care that he has a sufficient competency for his support; and it belongs
to them to stir up the members of the church to their duty in
communicating to him; and what they receive of them, they are to apply
to his use: and also, they are to serve the poor's table; to whom they
are to distribute of the church's stock, with all impartiality,
simplicity, cheerfulness, and sympathy.

[Acts 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 6:3</span></span>

Wherefore brethren look ye out among you,.... Or "choose out among you",
as the Syriac version adds, and as the Arabic and Ethiopic versions
render it; which shows that this sort of officers, deacons, must be
members of the church, and of the same church to which they are ordained
deacons; and that they must be chosen to that office by the whole
community, or by the common suffrages and votes of the people. So the
(b) Jews

"did not appoint (which may be rendered) "an overseer of the poor", in a
congregation, without consulting the congregation;''

which officer seems pretty much to answer to a deacon.

Seven men, of honest report; why the number seven is fixed upon, perhaps
no other solid reason is to be given, but that that number was judged
sufficient for the care of the poor in that church, and at that time;
nor is it obligatory on other churches to have just so many, neither
more nor fewer; for such officers are to be chosen as the church
requires: perhaps some regard might be had to "the seven good men of the
(c) city" among the Jews, who had great authority in their synagogues,
and who had power to sell them, when old and useless; and who seem,
according to Maimonides (d), to be the elders of the people. It is
necessary that this sort of officers in the church should be men "of
honest report"; that have a good testimony both from within the church
and without, of their honesty and fidelity; since they are intrusted
with the church's stock, and have the care of many devolved upon them:
so the collectors of alms among the Jews were to be men , "known and
faithful" (e); men of known probity and integrity: and, besides this
good and honest report they were to have from others, they were also to
be men

full of the Holy Ghost, of wisdom; they were to be men, not only that
had the Spirit of God in them, but who were eminent for their rich
experiences of grace; and who had superior gifts of the Spirit, whereby
they were capable both of defending the truth against opposers, and of
speaking a word of exhortation to duty, or of comfort under distress, or
of reproof to members, as circumstances required; and it may be at this
time when the church consisted of some of all nations, as seems from
[Act 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009.md) it might be necessary that
they should have the extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, especially that
of speaking with divers tongues, that they might be able to converse
with persons of different languages: and "wisdom" is highly requisite in
them, that they may be good economists of the church's stock, and
dispose of it in the most prudent manner: and conduct themselves
agreeably to the different tempers and spirits of men they have to do
with, and especially in composing differences among members.

Whom we may appoint over this business; assign or make over that part of
their office to them, which hitherto they had exercised, and install
them into it, and invest them with it.

\(b\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 55. 1. (c) T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 26. 2. &
27. 1. (d) In Misu. Megilla, c. 3. sect. 2. (e) Maimon. Hilchot Mattanot
Anayim, c. 9. sect. 1.

[Acts 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 6:4</span></span>

But we will give ourselves continually to prayer,.... Both in private
for themselves, and the church; and in the houses and families of the
saints, with the sick and distressed;. and in public, in the temple, or
in whatsoever place they met for public worship:

and to the ministry of the word; the preaching of the Gospel, to which
prayer is absolutely prerequisite, and with which it is always to be
joined. These two, prayer and preaching, are the principal employment of
a Gospel minister, and are what he ought to be concerned in, not only
now and then, but what he should give himself up unto wholly, that his
profiting might appear; and what he should be continually exercised and
employed in: and if parting with that branch of the ministerial
function, the care of the secular affairs of the church, and of the poor
of it, was necessary in the apostles, that they might be more at leisure
to attend to the more important and useful duties of prayer and
preaching; it therefore seems necessary that those who are called to
labour in the word and doctrine, if possible, should be exempt from all
worldly business and employment; that of the ministry being sufficient
to engross all a man's time and thoughts.

[Acts 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 6:5</span></span>

And the saying pleased the whole multitude,.... The speech the apostles
made took with them; all things they proposed were universally approved
of; the whole body of the church came into it at once unanimously; they
all judged it highly reasonable, that the apostles should be eased of
the burden in taking care of the poor, and that it should be transferred
to some other persons, and they fixed on the following:

and they chose Stephen, a man full of faith, and of the Holy Ghost; he
was a man eminent for his faith in Christ, and his faithfulness to him,
and in everything he was concerned, and for his courage and boldness in
the cause of Christ and for other gifts and graces of the Spirit, with
which he was filled; he was, it is very likely, the most eminent person
of all the seven, and is therefore named first; he is afterwards taken
notice of, and was the first that suffered martyrdom for Christ, with
which he was crowned, answerable to his name, which signifies a crown:

and Philip; who was also an evangelist, and had four daughters that
prophesied; and perhaps is the same that went down to Samaria, and
preached Christ there with great success, and after that baptized the
Ethiopian eunuch;

and Prochorus; of this and the rest, no other mention is made in the
sacred writings. He is said by some to be a nephew of Stephen's, and
first bishop of Nicomedia; but these are things not certain; and as for
the life of the Apostle John, said to be written by him, it is a
spurious and fabulous piece.

And Nicanor; of this man we have no other certain account; for that he
suffered martyrdom with "Stephen" is not to be depended on. It is a
Grecian name; there is one of this name who was a general in Demetrius's
army, who was sent by him against the Jews,

"Then the king sent Nicanor, one of his honourable princes, a man that
bare deadly hate unto Israel, with commandment to destroy the people.''
(1Mac 7:26)

and there was a gate of the temple, which was called the gate, of
Nicanor:

and Timon; he is said to be afterwards bishop of Bersea; though others
make him bishop, of Bostra; but with what truth cannot be asserted:

and Parmenus; of him no other account is given, than in the Roman
martyrology, which is not to be depended upon, that he suffered
martyrdom under Trajan:

and Nicolas, a proselyte of Antioch; who was first a Greek or Gentile,
and then became a Jew, a proselyte of righteousness, and then a
Christian, and now made a deacon. Some think, that from this man sprung
the sect of the Nicolaitanes, spoken of in the Revelations; though
others think, that that wicked set of men only covered themselves with
his name, or that they abused some words of his, and perverted the right
meaning of them; though was it certain he did turn out a wicked man, it
is not to be wondered at, that since there was a devil among the twelve
apostles, there should be a hypocrite and a vicious man among the first
seven deacons. It is observable, that the names of all these deacons are
Greek names; from whence, it seems, that they were of the Grecian or
Hellenistic Jews; so that the church thought fit to chose men out of
that part of them which made the complaint, in order to make them easy;
which is an instance of prudence and condescension, and shows of what
excellent spirits they were of.

[Acts 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 6:6</span></span>

Whom they set before the apostles,.... They did not barely nominate and
propose them to them, but they brought them into their presence, and
placed them before them, as the persons whom they had chosen, in order
to be ordained by them.

And when they had prayed; for these seven men set before them, that they
might appear to be richly qualified for this office, and might
honourably and faithfully discharge it, to the peace of themselves, the
advantage of the church, and the glory of God:

they laid their hands on them; that is, they ordained them, they
installed them into their office, and invested them with it, using the
rite or ceremony of laying on of hands, which was used by the apostles
for the conferring of gifts, and in benedictions, and at the ordination
of officers; and seems to be borrowed from the Jews, who used, it at the
creation of doctors among them, and at the promotion of them to that
dignity; and which they call or ordination by imposition of hands;
though that rite was not looked upon to be essentially necessary: for so
they say (f),

"ordination or promotion to doctorship is not necessarily done, "by the
hand", as Moses did to Joshua, but even "by word" only; it was enough to
say, I ordain thee, or be thou ordained or promoted.''

\(f\) Juchasin, fol. 60. 1.

[Acts 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 6:7</span></span>

And the word of God increased,.... This stratagem of Satan did not
succeed to divide the church, but issued in the better decorum and
discipline of it, and in the spread and success of the Gospel; God thus
making all things to work together for good;

and the number of the disciples multiplied in Jerusalem greatly; where
Christ was crucified, the apostles were scourged, and treated with the
utmost contempt, the sanhedrim and rulers of the Jews dwelt, who used
all their power and craft to crush the Gospel, and hinder the progress
of it, but in vain, there the word increased; which it may be said to
do, when saints are edified by it, and sinners are converted under it;
and in this last sense it is chiefly to be understood here: the
instances of conversion were very numerous; how large must this church
now be!

and a great company of the priests were obedient to the faith; that is,
to the Gospel, which contains things to be believed, articles of faith;
proposes Christ the great object of faith; and is the means of producing
faith, and which is of no profit, unless it is mixed with faith: and to
obey this is cordially to embrace the doctrines of the Gospel, and
cheerfully to submit to the ordinances of it. And that the priests, and
a large number of them, should do this, is very marvellous; since they
were the most inveterate enemies of the Gospel, and persecutors of the
saints; but what is it that efficacious grace cannot do? the Syriac
version instead of "priests" reads "Jews", but unsupported by any copy.

[Acts 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 6:8</span></span>

And Stephen, full of faith and power,.... The historian proceeds to give
a narrative of Stephen particularly, the first of the seven deacons; of
his faith and miracles, of his elocution and wisdom, of his courage and
intrepidity, of his constancy, and of his suffering martyrdom. He is
said to be full of faith, as before, [Act
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005.md) the Alexandrian copy, and four of
Beza's copies read, "full of grace"; and so do the Vulgate Latin and
Syriac versions; the Ethiopic version reads, "full of the grace of God":
he had an uncommon share of it; it was exceeding abundant in him; he had
a sufficiency of it for the service and sufferings he was called to: and
he was full of power to preach the Gospel, and teach it the people,
which he did with authority; to defend it, and oppose the adversaries of
it; to bear reproach and indignities for it, and even death itself; and
to do miraculous works for the confirmation of it, as follows:

did great wonders and miracles among the people; openly before them,
such as speaking with divers tongues, healing diseases, casting out
devils, &c.

[Acts 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 6:9</span></span>

Then there arose certain of the synagogue,.... Being filled with
indignation at the doctrine of Stephen, and with envy at his miracles,
they rose up in great wrath, and warmly opposed him: and they be longed
to that synagogue

which is called the synagogue of the libertines; or free men: it is a
Roman name, and signifies the sons of free men; and these were either
the sons of such Jews, who of servants, or slaves, had been made "free
men"; or rather such Jews whose parents were born free, or had obtained
their freedom at Rome, or in some free city under the Roman government,
as Paul at Tarsus; since it is not so easy to account for it, that there
should be a peculiar synagogue for the former, whereas there might be
for the latter, seeing they could not speak the language of the native
Jews. The Arabic version reads, "of the Corinthians", as if they were
the Jews from Corinth: and some have thought the word "Libertines" to be
the name of a nation or people, as well as the names that follow; and
some think it designs the Lybians or Lybistines in Africa; but neither
of these is likely:

and Cyrenians: natives of the city or country of Cyrene, from whence
were many Jews; see [Act 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010.md) such as
Simon the Cyrenian, the father of Alexander, and Rufus, who carried the
cross of Christ after him, [Mar 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#021.md)
these, with those that follow, either belonged to the same synagogue
with the Libertines, or rather they severally had distinct synagogues:
and this will not seem strange, when it is said (g), that there were in
Jerusalem four hundred and eighty synagogues; though it is elsewhere
said (h) four hundred and sixty:

and Alexandrians; for that there were a peculiar synagogue of these at
Jerusalem is certain; for there is express mention made of it in Jewish
writings (i).

"It happened to R. Eleazar bar Tzadok, that he bought "the synagogue of
the Alexandrians", which was at Jerusalem, and he did with it whatever
he pleased.''

And that they should have a synagogue at Jerusalem need not be wondered
at, when there was such an intercourse and correspondence between
Jerusalem and Alexandria: it is said (k),

"the house of Garmu were expert in making of the shewbread, and they
would not teach it; the wise men sent and fetched workmen from
Alexandria in Egypt, and they knew how to bake as well as they.----The
house or family of Abtines were expert in the business of the incense,
and they would not teach it; the wise men sent and fetched workmen from
Alexandria in Egypt, and they knew how to mix the spices as well as
they.''

Again it is said (l),

"there was a brass cymbal in the sanctuary, and it was cracked, and the
wise men sent and brought workmen from Alexandria in Egypt, and they
mended it---and there was a mortar in which they beat spices, and it was
cracked, and the wise men sent and fetched workmen from Alexandria, and
they mended it.''

Hence many of them doubtless settled here, and had a synagogue of their
own:

and of them of Cilicia; the metropolis of which country was Tarsus, [Act
21:39](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#039.md). I make no doubt of it, that
Saul of Tarsus was among them, or belonged to this synagogue, and was
one of the fierce disputants with Stephen; at least violently opposed
him, since he afterwards held the clothes of those that stoned him; we
read (m) of , which I should be tempted to render, the "synagogue of the
Tarsians", the same with the Cilicians here; but that it is elsewhere
said (n), that

"it happened to the synagogue of the Tursians, which was at Jerusalem,
that they sold it to R. Eliezer, and he did all his business in it.''

Where the gloss explains the word "Tursians" by "brass founders"; and it
seems to design the same synagogue with that of the Alexandrians, who
may be so called, because many of them wrought in brass, as appears from
a citation above. There was a synagogue of these Tarsians at Lud, or
Lydda (o): it is added, and of Asia; that is, the less; which joined to
Cilicia, and in which were great numbers of Jews; see [Act
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#027.md) this clause is left out in the
Alexandrian copy: at Jerusalem, there were synagogues for the Jews of
different nations; as here in London, are places of worship for
protestants of several countries; as French, Dutch, Germans, Danes,
Swedes, &c. Now several persons out of these synagogues, met together in
a body,

disputing with Stephen; about the doctrine he preached, and the miracles
he wrought, and by what authority he did these things.

\(g\) T. Hieros, Megilla. fol. 73. 4. Echa Rabbati, fol. 52. 1. (h) T.
Hieros, Cetubot. fol. 35. 3. (i) Juchasin, fol. 26. 2. e Talmud. Hieros.
Megilla, fol. 73. 4. (k) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 38. 1. & Hieros. Yoma, fol.
41. 1. (l) T. Bab. Erachin, fol. 10. 2. (m) T. Hieros. Shekalim, fol.
47. 1. (n) T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 26. 1. (o) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 35.
fol. 175. 3.

[Acts 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 6:10</span></span>

And they were not able to resist the wisdom,.... In Beza's most ancient
copy, and in another manuscript it is added, "which was in him"; that
divine wisdom, which the Spirit of wisdom gave him; they were not a
match for him with respect to the knowledge of divine things; they could
not answer the wise arguments he made use of, fetched out of the
Scriptures of truth, in which he was well versed, and had a large
knowledge of:

and the Spirit by which he spake; that is, the Holy Spirit, as the above
exemplars of Beza, and the Ethiopic version read; the meaning is, they
could not resist the Holy Spirit, by which Stephen spake, so as to
overcome him, or put Stephen to silence, or confute him; otherwise they
did resist him, or oppose themselves to him, but in vain, and without
success; for they always resisted the Holy Ghost in Christ and in his
apostles, as their fathers before them resisted him in the prophets, as
Stephen observes to them, [Act 7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051.md)
hereby was fulfilled what our Lord promised to his disciples, [Mat
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019.md).

[Acts 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 6:11</span></span>

Then they suborned men,.... Hired false witnesses, which seems to have
been commonly done by the Jews; so they did in the case of Christ:

which said, we have heard him speak blasphemous words against Moses, and
against God; that is, against the law of Moses, and so against God, who
gave the law to Moses, as appears from [Act
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013.md) the blasphemous words seem to be,
with respect to the ceremonial law, and the abrogation of it, which
Stephen might insist upon, and they charged with blasphemy; see [Act
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#014.md).

[Acts 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 6:12</span></span>

And they stirred up the people,.... The common people, who were easily
wrought upon, and soon incensed and provoked, when at any time it was
suggested to them that the rituals and ceremonies of the law of Moses
were treated with any neglect or contempt; see [Act
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#027.md).

And the elders and the Scribes; who belonged to the sanhedrim, to whom
they reported these things, as persons, under whose cognizance they
properly came:

and came upon him; at an unawares, and in an hostile way:

and caught him; seized him with violence:

and brought him to the council; the great sanhedrim, then sitting at
Jerusalem, to whom it belonged to judge of blasphemy.

[Acts 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 6:13</span></span>

And set up false witnesses,.... Having hired them, they brought them and
set them before the sanhedrim, to bear witness against Stephen:

which said, this man; meaning Stephen, who was now before the council,
at whom they pointed, and whose name, through contempt, they would not
mention:

ceaseth not to speak blasphemous words against this holy place; either
the city of Jerusalem, which is sometimes called the holy city, and
which was foretold by the angel to Daniel, and by Christ, that it should
be destroyed, and which Stephen might speak of; or rather the temple, so
the Ethiopic version; in a part of which, or in a place contiguous to
it, the sanhedrim might now be sitting:

and the law; the ceremonial law: the sense is, that Stephen was
continually telling the people, that in a little time their temple would
be destroyed, and an end be put to temple worship, and to all the
rituals and ceremonies of the law of Moses; the Vulgate Latin and Syriac
versions leave out the word "blasphemous"; and so do the Alexandrian
copy, and Beza's most ancient one; but as Beza observes, it is certain,
or at least it is most likely, that it was not omitted by the false
witnesses; though speaking against the temple and the law was sufficient
to make good a charge of blasphemy.

[Acts 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 6:14</span></span>

For we have heard him say,.... The Ethiopic version adds, "besides"; but
rather these words are a reason, giving evidence to, and supporting the
general charge:

that this Jesus of Nazareth; Stephen spoke of, and whom they so called
by way of contempt:

shall destroy this place; meaning the temple, as the Ethiopic version
renders it; and is the same charge, the false witnesses at Christ's
examination brought against him:

and shall change the customs which Moses delivered us; that is, the
rites, ceremonies, institutions, and appointments of the Mosaic
dispensation; and yet this is no other, than what the Jews themselves
say will be done, in the times of the Messiah; for they assert (p), that

"awbl dytel, "in time to come" (i.e. in the days of the Messiah) all
sacrifices shall cease, but the sacrifice of thanksgiving.''

\(p\) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 9. fol. 153. 1. & sect. 27. fol. 168. 4.

[Acts 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 6:15</span></span>

And all that sat in the council,.... The whole sanhedrim,

looking steadfastly on him; to observe whether his countenance altered,
his tongue stammered, or he trembled in any part of his body, neither of
which appeared; but on the contrary, they

saw his face, as if it had been the face of an angel. The Ethiopic
version adds, "of God"; there was such a calmness and serenity in it,
which showed his innocence and unconsciousness of guilt; and such a
beauty and glory upon it, that he looked as lovely and amiable as the
angels of God, who when they appeared to men, it was in very glorious
and splendid forms: his face might shine as Moses's did, when he came
down from the mount; or in some degree as Christ's did at his
transfiguration; and this might, as it ought to have been, taken as an
acquittance of him by God, from the charge of blasphemy, either against
God or Moses: the Jews (q) say of Phinehas, that when the Holy Ghost was
upon him, his face burned or shone like lamps, and Stephen was now full
of the Holy Ghost, [Act 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005.md).

\(q\) Ceseph. Misna in Maimon. Hilch. Teshuba, c. 9. & Vajikra Rabba,
sect. 1. fol. 146. 1. & sect. 21. fol. 163. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 7](act007.md)

</div>
