<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act014)  [Next](act016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

[Acts 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 15:1</span></span>

And certain men which came down from Judea,.... To Antioch; they were
not sent by the apostles, they came down of "themselves"; who they were,
is not certain; that they were "judaizing" Christians, and teachers
among them, is plain from the following account: according to Epiphanius
(g) they were Cerinthus, and some of his followers: these

taught the brethren; the Gentile converts at Antioch, who are styled
"brethren", though they were Gentiles, because they were regenerated by
the grace of God, and were of the same faith with the believing Jews,
and in the same church state with them at Antioch: and said,

except ye be circumcised after the manner of Moses; or custom of Moses,
which had been used from the time of Abraham, and was revived and
reinforced by Moses; wherefore the Syriac version renders it, "the law
of Moses"; See Gill on [Joh 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#019).

ye cannot be saved; these men were not only for retaining circumcision,
which was now abolished, but they made it necessary to salvation; which
was carrying the matter further than even the unbelieving Jews
themselves did, at least some of them: for though indeed it is a notion
with them, that no circumcised persons go to hell, but are all saved;
and some of them say, that God rejects uncircumcised persons, and brings
them down to hell (h); yet others of them speak of the godly among the
nations of the world, and of the proselytes of the gate, who keep the
seven precepts of Noah, as persons that shall be saved; so Ananias the
Jew, preceptor to King Izates, when he signified his great desire to be
circumcised, in order to put him off of it, told him, that if he was
determined to follow the customs of the Jews, he might worship God
without circumcision, which was more peculiar to the Jews than to be
circumcised (i).

\(g\) Contra Haeres. l. 1. Haeres. 28. (h) Shemot Rabba, sect. 19. fol.
104. 4. (i) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 20. c. 2. sect. 5.

[Acts 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 15:2</span></span>

When therefore Paul and Barnabas,.... Who were the ministers of the
uncircumcision, and were just returned from preaching the Gospel among
the Gentiles, with success, and were advocates for them, being witnesses
of the grace that was bestowed on them, and therefore opposed the
sentiments of these men:

and had no small dissension and disputation with them; which was
attended with much heat and sharpness, and continued some time, and
occasioned much disturbance and uneasiness; nor could the affair be
decided and issued: wherefore

they determined that Paul and Barnabas, and certain other of them; that
is, the members of the church at Antioch, taking this matter into
consideration, and finding that the difference could not be composed,
for the peace of the church, wisely came to a resolution, and made an
order, that Paul and Barnabas, with others, as Titus, who went with Paul
at this time, as appears from [Gal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001)
and some others of the brethren, and it may be also certain, on, the
other side of the question; that these

should go up to Jerusalem, unto the apostles and elders, about this
question; concerning circumcision, and the necessity of it to salvation,
that they might have the sense of James, and Peter, and John, who
particularly were at Jerusalem at this time, as appears from [Act
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007) and other apostles that might be
there; and also of other ministers of the word, who are called elders.
And the church of Jerusalem being the most ancient church, and several
of the apostles residing here, who had seen Christ in the flesh, and had
received their mission and commission from him, and had been
extraordinarily endowed with the Holy Ghost; and here being many other
preachers of the Gospel, and there being in a multitude of counsellors
safety, the church at Antioch judged it advisable to send to them for
counsel and direction; and it becomes churches to assist each other in
this way.

[Acts 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 15:3</span></span>

And being brought on their way by the church,.... That is, either being
accompanied by some of the brethren of the church some part of the way,
out of respect unto them, or being provided by them with things
necessary for their journey; see [Tit
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#013)

they passed through Phenice and Samaria; which both lay between Syria
and Judea; in the former of which places those that were scattered upon
the death of Stephen had preached, and a great number were converted and
believed in Christ who were Jews, [Act
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019) and in the latter Philip the
evangelist had preached with much success, [Act
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005) as therefore their way to
Jerusalem lay through these places, they called upon the brethren as
they passed;

declaring the conversion of the Gentiles; in the several places where
they had been, as in Syria, Pisidia, Pamphylia, and Lycaonia, how by
their ministry they were turned from darkness to light, from Satan unto
God, from their superstition and idolatry to the worship of the true
God, and to faith in Christ Jesus:

and they caused great joy unto all the brethren; the believing Jews in
those parts, who being truly believers in Christ, rejoiced at the spread
of his Gospel, and the increase of his interest, even among the
Gentiles; for if angels rejoice, much more should saints rejoice at the
conversion of sinners, let them be who or where they will; and where
there is true grace, there will be joy when this is the case. There were
churches in each of these places, of which "the brethren" here mentioned
were members, and which continued for many ages afterwards: the
foundation of the churches in Phenice was first laid by the converts
made by them, who were scattered abroad through the persecution at the
death of Stephen, [Act 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019). Quartus,
mentioned in [Rom 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023) is said to be
bishop of Berytus in this country. In the "second" century there were
churches at Tyre and Ptolemais, two cities in Phoenicia; Cassius was
bishop of the one, and Clarus of the other (k): in the "third" century
several Phoenician bishops suffered martyrdom, as Tyrannio, bishop of
the church of Tyre, Zenobius, presbyter of that at Sidon, and Sylvanus,
bishop of Emisa (l): in the "fourth" century, at the beginning of it,
there were present, at the council of Nice, the bishops of Ptolemais,
Damascus, Tripolis, Paneas, and Emisa; as they were also at a synod held
at Jerusalem in the same century, on account of the Arians, and at
another at Antioch on the same account: in the fifth century there were
churches in Phoenicia reformed by Chrysostom, by whose means also the
temples of the idols were destroyed, and many were converted in these
countries; and in this age lived several persons of note here, as
Antiochus bishop of Ptolemais, Eustathius bishop of Berytus, Paulus
bishop of Emisa, Pompeianus and Uranius of the same place, and Damianus
bishop of Sidon, and other Phoenician bishops, who assisted at the
council of Chalcedon; as Olympius bishop of Atrapolis, Theodorus bishop
of Tripoils, Joseph bishop of Heliopolis, Valerius bishop of Laodicea,
Thomas bishop of Euroma, and Theonas bishop of Enria or Enaria, all in
Phoenicia: in the sixth century, mention is made of the bishops of
Ptolemais, Tyre, Sidon, and Berytus, in the acts of the synod at Rome
and Constantinople; and though Phoenicia was seized upon, and wasted by
the Arabians and Persians, in the seventh century; yet we read, in the
eighth century, of Adeodatus, a bishop of Berytus, who baptized many
converted Jews (m). As for Samaria, our Lord himself preached and
converted many persons there; and after his resurrection he gave his
apostles a commission and directions to go there; and here Philip
preached with great success. Nicolaus, the deacon, is said to be the
first bishop of Samaria; and though in after ages Heathenism very much
prevailed in those parts; yet there were Christians and churches, more
or less, for several centuries; even in the sixth century there was a
bishop of Neapolis in Samaria, killed with the sword, and some
presbyters who were taken and fried in a pan, with the remains of some
martyrs, by the Samaritan Jews (n).

\(k\) Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 25. (l) Ib. l. 8. c. 13. (m)
Madgeburg. Hist. Eccles. cent. 4. c. 2. p. 2. c. 9. p. 35O, 390, 404.
cent. 5. c. 2. p. 3, 12, 13. c. 10. p. 550, 551. cent. 6. c. 2. p. 3.
cent. 7. c. 3. p. 17. c. 16. p. 365. cent 8. c. 2. p. 3. (n) Ib. cent.
6. c. 3. p. 22.

[Acts 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 15:4</span></span>

And when they were come to Jerusalem,.... Paul and Barnabas, and the
rest that came from Antioch with them:

they were received of the church; that is, that was at Jerusalem, in a
very kind and respectful manner; they were received into their houses,
and accommodated with everything convenient for them:

and of the apostles; particularly James, and Cephas, and John, who gave
to Paul and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, in token of their
approbation of them, affection for them, and agreement with them:

and elders: the other ministers of the Gospel who preached in that
place:

and they declared all things that God had done with them: just as they
did to the church at Antioch, when they returned from their travels; see
Gill on [Act 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027), the Arabic version
here adds, as there, "and that God had opened to the Gentiles the door
of faith."

[Acts 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 15:5</span></span>

But there rose up certain of the sect of the Pharisees,.... Which was
the strictest sect of religion among the Jews:

which believed; that Jesus was the Messiah, and professed their faith in
him, and were members of the church, though they still retained many of
their pharisaical tenets, and are therefore said to be of that sect:
these rose up in opposition to Paul and Barnabas, as they were relating
their success among the Gentiles, and giving an account of the
difference that had happened at Antioch, and their own sense of that
matter:

saying, that it was needful to circumcise them: the Gentiles that
believed:

and to command them to keep the law of Moses; both moral and ceremonial;
the observance of which they reckoned was absolutely necessary to
salvation. Some think these are not the words of Luke, relating what
happened at Jerusalem, when Paul and Barnabas gave in their account of
things to the apostles and elders; but that they are a continuation of
their account, how that in the controversy raised at Antioch, certain
Pharisees that came thither from Judea, rose up and asserted the
necessity of the, Gentiles being circumcised, and of their keeping the
law of Moses in order to their being saved; which is favoured by the
Syriac version, especially by the Latin interpreter of it, who supplies
the words thus, "but say they" (i.e. Paul and Barnabas) "there arose
men", &c.

[Acts 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 15:6</span></span>

And the apostles and elders came together,.... And also the brethren, or
private members of the church, even the whole church, as appears from
[Act 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022). Whether all the apostles
were here present, is not certain; Peter, James, and John were; but who
else, cannot be said: these met together

for to consider of this matter; to hear what was to be said on both
sides of the question, and then to judge what advice was proper to be
given to the Gentiles.

[Acts 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 15:7</span></span>

And when there had been much disputing,.... Pro and con upon this
subject; many had spoken; and much had been said, and a great deal of
time had been taken up about the thing in controversy:

Peter rose up; not only out of respect to this venerable assembly, but
to signify that he had something to say; and he stood up that he might
be the better heard. Beza's ancient copy reads, "rose up in spirit";

and said unto them, men and brethren: an usual form of address with the
Jews; [Act 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002)

ye know how that a good while ago; or "from ancient days"; or "from the
beginning", as the Ethiopic version renders it; from the beginning of
the preaching of the Gospel, after the ascension of Christ; quickly
after the effusion of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost: it is thought,
by some, to be ten or eleven, and, by others, to be twenty years ago, or
thereabout:

God made choice among us; the apostles; the Alexandrian copy reads,
"among you"; the sense is the same, for Peter must be supposed as
directing his discourse chiefly to the apostles:

that the Gentiles by my mouth should hear the word of the Gospel, and
believe; referring to the case of Cornelius, and his family: and his
sense is, that some years ago it pleased God, in his providence, to
single him out from the rest of the apostles, and in a very
extraordinary manner to call him to go to Caesarea, and preach the
gospel to Cornelius, and those that were in his house, that hearing they
might believe in Christ.

[Acts 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 15:8</span></span>

And God which knoweth the hearts,.... Of all men; he being omniscient,
the searcher of the hearts, and the trier of the reins of the children
of men, knew with what sincerity Cornelius sent for Peter; and with what
vehement desire and longing expectation he and his family and friends
waited for his coming; and with what earnestness, diligence, and
affection they attended to what he said:

bore them witness, giving them the Holy Ghost, even as he did unto us;
God bore a testimony, and showed his well pleasedness in the whole of
this affair, by bestowing upon them not only the regenerating and
sanctifying grace of the Spirit; but his extraordinary gifts, such as
speaking with divers tongues, even in like manner as these were bestowed
on the apostles themselves, on the day of Pentecost, though they were
uncircumcised persons; for the drift of Peter's oration is to show, that
circumcision was not necessary to salvation.

[Acts 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 15:9</span></span>

And put no difference between us and them,.... Neither in the
extraordinary gifts, nor special grace, of the Spirit; giving them the
same graces of faith, hope, and love, admitting to the same privileges
and immunities of the house of God, and giving them a right and title to
the same inheritance of the saints in light, though the one were
circumcised, and the other were not. God puts no difference as to
matters of religion under the Gospel dispensation between Jews and
Gentiles, neither on account of Abraham's seed, or of circumcision, or
of the ceremonial law, or of national adoption; nor would he have any
made with respect to conversation, civil or religious; all which Peter
knew full well: nor has he made any difference in his eternal choice of
persons to eternal salvation, on any of the above accounts, having
ordained Gentiles to eternal life as Jews, who in consequence of it
believe in Christ; nor in redemption, Christ having redeemed by his
blood men out of every kindred, tongue, people, and nation; nor in the
effectual calling, for they that were called in the first times of the
Gospel, were not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, to whom the
Gospel was alike sent, and made effectual to saving purposes: these
shared in the same blessings of pardon, justification, and adoption;
their sins were forgiven through the same blood, their persons were
justified by the same righteousness, and they were taken into the same
family, and were no more strangers and foreigners, but fellow citizens
of the saints, and of the household of God; having the same access to
God, being built on the same foundation, enjoying the same privileges,
and having the same hope of eternal glory.

Purifying their hearts by faith; which was done by implanting faith in
them, and leading that faith to the blood of Christ, which cleanses from
all sin, original and actual, with which men are defiled; for faith has
not this efficacy in itself, but as it has to do with the blood of
Jesus: and this spiritual purification being what answered to
circumcision, made that unnecessary; for this is the circumcision of the
heart, of which the other was only typical. The hearts of men are
filthy, and need purifying; they are originally polluted with sin; this
is the case of all men; and this defilement reaches to all the members
of the body, and the faculties of the soul; and especially the heart is
the seat of this impurity, which God only can cleanse: he promises to do
it, and does do it; and he only can do it, men cannot; for though, they
are exhorted to it, in order to make them sensible of their pollution,
and their need of cleansing, that they may apply where it is to be had,
yet it is not in their power to effect it; to make a clean heart is a
creation work, which is peculiar to God: the heart cannot be purified,
neither by ceremonial ablutions, nor by works of moral righteousness,
nor by humiliations and tears, nor by submission to Gospel ordinances,
as water baptism, but only by the grace of God, and the blood of Christ;
which the Spirit of God sprinkles upon the heart, and which faith looks
to and deals with, and so it is freed from an evil conscience; and this
blessing the believing Gentiles enjoyed in common with the believing
Jews.

[Acts 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 15:10</span></span>

Now therefore why tempt ye God,.... By hesitating about this matter, by
disputing upon this point, and by seeking for further proof and evidence
of the will of God in this affair; when it is so plain a case, that it
has been his will that the Gospel should be preached to Gentiles,
without obliging them to circumcision; that he has given his Spirit both
in his extraordinary gifts, and special grace, to uncircumcised persons;
particularly he has bestowed faith in Christ upon them, whereby they
have been led to the blood of Christ, typified in circumcision, and are
thereby purged from all their filth and pollution, and so are the true
circumcision: wherefore it is no other than tempting God, a manifest
opposition to him, and what must give him offence, to debate about a
point so clear; and especially to attempt

to put a yoke upon the neck of the disciples, which neither our fathers
nor we were able to bear. It is common with the Jews to call the law a
yoke; frequent mention is made of and "the yoke of the commandments"
(o), and , "the yoke of the law" (p): and by it here is meant, not
circumcision only and barely, for that the Jewish fathers had been able
to bear, and had bore it; nor the whole ceremonial law only, which
consisted of a multitude of commands and ordinances very heavy and hard;
but even the whole moral law, which circumcision obliged those who
submitted to it to keep it perfectly; see [Gal
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal005.htm#003), which neither the apostles, nor
their fathers, were ever able to do, nor any mere man whatever; and
therefore this yoke was intolerable and insupportable, and not to be put
upon the necks of the Gentile believers; who here are called disciples,
being taught the doctrine of the Gospel, and the way of salvation; which
was not by circumcision, nor by any works of the law, but by the grace
of Christ, as in the following verse.

\(o\) Targum in Cant. i. 10. & in Lam. iii. 27. Misn. Beracot, c. 2.
sect. 2. (p) Echa Rabbati, fol. 56. 3. Pirke Abot, c. 3. sect. 5. Tzeror
Hammor, fol. 39. 3.

[Acts 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 15:11</span></span>

But we believe,.... Who are circumcised; the Arabic version adds, "and
are sure"; for what follows is a sure and certain article of faith:

that through the grace of the Lord Jesus Christ; not through
circumcision, or by any works of the law, moral or ceremonial; but
through the grace of Christ undertaking for them, assuming their nature,
and dying in their room and stead; through his redeeming, justifying,
and pardoning grace: salvation is by Christ; Jehovah the Father
appointed him to be his salvation; he sent him, and he came to save
sinners; and he has obtained salvation for them; and it is in him, and
in no other: and this salvation is by "the grace" of Christ; it was
grace moved him to engage in this work before the world began; it was
good will to men that caused him to come down from heaven, and appear on
earth in the form of a servant; it was pure love that influenced him to
lay down his life for them; through the grace in his heart he did all
this for them; and it is the fulness of grace in his hands, out of which
they receive abundance, whereby they are entitled to, and are made meet
for eternal glory:

we shall be saved, even as they; either as the disciples, the Gentile
converts, who without circumcision, and the works of the law, were saved
by the pure grace and love of Christ, in dying for them, and on which
they alone depended for salvation; or else as the Jewish fathers were,
for they were justified, pardoned, accepted, and saved in the same way,
as the saints under the New Testament are: they could not keep the law
perfectly, nor was there then, nor now, salvation by it, only by the
grace of Christ; and in that way, and that only, Old and New Testament
believers, Jews and Gentiles, whether circumcised or uncircumcised, are
saved. The Gentiles were not saved by the light of nature, nor the Jews
by the law of Moses; the one were not lost for want of circumcision, nor
the other saved by it; the only way of salvation to both, and under all
dispensations, is the Lord Jesus Christ; through whose sacrifice sin is
atoned for, through whose blood it is pardoned, through whose
righteousness men are justified before God, and are accepted with him;
and through whom saints have communion with God; and by whom, and whose
grace, and not by their own works, they shall be saved with an
everlasting salvation, from sin, law, death, hell, and damnation: and
the salvation of one and of another, even of all that are saved, Jews or
Gentiles, is by grace; no one is deserving of it; they have all sinned,
and come short of the glory of God; have done that which is abominable,
and they themselves are abominable in the sight of God; they have
destroyed, and cannot help themselves; nor have they anyone good thing
but what they have received from the Lord, and therefore ought to
ascribe all to his grace; it is by that they are what they are, have
what they have, and do what they do. Salvation, in all its parts and
branches, is owing to grace; and so it is with respect to all persons
that are saved; some are not saved by their works, and others by the
grace of Christ, but they are all saved by grace; and none have any room
to boast of themselves against others.

[Acts 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 15:12</span></span>

Then all the multitude kept silence,.... Upon this oration of Peter's,
there was a profound silence in the whole assembly, among all the
brethren of the church, who were come together on this occasion; they
were all satisfied with, and by their silence acquiesced in, what Peter
said; and waited to hear what might be further said about this matter,
by other persons in the assembly; and even those who were on the other
side of the question, were confounded and nonplussed, and knew not what
to say, and the more so, when they perceived that the rest of the
apostles and elders were of the same mind; for Beza's most ancient copy
introduces this clause thus; "then the elders agreeing to the things
that were said by Peter, the whole multitude was silent": and this gave
Paul and Barnabas an opportunity of being heard; who, perhaps, could not
so well be heard before, for the clamour of the people against them, who
might not have so good an opinion of them, and of their practices:

and gave audience to Barnabas and Paul; Barnabas is mentioned first, he
being most known to the Jews, and of whom they might have the better
opinion; and who probably gave the account of their proceedings and
success among the Gentiles:

declaring what miracles and wonders God had wrought among the Gentiles
by them; what wonders of grace were wrought in the conversion of
multitudes of them, wherever they came; and what miracles in nature were
wrought for the confirmation of the Gospel, such as the striking blind
Elymas the sorcerer, at Paphos in Cyprus, and curing the cripple at
Lystra; and which they ascribe not to themselves but to God, whose
instruments they only were.

[Acts 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 15:13</span></span>

And after they had held their peace,.... Meaning not the multitude, but
Paul and Barnabas; when they had finished their account, and had done
speaking:

James answered; or rose up, as the Syriac version reads, he stood up and
began to speak. This was James the son of Alphaeus, one of the twelve
apostles, sometimes called the brother of the Lord; for the other James,
the son of Zebedee and brother of John, was dead, being killed by Herod,
[Act 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#002) but this was the brother of
Jude, and the same that wrote the epistle that bears his name: whether
he was now bishop or pastor of the church at Jerusalem, is not certain;
nor whether he was president in this council; the speeches made in it do
not appear to be directed to him: he began his oration thus,

saying, men and brethren, hearken to me; the titles he uses, and the
manner of desiring audience, were what were common with the Jews; see
[Act 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#014).

[Acts 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 15:14</span></span>

Simeon hath declared how God at the first did visit the Gentiles,....
James begins with taking notice of Peter's speech, and agrees to it, and
confirms it; for by Simeon is not meant, as some have thought, the
Simeon that took Christ in his arms, [Luk
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#025) who had been dead long ago; but
Simon Peter, who had spoken before. Simon and Simeon are one and the
same name; the former is only a contraction of the latter in the Syriac
language; Simeon was his pure Hebrew name, and James speaking to an
assembly of Hebrews, uses it; and observes, that he had given a very
clear and distinct narrative, how God at the first preaching of the
Gospel, quickly after the day of Pentecost, was pleased to look upon the
Gentiles, and show favour to them, and visit them in a way of grace and
mercy, by sending the Gospel to them, and his Spirit to make it
effectual: this was a gracious visit; he came and looked upon them,
quickened them, and spoke comfortably to them, and bestowed special
favours upon them; the set time for such a visit being come: the Arabic
version renders it, "how God first promised"; referring to the promises
concerning the calling of the Gentiles, which James afterwards confirms
by citing a passage out of the prophets to the same purpose: the Syriac
version, "how God began to choose out of the Gentiles": that is, by
calling them by his grace; and the Ethiopic version, "how God first had
mercy on the Gentiles"; who before had not obtained mercy:

to take out of them a people for his name; for himself, for his own
glory, to call upon his name, and to be called by his name, to bear his
name, and support his Gospel, cause and interest: the distinguishing
grace of God may be seen herein; it was grace to visit them, to look
upon them, when for many hundreds of years he had overlooked them, he
had taken no notice of them; and it was distinguishing grace to take
some out of them, to be a special and peculiar people to himself; to
separate them from the rest by his powerful and efficacious grace, and
form them into a church state, that they might show forth his praise and
glorify him.

[Acts 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 15:15</span></span>

And to this agree the words of the prophets,.... In several of the
prophecies of the Old Testament, which plainly speak of the calling of
the Gentiles; though James thought it sufficient to produce only one
instead of many:

as it is written; in [Amo 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011) and
this is agreeably to the Jewish way of citing Scriptures, as Surenhusius
observes; so it is said (q), in twenty four places the priests are
called Levites, and this is one of them, [Eze
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015) where only one place is
mentioned, instead of the twenty four.

\(q\) T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 86, 2. & Beracot, fol. 4. 1, 2.

[Acts 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 15:16</span></span>

After this I will return,.... That is, after the Lord had destroyed the
sinful kingdom from off the face of the earth, and had sifted the house
of Israel among all nations, and the sinners of his people were slain
with the sword; after all this he promises to return and show favour to
them: this is the sense of the prophet which James gives; for these
words are not at length in Amos; there it is only said, "in that day";
upon which Jarchi's note is,

"after all these things shall have come upon them, that day shall come
which is appointed for redemption;''

which well agrees with James here, and the manner in which he introduces
this passage:

and will build again the tabernacle of David, that is fallen down: that
is, as the Jewish (r) writers themselves interpret it, the kingdom of
the house of David, though in a temporal sense, which was now in a most
ruinous condition; the sceptre was departed from Judah; all; power and
authority were falling off apace from the Jews, into the hands of the
Romans; David's family were quite sunk, and almost gone, and had no
share at all in the civil government; Jesus, who was descended from him,
and was of the blood royal, and right heir to his throne, was born of a
poor virgin; and his supposed father was a carpenter; and he himself the
King of the Jews, was crucified by them; yet notwithstanding all this,
David's tabernacle was to be rebuilt, and his kingdom to be restored by
the Messiah, but in a spiritual way; for the tabernacle of David designs
the spiritual kingdom or church of Christ, who is here called David, as
in [Eze 34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023) and of whom David was an
eminent type: and the church may be called a tabernacle, being in the
present state of things, as to its place, uncertain and moveable, though
ere long it will be a tabernacle that will not be taken down, [Isa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020) and Christ's tabernacle, being
of his building, and where he dwells and keeps his court, as King of
saints; see [Isa 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#005) and which was in
a fallen ruinous condition when he came on earth, through the corrupt
principles of the Pharisees and Sadducees, the bigotry and superstition
of the one, and the deism of the other; and through the great decay of
spiritual worship and powerful godliness, and the bad lives of
professors, and the small number of truly godly persons: the Jews (s)
themselves refer this prophecy to the times of the Messiah, yea, one of
the names by which they call the Messiah is taken from hence (t): it is
asked,

"who is Bar Naphli? it is replied, the Messiah; the Messiah is called
Bar Naphli (the son fallen, or of the fallen); is it not written, "in
that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen down?"''

one of their own commentators (u) on this text, has this note,

"if we interpret this of the Messiah, the matter is clear:''

but then this must be understood in a spiritual sense, for Christ's
kingdom is not a worldly one; the raising up and rebuilding of this
tabernacle, must design the reviving of true religion, the doctrine and
practice of it, the enlargement of the church of God, by the conversion
both of Jews and Gentiles:

and I will build again the ruins thereof, and I will set it up; which
has been done by breaking down the middle wall of partition between Jews
and Gentiles, and letting in the latter into the Gospel church with the
former, whereby it grows up to be an holy temple in the Lord; see [Isa
54:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#002) and to this sense the Jews
themselves (w) interpret it;

"the holy blessed God will raise up the tabernacle of David that is
fallen, as it is said, [Amo 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011) in
that day I will raise up the tabernacle of David; for all the world
shall be , "one bundle"; as it is said, [Zep
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zep003.htm#009)''

\(r\) Targum, Jarchi & Kimchi in loc. (s) Zohar in Gen. fol. 53. 2. & in
Exod. fol. 4. 2. & 96. 2. (t) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 96. 2. (u) Aben
Ezra in Amos ix. 11. (w) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 88. fol. 76. 4.

[Acts 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 15:17</span></span>

That the residue of men might seek after the Lord,.... The rebuilder and
proprietor of this tabernacle, and who dwells in it; that is, attend his
worship, pray unto him, and seek unto him for life and salvation: in
Amos these are called, "the remnant of Edom": and design the remnant
according to the election of grace among the Gentiles; the Jews
generally call all other nations, and especially the Roman empire, Edom:

and all the Gentiles upon whom my name is called; for God is the God of
the whole earth, of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews; and his Gospel
was now spread among them, and many of them were converted and called
Christians, and the children and people of God: the Jews (x) understand
this of the people of Israel, who are called by the name of the Lord, or
on whom his name is called; and some think the words are to be
transposed (y) thus,

"that Israel on whom my name is called might possess the remnant of
Edom, and all the people;''

and is true of their possessing or enjoying them in a Gospel church
state:

saith the Lord, who doth all these things; raises up the tabernacle of
David, revives the interest of religion, resettles the church, and
increases it, calls and converts the Gentiles, causes them to seek after
the Lord, and unites them in one church state with the Jews; the word
"all" is left out in the Alexandrian copy, and in the Vulgate Latin and
Ethiopic versions, and is not in Amos.

\(x\) Targum in Amos ix. 12. (y) Kimchi & Aben Ezra in ib.

[Acts 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 15:18</span></span>

Known unto God are all his works,.... These are the words of James, and
not of Amos; all the things which God does in the church and in the
world, they were all foreknown and predetermined by him: from the
beginning of the world; or from eternity; even all his works of
creation, providence and grace: the Alexandrian copy, and Beza's most
ancient copy, and the Vulgate Latin version, read in the singular
number, "his work"; the work of the conversion of the Gentiles; this was
fixed and resolved on by God in eternity; he knew it would be, because
he had determined it should be; and accordingly he foretold it, and
spoke of it in various periods of time before it came to pass; and
therefore it should not be looked upon as some new and strange thing,
that was never known, spoken or heard of: and this holds true of every
other work of God, and agrees with what the Jews sometimes say (z), that

"every work which is renewed in the world, the holy blessed God has
commanded (or ordered) it from the day the world was created.''

\(z\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 78. 2. Vid. ib. in Lev. fol. 25. 4.

[Acts 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 15:19</span></span>

Wherefore my sentence is,.... Opinion or judgment in this case, or what
he reckoned most advisable to be done; for he did not impose his sense
upon the whole body, but proposed it to them:

that we trouble not them; by obliging them to be circumcised, which
would have been very afflicting and disturbing to them; not only because
of the corporeal pain produced by circumcision, but because of the
bondage their minds would be brought into, and they become subject to
the whole law, and all its burdensome rites and ceremonies:

which from among the Gentiles are turned to God; the one true and living
God, Father, Son, and Spirit, and from idols, and the worshipping of
them.

[Acts 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 15:20</span></span>

But that we write unto them,.... Or send an epistle to them, to this
effect, concerning the following things:

that they abstain from pollutions of idols; that is, from eating things
offered to idols; see [Act 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029) for
not idolatry, or the worshipping of idols itself, is here spoken of; for
that was no indifferent thing; and besides, these converted Gentiles
were turned from that, and there was no danger of their returning to it;
but eating things sacrificed to idols was an indifferent thing; but yet
inasmuch as it had a tendency to lead to idolatry, and gave offence to
the Jewish believers in the churches, and was a stumbling block to weak
minds, who by the example of stronger Christians, were led to eat them
as sacrificed to an idol, and so their weak consciences were defiled,
therefore it was very proper to abstain from them;

and from fornication; not spiritual fornication or idolatry, but
fornication taken in a literal sense, for the carnal copulation of one
single person with another, and which is commonly called simple
fornication: the reason why this is put among, things indifferent is,
not that it was so in itself, but because it was not thought to be
criminal by the Gentiles, and was commonly used by them, and which must
be offensive to the believing Jews, who were better acquainted with the
will of God; this is omitted in the Ethiopic version:

and from things strangled; that is; from eating them, and design such as
die of themselves, or are torn with beasts, or are not killed in a
proper way, by letting out their blood; but their blood is stagnated or
congealed in the veins: the Jews might not kill with a reaper's sickle,
nor with a saw, nor with the teeth, or nail; because these "strangled"
(a): and what was not slain as it should be, was reckoned all one as
what dies of itself; and whoever ate of either of these was to be beaten
(b); the law respecting these things was of the ceremonial kind, and
peculiar to the Jews, and was not binding upon the Gentiles; for that
which died of itself might be given to a stranger, and he might eat it,
or it might be sold to an alien, [Deu
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021) this has been wanting in many
copies, and it was not read by several of the ancient fathers:

and from blood: which is not to be understood of the blood of men and
shedding of that, which is of a moral nature; but of the blood of
beasts, and of eating of that. There were several laws about eating of
blood, and which are different, and ought to be carefully distinguished.
The first is in [Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004) "but flesh
with the life thereof, which is the blood there of, shall you not eat";
which forbids the eating of flesh with the blood; but not the eating of
flesh separately, nor the eating of blood separately, provided they were
properly prepared and dressed, but the eating of them together without
any preparation. As this was the first hint to man that we know of, that
he might eat flesh, it was proper that the manner in which he should eat
it, should be suggested to him; that he should not take the creature
alive and eat it, or tear off any of its members and eat it whilst
alive, or eat raw flesh; but should prepare it by roasting or boiling,
or some way, in which it might become proper food: and it is the
constant sense of the Jewish synagogue (c), that this law is to be
understood of the member of a living creature, torn from it, and eaten
whilst alive; six commands, the Jews say, were given to the first man
Adam, the first five forbid idolatry, blasphemy, shedding of blood,
uncleanness, and theft, or robbery, and the sixth required judgment
against offenders; to these were added, for the sons of Noah, a seventh,
which forbid the eating of the member of a living creature, as it is
said, [Gen 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#004) (d). So that this law
has nothing to do with eating of blood, simply considered, and no more
forbids eating of it separately, than it does eating of flesh
separately: in like manner is the law in [Deu
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#023) to be understood, and is so
interpreted by the Jewish writers (e): another law is in [Lev
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026) "ye shall not eat anything with
the blood"; which according to our version, seems to be the same law
with the former, but is not; for it is not said here, as before, "in",
or "with", but "upon", "over", or "by" the blood. This is differently
understood: some think the sense is, that no one should eat of the
sacrifices, before the sprinkling of the blood upon the altar (f); or
until it stands or is congealed in the basons (g); others, that it is a
caution to judges, that they do not eat until they have finished
judgment; for whoever judges or passes sentence after he has eat and
drank, is as if he was guilty of blood (h): another observes (i), that
next to this clause, it is said, "neither shall ye use enchantment";
meaning that they should not use enchantment by eating, in the way that
murderers do, who eat bread over the slain, that the avengers of the
slain may not take vengeance on them; this author smells something
superstitious or diabolical in this matter; and indeed this is the case;
the truth of the matter is, it refers to a practice among the Heathens,
who fancied that blood was the food of the demons, to whom they
sacrificed; and therefore when they sacrificed to them, they took the
blood of the beast and put it into a vessel, and sat down by it, and
round about it, and ate the flesh; imagining that whilst they ate the
flesh, the demons eat the blood, and by this means friendship and
familiarity were contracted between them; so that they hoped to receive
some advantage from them, and be informed of things to come (k). Hence,
this law is placed with others against enchantments and observing times,
to which may be added, [Eze 33:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#025) "ye
eat with the blood", or "over it", or "by" it; "and lift up your eyes to
your idols": which is to be understood in the same light, and with these
compare [Sa1 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#032). But besides these,
there was a third law, which is frequently repeated, [Lev
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017) which absolutely forbids the
eating of blood, as well as fat; the Jews except the blood of fishes,
and locusts, and creeping things, and the blood of men, and the blood
that is in eggs, and that which is squeezed out of flesh, or drops from
it, which a man may eat and not be guilty of the breach of this law (l)
the reason of this law was, because the blood, which is the life, was
given in sacrifice for the life of men, to be an atonement for them;
wherefore, to keep up a just reverence of the sacrifice, and to direct
to the blood of the great sacrifice of the Messiah, blood was forbidden
to be eaten, till that sacrifice was offered up; and then that blood
itself was to be spiritually eaten by faith: and now if eating of blood
in general was morally evil in itself, it would be a monstrous shocking
thing in the Christian religion, that the blood of Christ is to be
drank; though it be to be understood in a spiritual sense: the law
against eating blood was very strictly enjoined the Jews, and severely
punished; whoever ate of blood, but the quantity of an olive, if he ate
it wilfully, was guilty of cutting off; if ignorantly, he was to bring a
sin offering (m): James knew that the breach of this law would give
great offence to the Jews, and therefore for the peace of the church he
moves that the Gentiles might be wrote to, to abstain from blood; and
which was agreed to and done: and this was attended to with much
strictness by the primitive Christians, who seemed to have observed this
advice in the form of a law, and thought it criminal to eat blood; but
in process of time it was neglected; and in Austin's time abstinence
from blood was derided, as a ridiculous notion; and it is at least now
high time that this, and everything else of a ceremonial kind, was
dropped by Christians; though where the peace of the brethren is in
danger, this, and everything of an indifferent nature should be
abstained from: Beza's ancient copy adds, "and whatsoever they would not
have done to themselves, do not unto others"; and so two of Stephens's:
the Ethiopic version is, "whatsoever they hate should be done to
themselves, let them not do to their brethren".

(God forbids his people from eating the blood of any animal. Blood
carries both infections and toxins that might circulate in the animal's
body. Therefore, by eating an animal's blood, one exposes himself
needlessly to potential toxins and infections. The harmful effects of
eating blood can be illustrated by tribes in Africa who consume large
amounts of blood in their pagan culture. These people have developed the
chronic diseases seen in our elderly while still teenagers. Their life
span is approximately 30 years. Rex D. Russel, M.D. p. 229, "Proceedings
of the 1992 Twin-Cities Creation Conference". Editor's note.)

\(a\) Misn. Cholin, c. 1. sect. 2. (b) Maimon. Hilchot Maacolot Assurot,
c. 4. sect. 1. (c) Targum Jon Jarchi, Aben Ezra & Abendanae not. in Sol.
ben Melec in loc. (d) Maimon. Hilchot Melacim, c. 9. sect. 1. (e) Jarchi
and Baal Hatturim in loc. T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 56. 2. & 59. 1. &
Cholin, fol 102. 2. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 95, 4. (f) Jarchi & Aben Ezra in
loc. (g) Targum Jon. in loc. (h) Zohar in Exod. fol. 50. 3. Vid. Maimon.
Hilchot Sanhedrin, c. 13. sect. 4. (i) Baal Hatturim in Lev. xix. 26.
(k) Maimon. Morch Nevochim, par. 3. c. 46. Kimchi in I Sam. xiv. 32. &
in Ezek. xxxiii. 25. (l) Misn. Ceritot, c. 5. sect. 1. Maimon. Maacolot
Asurot, c. 6, sect. 1. Jarchi in Lev. xvii. 10. Moses Kotsensis Mitzvot
Tora, pr. pag. 137. (m) Maimon. Maacolot Asurot, c. 6. sect.7

[Acts 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 15:21</span></span>

For Moses of old time hath in every city them that preach him,.... That
is, for many years past, even from the times of Ezra, the law of Moses
has been publicly expounded by them, whom the Jews call Derashim,
preachers, or expounders, in every city where there was a synagogue; and
every city belonging to the Jews, were obliged to build a synagogue,
yea, they were obliged to do it where there were but ten Israelites (n):
this is given by James as a reason why the Gentiles should be wrote unto
concerning the above things; because that they hearing the law read and
expounded every week, would be ready to conclude that they were obliged
to submit unto it, as to circumcision, and other things; unless they
were told that they were free from it; only in order to maintain peace
with their brethren the Jews, it would be necessary for them to abstain
from the above things: and it may also carry in it a reason, why the
Jews need not be wrote unto, and why they had no reason to complain for
thus writing to the Gentiles; since they had the law read and explained
to them every week, and there would be no attempt to make any alteration
in that form of service:

being read in the synagogues every sabbath day; See Gill on [Act
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015).

\(n\) Maimon. Tephilla, c. 11. sect. 1.

[Acts 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 15:22</span></span>

Then pleased it the apostles and elders, with the whole church,.... The
opinion, judgment, and advice of James, being approved of by the whole
body of the apostles, ministers, and brethren of the church assembled
together on this occasion; they unanimously agreed,

to send chosen men of their own company to Antioch, with Paul and
Barnabas; that is, they thought fit to choose some persons from among
themselves, out of that assembly, or who were members of the church at
Jerusalem; and send them to Antioch, where the difference began, along
with Paul and Barnabas, to give an account of the sense of the apostles,
elders, and brethren, about the affair in controversy, and what was
their advice upon the whole: and the rather they took this step, to
prevent all suspicion of Paul and Barnabas giving a partial account, or
putting a wrong turn upon the sentiments of this assembly, they being
parties concerned on one side, wherefore they thought fit to send some
indifferent persons along with them, to confirm their narrative, and to
compose differences among them, and to bring back an account of the
state of the church:

namely, Judas surnamed Barsabas; See Gill on [Act
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#023).

and Silas, the same with Sylvanus:

chief men among the brethren, leading men among them, who went before
them, were guides to them, in doctrine and discipline; for these were
prophets or preachers, as appears from [Act
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032) and these they pitched upon,
partly out of respect to Paul and Barnabas, as being suitable companions
for them, and partly out of respect to the church at Antioch, and
chiefly because of their ability, and capacity, for such service they
were sent upon.

[Acts 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 15:23</span></span>

And wrote letters by them after this manner,.... Not that they made use
of them as their amanuenses, to write their letters for them; but being
written they put them into their hands, and sent them by them, and they
were written in the following form:

the apostles, and elders, and brethren; which belonged to, or were
members of the church at Jerusalem; they are severally set in their
proper place and order: the apostles, Peter, and James, and John, and it
may be some others first; for these God had set in the first place in
the church; then the elders, or preachers of the Gospel, such as were
Judas and Silas: and then the brethren, or private members of the
church; who are called so, because they are of one family, and have one
Father, and are partakers of the same grace and privileges: these,

send greeting; or their Christian salutation, wishing all peace and
prosperity, both for soul and body, temporal, spiritual and eternal:

unto the brethren which are of the Gentiles in Antioch, and Syria and
Cilicia; the brethren or members of the several churches in these parts,
who were Gentiles, are particularly sent to; and not the brethren who
were Jews; because they were especially concerned, and to them is the
advice directed: Antioch is first mentioned, that being the place where
the controversy began; but there being other churches in Syria, besides
Antioch, in which were many Gentiles, and also in Cilicia, and
particularly at Tarsus, Paul's native place, and where he had preached,
[Act 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#030) they are therefore
mentioned, and being countries near to one another, it is very likely
that the controversy had spread itself among them.

[Acts 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 15:24</span></span>

Forasmuch as we have heard,.... By the report of Paul and Barnabas, who
were sent by the church at Antioch to Jerusalem, to acquaint them with
the state of their case:

that certain which went out from us; [Act
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

have troubled you with words, or doctrines:

subverting your souls; removing them from the doctrine of grace to
another Gospel, and which deserved not the name of a Gospel; and was
very destructive to their souls, at least to the peace and com fort of
them: this shows what an opinion the apostles, and elders, and members
of the church at Jerusalem had of these "judaizing" preachers, and their
tenets; they looked upon them as troublers of God's Israel, and upon
their doctrines as subversive of spiritual joy and comfort.

Saying, ye must be circumcised and keep the law; the ceremonial law; the
Alexandrian copy, and the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions leave out
this clause; See Gill on [Act 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001),
[Act 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#005).

to whom we gave no such commandment: it looks as if these "judaizing
preachers" not only pretended to be sent out by the apostles, to preach;
but that they had particularly this in their instructions from them,
that they should insist upon it, that the Gentiles that were received
into the churches, should be circumcised, and be obliged to keep the
other parts of the ceremonial law, when they had no such orders from
them.

[Acts 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 15:25</span></span>

It seemed good unto us, being assembled with one accord,.... Or
together; in one place, as the Vulgate Latin and Arabic versions render
it; see [Act 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001) though certain it is,
that as they were in one place, so they were in one mind; and their
unanimity was proper to be mentioned, in order to engage a regard to
their advice:

to send men chosen unto you; men chosen for this purpose; namely, Judas
and Silas:

with our beloved Barnabas and Paul; who are commended thus, partly to
express their affection to them; and partly to observe the wisdom of the
church at Antioch, in sending two such agreeable persons; and chiefly to
testify their approbation of the doctrine and conduct of these two men.

[Acts 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 15:26</span></span>

Men that have hazarded their lives,.... As at Antioch, in Pisidia, where
a persecution was raised against them, and they were expelled out of the
coasts of that place; and at Lystra, where Paul was stoned, and left for
dead, [Act 13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050) and this they did,
not for any sinister and selfish ends, for any worldly gain, or vain
glory, and popular applause, but

for the name of our Lord Jesus Christ; for the sake of his Gospel, and
the enlargement of his interest, and kingdom in the world; and therefore
were worthy of esteem, and ought to be regarded and attended to, and
greatly to be preferred to false teachers; who only sought themselves,
their worldly honour, and ease, and would sacrifice nothing, nor hazard
anything, for the sake of Christ.

[Acts 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 15:27</span></span>

We have sent therefore Judas and Silas,.... The chosen men before
mentioned,

who shall also tell you the same things by mouth; as are written in
these letters; which would both confirm and explain things unto them.

[Acts 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 15:28</span></span>

For it seemed good to the Holy Ghost, and to us,.... By various things
they had reason doubtless to conclude, that they were under the
influence and direction of the Holy Ghost in this affair; as by the
spirit of prayer that was among them; by that power and energy with
which many of them spoke on this occasion, and that so agreeable to the
word of God; and by that unanimity with which they came into the advice
given. With respect to the form here used, compare [Ch1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#002) and the Targum on it, which
renders the words thus;

"if it be beautiful before you, and acceptable before the Lord, let us
send, &c.''

It follows here,

to lay upon you no greater burden than these necessary things; not that
they were necessary to salvation, but necessary to secure the peace of
the churches, and at least were necessary, at that present time; and
therefore since it appeared to be necessary to enjoin them for the
present, they hoped they would not refuse to bear them; and especially,
since, though they must own they were burdens, and a part of the yoke of
bondage, yet they were not many, nor very heavy, and for the future they
should lay no other, nor more upon them; and what they did, was to
prevent any other or greater burden to be laid; and so the Syriac
version renders it, "lest any more, or greater burden should be laid
upon you."

[Acts 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 15:29</span></span>

That ye abstain from meats offered to idols,.... Which explains what is
meant by pollutions of idols, [Act
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020)

and from blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication. See
Gill on [Act 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020).

In Beza's most ancient copy, and in three other manuscripts, and in the
Complutensian edition, it follows, "and whatsoever ye would not have
done to yourselves, that do ye not to another"; in like manner the
Ethiopic version also reads, as in [Act
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020) "from which if ye keep
yourselves ye shall do well"; it will be doing a good thing, and make
for the peace of the churches; in Beza's most ancient copy it is added,
"born", or "moved by the Holy Ghost": being influenced and assisted by
him in this, and every good work:

fare ye well; the Syriac version adds, "in our Lord".

[Acts 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 15:30</span></span>

So when they were dismissed,.... That is, Paul and Barnabas, with Judas
and Silas, by the apostles, elders, and church at Jerusalem:

they came to Antioch; or "came down to Antioch", as the Alexandrian
copy, the Vulgate Latin, and Ethiopic versions read, agreeably to [Act
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#001)

and when they had gathered the multitude together; the whole church,
which consisted of many members; the company, or congregation of the
faithful, as the Arabic version renders it: and as Paul and Barnabas
were sent by the church at Antioch; and as the letter, which they, with
Judas and Silas, brought from Jerusalem, was directed and sent to the
brethren at Antioch, it was highly reasonable, and necessary, that they
should be called together, and an account of the business they were sent
upon be given them, and the letter be delivered to them, as it
accordingly was:

they delivered the epistle; sent by the apostles, elders, and brethren
at Jerusalem to them; this they put into the hands of some one or other
of the brethren of the church, in order to be read.

[Acts 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 15:31</span></span>

Which when they had read,.... That is, when the brethren of the church
at Antioch had read the letter delivered to them; for not Paul and
Barnabas, or Judas and Silas, who were sent with it, read it, but the
brethren to whom it was sent, as was proper.

They rejoiced for the consolation, or "exhortation", as the word may be
rendered, which was given them in the letter, to abstain from the above
things, without being burdened with any other; and they rejoiced that
there was such an agreement among the apostles, elders, and brethren at
Jerusalem; and that their sentiments, and those of Paul and Barnabas,
and other faithful ministers and saints at Antioch, were alike, and were
opposed to the judaizing preachers and professors; and above all, they
rejoiced that they were freed from the burdensome yoke of the law, and
that the controversy which had been raised among them, was likely to be
ended, and to issue so well.

[Acts 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 15:32</span></span>

And Judas and Silas being also prophets themselves,.... As well as Paul
and Barnabas, and others, that were at Antioch; see [Act
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001) and by prophets are meant, not
only such who had the gift of foretelling things to come; though such
there were, and these might have that gift; but such who were able to
explain the prophecies of the Old Testament, give the true sense of the
Scriptures, and open them to the edification of others; wherefore having
such gifts, they made use of them; Beza's ancient copy adds, "full of
the Holy Ghost":

and exhorted the brethren with many words; which does not so much design
the prolixity of their discourses, and the frequency of their
ministrations, though they might preach both long and often; as the
richness of the matter of them, as the Syriac version suggests,
rendering it, "with a rich word"; with copiousness, fulness, and
abundance of Gospel truths, with which they comforted the brethren,
giving them many useful instructions and exhortations:

and confirmed them; in the doctrines of the Gospel, and particularly in
their Christian liberty, and freedom from the law of Moses, in which the
false teachers had endeavoured to stagger them.

[Acts 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 15:33</span></span>

And after they had tarried there a space,.... How long is not certain;
the Arabic version renders it "a year"; and it is probable enough, they
might stay there so long, till things were thoroughly settled, which
were thrown into great disorder and confusion, by the pleaders for
circumcision:

they were let go in peace; that is, they were dismissed, and went away
with the leave and consent of the church; who returned them thanks for
the service and good offices they had done them, and wished them all
peace, prosperity, and happiness, both in soul and body, and great
success in their ministrations wherever they went: and as they were
dismissed in peace, they left the church in perfect peace; an end being
put to the controversy about circumcision, which was raised among them;
and the members of the church being agreed in their sentiments, and
heartily united in their affections to one another: and thus Judas and
Silas were honourably dismissed

from the brethren, at Antioch,

to the Apostles, at Jerusalem; the Alexandrian copy, and Beza's ancient
copy, the Vulgate Latin, and Ethiopic versions, read, "to them that sent
them"; and so include, with the apostles, the elders, and brethren at
Jerusalem, who wrote the letter to the church at Antioch, and sent it by
them; and it was proper that they should return to them, and give them
an account of the success of it, how it was received, and what good it
had done.

[Acts 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 15:34</span></span>

Notwithstanding it pleased Silas to abide there still,.... Though he had
leave to go, and was actually dismissed with Judas; and doubtless
intended to have gone with him, but for some reason or another he
changed his mind, and thought fit to continue at Antioch some time
longer: and the design of Providence in it seems to have been this; that
he might be a companion with the Apostle Paul in his travels among the
Gentiles, as he afterwards was, and was very useful to him. This verse
is wanting in the Alexandrian copy, and in the Syriac and Arabic
versions; the Ethiopic version reads, "and Paul proposed", or
"determined to abide", as he did some little time longer, as appears
from the following verse: the Vulgate Latin version here adds, and
"Judas went alone to Jerusalem"; and so it is read in one of Beza's
copies, and in one of Stephens's.

[Acts 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 15:35</span></span>

Paul also and Barnabas continued in Antioch,.... As well as Silas:
teaching and preaching the word of the Lord; the Gospel of Christ; not
the word of men, but the word of the Lord, of which he is both the
author and subject: this they preached in season, and out of season,
with power, purity, plainness, and faithfulness.

And many others also; who either came along with them from Jerusalem,
when they brought the letter from thence, or were here before; who came
hither upon the persecution raised at the death of Stephen, [Act
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#019) or they were the prophets which
afterwards came from Jerusalem thither, [Act
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#027) such as Simeon called Niger,
Lucius of Cyrene, and Manaen, [Act
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#001).

[Acts 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 15:36</span></span>

And some days after,.... That Judas was gone to Jerusalem, and which
they had spent in teaching and preaching the word of the Lord at
Antioch:

Paul said to Barnabas, let us go again and visit our brethren in every
city, where we have preached the word of the Lord, and see how they do;
by the "brethren in every city", the apostle means the believers in
Syria, Pamphylia, Pisidia, and Lycaonia; where he and Barnabas had
preached the Gospel with success; where churches were planted and elders
were ordained; of which an account is given in the two preceding
chapters: and it may be observed, what an affection the apostle had for
the young converts, and members of these churches; he calls them
"brethren", they being partakers of the same grace, and of the same
faith and family with himself, though they were not in the same office,
nor had the same gifts; as also what care he took of them, and of those
new planted churches: and which shows, that such are to be visited and
looked after, and their cases inspected into; and inquiries should be
made of them, how they do, how they go on; whether they continue in the
faith, and grow in grace and in the knowledge of Christ; and whether
they are lively in the exercise of the graces of faith, hope, love,
humility, &c. and diligent and fervent in the discharge of duty; and
this is a work becoming the ministers of the Gospel; and the example of
the apostle is worthy of imitation.

[Acts 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 15:37</span></span>

And Barnabas determined,.... Or consulted, and contrived in his own
mind, and purposed within himself; the Alexandrian copy, and two of
Beza's, the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic versions read, "he
would", or was willing; he had a mind, a very great desire,

to take with them John, whose surname was Mark; of whom see [Act
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#012) he being his sister's son, [Col
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010) him they brought with them to
Antioch, when they returned from Jerusalem thither, where they had been
sent by the church at Antioch, with money for the relief of the poor
saints; see [Act 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#029) and who seems
to have come with them from Jerusalem again; for thither he went, when
he parted from them at Pamphylia, [Act
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013).

[Acts 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 15:38</span></span>

But Paul thought not good to take him with them,.... He did not think
him worthy, or a fit and proper person to go with them, as the word used
seems to signify, and therefore he refused to take him: the Syriac
version renders it, "but Paul would not take him with them"; and, the
Ethiopic version is very expressive, though it renders it in softer
language, "Paul prayed, or entreated Barnabas that he would leave Mark";
that is, behind them at Antioch: his reasons were as follow:

who departed from them from Pamphylia; see Gill on [Act
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#013); either through the fatigue of
the journey, or fear of danger, or weariness in his work, or affection
to his mother; or be it what it will, it seems in the apostle's opinion
of the matter, he was very blameworthy, and on account of it very
undeserving, at least at present, of being a companion of theirs in
their travels:

and went not with them to the work; the Arabic version adds, "of
preaching"; that is, the Gospel, in the several places whither they
went, and to which the Holy Ghost had called them, and for which the
church at Antioch had separated, and sent them forth; but in the midst
of this John deserted them; and which the apostle resented, he having,
as yet, not given any evidence of his sense of his evil, and of his
repentance for it, to his satisfaction; though it seems as if he
afterwards did, since in [Col 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010) he
speaks of him with great respect, as one of his fellow workers, and who
had been a comfort to him.

[Acts 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 15:39</span></span>

And the contention was so sharp between them,.... About this matter;
Barnabas insisting on it, that John Mark should go with them, he being a
relation of his; and in whose favour it might be urged, that his mother
Mary was an excellent good woman, who had received the saints into her
house, in a time of persecution; and that it should be considered, that
this her son was but a young man, and could not be thought to have that
courage, resolution, constancy, and solidity, as older professors and
ministers; and that his crime was not very heinous, and should be
overlooked. Paul, on the other hand, opposing his going with them, as a
very unworthy person, because he had behaved so cowardly, and had shown
such a coldness and indifference to the work of the ministry, and had so
shamefully left them; and thus they disputed the point till there was a
paroxysm between them, as is the word used: they were irritated and
provoked by one another, and were so warmed and heated on both sides,

that they departed asunder one from another; thus as soon almost as
peace was made in the church, a difference arises among the ministers of
the word, who are men of like passions with others; and though it is not
easy to say which was to blame most in this contention; perhaps there
were faults on both sides, for the best men are not without their
failings; yet this affair was overruled by the providence of God, for
the spread of his Gospel, and the enlargement of his interest; for when
these two great and good men parted from one another, they went to
different places, preaching the word of God:

and so Barnabas took Mark and sailed unto Cyprus;

See Gill on [Act 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#004).

[Acts 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 15:40</span></span>

And Paul chose Silas,.... To be his companion and assistant; this being
the design of the Holy Ghost in influencing his, mind to stay longer at
Antioch, after he, with Judas, was dismissed by the church to go to
Jerusalem, [Act 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#033).

and departed; that is, from Antioch:

being recommended by the brethren unto the grace of God;

See Gill on [Act 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#026). The apostle
having such a recommendation by the brethren of the church at Antioch,
when he departed from them, and nothing of this kind being said with
respect to Barnabas, have induced some to think, that the church took
the part of the apostle against Barnabas, in the dispute between them;
since the one went away saluted by them, and the other not.

[Acts 15:41](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">act 15:41</span></span>

And he went through Syria and Cilicia,.... Antioch was the metropolis of
the former, and Tarsus, the apostle's native place, was in the latter;
and in both these countries he had been before, and had been the
instrument of converting many souls, and of planting churches, which he
now visited, as he proposed to Barnabas to do: for it follows,

confirming the churches; in the Gospel, and the truths and ordinances of
it, he had before instructed them in: of the church at Antioch; see Gill
on [Act 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026). And that there were
also churches in Cilicia, is very manifest; and particularly there was
one at Tarsus, the chief city in it. Herodian, of whom we read in [Rom
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#011) and Jason, in [Act
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005) who are reckoned among the
seventy disciples, are said to be bishops or pastors of this church; See
Gill on [Luk 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001). In the "second"
century there was a church in that city, to which Ignatius wrote an
epistle, still extant (o), in which he makes mention of Philo their
deacon: in the "third" century Helenus presided over this church, and
was present at a synod at Antioch, when Paulus Samosatenus was condemned
for heresy (p): in the "fourth" century mention is made of several
churches in Cilicia, and the bishops of them; there was a church at
Apsis in Cilicia, Amphion was bishop of Epiphania, Theodorus of
Mopsuestia, Cyriacus of Adanan, and Sylvanus of Tarsus, the metropolis;
in which last place, in the beginning of this century, several martyrs
suffered under Dioclesian, particularly Tharatus, Probus, and
Andronicus: here the orthodox, in the times of Valens, would have
convened a synod against the Arians, but were hindered by him; and in
this century Diodorus, bishop of Tarsus, had the care of all the
churches in Cilicia committed to him; in this age also we read of
Antoninus, a presbyter of this church, afterwards made bishop of it: in
the "fifth" century mention is made of the bishops of several churches
in Cilicia, as of Mopsuesta, Irenopolis, Epiphania, Tarsus, Anazarbus,
Sebaste, and others who were present at several councils held at
different places in this century; in the "sixth" century, out of the
cities of Cilicia, Jotapa, Pisidia, Pompeiopolis, Tarsus, Coricus,
Anemurius, bishops are said to come to the synod at Rome and
Constantinople: in the seventh century, Tarsus was the metropolitan
church of Cilicia; and mention is made of the bishops of that and of
other cities in this country, who assisted at the sixth council at
Constantinople: in the "eighth" century, notice is taken of a Church at
Sida in Cilicia (q); so long the Christian name was in those parts.
Beza's ancient copy adds, "delivering the commandments of the elders";
and the Vulgate Latin version, "bidding" them to keep the commandments
of the apostles and elders; see [Act
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004), namely; the decrees of the
assembly at Jerusalem; which seems very agreeable, since the letters
were directed and sent to the brethren of the Gentiles in Syria and
Cilicia, as well as in Antioch; see [Act
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#023).

\(o\) Ignat. Epist. p. 73, 81. (p) Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 7. c. 28. (q)
Madgeburg. Hist. Eccl. cent. 4. c. 2. p. 2, 3. c. 3. p. 18. 22. 74. c.
7. p. 289. c. 9. p. 405, 481, c. 10. p. 570. cent. 5. c. 2. p. 3. c. 10.
p. 585, 586. cent. 6. c. 2. p. 3. cent. 7. c. 2. p. 3. c. 7. p. 112.
cent. 8. c. 2. p. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 16](act016)

</div>
