<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act024)  [Next](act026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001.md)

[Acts 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 25:1</span></span>

Now when Festus was come into the province,.... Of Judea, which was a
Roman province, over which he was made governor by Nero, the Roman
emperor, in the room of Felix; he now being landed in some part of the
province, namely, at Caesarea, and so might be said to have entered upon
the government of it, as the phrase will bear to be rendered;

after three days he ascended from Caesarea to Jerusalem; he very likely
came by sea from Italy to Judea, and landed at Caesarea; for though
Joppa was the nearest port to Jerusalem, yet Caesarea was the safest,
and most commodious port, being made so by Herod; See Gill on [Act
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#022.md), and besides, it seems to have
been very much the residence of the kings and governors of Judea, [Act
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#019.md) here Festus stayed three days
after his landing, to rest himself after the fatigue of the voyage, and
then went up to Jerusalem, the metropolis of the province of Judea.

[Acts 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 25:2</span></span>

Then the high priest,.... Ananias, as in [Act
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#002.md) the Alexandrian copy, the Vulgate
Latin version, and all the Oriental versions, read, "the chief priests",
the whole college of the priests:

and the chief of the Jews; their rulers and elders, the members of the
Jewish sanhedrim;

informed him against Paul; they took the first opportunity of waiting
upon him, when he was come to Jerusalem; hoping it might be a favourable
one to them, since he was just entering upon his government, and might
be willing to gratify the chief of the nation, and gain their affection
and esteem, and since as yet he was not acquainted with their wicked
dispositions and artifices; and brought a bill of information against
Paul, and gave a large account of him, what a wicked man he was, and
what evils he had committed; they laid many things to his charge, and
very heavily accused him, and endeavoured to prepossess the governor,
and prejudice him against him:

and besought him; that he would grant them the following request.

[Acts 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 25:3</span></span>

And desired favour against him,.... Paul; they asked what would be a
favour to them, and a prejudice to him: or "of him", that is, of Festus;
they asked a favour of him, and desired it as such, as what would be
gratefully accepted and acknowledged by them; which sense is confirmed
by the Syriac version; the Arabic version renders it "to", or "upon
them"; that is, they asked him to grant a favour to them, or bestow one
on them, which is as follows:

that he would send for him to Jerusalem; that his case might be heard
before him, and he might be tried and judged by him, as they pretended:

laying wait in the way to kill him; this was their design, though they
concealed it, and pretended no other view than that justice might take
place: their scheme was, that if they could have prevailed upon Festus
to have sent for Paul to Jerusalem, from Caesarea, they would have
provided men, perhaps the same forty and upwards as before, in [Act
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#012.md) to have laid in wait for him in
the way as he came, and to have killed him: the whole of this shows the
malice of these men, the badness of their cause, the indefatigableness
and diligence to attain their end, the danger the apostle was in, and
the care of Providence over him.

[Acts 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 25:4</span></span>

But Festus answered, that Paul should be kept at Caesarea,.... Or that
he was kept there, and was in proper custody, under the care of a
centurion, and should continue there; nor was there any reason why he
should be removed, especially since he should return thither speedily,
as he adds:

and that he himself would depart shortly thither; the answer was a very
wise and prudent one, and the reasons given were just and strong; as
that Paul had been sent to Caesarea, was left bound by his predecessor
there; there he found him, and there he was under a proper guard, and
there it was right for him to continue; and besides, he himself should
make no stay in Jerusalem, but should depart for Caesarea in a few days,
and therefore it was very improper to send for Paul thither.

[Acts 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 25:5</span></span>

Let them therefore, said he, which among you are able,.... Who are at
leisure, can spare time, and to whom it will be convenient, without
interrupting other business, to take such a journey; and who are able to
bear the expenses of it, without hurting their families, and whose
health and age will admit of it; and above all, who are masters of this
affair, and are capable of forming charges, and of supporting them with
proper proofs and evidences: let such

go down with me; from Jerusalem to Caesarea: and accuse this man: in
proper form, according to the rules of law, of what he is guilty, and
can be proved upon him:

if there is any wickedness in him; or committed by him, anything that is
absurd and unreasonable, notoriously flagitious and criminal; that is,
contrary to the rules of reason, the common sense of mankind, and the
laws of God and men; and especially of the Roman empire, or that is
blasphemous or seditious.

[Acts 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 25:6</span></span>

And when he had tarried among them more than ten days,.... The
Alexandrian copy, and three of Beza's copies, and some others, and the
Vulgate Latin version read, "no more than eight or ten days"; and the
Syriac and Ethiopic versions leave out the phrase "no more", and read
"when he had stayed there", as the former; that is, at Jerusalem; or
"when he had remained among them", as the latter; the Jews, chief
priests, and others, "eight or ten days"; the historian, not being
certain to a day, expresses himself in this manner:

he went down to Caesarea; from whence he came, and where Paul was:

and the next day sitting in the judgment seat; the day after he was come
to Caesarea, he sat upon the bench in the court of judicature, to try
causes, and particularly the apostle's, which he was very desirous of
knowing, for which reason he so soon took the bench: and

commanded Paul to be brought; from the place where he was kept a
prisoner, to the judgment hall where Festus was.

[Acts 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 25:7</span></span>

And when he was come,.... Into court:

the Jews which came down from Jerusalem; along with Festus, perhaps the
high priest with the elders, and Tertullus the orator, as before:

stood round about; either the Apostle Paul, or the judgment seat; the
witnesses and accusers were to stand, as well as the person accused; See
Gill on [Mar 14:57](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#057.md).

And laid many and grievous complaints against Paul; which they could not
prove; for his moral conversation, both before and after conversion, was
very strict and conformable to the laws of God and man; and yet as pure
and inoffensive as he was, he was not exempt from the calumnies of men;
and these many and very grievous; but it was his happiness, and to his
honour through the grace of God, that his enemies could not make good
anyone thing against him.

[Acts 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 25:8</span></span>

While he answered for himself,.... As he was allowed by the Roman laws
to do, he pleaded his own cause, and showed the falsehood of the charges
exhibited against him; by observing, that as the crimes alleged against
him were reducible to three heads, neither of them were just and true:

neither against the law of the Jews; the law of Moses, whether moral,
ceremonial, or judicial; not the moral law, that he was a strict
observer of, both before and since his conversion; nor the ceremonial
law, for though it was abolished, and he knew it was, yet for peace
sake, and in condescension to the weakness of some, and in order to gain
others, he submitted to it, and was performing a branch of it, when he
was seized in the temple; nor the judicial law, which concerned the Jews
as Jews, and their civil affairs: neither against the temple; at
Jerusalem, the profanation of which he was charged with, by bringing a
Gentile into it; which was a falsehood, at least a mistake:

nor yet against Caesar, have I offended at all; for he was charged with
sedition, [Act 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#005.md). Caesar was a
common name to the Roman emperors, as Pharaoh was to the kings of Egypt;
and which they took from Julius Caesar the first of them, who was
succeeded by Augustus Caesar, under whom Christ was born; and he by
Tiberius, under whom he suffered; the fourth was Caius Caligula; the
fifth was Claudius, mentioned in [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028.md) and the present Caesar, to whom
Paul now appealed, was Nero; and though succeeding emperors bore this
name, it was also given to the second in the empire, or the presumptive
heir to it: authors are divided about the original of Caesar, the
surname of Julius; some say he had it from the colour of his eyes, which
were "Caesii", grey; others from "Caesaries", his fine head of hair;
others from his killing of an elephant, which, in the language of the
Moors, is called "Caesar": the more common opinion is, that he took his
name from his mother's womb, being "Caeso", cut up at his birth, to make
way for his passage into the world; in which manner also our King Edward
the Sixth came into the world.

[Acts 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 25:9</span></span>

But Festus, willing to do the Jews a pleasure,.... As did his
predecessor Felix, [Act 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#027.md) he being
just entered upon his new government, and having met with some caresses
and civilities from the Jews at Jerusalem, by whom he had been much
pressed and urged about the affair of the apostle:

answered Paul, and said, wilt thou go up to Jerusalem, and there be
judged of these things before me? meaning by the Jewish sanhedrim, he
Festus being present: this was what the Jews had requested of him when
he was at Jerusalem, that he would send for Paul thither, and there let
him be judged, and which request he had denied; but having been
solicited and importuned by the Jews, perhaps as, they came down
together, he was inclined to gratify them, and to admit of it that he
should be tried at Jerusalem, before the sanhedrim, he being present;
and yet he was unwilling to do this without the prisoner's consent, he
being a freeman of a Roman city; fearing he should be charged with
delivering up a Roman into the hands of the Jews, which might be
resented by the emperor and the Roman senate, should it come to their
knowledge.

[Acts 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 25:10</span></span>

Then said Paul, I stand at Caesar's judgment seat,.... Not that here was
a seat in the judgment hall built by Herod for Caesar himself to sit in,
should he ever come there, as some have thought; but the seat on which
Festus sat is called Caesar's judgment seat, because it was in a Raman
court of judicature, and because Festus, who filled it, represented
Caesar himself:

where I ought to be judged: being a Roman citizen, and not at Jerusalem
by the sanhedrim of the Jews, who had nothing to do with him:

to the Jews have I done no wrong, as thou very well knowest; it may be
by his predecessor Felix, who had informed him of this case; or by
Lysias's letter, which might come to his hands; or by the apostle's
answer and vindication of himself, which he now made.

have I done no wrong, as thou very well knowest; it may be by his
predecessor Felix, who had informed him of this case; or by Lysias's
letter, which might come to his hands; or by the apostle's answer and
vindication of himself, which he now made.

[Acts 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 25:11</span></span>

For if I be an offender,.... Against the law of Moses, or the temple at
Jerusalem, or Caesar the Roman emperor:

or have committed anything worthy of death; by the laws of the Romans,
as sedition, murder, &c.

I refuse not to die; signifying that he did not decline going to
Jerusalem, either through any consciousness of guilt, or fear of death;
for if anything could be proved against him, that was of a capital
nature, he did not desire to escape death; he was ready to die for it;
this was no subterfuge, or shift, to evade or defer justice:

but if there be none of these things; to be found, or proved, and made
to appear:

whereof these accuse me; pointing to the Jews, that came down to be his
accusers, and had laid many and grievous charges against him:

no man may deliver me unto them; not justly, or according to the Roman
laws; suggesting that Festus himself could not do it legally;

I appeal unto Caesar; to this the apostle was induced, partly by the
conduct of the governor, who seemed inclined to favour the Jews; and
partly by the knowledge he might have of their intention to lie in wait
for him, should he go up to Jerusalem; and chiefly by the vision he had
had, which assured him that he must bear witness of Christ at Rome, [Act
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#011.md).

[Acts 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 25:12</span></span>

Then Festus, when he had conferred with the council,.... Not with the
Jewish sanhedrim, or any part of it that came down on this occasion; but
with Roman counsellors, which he had to assist him in judgment, when any
difficult matters were before him; the Syriac and Ethiopic versions
render it, "with his counsellors"; and the Arabic reads in the singular
number, "with his counsellor"; with these he advised, whether it was
proper to admit of Paul's appeal, or not; and having had their opinion,

he answered, hast thou appealed unto Caesar? unto Caesar shalt thou go:
the question is put, partly for the more certain knowledge of the thing,
that there might be no mistake in it; and partly on account of the Jews,
that they might see that though he was disposed to do them a favour, it
was not in his power, because of this appeal; and it may be with some
resentment in himself, since it carried in it a sort of reflection upon
him, as if he was incapable of issuing this affair, or would not be just
and faithful in it.

[Acts 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 25:13</span></span>

And after certain days,.... Several days after the above appeal made by
Paul:

King Agrippa and Bernice came unto Caesarea to salute Festus: this King
Agrippa was the son of Herod Agrippa, who killed James the brother of
John, and of whose death mention is made in [Act
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#001) the Jewish chronologer (h.md) calls
him Agrippa the Second, the son of Agrippa the First, the fifth king of
the family of Herod: he was not king of Judea, this was reduced again
into a province by Claudius; and upon the death of his uncle Herod, king
of Chalcis, he was by the said emperor made king of that place, who
afterwards removed him from thence to a greater kingdom, and gave him
the tetrarchy, which was Philip's, his great uncle's; namely, Batanea,
Trachonitis, and Gaulanitis, to which he added the kingdom of Lysanias;
(see [Luk 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001).md) and the province which
Varus had; and to these Nero added four cities, with what belonged to
them; in Peraea, Abila and Julias, and in Galilee, Tarichea and Tiberias
(i). The Jewish writers often make mention of him, calling him, as here,
King Agrippa; See Gill on [Act 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#003.md),
and so does Josephus (k). According to the above chronologer (l) he was
had to Rome by Vespasian, when he went to be made Caesar; and was put to
death by him, three years and a half before the destruction of the
temple; though others say he lived some years after it: and some of the
Jewish writers affirm, that in his days the temple was destroyed (m).
Agrippa, though he was a Jew, his name was a Roman name; Augustus Caesar
had a relation of this name (n), who had a son of the same name, and a
daughter called Agrippina; and Herod the great being much obliged to the
Romans, took the name from them, and gave it to one of his sons, the
father of this king: the name originally was given to such persons, who
at their birth came forth not with their heads first, as is the usual
way of births, but with their feet first, and which is accounted a
difficult birth; and "ab aegritudine", from the grief, trouble, and
weariness of it, such are called Agrippas (o). Bernice, who is said to
be with King Agrippa, is not the name of a man, as some have supposed,
because said to sit in the judgment hall with the king, but of a woman;
so called, in the dialect of the Macedonians, for Pheronice, which
signifies one that carries away the victory; and this same person is, in
Suetonius (p), called Queen Beronice, for whom Titus the emperor is said
to have a very great love, and was near upon marrying her: she was not
wife of Agrippa, as the Arabic version reads, but his sister; his father
left besides him, three daughters, Bernice, Mariamne, and Drusilla,
which last was the wife of Felix, [Act
24:24](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#024.md). Bernice was first married to
her uncle Herod, king of Chalcis (q), and after his death to Polemon,
king of Cilicia, from whom she separated, and lived in too great
familiarity with her brother Agrippa, as she had done before her second
marriage, as was suspected (r), to which incest Juvenal refers (s); and
with whom she now was, who came together to pay a visit to Festus, upon
his coming to his government, and to congratulate him upon it.

\(h\) Ganz Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 26. 1. (i) Joseph. de Bello Jud.
l. 2. c. 11. sect. 5. & c. 12. sect. 1. 8. & c. 13. sect. 2. (k) Antiqu.
l. 20. c. 8. sect. 1. (l) Tzemach David, ib. col. 2. (m) Jarchi &
Bartenora in Misn. Sota, c. 7. sect. 8. (n) Sueton. in Vita Augusti, c.
63, 64. (o) A. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 16. c. 16. (p) In Vita Titi, c. 7.
(q) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 19. c. 5. sect. 1. & c. 9. sect. 1. & de Bello
Jud. l. 2. c. 11. sect. 5, 6. (r) Antiqu. l. 20. c. 6. sect. 3. (s)
Satyr 6.

[Acts 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 25:14</span></span>

And when they had been there many days,.... Indulging themselves in
pleasure, and spending their time in conversing on various subjects; and
in order to carry on the conversation, and pass away time,

Festus declared Paul's case unto the king; in the following manner:

saying, there is a certain man left in bonds by Felix; the former
governor in Caesarea, meaning Paul.

[Acts 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 25:15</span></span>

About whom, when I was at Jerusalem,.... Quickly after he came to his
government:

the chief priests and elders of the Jews informed me; brought an
accusation to him, exhibited to him charges against him, presented to
him a bill of information, setting forth various crimes he had been
guilty of:

desiring to have judgment against him; not barely to have his cause
tried, but to have a sentence of condemnation passed upon him; some
copies read "condemnation", as the Alexandrian copy, and two of Beza's;
and that punishment is designed, and even death itself, is manifest from
the following words.

[Acts 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 25:16</span></span>

To whom I answered,.... As follows:

it is not the manner of the Romans to deliver any man to die; or to give
any man to destruction; to pass sentence of death upon him, without
hearing his cause, and purely at the request of another, and merely to
gratify him:

before that he which is accused have the accusers face to face; so as to
speak to his face, or before him, what they have to charge him with:

and have licence to answer for himself, concerning the crime laid
against him; and this was also according to the law of the Jews, [Joh
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#051.md) though Festus, from such an
application to him by the chief priests and elders, might conclude that
their manner was different, he being ignorant of their laws and customs;
but their prejudice to the apostle carried them to act such an illegal
part, or at least to desire it might be acted: it is one of the Jewish
canons, that it is unlawful for a judge to hear one of the contending
parties, before the other is come in.

[Acts 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 25:17</span></span>

Therefore when they were come hither,.... To Caesarea, namely the chief
priests and elders of the Jews:

without any delay on the morrow, I sat on the judgment seat: that is,
the next day after they came down, Festus went into the judgment hall,
and took his place there, in order to hear this cause; which
circumstance he mentions, to show how expeditious he was:

and I commanded the man to be brought forth: from his place of
confinement, to the hall, to answer for himself.

[Acts 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 25:18</span></span>

Against whom when the accusers stood up,.... As they were obliged to do,
whilst they were exhibiting their charges, bearing their testimonies,
and producing their proofs; [Act 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#007.md).

They brought none accusation of such things as I supposed: for by his
being left in bonds, and by the information of the chief priests and
elders, and their violence against him, he imagined he must be
chargeable with some notorious capital crime.

[Acts 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 25:19</span></span>

But had certain questions against him of their own superstition,.... Or
religion; as about their law, which they said Paul had spoke against;
and about their temple, which they pretended he had polluted; and about
the resurrection of the dead, which he asserted, and some denied:

and of one Jesus which was dead, whom Paul affirmed to be alive; for it
seems more was said on each side, than is recorded by Luke: the Jews
objected to him among other things, his belief in Jesus of Nazareth,
whom they traduced as an impostor and deceiver; Paul on the other hand
argued, that he was the true Messiah; and in proof of it, affirmed that
though they had put him to death, he was risen from the dead, and so was
declared to be the Son of God with power: Festus, it is very likely, had
never heard of Jesus before, and therefore speaks of him in this manner;
or if he had, he had entertained a contemptible opinion of him, as well
as of the Jewish religion; and which he expresses, even in the presence
of the king, who had outwardly at least embraced it.

[Acts 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 25:20</span></span>

And because I doubted of such manner of questions,.... Or was ignorant
of them, and knew not what to make of them, or to say to them, and was
at an entire loss what to do in this affair:

I asked him whether he would go to Jerusalem, and there be judged of
these matters; before the Jewish sanhedrim, who best understood them.

[Acts 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 25:21</span></span>

But when Paul had appealed to be reserved,.... In custody at Caesarea:

unto the hearing of Augustus; to have his cause heard, tried, and judged
of, by the Roman Emperor Nero, here called Augustus; for as it was usual
for a Roman emperor to be called Caesar, from Julius Caesar, the first
of them, so to be called Augustus, from Octavius Augustus, the second
emperor: his original surname was Thurinus, but this being objected to
him as a reproachful one, he afterwards took the name of Caesar, and
then of Augustus; the one by the will of his great uncle, the other by
the advice of Munatius Plancus; when some thought he ought to be called
Romulus, as if he was the founder of the city, it prevailed that he
should rather be called Augustus; not only this surname being new, but
more grand, seeing religious places, and in which anything was
consecrated by soothsaying, were called "Augusta, ab auctu, vel ab avium
gestu, gustuve", according to Ennius (t): in the Greek text the name is
Sebastos, which signifies venerable and worshipful.

I commanded him to be kept; in Caesarea, by a centurion, and not sent to
Jerusalem:

till I might send him to Caesar: till he could have an opportunity of
sending him to Rome, to take his trial before the emperor.

\(t\) Suetonius in Vit. Octav. c. 7.

[Acts 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 25:22</span></span>

Then Agrippa said to Festus,.... After he had given him the above
account:

I would also hear the man myself; Agrippa being a Jew by profession, and
knowing more of these things than Festus did, and very likely had heard
much concerning Jesus Christ; and if not of the apostle, yet however of
the Christian religion; and therefore he was very desirous, not only out
of curiosity to see the man, but to hear him; and get some further
information and knowledge about the things in dispute, between the Jews
and Christians, in which Festus was very ready to gratify him:

tomorrow, said he, thou shall hear him: and sooner things could not well
be prepared for an affair of this kind, and for so grand a meeting.

[Acts 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 25:23</span></span>

And on the morrow, when Agrippa was come,.... Into the hall, or court of
judicature:

and Bernice; his sister, along with him:

with great pomp: in rich dress, with the "regalia", or ensigns of
royalty carried before them, and attended with a large train and retinue
of servants:

and was entered into the place of hearing; the causes that were tried in
court, that particular part of the hall, which was assigned for that
purpose; for as there were the proper places for the judge and council,
and for the plaintiffs and defendants, so for those that came to hear:

with the chief captains; or tribunes, who had the command of the Roman
soldiers; and who had each of them a thousand men under them, as their
title signifies:

and principal men of the city; that is, of Caesarea; the magistrates,
and chief inhabitants of the place:

at Festus's commandment Paul was brought forth; and became a spectacle
to a vast number of men, as he himself says; and which in part fulfilled
what Christ had foretold to his disciples, that they should be brought
before kings and governors for his sake; see [Co1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#009.md).

[Acts 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 25:24</span></span>

And Festus said, King Agrippa,.... He addressed himself to him in the
first place, as being the principal person, and of great dignity, as
well as knowledge:

and all men which are here present with us; the chief captains, and
principal inhabitants of the city:

ye see this man the prisoner at the bar, meaning Paul:

about whom all the multitude of the Jews have dealt with me: applied
unto him, interceded with him, and very importunately pressed and
desired him to give judgment against him:

both at Jerusalem and also here; at Caesarea, whither they came from
Jerusalem to accuse him:

crying: in a very noisy and clamorous way:

that he ought not to live any longer; as they did before Lysias the
chief captain, [Act 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#022.md) and so in
the hearing of Festus; for it was his death they sought, and nothing
else would satisfy them.

[Acts 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 25:25</span></span>

But when I found that he had committed nothing worthy of death,....
Which was a public testimony of the apostle's innocence, to the great
mortification of his enemies, some of whom might be present; a like
testimony was given of him by Lysias, [Act
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#029.md).

And that he himself hath appealed unto Augustus; the Emperor Nero; see
[Act 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#021.md).

I have determined to send him; having had the opinion of his council
upon it.

[Acts 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 25:26</span></span>

Of whom I have no certain thing,.... No certain crime, charge, or
accusation; nothing of any moment or consequence, no particular thing,
nothing but a heap of confused notions, of I know not who or what:

to write unto my lord; meaning the Roman emperor, under whom he served
as governor of Judea:

wherefore I have brought him before you; the whole company then present:

and especially before thee, O King Agrippa; as being not only a man of
eminence, dignity, and authority, but of knowledge in such matters,
which the Jews accused Paul of; see [Act
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#002.md).

That after examination had; of Paul, and his case;

I might have somewhat to write; concerning him, and the charges
exhibited against him to the emperor.

[Acts 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/act025.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 25:27</span></span>

For it seemeth to me unreasonable to send a prisoner,.... A man bound as
if he was a malefactor, and guilty of some heinous crimes, to Rome, to
be tried before Caesar:

and not withal to signify the crimes laid against him; for which he is a
prisoner, and for which he is sent to the emperor: it seemed to Festus
an absurd thing, and what might be justly looked upon by his master, a
foolish, silly, and stupid piece of conduct, and void of common sense
and reason, mere madness and folly; to send him a prisoner, and not
signify in his letter to him, what was laid to his charge; and yet this
was so dark and obscure, that he could not tell what to make of it, nor
what to write to his lord about it; and hoped therefore, upon this
re-examination of Paul before Agrippa, he should come to a more certain
knowledge of this affair, and be better furnished to give Nero an
account of it, to whom the apostle had appealed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 26](act026.md)

</div>
