<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Acts Index](act)  
  [Previous](act003)  [Next](act005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001)

[Acts 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 4:1</span></span>

And as they spake unto the people,.... For though only mention is made
of Peter's preaching in the preceding chapter, yet doubtless John
preached as well as he; either in turn, or to a part of the people at
some distance: and this shows their diligence, faithfulness, and
integrity, in the ministration of the word; and it is recorded to their
honour, that whilst they were about their master's business, and
discharging the duty of their office,

the priests, and the captain of the temple, and the Sadducees came upon
them; by agreement, with great violence, and at unawares: the "priests"
might be those who kept the watch in the temple; for

"in three places the priests kept watch, in the house of the sanctuary;
in the house of Abtines, in the house of Nitsots, and in the house of
Moked, and the Levites in one and twenty places (p).''

And it now being eventide, they might be about to take their stands;
"and the captain of the temple" might be he, whom they call, , "the man
of the mountain of the house"; who was a ruler, or governor, and a
president over all the wards (q); he is sometimes called , "the head of
the ward" (r); and of him it is said (s),

"the man of the mountain of the house goes his round through every ward,
with burning torches before him; and every ward that does not stand (is
not on his feet), the man of the mountain of the house, says to him,
peace be to thee; and if he observes that he is asleep, he strikes him
with his staff, and he has power to burn his garments.''

The Vulgate Latin and the Oriental versions read in the plural number,
as in See Gill on [Luk 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#004), [Luk
22:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#052). The Sadducees were a sect among
the Jews, that denied the resurrection of the dead; of their rise, name,
and tenets; see Gill on [Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007).

\(p\) Misn. Middot, c. 1. sect. 1. (q) Bartenora & Yom Tob in ib. sect.
2. (r) Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 6. fol. 186. 3. (s) Misn. Middot, c. 1.
sect. 2.

[Acts 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 4:2</span></span>

Being grieved that they taught the people,.... Any doctrine, and
especially that which follows, and which particularly gave uneasiness to
the Sadducees, they were exceedingly distressed by it; it pained them to
the very heart, and they were filled with wrath and indignation:

and preached through, or in Jesus, the resurrection of the dead; they
not only preached the doctrine of the resurrection of the dead in
general, but gave an instance and proof of it in the resurrection of
Christ, affirming that he was risen from the dead; and they also
preached up the resurrection of the dead in his name, and asserted, that
he would be the author of it, and it would be erected by his power: so
that their doctrine was equally disagreeable to the Pharisees and
Sadducees; to the Sadducees, who denied that there was, or would be any
resurrection of the dead; and to the Pharisees, who though they believed
it, yet were highly offended that it should be said, that Jesus was
risen from the dead; and that the general resurrection of the dead
should be attributed to him.

[Acts 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 4:3</span></span>

And they laid hands on them,.... The Arabic version renders it, "on
both"; on Peter and John; seized them by force, and drew them out of the
temple:

and put them in hold unto the next day; not in the common public prison,
as in [Act 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#018) but they put them into
the hands, and under the care and custody of a set of men, to keep and
guard them; that they might not go away, until they had an opportunity
of bringing them before the sanhedrim, to be examined and punished by
them:

for it was now eventide; it was at the ninth hour, or about three
o'clock in the afternoon, when Peter and John went up to the temple,
where they healed the lame man; after which, both of them preached to
the people; so that it must now be evening; at least, as the Syriac
version renders it, "the evening was near", or was drawing on.

[Acts 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 4:4</span></span>

Howbeit, many of them which heard the word,.... The doctrine of the
Gospel, preached by Peter and John:

believed; the report of it, and in Christ, as risen from the dead, which
was the sum and substance of it: and this they did, notwithstanding the
opposition made by the priests, the captain of the temple, and the
Sadducces, and the violence they used to the apostles; for though they
kept their persons in hold, they could not stop the free course of the
word, which ran and was glorified:

and the number of the men was about five thousand; or "was five
thousand", as the Alexandrian copy, the Vulgate Latin, and Ethiopic
versions read; that is the number, not of the hearers, but "of them that
believed", was so many; and so read the Arabic and Ethiopic versions:
there were so many persons converted at this time; for this number does
not include the three thousand that were converted under the first
sermon, but regards those who now became true believers, and were added
to the church; so that there were now eight thousand persons added to
it; a great increase indeed! now had Christ the dew of his youth, and
now were these fishermen fishers of men indeed: that our Lord's feeding
five thousand men with five barley loaves and two fishes, should have
any regard to the conversion of these five thousand men, is but a
conceit.

[Acts 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 4:5</span></span>

And it came to pass on the morrow,.... The disciples being kept in
custody all night:

that their rulers, and elders, and Scribes; that is, their
ecclesiastical rulers; the chief priests, who, with the Scribes, and
elders of the people, made up the great council at Jerusalem, consisting
of seventy one persons, so they are called in [Mat
26:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#003).

[Acts 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 4:6</span></span>

And Annas the high priest,.... So called, either because he had been an
high priest, though he was not now, but Caiaphas his son-in-law; or
because he was the Sagan of the high priest, and had all the other
priests under his government; and is mentioned first, because he was
father-in-law to Caiaphas; See Gill on [Luk
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002) he could not be called so, because
he was "prince", or president of the council; for not he, but Gamaliel,
was president at this time. And

Caiaphas; who was properly high priest, and continued so for three years
after the death of Christ:

and John; who is thought by Dr. Lightfoot to be the same with Jochanan,
or John ben Zaccai; a famous Jewish Rabbi, who lived at this time, and
until, and after the destruction of Jerusalem: this Rabbi was "a priest"
(t), as this John was, of the kindred of the high priest; he lived also
at Jerusalem; for it is said of him (u), that he sat in the shadow of
the temple, and expounded all the whole day; and a very remarkable story
is told of him, which happened just about this time (w); which is, that

"forty years before the destruction of the temple--the doors of the
temple opened of themselves, when Rabban Jochanan ben Zaccai reproved
them, saying, O temple, temple, wherefore dost thou fright thyself? I
know thee, that thine end shall be, to be destroyed; for so prophesied
of thee Zechariah, the son of Iddo, [Zac
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001). "Open thy doors, O Lebanon",
&c.''

The chief objection to him, as that learned writer observes, is, that he
lived and died a Pharisee, whereas this John seems to have been a
Sadducee; see [Act 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#017). This puts me
in mind of John the high priest, who ministered in the high priesthood
fourscore years, and at last became a Sadducee (x): Beza's ancient copy
reads "Jonathan: and Alexander"; whose surname was Lysimachus, and had
the title of "Alabarcha"; he was a very rich man (y): after Alexander
the great had been at Jerusalem, this name became frequent among the
Jews; and it is said (z) to be promised him, and was fulfilled, that
every son that was born to the priests that year he entered Jerusalem,
should be called Alexander; and therefore it is no wonder to hear of an
Alexander among the kindred of the high priest; frequent mention is made
of , "Rabbi Alexander", in the Jewish writings (a):

and as many as were of the kindred of the high priest; by whose means
they were become members of the sanhedrim:

were gathered together at Jerusalem; where the great council only sat,
until the destruction of it; it seems by this, that some of the members
of it lived in the country; it may be in some of the villages adjacent,
where they might be easily and quickly sent for, upon any occasion, as
they very likely now were; the Syriac version leaves out the words "at
Jerusalem".

\(t\) Juchasin, fol. 20. 2. (u) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 26. 1. (w) T.
Bab. Yoma, fol. 39. 2. & Hieros. Yoma, fol. 43. 3. (x) T. Bab. Beracot,
fol. 29. 1. (y) Joseph Antiqu. l. 20. c. 4. sect. 2. (z) Juchasin, fol.
14. 1. & 159. 1. Ganz Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 18. 2. (a) T. Bab.
Yoma, fol. 53. 2. Chagiga, fol. 5. 1. Megilla, fol. 17. 2. Nedarim, fol.
41. 1. Sanhedrin, fol. 98. 1. & passim.

[Acts 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 4:7</span></span>

And when they had set them in the midst,.... Of the assembly, as the
Ethiopic version adds; in the middle of the sanhedrim, which sat in a
semicircular form; or as the Jews express it, as the half of a round
corn floor, or as a half moon, and not in a perfect circle; because it
was necessary that the contending parties, and the witnesses, might go
in and speak before them all (b); so that those that were set before
them, were placed in the middle of them: and here Peter and John were
set; so the Arabic version renders it, "when they set both": they sent
for them out of the hold, or custody, where they had been all night, and
ordered them to be brought before them, to be examined about their
doctrine and practice:

they asked, by what power, or by what name have ye done this? they
inquired of them, whether it was by a natural, or by a divine, or by a
diabolical power, that they had wrought the cure upon the lame man?
whether it was by the use of medicine, or by the help of magic art, and
the assistance of the devil, which they were very ready to charge Christ
and his disciples with? or whether they pretended to a divine and
supernatural aid? and also what name they had made use of, and by whose
authority they acted?

\(b\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 4. sect. 3. & Bartenora in ib.

[Acts 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 4:8</span></span>

Then Peter, filled with the Holy Ghost,.... At that very instant, having
received a fresh measure of the gifts and graces of the Spirit, besides
what he had poured forth upon him at the day of Pentecost; so that he
had great courage and presence of mind, and freedom of speech, as Christ
had promised his disciples they should have, when they were brought
before governors and magistrates, [Mat
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018). The case was much altered with
Peter, he who but a little while ago was frightened by a servant maid,
now stands before the Jewish sanhedrim, with undaunted courage and
resolution:

and said unto them, ye rulers of the people, and elders of Israel; he
addresses them in a very handsome manner, and gives them their proper
titles as magistrates; which ought to be done by men and Christians;
honour should be given, to whom honour is due: the Vulgate Latin,
Syriac, and Ethiopic versions, and some copies, add "hear", which seems
very necessary; he called for audience, or desired to be heard a few
words, in the defence of himself and fellow apostle, and in answer to
their questions.

[Acts 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 4:9</span></span>

If we this day be examined of the good deed,.... Or "seeing" we are; for
it was not a matter of doubt, but a clear case, that they were brought
into court, and were passing under an examination, about the cure of the
lame man; which the apostle rightly calls a

good deed, it being done in faith, and to the glory of God, and for the
good of the man; and hereby tacitly suggests, that they were dealt very
hardly with, to be seized and kept in custody, and be called in
question, for doing an action so beneficent and kind, as this was, which
was

done to the impotent man; who could not help himself, nor get his bread
any other way, than by begging:

by what means he is made whole; restored to perfect health, and the
proper use of his limbs; that is, by what power, and in what name this
was done; the answer is ready, and it is as follows.

[Acts 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 4:10</span></span>

Be it known unto you all,.... The members of the sanhedrim:

and to all the people of Israel; who might hear of this affair; for the
apostle was not ashamed of what he had done, nor of the person in whose
name he had done it:

that by the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth; by calling, on that name,
and by making use of it, and by the power and authority of Jesus Christ,
who by way of contempt was called the

Nazarene: whom ye crucified; for though Pilate delivered him to be
crucified, and the Roman soldiers did crucify him, yet this was at the
request and instigation of the chief priests, Scribes, and elders; and
therefore it is ascribed to them, who were bent upon his death; and no
other would satisfy them, but the shameful and painful death of the
cross:

whom God raised from the dead; of which the apostles were witnesses,
having seen him and conversed with him after his resurrection; and this
was the doctrine they were sent to publish, and for which they were
apprehended and detained in custody; but this did not deter them from
preaching it, no, not before the sanhedrim; which was an instance of
great courage and faithfulness: and this is the rather mentioned; to
show, that it was not by the name of one that was dead, but of one that
was alive, that this cure was performed; as well as to observe to them,
that their efforts against Christ were vain and fruitless:

even by him doth this man stand here before you whole; from whence it
appears, as well as from [Act 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#018)
that the man that was healed, was now present: and either he was laid
hold on, and detained in custody with the apostles, in hope to discover
fraud if they could; or hearing that the apostles were before the
sanhedrim, and examining on his account, might come of himself, in order
to attest and prove the matter of fact, and to vindicate them.

[Acts 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 4:11</span></span>

This is the stone,.... That is, this Jesus of Nazareth, by whose name
the lame man was made whole, is that stone spoken of in [Psa
118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022) by whom is meant the true
Messiah, comparable to a stone, for his strength and duration, and
usefulness, as a foundation and corner stone, in the spiritual building
of the church; and yet notwithstanding is the stone

which was set at nought of you builders: the priests, elders, and
Scribes; who were fond of being called builders, but made miserable work
of it; despising and rejecting the stone of Israel, and instead of him
as a foundation, built themselves, and others, on the traditions of the
elders, and their own righteousness: but though Christ was rejected by
them, both in person and in doctrine, and was ignominiously treated, and
at last put to death, yet he was raised from the dead, and exalted at
the right hand of God; and is the stone,

which is become the head of the corner; or the chief corner stone, that
adorns, strengthens, knits, and keeps together, the whole building; in
which Jews and Gentiles, saints in all ages and places, even all the
elect of God, are united together; See Gill on [Mat
21:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#042).

[Acts 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 4:12</span></span>

Neither is there salvation in any other,.... Meaning not corporeal
healing, but spiritual and eternal salvation; the Syriac version renders
it, neither is there "redemption in any other": Christ is the only
Saviour and Redeemer, who was promised and prophesied of as such; who
has saved and redeemed his people from the law, sin, and Satan; nor is
salvation to be sought and hoped for from any other; not in a man's
self, nor in any other creature, angels or men; not in and by his own
works, and legal righteousness; not by obedience to the law of Moses,
moral or ceremonial; nor by the light of nature, much less by an
observance of the traditions of the elders:

for there is none other name; thing or person, be it ever so great, or
whatever show of power and strength, of holiness and religion, it makes;
as the name of kings, princes, and the great men in the world; or of
ministers and preachers in the church; or even of Christians and
believers, which may be only a name to live; none but the name of Jesus,
his person, blood, and righteousness:

under heaven: throughout the whole earth, in all the nations and
kingdoms of it; nor even in heaven itself, among all the mighty angels
there, thrones, dominions, principalities, and powers; none but the
Father and the Spirit, who are one with Christ: there is none but he

given among men; and he has been freely given by his Father, as an
instance of his matchless love to the world; and also freely given by
himself, to be a sacrifice for the sins of his people; and is freely
preached among men, as the only Saviour of them; for there is no other,

whereby we must be saved: God resolved in his purposes and decrees, in
his council and covenant, upon the salvation of his chosen people; and
he appointed his Son to be the salvation of them, and determined he
would save them by him, and by no other, and in no other way; wherefore,
whoever are saved, must be saved by him, see [Hos
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007) the Arabic version adds, "unless
by him only".

[Acts 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 4:13</span></span>

Now when they saw the boldness of Peter and John,.... With what courage
and intrepidity they stood before them, the presence of mind they had,
and the freedom of speech they used, as the word properly signifies:
they observed their elocution, the justness of their diction, the
propriety of their language, and the strength and nervousness of their
reasoning; as well as their great resolution, constancy, and firmness of
mind; not being afraid to profess the name of Christ, or to charge them
with the murder of him; and that they seemed to be determined to abide
by him, at all events; to assert him to be the true Messiah, though
rejected by the Jewish builders; and that he was risen from the dead;
and not only to ascribe unto him the miracle now wrought, but the
salvation of men; and to declare, that there was none in any other but
him: the Syriac version renders it, "when they heard the word of Simeon
and John, which they spoke openly": and freely, without any reserve:
they answered readily to the question, that it was by the name of Jesus
of Nazareth that they had done this miracle; they dealt freely with the
Jewish sanhedrim, and told them in so many words, that they were the
crucifiers of Christ, and the rejecters of that stone, which God had
made the head of the corner, and that there was no salvation for them in
any other: it appears from hence, that John spoke as well as Peter,
though his words are not recorded:

and perceived that they were unlearned ignorant men; not by what they
now said, but by what they heard and understood of them before: they
were informed that they were "unlearned" men, or who did not understand
letters; not but that they had learned their mother tongue, and could
read the Scriptures; but they had not had a liberal education; they had
not been brought up at the feet of any of the doctors, in any of the
schools and universities of the Jews; they were not trained up in, and
conversant with, the nice distinctions, subtle argumentations, and
decisions of the learned doctors, in the interpretation of the law of
Moses, and the traditions of the elders: and understood that they were
also "ignorant" men, "idiots", or private men; for men might be
unlearned, and yet not be such; it seems the high priests themselves
were sometimes unlearned men: hence, on the day of atonement,

"they used to read before him, in the order of the day, and say to him,
Lord high priest, read thou with thine own mouth; perhaps thou hast
forgot, or it may be, , "thou hast not learned" (c).''

The Jews have adopted the word here used into their language; and
express by it, sometimes a man that is mean, abject, and contemptible:
thus instead of "children of base men", or "without a name", the
Targumist on [Job 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#008) reads, , "the
children of idiots", or "private men": and in the Targum on [Sa1
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#023) it is used for one lightly
esteemed, and comparable to a flea: it sometimes designs persons in a
private life, though men of learning and knowledge, in distinction from
those that are in office; so we read (d), that

"three kings, and four "private" persons, have no part in the world to
come; the three kings are Jeroboam, Ahab, and Manasseh; the four
"idiots", or private men, are Balaam, Doeg, Ahithophel, and Gehazi.''

And so a bench of idiots, or private men, is distinguished from a bench
of authorized and approved judges (e); and sometimes the word is used of
such, as are distinguished from doctors, or wise men; so when it is said
(f),

"the command of plucking off the shoe, is done before three judges, and
though the three are "idiots";''

the note of Maimonides upon it is,

"not wise men, but that know how to read the language,''

the Hebrew language: and such were the disciples, in every sense of the
word; they were mean and abject, poor fishermen, men of no name and
figure, that were in no office, and exalted station of life, nor versed
in Jewish learning, but common private men: so that

they marvelled; the sanheddrim were astonished to hear them talk with so
much fluency and pertinence:

and they took knowledge of them, that they had been with Jesus; looking
wistly upon them, they knew them again, and remembered that; they were
persons that were the disciples of Jesus, and whom they had seen in
company with him; not in the high priest's palace, when Jesus was
arraigned, examined, and condemned there; though Peter, and some think
John was there at that time, yet not to be observed and taken notice of
by the sanhedrim; but in the temple where Jesus taught, and where the
chief priests, Scribes, and elders came, and disputed with him about his
authority, and cavilled at him, [Mat
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#015).

\(c\) Misn. Yoma, c. 1. sect. 3. (d) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 11. sect. 2.
(e) T. Bab. Bava Metzia, fol. 32. 11. (f) Misn. Yebamot, c. 12. sect. 1.

[Acts 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 4:14</span></span>

And beholding the man which was healed,.... Who either was taken into
custody, and brought before the sanhedrim, along with the apostles; or
rather, who came here of his own accord to be witness for them: for he
was

standing with them; in company with them, and close by them, and on
their side; and so they could, and did point and appeal unto him, who
was ready to justify, that it was not by the use of medicine, or of
magic art, or in the name of Satan or Beelzebub, but by the name of
Jesus Christ of Nazareth, that his cure was wrought:

they could say nothing against it; they could not gainsay the fact, for
the man was before them, perfectly well, whom they personally knew, by
his lying so long at the gate of the temple; they knew that he had been
lame from his mother's womb, who was now above forty years of age; and
they could say nothing against the manner of his cure, who was present
to attest it; nor could they say anything against them; the apostles, as
the Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions read; they could not blame
them for doing it, it being a good deed, nor charge them with fraud and
imposture.

[Acts 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 4:15</span></span>

But when they had commanded them,.... That is, when the sanhedrim had
ordered the apostles; or "commanded that both", as the Arabic version
reads, both Peter and John; and, it may be, the man that was healed too:

to go aside out of the council; or place where the council, or sanhedrim
sat; which, whether it was in the chamber "Gazith", in the temple where
they used to sit (g), or in the shops, or in the city, whither they
removed, is not certain. We are told (h), that

"the sanhedrim removed from the chamber Gazith, to the shops, and from
the shops to Jerusalem, and from Jerusalem to Jabneh;''

that is, after the destruction of the city. And the first remove was
much about this time; for it is said (i), that

"forty years before the destruction of the temple, the sanhedrim
removed, and sat in the shops.''

Not in the shops where things were sold for the use of the temple, but
in a court adjoining to them, which took its name from them.

They conferred among themselves; what was proper to be done, the
apostles being withdrawn.

\(g\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 10. sect. 2. & Middot. c. 5. sect. 3. (h) T.
Bab. Roshhashana, fol. 31. 1. (i) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 8. 2.

[Acts 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 4:16</span></span>

Saying, what shall we do to these men?.... Whether they should punish
them by scourging them, or detain them longer in custody, or commit them
to prison, or dismiss them:

for that indeed a notable miracle hath been done by them: they were
convicted that a miracle was wrought; that it was a clear case, a well
known thing, of which there was no room to doubt, and that it was done
by the apostles; but this was not all the difficulty, had it been a
thing only within their knowledge, and which they could have concealed,
it would have given them no uneasiness; but, as they observe,

it is manifest to all them that dwell in Jerusalem: for the man having
been so long lame, and had lain so long at the temple, where all the
inhabitants frequently went, he was known and took notice of by them;
and his cure being wrought so openly, and in such a miraculous way, it
was the common talk of the city: so that there was no smothering it:

and we cannot deny it; the fact is so certain and evident; nor hide it,
as the Ethiopic version renders it, it being so notorious and public.

[Acts 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 4:17</span></span>

But that it spread no further among the people,.... Meaning not in
Jerusalem; for the fame of this miracle was spread among all the
inhabitants of that city; but in other parts of the nation:

let us straitly threaten them; or "in threatening threaten them"; that
is, severely threaten them with imprisonment, or with the scourging of
forty stripes save one, or with death itself.

That they speak henceforth to no man in this name; which through
indignation and contempt they do not mention, but mean the name of
Jesus: and their sense is, that the apostles, from this time forward,
should not teach, or preach the doctrine of the resurrection of the
dead, or any other doctrine of the Gospel, in the name of Jesus, to any
man, Jew or Gentile; or perform any miracle in his name, or call upon
his name, and make use of it, for the healing of any person, or doing
any miraculous work. The Ethiopic version is a very odd one, and quite
contrary to the sense of the sanhedrim, "that they should not speak any
more but in the name of the man Jesus".

[Acts 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 4:18</span></span>

And they called them,.... From the apartment where they were; or ordered
their servants to call them in to them:

and commanded them not to speak at all; either privately or publicly, in
the ministry of the word, or in working of miracles, in the city, or in
the country:

nor teach in the name of Jesus; any doctrine whatever; or "the name of
Jesus", as the Arabic version reads; that is, the doctrine of Jesus,
that which respects his person, his carnation, his offices, his
sufferings, death, and resurrection from the dead.

[Acts 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 4:19</span></span>

But Peter and John answered and said unto them,.... With great boldness
and courage, and without any fear of man, but in the true fear of God

whether it be right in the sight of God; who is omniscient, and sees,
and knows all things, all the actions of men, and the springs of them;
who is holy, just, and true, and sits and judges among the gods, that
which is right:

to hearken unto you more than unto God, judge ye: it is not denied that
magistrates are to be hearkened to, and obeyed: but not more than God,
or in things that are contrary to his nature, will, law, honour, and
glory: whatever is agreeable to the law and will of God, commanded by
magistrates, should be attended to, and cheerfully obeyed; but what is
not should be disregarded, whatever follows upon it: and this was so
just and reasonable, that the apostles appeal to the sanhedrim, or
council itself, to determine.

[Acts 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 4:20</span></span>

For we cannot but speak,.... It was not physically, but morally
impossible; or it was not lawful, and therefore they would not speak any
other, and they could not avoid speaking, say they,

the things which we have seen and heard; as the miracles and doctrines
of Christ, his resurrection from the dead, of which they were eye and
ear witnesses. This shows their great fidelity and integrity, their
inviolable attachment to Christ, and their fearlessness of the
displeasure and wrath of men.

[Acts 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 4:21</span></span>

So when they had further threatened them,.... Either repeated the same,
as before; or added some more severe ones, to terrify them, if possible;
not being able to answer their arguments, or invalidate their reasoning:

they let them go; they did not acquit them as innocent persons, but
dismissed them from custody:

finding nothing how they might punish them; not being able, though they
sought most diligently for it, to fix anything upon them, which might be
a cause, or occasion, or pretence of inflicting any punishment upon
them:

because of the people: they would not have stuck at the injustice of it,
or have been under any concern about offending God; but they were afraid
of the people, of losing their credit among them, and lest they should
rise up against them, and on the side of the apostles:

for all men glorified God for that which was done; they saw the hand of
God in it, and ascribed it to his mercy, goodness, and power, and gave
him the glory of it; and therefore to punish the instruments of so great
and good a work, would have been esteemed barbarous and wicked, and
would have been highly resented by them; since, on the contrary, they
judged them worthy of great honour and respect.

[Acts 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 4:22</span></span>

For the man was above forty years old,.... So that the miracle was the
greater, that a man born lame, and who had been so above forty years,
should have a cure; and he was the more known to the people, and his
testimony met with more credit:

on whom this miracle of healing was showed; both for the good of men,
for the glory of God, and for the confirmation of the Gospel of Christ.

[Acts 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 4:23</span></span>

And being let go,.... Or dismissed from custody, by the order of the
sanhedrim:

they went to their own company; or "to their own men", as the Ethiopic
version reads; or "to their own brethren", as the Syriac; either to the
other ten apostles; or to the hundred and twenty, who first met
together; or the whole multitude of them that believed, [Act
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032) the eight thousand that had been
added to them, the whole church. Saints love to be together, and delight
in the company of each other; and especially when they have anything to
communicate, that may be for their mutual good, or for the honour of
God:

and reported all that the chief priests and elders had said unto them;
what commands and injunctions they had lain upon them, and what
threatenings they had given them, and, no doubt likewise, what answers
they had returned to them.

[Acts 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 4:24</span></span>

And when they heard that,.... The whole of the report the apostles made;
and which they heard with patience, and without making any unworthy
reflections upon the sanhedrim; and being, on the one hand, not over
much terrified, and cast down, and, on the other hand, not sluggish,
careless, and secure; they betake themselves, not to plots,
conspiracies, and seditions; nor to arms to defend and avenge
themselves, though their numbers were large; but to prayer, that they
might not be deterred by threatenings, from speaking boldly the word of
the Lord:

they lift up their voice to God with one accord; being inspired by the
Holy Ghost, they not only agreed in the matter of their petitions, which
agreement is of great avail with God; for whatever two or more agree in
to ask of God, shall be given to them; but also in the very words which
were vocally expressed by them, and that in a very loud and sonorous
way, to signify the vehemency and ardour of their minds and affections:

and said, Lord, thou art God; or, as in one of Beza's copies, "Lord our
God"; or, as in the Ethiopic version, "Lord, thou art our God";
addressing God, the Father of Christ, as appears from [Act
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027) as their own God, their covenant
God and Father in Christ, from whom they might hope for help, and in
whom they might expect safety, and every supply of grace:

which hast made heaven and earth, and the sea, and all that in them is;
and which is a full proof of the omnipotence of God; an attribute of
singular use to the saints in distressed circumstances; for what is it
he cannot do, who made all things that are? and what is it he will not
do for his saints, for the accomplishment of his purposes, the making
good of his covenant and promises, the fulfilment of prophecies; the
good of his people, and the glory of his name?

[Acts 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 4:25</span></span>

Who by the mouth of thy servant David has said,.... In [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) from whence we learn, that that
psalm, though it is without a title, and does not bear David's name, yet
is one of his and so Kimchi says, that David composed it at the
beginning of his reign; though Aben Ezra thinks, that it was composed by
one of the singers for him, on the day he was anointed; yet he
afterwards seems to doubt of it, and on [Psa
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007) says, they are the words of David,
or the words of the singer. And certain it is, that in the apostles'
time this psalm was reckoned to be David's by the Jews in common; and
therefore they speak of it as such: and it was the sense of the ancient
doctors of the synagogue, that this psalm is to be understood of the
Messiah. Jarchi says, our Rabbins expound the business (of this psalm)
concerning the King Messiah; and Kimchi observes, that there are some
that interpret this psalm of Gog and Magog (k), and the Messiah, or
anointed, that is the King Messiah; though one of these writers was of
opinion, that it is best to understand it of David himself; and Aben
Ezra says, that it was composed either for David, or for the Messiah,
and to understand it of the Messiah, the thing is more clear. The verses
[Psa 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#007) are particularly applied to
the Messiah in some of their most ancient writings (l), and also in
modern ones (m), as is [Psa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002) to
Messiah ben Joseph (n): and indeed the whole psalm belongs to the
Messiah, as appears from the express mention of him, and the vain
attempts of the kings of the earth against him; from the decree and
resolution of God to make and declare him king of Zion, notwithstanding
their utmost efforts; from his having the Gentiles for his inheritance,
which is true of no other; and especially from that reverence,
adoration, and worship, which were to be given to him, and that trust
and confidence to be placed in him, which can by no means agree with
David, nor with any mere creature. The Syriac version reads, "who in the
Holy Ghost, by the mouth", &c. and so read Beza's most ancient copy, and
five other manuscripts of his; and the Vulgate Latin, and Ethiopic
versions, read, "who in the Holy Ghost, by the mouth of our father
David", &c. and the Alexandrian copy, but does not seem to be a genuine
reading; since the Jews were not used to call David, but Abraham, their
father; nor is it, with propriety, expressed, that God the Father said
in, or by the Spirit, what follows,

why did the Heathen rage, and the people imagine vain things? that is,
the Gentiles, and the people of the Jews, Pilate, and his council, with
the Roman soldiers, and the Jewish sanhedrim, with the common people;
who raged against Christ, seized him in a furious manner, led him as a
malefactor, and hurried him from bar to bar, in a tumultuous way, and
with great noise and clamour urged the crucifixion of him; nor did their
rage cease until they had put him to death: yet it was a vain thing in
them to imagine he should be held under the power of death; or that this
would put a stop to the spread of his doctrine, and the enlargement of
his kingdom and interest; since he rose from the dead, as a triumphant
conqueror, over all his enemies, and pouring forth his Spirit, in an
extraordinary way, he spread his Gospel, and his glory throughout the
earth.

\(k\) Vid. T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol 3. 2. (l) Zohar in Numb. fol. 82. 2.
Bereshit Rabba, sect. 44. fol. 38. 4. & T. Bab. Succa, fol. 52. 1. (m)
Maimon. in Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 11. sect. 1. Abarbinel Mashmiah, Jeshua,
fol. 37. 4. & 38. 1. (n) Pirke Eliezer, c. 19.

[Acts 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 4:26</span></span>

The kings of the earth stood up,.... Herod Antipas, tetrarch of Galilee,
sometimes called a king, [Mar 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#014) and
Pilate the Roman governor, who represented his master Caesar; these
stood, or rose up in an hostile manner, and set themselves against, and
opposed themselves to the Messiah, Jesus of Nazareth:

and the rulers were gathered together; the Jewish rulers, Annas,
Caiaphas, and the rest of the members of the sanhedrim, who met together
more than once; and particularly at the high priest's palace, to consult
how they should take Jesus and put him to death; and who also gathered
together at the same place, when he was taken, to arraign, examine, and
condemn him. And this opposition, and these conspiracies and
consultations, were

against the Lord: Jehovah, the Father of Christ, who sent him, and
anointed him; so that what was done against Christ, was done against the
Lord, their views and designs, their interest and glory, being the same:

and against his Christ; or anointed one, who was anointed by him, with
the Holy Ghost, from his birth, and at his baptism, to be prophet,
priest, and King.

[Acts 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 4:27</span></span>

For of a truth, against thy holy child Jesus,.... This is the
interpretation of the above passages in [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001) and the application of them to
Jesus; who is called the "child" of God, because the human nature of
Christ was taken into union with the second person, who is the Son of
God: unless the word should rather be rendered "servant", as it is in
[Act 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#025) and which is a character
that belongs to Christ, and is often given him as Mediator, who, as
such, is God's righteous servant; and he is called "holy", because he
was so in his conception and birth, and in his life and conversation,
being free both from original sin, and actual transgression; and which
is an aggravation of the sin and guilt of these men, that they should
rise up, and gather together against him; and yet it was a clear case, a
notorious fact, a certain truth, that could not be denied: and for the
further aggravation of their crime, as well as for the sake of
explaining the phrase "his, Christ", it is added,

whom thou hast anointed; with the oil of gladness, above his fellows.
Christ was, in some sense, anointed to be prophet, priest, and King,
from eternity, being so early set up as Mediator, or called unto, and
invested with that office; see [Pro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022) and he was anointed in time, both
at his incarnation and baptism, having the Spirit without measure given
unto him, which is that anointing, that teacheth all things.

Both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with the Gentiles, and the people of
Israel, were gathered together. This Herod was Herod Antipas, the son of
Herod the great, and who beheaded John the Baptist; and Pontius Pilate
was the Roman governor of Judea, at the time of Christ's death; the
Gentiles were those of Pilate's council, and the Roman soldiers;

and the people of Israel, were the Jews, both the rulers, and the common
people; the Syriac version renders it, "the synagogue of Israel": and
these, though they were of different nations, and of different
interests, yea enemies to one another, as the Jews and Gentiles in
general were; and as were Herod and Pontius Pilate in particular; yet
all gathered, consented, and agreed together to mock, scourge, and
crucify this innocent and holy person. The Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and
Ethiopic versions add, "in this city"; and so the above copies of
Beza's, and others; meaning, in the city of Jerusalem, where the
apostles now were, and where the above persons met together, and from
whence a prophet could only perish. The Alexandrian copy reads, "in this
thy city": which was called the city of God, and the holy city; and yet
in this was this wicked convention, and all this wickedness done.

[Acts 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 4:28</span></span>

For to do whatsoever thy hand,.... It was not the end of their gathering
together against Christ, or it was not their intention and design, to
fulfil the purposes and decrees of God, but to fulfil their own lusts,
and satiate their rage and malice against him; but it was so in the
event, according to the wise disposal of providence, that by their
gathering together, by their consultations and conspiracies, they
brought about what God in his everlasting council had decreed. By "the
hand" of the Lord here is not meant, the grace and favour of God; or the
power and providence of God; or his word of precept, his revealed will;
but his secret will, the counsel of his will, the hidden purpose of his
heart, the wise consultation of his mind, which is formed according to
his infinite wisdom: so in [Sa2 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#019)
it is said, "is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this?" that is,
the head of Joab, the wise counsel of Joab; and so the Jewish writers
interpret it, "his counsel" (o): and so the word is explained here
immediately; for it follows,

and thy counsel determined before to be done: God's decrees are from
eternity; there is nothing comes to pass in time but what he has
beforetime determined should be done, either by effecting it himself, or
doing it by others, or suffering it to be done, as in the case here.
Whatever was done to Christ, either by Jews or Gentiles, by Herod or
Pontius Pilate, was according to the secret will of God, the covenant he
made with Christ, and the council of peace that was between them both:
what they wickedly did, God designed for good, and hereby brought about
the redemption and salvation of his people: this neither makes God the
author of sin, nor excuses the sinful actions of men, or infringes the
liberty of their wills in acting.

\(o\) Kimchi in loc. & R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 36. 2.

[Acts 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 4:29</span></span>

And now, Lord, behold their threatenings,.... Meaning not with his eye
of omniscience, which he could not but do; but that he would so take
notice of them, as in his providence to rebuke them for them, or
restrain them, or make them fearless of them:

and grant unto thy servants; the apostles, and all the ministers of the
word, who are the servants of the most high God, and who serve him in
the Gospel of his Son, with great cheerfulness and faithfulness:

that with all boldness they may speak thy word; and not their own, or
another's; the Gospel, which is God's speech, or a word, a message of
grace and mercy from him to sinful creatures. The request of the whole
church is, that the ministers of the word might not be intimidated by
the menaces of the sanhedrim; but go on to declare it with all freedom
of expression, with all boldness, courage, and intrepidity of mind, and
all openness and faithfulness, and in the most public manner. And such a
petition shows, that as it is gift of God to speak his word, or preach
his Gospel, so it also is, to speak it freely, boldly, and faithfully,
as it should be spoken.

[Acts 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 4:30</span></span>

By stretching forth thine hand to heal,.... That is, by exerting his
power in healing sicknesses, diseases, and lameness, as in the above
instance, by the hands of the apostles; which, as it would be contrary
to the schemes of the Jewish sanhedrim, and would confirm the doctrines
of the Gospel; so it would animate the preachers of the word to preach
it with more readiness, cheerfulness, and firmness of mind;

and that signs and wonders may be done by the name of thy holy child
Jesus; as had been done already, and by whose name particularly the lame
man at the temple had received a cure, and in whose name the sanhedrim
had forbid the apostles to preach, or to make use of it, in doing any
other miracle.

[Acts 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 4:31</span></span>

And when they had prayed,.... Either while they were praying, or as soon
as they had done; for sometimes, as here, prayer is immediately heard,
and an answer is returned, whilst the saints are speaking, or as soon as
prayer is ended:

the place was shaken where they were assembled together; which, whether
it was a private house, or the temple, is not certain: the latter seems
more probable, because their number was so great, that no private house
could hold them; and since this was the place where they used to
assemble; this was now shaken with a rushing mighty wind, as on the day
of Pentecost, and was a symbol of the divine presence, and a token that
their prayers were heard, and an emblem of the shaking of the world by
the ministry of the apostles:

and they were all filled with the Holy Ghost; with the gifts of the Holy
Ghost, even with extraordinary ones, such as speaking with divers
tongues, as before on the day of Pentecost; see [Act
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#004) and this was the case not only of
the apostles, but of the other ministers of the word, and it may be of
the whole church:

and they spoke the word of God with all boldness; that is, the apostles,
and preachers of the Gospel, spoke it with great freedom, and without
fear, not only privately, in their community, but publicly, in the
temple: this was what was particularly prayed for, and in which they had
a remarkable answer.

[Acts 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 4:32</span></span>

And the multitude of them that believed,.... The Gospel, and in Christ,
the substance of it; and a multitude they were, for they were now about
eight thousand persons. And though their number was so great, they

were of one heart and of one soul; there was an entire consent and
agreement in doctrine, in matters of faith they were all of one mind and
judgment, and there was a perfect harmony in their practice, they all
performed the same duties, and observed the same commands and
ordinances; and all pursued the same interest, and had the same ends and
views; and there was a strict union of their affections to each other;
their souls were knit to one another; so that there was, but as it were,
one soul in this large body of Christians. Aristotle, being asked what a
friend was, answered, one soul dwelling in two bodies (p): and so the
Jews say, it is fit and proper that lovers or friends should be , "of
one heart, as one man" (q); and such friends and hearty lovers were
these.

Neither said any of them, that ought of the things which he possessed
was his own; though he had a peculiar right unto them, yet he did not
claim that right, nor insist on it, nor so much as speak of it, nor make
use of his substance as if it was his own, reserving it for himself, or
even disposing of it himself; but exposed it to the free use of the
whole body, to enjoy it equally with himself:

but they had all things common; which was what they were not obliged to,
but it was a free and voluntary action of their own, and so is not
binding on others; nor indeed is their practice to be imitated, in the
direct manner in which they did it, for their case was peculiar. They
were not only every day liable to persecutions and to have their
possessions seized, and their goods confiscated; but they also knew,
that in process of time, Jerusalem would be destroyed, and they could
not tell how soon; and therefore judged it right to sell off their
possessions, and throw the money into one common stock, for their mutual
support, and for the carrying on the common cause of Christ.

\(p\) Diog. Laert. in vit. Aristot. l, 5. 313. (q) Tzeror Hammor, fol.
21. 3. & 162. 4.

[Acts 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 4:33</span></span>

And with great power,.... Either in a very powerful way, with great
fervency of spirit, and ardour of mind, and uncommon zeal; or with great
efficacy on the souls of men; or with many miracles, and powerful
operations in healing the sick, casting out devils, &c.

gave the apostles witness of the resurrection of the Lord Jesus; which
they were chosen to be witnesses, and were eyewitnesses of; and which is
a fundamental article of the Gospel, and was what the Sadducees were
particularly disturbed at, and on account of which they forbade them to
preach any more in Christ's name.

And great grace was upon them all; not only upon the apostles and
ministers, but upon the whole church: and which may be understood either
of the large gifts of the Spirit of God, which were poured out upon
them, and plentifully bestowed on them; or of the gracious protection of
God over them, preserving them from the rage and malice of men; or of
that grace and favour which they had among thee people in common; or of
that charity, liberality and beneficence, which were among them, which
sense is confirmed by what follows; though it may be all these senses
may be taken in.

[Acts 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 4:34</span></span>

Neither was there any among them that lacked,.... Bread to eat, or
clothes to wear, or any of the necessaries of life; which shows their
great charity, and gives a reason why they were in so much favour with
the people, because they took so much care of their poor; and this
flowed from the grace of God bestowed upon them:

for as many as were possessors of lands and houses; or "vineyards", as
the Ethiopic version reads, whether in Jerusalem or elsewhere;

sold them and brought the prices of the things that were sold; whether
lands, houses, or vineyards.

[Acts 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 4:35</span></span>

And laid them down at the apostles' feet,.... Showing great veneration
and respect to the apostles, and a sort of neglect and contempt of their
worldly substance; and signifying that they entirely delivered them to
the apostles, and subjected them to their disposal:

and distribution was made unto every man, according as he had need;
though they had all things in common, yet there was an order observed; a
man might not go to the common stock and take out of it what he would;
but as all was committed to the care of the apostles, and was in their
power; the distribution was made by them, to every man, to the original
proprietors, as well as to others, and that not as much as a man would
have, or he might crave; but as much as he needed, for the present, of
which the apostles were the judges.

[Acts 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 4:36</span></span>

And Joses,.... The Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic versions, read
"Joseph", and so do Beza's most ancient copy, and two of his
manuscripts, and the Alexandrian copy, and others; for "Jose", or
"Joses", is only an abbreviation or contraction of "Joseph"; though
according to others it is the same with "Josiah": there is one of this
name, who was the sort of Alphaeus, and brother to two of the apostles,
James and Jude, [Mat 13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055) and another
called "Joses Barsabas"; and it may be to distinguish the one from the
other this is called "Joses Barnabas"; for so it follows,

who by the apostles was surnamed Barnabas: his name before his
conversion was "Joses", or "Joseph", or "Josiah"; and afterwards, or at
least after he came to be acquainted with the apostles, and to be in
their company, they called him "Barnabas", The Arabic and Ethiopic
versions read, "who was of the apostles"; and so Barnabas is spoken of
as if he was an apostle, [Co1 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005)

which is, being interpreted, the son of consolation; or "of
exhortation"; from the excellent gift and talent he had at exhorting;
see [Act 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#023) and from the use he was
of for the comforting of distressed minds; for "Naba, to prophesy",
includes both exhortation and comfort; and he having the gift of
prophecy or preaching the Gospel, was called "Barnabas", a son of
comfort, or a comforter, or an exhorter: and so Jerom (r) interprets it,
"the son of a prophet". Drusius conjectures that his right name was ,
"Bar Nachama", and by contraction "Barnama", and with a Greek
termination "Barnamas"; which properly signifies, in the Chaldee and
Syriac languages, "the son of consolation", as it is here interpreted;
and he observes, that the letters "M" and "B" are sometimes used one for
an other: thus one and the same man is called "Berodach" and "Merodach",
[Kg2 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#012) and the same river is
called "Abana", [Kg2 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012) and in the
margent "Amana"; but others think he had his name from the same word
that Noah had his, and which signifies rest and comfort, as appears from
the reason of his name. "This same shall comfort us", &c. And so the
name of this man in the Chaldee or Syriac language was , which may be
literally rendered "the son of the fathers' rest", or "comfort". And
this man is said to be

a Levite; of the tribe of Levi, and of the priestly race:

and of the country of Cyprus; or "by birth", or "nation, a Cyprian"; for
though he was a Jew, as is clear from his being of the tribe of Levi,
and was born of Jewish parents, yet in Cyprus, and so was a native of
that place. The Ethiopic version renders it, "of the city of Cyprus";
but Cyprus was not a city, but a country; wherefore the Syriac version
renders it, "of the place, or country of Cyprus", as we do: it was an
island in the further part of the Mediterranean sea; it had its name
from the plant Cyprus, and is now by the Turks called "Kibris".
According to Pliny (s), it lay to the east and west of Cilicia, and was
opposite Syria, and was formerly the seat of nine kingdoms; its
circumference was three hundred and seventy miles, and had been called
by various names; as Acamantis, Cerastis, Aspella, Amathusia, Macaria,
Crypton, and Colinia; in it were fifteen towns or cities, which wcre
Paphos, Palsepaphos, Curias, Citium, Corineum, Salamis, Amethus,
Lapethos, Solce, Tamaseus, Epidarum, Chytri, Arsinoe, Carpasium, and
Golgi. According to the same writer (t), it was by an earthquake divided
from Syria; and that part of it which lay to the east from Syria, is
said to be less than a hundred miles distant from it. And according to
Mela (u), its chief cities were Salamis and Paphos, mentioned in [Act
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#005). And according to Ptolomy (w), it
had on the west Pamphylia, on the south the Egyptian and Syrian seas,
and on the east the Syrian sea, and on the north the straits of Cilicia:
it was inhabited by people of various nations, and, among the rest, by
Jews; and R. Benjamin makes mention of Jewish Rubbans in Cyprus, in his
time (x).

\(r\) De Nominibus Hebraicis, fol. 105. I. (s) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 31.
(t) Ib. l. 2. c. 88. (u) De Orbis Situ, l. 2. p. 66. (w) Geograph. l. 5.
c. 14. (x) Itinerar. p. 30.

[Acts 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 4:37</span></span>

Having land, sold it,.... Whether this was in Cyprus, or in Judea, is
not certain; nor how he came by it, whether he had bought it, as the
priests and Levites might, and as Jeremiah, who was of the priests,
bought a field at Anathoth, [Jer 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#009)
or, whether it was his wife's dowry; for the Levites had nothing by
inheritance: they had forty two cities, and the six cities of refuge to
dwell in, and the field of the suburbs of these cities; which field or
land was never to be sold, but to be a perpetual possession, [Lev
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#034) but now the ceremonial law was
abolished, and this precept was not attended to, if the land was of this
sort. Moreover, the Jewish doctors interpret the above law otherwise;
and understand it only of changing, and not of selling, which they allow
of; one of their canons runs thus (y),

"the priests and Levites, "sell" always, and redeem always, as it is
said, [Lev 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#032), "the Levites may
redeem at any time".''

Upon which canon, one of their commentators (z) says,

"they sell always; and not as an Israelite, who cannot sell less than
two years before the jubilee;--but these "sell" even near the jubilee;
"and they redeem always": if they sell houses in walled towns, they are
not confirmed at the end of the year, as the houses in the walled towns
of Israelites; and if "they sell fields", it is not necessary that they
should remain in the hands of the buyer two years, but they may redeem
them immediately, if they will.''

And another of them (a) has this observation,

"all agree that the Levites may not change a city, or suburb, or field,
which are theirs, because it is said, [Lev
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#034) "but the field of the suburbs of
their cities may not be sold"; and the wise men of blessed memory say,
the meaning of it is, it shall not be changed, for they do not change
anything from what it was before.''

And agreeably to this is what Maimonides (b) elsewhere says,

"they do not make in the cities of the Levites a city a suburb, or a
suburb a city, or a suburb a field, or a field a suburb, as it is said,
[Lev 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#034) "but the field of the
suburbs of their cities shall not be sold"; from report (or tradition)
we learn, that that is said, "shall not be sold", means, shall not be
changed; but the field, suburbs, and city, everyone of these three shall
be as they are for ever. Priests and Levites who "sell" a field, of the
fields of their cities, or an house of any of the houses of their walled
towns, do not redeem according to this order (i.e. as the other
Israelites), but "they sell fields"; and even near to the jubilee, and
redeem them immediately.''

So that if this land of Barnabas lay in Judea, as is most likely, it
might be sold, and much more, if in Cyprus. But, be it what and where it
will, he sold it:

and brought the money; from Cyprus or Judea, or that part of the land of
Canaan where it lay, and where he had sold it:

and laid it at the apostles' feet; perhaps he might be the first person
that did so, and set an example which was universally followed; however,
he is particularly mentioned, being a man of note among the apostles,
and of great usefulness in after times, and of whom frequent mention is
made in other places.

\(y\) Misn. Eracin, c. 9. sect. 8. (z) Bartenora in Misn. Eracin. (a)
Mainton. in ib. (b) Hilchot Shemitta Veyobel, c. 13. sect. 4, 5, 7.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 5](act005)

</div>
