<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Acts Index](act.md)  
  [Previous](act015)  [Next](act017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Acts Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001.md)

[Acts 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">act 16:1</span></span>

Then came he to Derbe and Lystra,.... Which were cities of Lycaonia,
[Act 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#006.md) after Paul had gone through
Syria and Cilicia; in the last of these places, he had been stoned, and
yet goes thither again; none of these things moved him from the
preaching of the Gospel, and from the care of the churches, such zeal,
courage, and intrepidity was he possessed of:

and behold a certain disciple was there: a converted person, a believer
in Christ, one that had learned to know and deny himself, and understood
the way of salvation by Christ, and was a follower of him; whether the
apostle was an instrument of his conversion, when he was before in these
parts, is not certain, though probable, since he often calls him his
son; nor is it so evident whether he was at Derbe or at Lystra, though
the latter seems most likely, since a report was given of him by the
brethren there, and at Iconium, when no mention is made of Derbe, in the
following verse:

named Timotheus; or Timothy, the same person to whom afterwards the
apostle wrote two epistles: it is a name much used among the Greeks, and
his father was a Greek; one of this name, who was an historian among the
Greeks, is frequently mentioned by Laertius (r); and there was another
of this name, the son of Conon, an Athenian general (s); and another
that was a captain or general of Antiochus,

"Afterward he passed over to the children of Ammon, where he found a
mighty power, and much people, with Timotheus their captain.'' (1
Maccabees 5:6)

"Now Timotheus, whom the Jews had overcome before, when he had gathered
a great multitude of foreign forces, and horses out of Asia not a few,
came as though he would take Jewry by force of arms.'' (2 Maccabees
10:24)

the name signifies one that honoured God, or was honoured by God; both
were true in this disciple of Christ:

the son of a certain woman which was a Jewess, and believed; his mother
was a Jewish woman, but a believer in Christ, her name was Eunice, [Ti2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#005.md)

but his father was a Greek; a Gentile, an uncircumcised one, and so he
seems to have remained, by his sons not being circumcised.

\(r\) De Vit. Philosoph. l. 3. in Vit. Platon. & l. 4. Vit. Speusippi, &
l. 5. Vit. Aristotel. (s) Aelian. Hist. Var. l. 2. c. 10, 18. & l. 3. c.
16, 47.

[Acts 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">act 16:2</span></span>

Which was well reported of,.... Not the father of Timothy, but Timothy
himself; to whose piety, virtue, and good conversation witness was
borne,

by the brethren that were at Lystra and Iconium; the members of the
churches which were in these places, and which were not far from one
another; and as it is necessary that ministers of the Gospel should have
a good report of them that are without, so likewise of them that are
within; and the testimony of the latter is preferable to that of the
former.

[Acts 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">act 16:3</span></span>

Him would Paul have to go forth with him,.... Perceiving that he was a
young man, that not only had the grace of God, but very considerable
gifts, and abilities for ministerial service; and having a good
testimony of his agreeable life and conversation, the apostle was very
desirous he should go along with him, and be his companion in his
travels, and be an assistant to him in the work of the ministry; and
accordingly he was, and is often spoken of in his epistles, as his
fellowlabourer, and one that served with him in the Gospel of Christ,
and who was very dear unto him:

and took and circumcised him; which may seem strange, when there had
been so lately a controversy in the church at Antioch about
circumcision, from whence the apostle was just come; and when this
matter had been debated and determined by the apostles and elders at
Jerusalem, where he was present, and he was now carrying about their
decrees: but it is to be observed, that the apostle used circumcision
not as a duty of the law, as what that required, and in obedience to it,
which he knew was abrogated; much less as necessary to salvation, which
the judaizing preachers urged; but as an indifferent thing, and in order
to gain a point, and secure some valuable end, as follows

because of the Jews which were in those quarters; not the believing
ones, for he brought along with him the decrees of the apostles and
elders to satisfy them, that circumcision was not necessary; but the
unbelieving ones, who he knew would not suffer an uncircumcised person
to teach in their synagogues, nor would they hear him out of them;
wherefore having a mind to take Timothy with him to be assisting to him
in the preaching of the Gospel, in point of prudence he thought it
proper to circumcise him, that he might be received by them, and be the
more acceptable to them; who would otherwise have taken such an offence
at him, as not to have heard him: thus the apostle to the Jews became a
Jew, that he might gain and save some, [Co1
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#020.md) for they knew all that his father
was a Greek; and that therefore he was not circumcised; for a woman
might not circumcise, because she was not a fit subject of circumcision
herself (t); though in case of necessity circumcision by women was
allowed of (u).

\(t\) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 27. 1. (u) Maimon. Hilchot. Mila, c. 2.
sect. 1.

[Acts 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">act 16:4</span></span>

And as they went through the cities,.... Of Derbe, Lystra, and Iconium,
and others in Lycaonia, and in Phrygia and Galatia; the Arabic version
reads, "they both"; that is, Paul and Barnabas:

they delivered them the decrees for to keep; they gave the churches, in
these cities, the sentiments, and determinations to be observed and
followed by them:

that were ordained of the apostles which were at Jerusalem; concerning
the abstinence of the Gentiles from things offered to idols, and from
blood, and from things strangled, and from fornication, [Act
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#020.md).

[Acts 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">act 16:5</span></span>

And so were the churches established in the faith,.... Of Christ, both
in the grace and doctrine of faith; and that both by the preaching of
the Gospel by the apostle and his companions, and by the decrees of the
elders delivered by him:

and increased in number daily; as well as in gifts and grace.

[Acts 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">act 16:6</span></span>

Now when they had gone throughout Phrygia,.... See Gill on [Act
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010.md) To which may be added, that this
country had its name either from the river Phryx, as Pliny (w) observes,
or from the word Phrygios, which signifies "dry"; this being a very dry
and sandy country: it was famous for marble stone; hence we read (x) of
Phrygian Stone or marble, of which pillars and statues were made:
according to Josephus (y), the original of the Phrygians was Togarmah
the son of Gomer, and grandson of Japheth, [Gen
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#003.md), whom he calls Thygrammes, and
his people from him, Thygrammeans, and who, adds he, as it seems by the
Greeks, are called Phrygians. Herodotus (z) reports, that the Phrygians
(as the Macedonians say) were called Briges or Brygians, so long as they
were Europeans, and dwelt with the Macedonians: but when they went into
Asia, together with the country, they changed their names, into
Phrygians: of one Philip a Phrygian, whom Antiochus left governor at
Jerusalem, mention is made in:

"And he left governors to vex the nation: at Jerusalem, Philip, for his
country a Phrygian, and for manners more barbarous than he that set him
there;'' (2 Maccabees 5:22)

here dwelt Jews, as appears from [Act
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010.md) and here the apostle preached and
made converts.

And the region of Galatia: in Asia Minor: it had Cappadocia on the east,
Bithynia on the west, Pamphylia on the south, and the Euxine sea on the
north. The inhabitants of this country were originally Gauls, who under
Brennus their captain, came out of some parts of France, and invaded
Italy, and came to Rome, and took it all but the capitol; from whence
being sallied out upon by the Romans at an unawares, they were obliged
to retire; and from thence they sailed into Greece, and went into Asia,
into this part of it where they settled, which was first called after
them Gallo Graecia, and in process of time Galatia; though some say the
Grecians called them Galatians from Gala, which signifies "milk",
because of their milky colour: of the Galatians, mention is made in,

"And he told them of the battle that they had in Babylon with the
Galatians, how they came but eight thousand in all to the business, with
four thousand Macedonians, and that the Macedonians being perplexed, the
eight thousand destroyed an hundred and twenty thousand because of the
help that they had from heaven, and so received a great booty.'' (2
Maccabees 8:20)

here the Gospel was preached, and many believed; for we afterwards read
of disciples both in this country and in Phrygia, [Act
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#023.md) and here were churches formed,
and to whom the apostles preached, and delivered the decrees of the
apostles and elders.

And were forbidden of the Holy Ghost; not by an articulate voice, but by
a secret and powerful impulse upon their minds;

to preach the word in Asia: that is, in that country which was properly
called Asia, or pro-consular Asia, otherwise Phrygia, and Galatia, were
provinces in Asia Minor. Beza's most ancient copy, and the Vulgate Latin
and Syriac versions read, "the word of God": the reasons why it was
prohibited to be preached here, at this time, cannot be said, and must
be referred to the sovereign will of God; it seems, that at this
instant, there were no chosen ones to be called by grace, and there was
work for the apostle and his companions to do elsewhere, namely, in
Macedonia.

\(w\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 29. (x) Pausanias, l. 1. sive Attica, p. 32.
(y) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 6. sect. 1. (z) Polymnia, c. 73. Vid. Plin. l. 5.
c. 32.

[Acts 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">act 16:7</span></span>

After they were come to Mysia,.... Another country in Asia Minor. It is
divided by Ptolomy (a) into two parts; superior Mysia is bounded by
Dalmatia on the west, by Macedonia on the south, by part of Thrace on
the east, and by part of the river Danube on the north; inferior Mysia
is bounded on the west with part of the river Ciaber and the Danube, on
the south with part of Thrace, on the north with the turn of the river
Tyra, and on the east with the Euxine Pontus; but this was the European
Mysia: the Mysia which seems here intended, was divided into the lesser
Mysia by the Hellespont, and had Troas on the south; and into the
greater Mysia by Olympus, which was bounded on the west with the lesser
Mysia and Troas, on the east with Bithynia, and on the south with Asia,
properly so called. By Pliny (b) it is called Aeolis, and so Jerom says
(c), it was in his times; sometimes it is called Abretta and Abrettina,
and of later years Thya, or Thyria: some suggest it has its name of
Mysia from Mysus, the brother of Car (d), the father of the Carions; but
according to the Talmudists, it had its name from Meshech, the son of
Japheth, [Gen 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002) for they say (e.md)
Meshech, , "this is Mysia"; Pliny observes (f), that there are some
authors who assert that the Mysians, Brygians, and Thynnians came out of
Europe, from whom they are called Mysians, Phrygians, and Bithynians, in
Asia. The inhabitants of Mysia were very despicable; hence the proverb,
"ultimus Mysorum", "the last of the Mysians" (g), is used for a very
mean and contemptible person. The apostle was willing to preach to the
wise and unwise, and disdained not to carry the Gospel to the meanest
part of mankind.

They assayed to go into Bithynia; another country in Asia Minor; it
makes one province with Pontus, and has the same boundaries; Pontus
being at the east, and Bithynia at the west: it was bounded on the north
with the Euxine sea, on the east with Galatia, on the south with Asia
properly so called, and on the west with the Propontis; according to
Pliny (h) it was called Cronia, afterwards Thessalis, then Maliande,
(perhaps Mariandyne), and Strymonis; and Herodotus (i) reports, that the
Thracians going into Asia were called Bithynians, who were first called
(as they say) Strymonians, inhabiting Strymon; according to Jerom (k),
it was formerly called Bebrycia, then Mygdonia, and Phrygia Major, and
by the river Iera, or, as Pliny calls it, Hieras, is divided from
Galatia; to which agrees Solinus (l) who says it was before Bebrycia,
afterwards Migdonia, and now Bithynia, from Bithynus the king; the king;
though others say, it was so called from Bithyne, a daughter of Jupiter;

but the Spirit suffered them not; the Alexandrian copy, and Beza's most
ancient copy, and some others, and the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and
Ethiopic versions read, "the Spirit of Jesus": so that it was not an
evil spirit, or Satan, that hindered them, who sometimes did; but they
were under the direction and guidance of the divine Spirit, called, in
the preceding verse, the Holy Ghost; however, the Gospel was preached
here afterwards, and churches formed; of which See Gill on [Pe1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md).

\(a\) Geograph. l. 3. c. 9, 10. (b) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 30. (c) De locis
Hebraicis, fol. 96. E. (d) Herodotus, l. 1. c. 171. (e) T. Bab. Yoma,
fol. 10. 1. (f) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 32. (g) Ciceron. Orat. 24. pro. L.
Flacco, p. 785. (h) Ib. (i) Polymnia, c. 75. (k) De locis Hebraicis,
fol. 95. L. (l) Polyhistor. c. 54.

[Acts 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">act 16:8</span></span>

And they passed by Mysia,.... Without stopping or staying there, though
they came to it:

came down to Troas; either the country of Troas, as the Syriac version
renders it; which, according to Solinus (m), is bordered on the north
part of Galatia, and was near to Lycaonia, Pisidia, and Mygdonia on the
south, and to Lydia on the east, and to Mysia and Caria on the north: or
rather the city of Troas, which Pliny says (n), was formerly called
Antigonia, now Alexandria, a colony of the Romans. Antigonus king of
Asia called it Troas at first, because it was in the country, and near
where Troy stood, but afterwards he called it, according to his own
name, Antigonia; but Lysimachus king of Thrace having got this city into
his hands, repaired it, and called it after the name of Alexander,
Alexandria; and to distinguish it from Alexandria in Egypt, and other
cities of the same name in other places, it was called Alexandria Troas.

\(m\) lb. c. 53. (n) Hist. Nat. l. 5. c. 30.

[Acts 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">act 16:9</span></span>

And a vision appeared to Paul in the night,.... Either in a dream, or,
it may be, when he was awake:

there stood a man of Macedonia; an angel in the form of a man; the
Syriac version reads, "as a man of Macedonia", and who might appear in a
Macedonian habit, or speak in the Macedonian language; or the apostle
might conclude him to be so, from his making mention of Macedonia, as
the place where he requested him to come, and assist:

and prayed him, saying, come over into Macedonia; Macedonia was a very
large country in Europe; which formerly consisted, as Pliny (o) says, of
a hundred and fifty people, or nations, and was called Emathia; it took
its name of Macedonia from Macedo, a son of Jupiter, and of Thyd, a
daughter of Deucalion: according to Ptolomy (p) it had on the north
Dalmatia, superior Mysia and Thracia; on the west, the Ionian sea; on
the south Epirus; and on the east, part of Thracia, and the gulfs of the
Aegean sea. It had formerly other names besides Emathia and Macedonia,
as Mygdonia and Edoma, and is now called Albania or Ronnelli. Troas,
where the apostle now was, when he had this vision, was just by the
Hellespont, over which he must go to Macedonia; and therefore the
Macedonian prays him to "come over", adding,

and help us; by praying and preaching, to pull down the kingdom of
Satan, to destroy superstition and idolatry, to enlighten the eyes of
men, and turn them from darkness to light, from the power of Satan to
God, and save them from utter ruin and destruction. This shows what a
miserable condition this country was in; and that God had some chosen
people among them to gather in, whose time was now come; and of what use
and service the angels, Christ's ministering spirits, are, who are
helpful in weakening the kingdom of Satan, and advancing the interest of
Christ, and in spreading his Gospel, and particularly in directing the
ministers of it where to preach it; though it follows not from hence,
that this angel presided over the whole country, and was their tutelar
angel, as some think.

\(o\) Hist. Nat. l. 4. c. 10. (p) Geograph. l. 3. c. 13.

[Acts 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">act 16:10</span></span>

And after he had seen the vision,.... And considered it, and related it
to his companions: and when they had well weighed it, and the
circumstances of it:

immediately we endeavoured to go into Macedonia; they determined upon
it, and took all the proper methods, and made the necessary provisions
for it. Here Luke, the writer of this history, first appears, saying,
"we endeavoured"; whether he came with the apostle from Antioch, since
he is commonly said to have been a physician of Antioch; or whether he
met the apostle at Troas, since here is the first hint of him, is not
certain:

assuredly gathering, that the Lord had called us for to preach the
Gospel unto them; they concluded from the vision with great certainty,
that they had a manifest call from God to go into Macedonia, and preach
the Gospel to the inhabitants of it, not doubting but that they should
meet with success. The Alexandrian copy, the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic
versions, read "God", instead of "Lord".

[Acts 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">act 16:11</span></span>

Therefore loosing from Troas,.... Or setting sail from thence, which, as
before observed, was the Hellespont; which was a narrow sea that divided
Asia from Europe, now called Stretto di Gallipoii, or Bracci di St.
Georgio: and so Pliny (q) speaking of Troas says, it lies near the
Hellespont; and Jerom (r) calls it a maritime city of Asia; and it
further appears to be on the sea coast, by what is said in [Act
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006.md), for from Philippi hither, the
apostle and his company sailed in five days, and from hence they sailed
to Assos, [Act 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#006.md)

we came with a straight course to Samothracia; which was an island in
the Aegean sea, or Archipelago: it was formerly called Dardania (s),
from Dardanus the, son of Jupiter by Electra, who fled hither from
Italy, upon killing his brother Jasius; it had its name of Samothracia,
from Thracia, near to which it was, and from the Samians who inhabited
it; and it was called Samothracia to distinguish it from the island
Samos in the Ionian sea; it is now called Samandrachi: Jerom (t) calls
it an island in the gulf of Pagasa; of this island of Samothracia, Pliny
says (u), that it was free before Hebrus, was thirty two miles from
Imbrus, twenty two and a half from Lemnus, thirty eight, from the shore
of Thracia, and in circumference thirty two--and that it is fullest of
good havens of any in those parts; and adds, that Callimachus calls it
by its ancient name Dardania; it seems it was also called Leucosia, or
Leucadia, because to spectators at a distance it looked white: according
to (w) Herodotus the Pelasgi first inhabited Samothracia, who with the
Athenians dwelt there, and from them the Samothracians received their
sacred rites and mysteries; for this island was famous for the worship
of the Cabiri, or chief deities of the Gentiles, particularly Ceres,
Proserpina, Pluto, Mercury, and the two brothers Castor and Pollux,
Neptune, and all the sea gods; insomuch that it was called "the holy
island" (x), and persons of other nations, and even of the greatest
figure, were initiated into the mysteries of the Samothracians, which
Pliny (y) calls the most holy; for speaking of Venus, Potho, and
Phaeton, adds, who are worshipped with the most holy ceremonies of
Samothracia. The apostle did not stay to preach the Gospel in this
place, nor do we read of its being preached here by him at any other
time, or by any other, nor of any church in this place in after ages in
ecclesiastical history. The apostle and his companions are said to come
hither, "with a straight course"; not only because they might have a
fair gale, which brought them at once hither; but because when they were
over the Hellespont, this island lay directly in their way, in a
straight line to Macedonia:

and the next day to Neapolis; the Alexandrian copy reads, "the new
city", as the word signifies; hence the Ethiopic version by way of
interpretation renders it, "the next day we came to the new city, the
name of which is Neapolis": according to Ptolomy, it was a sea port of
Edonis, a part of Macedonia, and was upon the borders of Thrace; it is
now called Christopoli; and was not Neapolis in Campania, nor Sychem in
Samaria, which is so called, but was at a great distance from either of
these. Pliny places it in Thracia, as he also does Edonis, and even
Philippi (z). Jerom calls (a) it a city of Caria, but wrongly: and
though we have no account of the apostles preaching in this place, and
of making converts, neither now nor at any other time; yet it appears
even in after ages that here was a church in this place: in the "sixth"
century the bishop of it was sent to the fifth Roman synod; and in the
"seventh" century one Andreas was bishop of this place, who was in the
sixth synod at Constantinople (b).

\(q\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 30. (r) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 96. K. (s)
Pausanias Achaica, sive, l. 7. p. 403. Ptolom. Geograph. l. 3. c. 11.
(t) Ib. fol. 96. I. (u) Nat. Hist. l. 4. c. 12. (w) Euterpe, c. 51. (x)
L. Attilius in Liv. Hist. l. 45. c. 5. (y) Nat. Hist. l. 36. c. 5. (z)
Ib. l. 4. c. 11, (a) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 96. F. (b) Magdeburg.
Hist. Eccl cent. 6. c. 2. p. 7. cent. 7. c. 10. p. 258.

[Acts 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">act 16:12</span></span>

And from thence to Philippi,.... This place is by Appianus called Datos,
which was its original name; and by Diodorus Siculus, Crenidae (c), from
the fountains of water, which were many and wholesome, that were about
it; and it had its name Philippi, from Philip king of Macedon, father of
Alexander the great, who rebuilt it (d): it is now vulgarly called
Chrixopolis, that is, Chrysopolis, from the veins and mines of gold
found about it; it was famous for a battle here fought between Augustus
Caesar and Anthony on the one side, and Brutus and Cassius on the other,
in which the latter were vanquished:

which is the chief city of that part of Macedonia; which is called
Edonis, in which Ptolomy places it;

and a colony: that is, of the Romans; see [Act
16:37](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#037) and which Pliny (e.md) also calls a
colony:

and we were in that city abiding many days; without doing anything,
having no opportunity, or door opened to them to preach the Gospel;
which must be a great trial of their faith, after Paul had seen such a
vision, by which they were so strongly assured it was the will of God
they should come and preach the Gospel here, and after they had
travelled so far by sea and land; though some observe, that the word
used signifies not only to abide, but to exercise themselves, by
teaching and preaching the word, which it is supposed they did with
success; and that the women they after met with by the river side, were
such, at least some of them, who had been converted under their
ministry; but the former seems to be the truest sense.

\(c\) Ptolom. Geograph. l. 3. c. 13. (d) Pausaniae Eliac. 2. l. 6. p.
352. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 4. c. 11. (e) Ib.

[Acts 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">act 16:13</span></span>

And on the sabbath,.... That is, as the Syriac version renders it, "on
the sabbath day"; the Jewish sabbath, the seventh day of the week;
though the words may be rendered, "on a certain day of the week"
agreeably to [Act 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#007.md) where the first
of the sabbath means the first day of the week; but be this as it will,
on this day,

we went out of the city by a river side; perhaps the river Strymon,
which was near; the Alexandrian copy and some others, and the Vulgate
Latin version read,

without the gate; and the Syriac version, "without the gates of the
city"; all to the same sense: it looks as if there was no synagogue of
the Jews in this place, or otherwise the apostle and his companions
would have gone into that, according to their custom; and this the
rather seems to be the case, since it is so particularly remarked, that
at Thessalonica, the next place they stayed at there was one, [Act
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#001.md) and the reason might be, because
that Philippi being a Roman colony, the Jews were not suffered to have
one in it; wherefore Paul and his company, whether on the Jewish
sabbath, or on any other day of the week, took a walk out of the city;
either for the sake of a walk, or rather to converse together, and
consider what was to be done, or to look out for an opportunity to
preach the Gospel; and they came to a place,

where prayer was wont to be made; or as the words may be rendered,
"where was thought to be a place of prayer"; a "proseucha", an oratory,
or a place built and made use of for prayer; that is, as they walked
along, they saw a place, which in their opinion looked like a religious
house, or a place for prayer, and so made up to it, where they found
some persons assembled together on that account: this sense is confirmed
by several versions; the Vulgate Latin version reads, "where there
seemed to be prayer", and so reads Beza's most ancient copy; and the
Syriac version is very express, "for there was seen" , "an house of
prayer"; to which agrees the Arabic version, "we went out to a certain
place, which was thought to be a place of prayer"; to which may be added
the Ethiopic version, "and we thought there was prayer there"; and that
the Jews had their oratories, or prayer houses, is certain; See Gill on
[Luk 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012.md) and that these were without
the cities, and in the fields, appears from a passage of Epiphanius (f),
who says,

"there were anciently places of prayer, both among the Jews, "without
the city", and among the Samaritans, there was a place of prayer at
Sichem, which is now called Neapolis, "without the city", in the field,
about two stones distance, in form of a theatre, open to the air, and
without covering, built by the Samaritans, who in all things imitated
the Jews:''

and if these were commonly built by fountains and rivers, and as some
think, in imitation of Isaac, who went out into the field, "to
meditate"; which the Chaldee paraphrase renders, "to pray"; and is also
in the same place said to come, as the Jerusalem paraphrase renders it,
"to a well", or "fountain", [Gen 24:62](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#062.md)
then this clause may be rendered, "where it was usual for a prayer house
to be": and then the sense is, there being no synagogue in the city, the
apostle and those with him went out of it, to the river side, to look
out for a prayer house; where such places were wont to be built, and
they accordingly found one:

and we sat down, and spake unto the women which resorted thither; who
seem to have been Jewish women, who met here to attend public prayer,
there being no religious worship of the true God in the city; and among
these worshippers of God was Lydia, hereafter mentioned; and worship not
being begun, the apostle and his companions sat down among them, and
entered into some religious conversation with them, and took the
opportunity of preaching the Gospel, which was what they wanted, and
were seeking after.

\(f\) Contr. Haeres. Tom. 2. l. 3. Haeres. 80.

[Acts 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">act 16:14</span></span>

And a certain woman, named Lydia,.... Whether this woman was a Jewess or
a Gentile, is not certain, her name will not determine; she might be
called so from the country of Lydia, which was in Asia minor, and where
was Thyatira, her native place; Horace makes frequent mention of one of
this name (g) and it might be a Jewish name; we read of R. Simeon ben
Lydia (h); and as these seem to be Jewish women that met at this
oratory, she might be one:

a seller of purple; either of purple silks, much wore in the eastern
countries; or of the purple dye, which in,

"Then Judas returned to spoil the tents, where they got much gold, and
silver, and blue silk, and purple of the sea, and great riches.'' (1
Maccabees 4:23)

is called "purple of the sea", or "sea purple"; it being the blood or
juice of a turbinated shell fish, which the Jews call "Chalson": this
they speak of as a shellfish; hence those words (i),

"go and learn of the Chalson, for all the while it grows, its shell
grows with it:''

and that purple was dyed with the blood of it, appears from the
following instances; "the best fruits in the land", [Gen
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011) are interpreted (k.md), the things
that are the most famous in the world, as the Chalson, &c. with whose
blood, as the gloss on the passage says, they dye purple: and the purple
dyed with this was very valuable, and fetched a good price; the tribe of
Zebulun is represented (l), as complaining to God, that he had given to
their brethren fields and vineyards, to them mountains and hills, to
their brethren lands, and to them seas and rivers; to which it is
replied, all will stand in need of thee, because of Chalson; as it is
said, [Deu 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#019.md) "They shall suck of
the abundance of the seas"; the gloss upon it, interpreting the word
Chalson, is, it comes out of the sea to the mountains, and with its
blood they dye purple, which is sold at a very dear price. The text in
[Deu 33:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#019.md) is thus paraphrased by
Jonathan the Targumist;

"at the shore of the sea they dwell (i.e. they of the tribe of Zebulun),
and they delight themselves with (the fish) Tuny, and take Chalson, and
with its blood dye purple the threads of their garments.''

And so Maimonides says (m), that they use this in dying the fringes on
the borders of their garments; after they have scoured the wool, and the
like, that it may take the dye, he says,

"they take of the blood of Chalson, which is a fish whose colour is like
the colour of purple, and its blood is black like ink, and it is found
in the salt sea,''

particularly about Tyre; so the husbandmen in [Jer
52:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#016) are interpreted (n.md), they that
catch Chalson from the ladder of Tyre to Chippah, or the shore; the
gloss explains it, those that squeeze and press the Chalson, to fetch
out its blood: and with all this agree the modern accounts given of
purple, as follow;

"purple was much esteemed among the ancients, especially the Tyrian
purple; which underwent more dyes than the rest, and which was almost
peculiar to emperors and kings, yet this purple did not exceed that now
in use.--The ancient purple was tinged, or given with the blood or juice
of a precious turbinated testaceous sea fish, called by the Greeks and
by the Latins "purpura".--In the seas of the Spanish West Indies, about
Nicoya, is found a shell fish, which perfectly resembles the ancient
"purpura", and in all probability is the very same--these are gathered
very plentifully in the spring, and by rubbing one against another,
yield a kind of saliva, or thick glair, resembling soft wax; but the
purple dye is in the throat of the fish, and the finest part in a little
white vein--the chief riches of Nicoya consist in this fish; cloth of
Segovia dyed with it, is sold for twenty crowns the ell.--In the
Philosoph. Transact., we have an account of a purple fish discovered in
1686, by Mr. W. Cole, on the coasts of Somersetshire, South Wales, &c,
where it is found in great abundance.--The fish is a kind of "buccinum",
a name given by the ancients to all fishes, whose shell bears any
resemblance to a hunting horn; and it appears from Pliny, that part of
the ancient purple was taken from this kind of shell fish. The Caribbee
Islands have likewise their "purple" fish; it is called "burgan", being
of the size of the end of the finger, and resembling our periwinkles;
its shell is of a brownish azure, its flesh white, its intestines of a
very bright red, the colour whereof appears through the body; and it is
this that dyes that froth, which it casts when taken, and which is at
first of a violet hue, bordering on blue; to oblige them to yield the
greater quantity of froth, they lay them on a plate, and shake and beat
them against one another, upon which the plate is immediately covered
with the froth, which is received on a linen cloth, and becomes
"purple", in proportion as it dries (o).''

It may be further observed, that the fringes which the Jews wore upon
their garments, had on them a ribband of blue or purple, [Num
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#038.md), for the word there used, is by
the Septuagint rendered "purple", in [Num
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#007.md) and sometimes "hyacinth"; and the
whole fringe was by the Jews called "purple" :hence it is said (p),

"does not everyone that puts on the "purple" (i.e. the fringes on his
garments) in Jerusalem, make men to wonder? and a little after, the
former saints, or religious men, when they had wove in it (the garment)
three parts, they put on it "the purple".''

And there were persons who traded in these things, and were called ,
"sellers of purple" (q), as here; that is, for the Tzitzith, or fringes
for the borders of the garments, on which the ribband of blue or purple
was put, as the gloss explains it: the Jews were very curious about the
colour, and the dying of it; that it should be a colour that would hold
and not change; and that the ribband be dyed on purpose for that use.
Maimonides gives rules for the dying of it (r), and they were no less
careful of whom they bought it; for they say, that "the purple" was not
to be bought, but of an approved person, or one that was authorized for
that purpose (s); and a scruple is raised by one, whether he had done
right or no, in buying it of the family of a doctor deceased (t): now
since Lydia might be a Jewess, or at least, as appears by what follows,
was a proselytess of the Jewish religion, this might be her business to
sell the purple for their fringes, and it may be the fringes themselves;
and if this was her employment, she was thoroughly a religious person in
their way, since we find, that , "sellers of purple", were free from
reading

"hear O Israel", &c. [Deu 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004.md) and
"from prayer", and from the phylacteries, &c. for this reason, because
he that is employed in the commandment (in any work for it) was free
from the commandment (u);''

and yet she attended at the place and time of prayer:

of the city of Thyatira; which was in Lydia, or as others say in Mysia,
which was in Asia Minor; Pliny (w) seems to place it in Ionia, by the
river Lycus, and says it was formerly called Pelopia and Euhippa, and it
was also called Semiramis; it had its name of Thyatira from Seleucus
Nicanor, who being at war with Lysimachus near this place, and hearing
he had a daughter born, called it Thygateira; though others say it was
so called, because that when the Mysians were about to build a city,
inquiring of the gods where they should build it, were told, that they
should build it where a hart was struck, and appeared running; and ,
because of the sacrificing of the hart, they called it Thyateira. The
Turks now call it "Ak hissar", the white camp. This was Lydia's native
place, from which she was now at a great distance, being either wholly
removed hither, or was here upon business; for Thyatira was in Asia, and
Philippi, where she now was, was in Europe:

which worshipped God; the true God, the God of Israel, and not the gods
of the Gentiles, among whom she was; which shows, that she was either a
Jewish woman, who had knowledge of the one true and living God, or at
least a proselytess of the Jewish religion:

heard us; not alone, but with other women; and at first only externally,
and not so as to understand and receive what she heard, until the
efficacious grace of God was exerted upon her, signified in the
following clause:

whose heart the Lord opened; which was before shut and barred, with the
bars of ignorance, hardness, and unbelief. The heart of a sinner before
conversion, is like a house shut up, and wholly in darkness; whatever
degree of natural or moral light is in it, there is none in spiritual
things; it is empty of the grace of God, of the fear of him, and love to
him; it is without proper inhabitants, without God, Christ, and the
Spirit; and is the habitation of devils, and the hold of every foul
spirit, who delight in dark and desolate places; it is bolted and barred
with unbelief, and walled up, and even petrified and hardened with sin,
and is guarded and garrisoned by Satan, and its goods are kept in peace
by him: and this had been the case of Lydia; but now the Lord opened her
understanding, and put light into it, which was before darkness itself;
as to spiritual things; by which she saw her wretched, sinful, and
miserable state by nature, the insufficiency of all ways and means, and
works, to justify and save her, and the necessity, suitableness, and
fulness of grace and salvation by Christ; which was done by the same
divine power, that at first created light in darkness: moreover, the
Lord wrought upon her affections, and engaged them to divine and
spiritual things; creating love in her soul to Christ, to his people,
truths and ordinances; which was done by his almighty hand, taking away
the stony heart, and giving an heart of flesh: he also removed the bar
of unbelief, entered in himself, dispossessed Satan, and worked faith in
her, to look to him, lay hold on him, and receive him, as her Saviour
and Redeemer; making her willing in the day of his power, to be saved by
him, and to serve him: it is a petition the Jews frequently make (x), in
their prayers to God, , "that thou wouldst open my heart", in thy law;
or as sometimes, open our hearts in the doctrine of thy law: not Lydia
herself, nor the Apostle Paul, but the Lord opened her heart; Jehovah
the Father, who commanded light out of darkness; Jehovah the Son, who
has the key of the house of David; Jehovah the Spirit, who convinces of
sin, righteousness, and judgment:

that she attended unto the things which were spoken of Paul; concerning
the person and offices of Christ, concerning his truths and ordinances,
concerning free justification by his righteousness, pardon by his blood,
and everlasting salvation by him; these things she hearkened unto in
another manner than she had done; before she heard, but did not attend
to what she heard; but faith coming by hearing, now she hears with the
hearing of faith, and understands what she hears, and cordially receives
and embraces it, and put into practice what she heard, submitting to the
ordinance of Christ, as follows.

\(g\) Carm. l. 1. ode 8, 13, 25. & l. 3. ode 9. (h) Juchasin, fol. 105.
1. (i) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 18. 3. (k) Bereshit Rabbi, sect. 91.
fol. 79. 4. & Mattanot Cehunah in ib. (l) T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 6. 1.
(m) Hilchot Tzitzith, c. 2. sect. 2. (n) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 26. 1. &
75. 1. (o) Chambers's Cyclopoedia in the word "Purple". (p) T. Bab.
Menachot, fol. 40. 1, 2. (q) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 50. 2. (r) Maimon.
Hilchot Tzitzith. c. 2. sect. 1, 2, 3. (s) Ib. sect. 4. (t) T. Bab.
Avoda Zara, fol. 39. 1. (u) T. Bab. Succa, fol. 26. 1. (w) Nat. Hist. l.
5. c. 29. (x) Zohar in Exod. fol. 83. 1. Raziel, fol. 45. 1. & 42. 1, 2.
Shaare Zion, fol. 53. 2. & 65. 1. Seder Tephillot. Ed. Basil. fol 74. 2.

[Acts 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">act 16:15</span></span>

And when she was baptized,.... In water, in the name of the Father, Son,
and Holy Ghost, according to the commission of Christ, by the apostle,
or some one of his companions; by whom she was instructed into the
nature and use of this ordinance; and very likely it was performed in
that river, by the side of which the oratory stood, where they were
assembled:

and her household; they were baptized also, being converted at the same
time; these seem to be her menial servants, who came along with her from
her native place upon business, and who attended on her; accordingly the
Ethiopic version renders it, "and she was baptized with all her men";
and these were believers, and are called "the brethren", [Act
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#040.md) hence this passage will by no
means serve the cause of infant baptism: whether Lydia was a maid, a
wife, or widow, cannot be said; it looks, however, as if she had no
husband now, since she is mentioned as a trader herself; and whether she
had any children or not, is not certain, nor can it be concluded from
this clause, for there are many households that have no children; and if
she had young children, it is not likely she should bring them with her
to such a distant place, whither she was come upon trade and business:
the pleaders for infant baptism must prove that she had children; that
these were her household, or part of her household here spoken of; and
that they were baptized; or this instance will be of no service to their
cause:

she besought us, saying, if ye have judged me to be faithful to the
Lord; this she said, not as doubting whether they had so judged of her,
but as supposing it, and taking it for granted, that they had; wherefore
she reasons upon it, and argues from it; and the sense is this, that
seeing the apostle and his company had judged her to be a believer in
Christ, by admitting her to the ordinance of baptism; and she had shown
her faithfulness to him, by submitting to it, according to his will;
therefore she earnestly entreated them to take up their residence at her
house, whilst at Philippi: saying,

come into my house, and abide there; her faith soon worked by love; and
by the fruits of righteousness which followed upon it, it appeared to be
true and genuine: and she constrained us; Paul and Silas, and Timothy
and Luke, and whoever else were in company; she not only invited them,
but obliged them to go with her; she would take no denial, and by her
arguments, entreaties, and importunity, as it were forced them, and
prevailed upon them to go with her.

[Acts 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">act 16:16</span></span>

And it came to pass as we went to prayer,.... That is, to the house of
prayer, or to the oratory, as they were in the way to it; for this is
not to be understood of their just going to the act, or duty of prayer;
for the damsel that now met them, is said to follow them, and to do so
for many days, one after another; and it was by their going to the
prayer house, that she knew what they were; and besides, the phrase of
"going to prayer", as used by us, for the act or duty of prayer, is a
mere Anglicism, and unknown to the eastern writers: now this their going
to the oratory, was after they had been at Lydia's house, and had been
entertained and refreshed there; whether this was on the same day that
she was converted and baptized, is not certain: however, so it was, that

a certain damsel possessed with a spirit of divination, met us; in the
Greek text it is, "the spirit of Python"; the Alexandrian copy and the
Vulgate Latin version read, "the spirit Python"; the same with Apollo,
who was called Pythius, as was his oracle, from the people coming to
him, to inquire of him and consult with him, about difficult matters
(y); or rather from the Hebrew word which signifies a serpent; and so
Apollo is said to have his name Pythius, from his killing the serpent
Typhon, or Python (z); hence the city of Delphos, where was the oracle
of Apollo, was called Pytho (a); the prophetess that sat upon the golden
tripos, and delivered out the oracles, Pythia; and the feasts and plays
instituted to the honour of Apollo, were called the Pythian feasts and
plays, and the place of the oracle Pythium (b): and so this maid, or the
spirit in her, pretended to divine and foretell things to come; and the
Arabic renders it, "an unclean spirit, foretelling future things": the
Jews (c) make this spirit of Python, to be the same with Ob, which we
render a familiar spirit, [Lev 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#027.md)
and the Septuagint by "Engastrimythos", a ventriloquist, one that seemed
to speak out of his belly, and pretended to predict future events; and
most of the versions in the Polyglot Bible render it by "Python", the
word here used: so the Jews say (d), that a master of Ob (as the woman
of Endor is called the mistress of Ob), , this is "Python": and so
Jarchi on [Deu 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011.md) explains the
word, and adds, that it is one that speaks out of his arm holes, as
those sort of people did from several parts of their bodies, and even
from their secret parts: the word signifies a bottle, and they were
called masters or mistresses of the bottle; either because the place on
which they sat, and from whence they gave forth their oracles, was in
the form of one; or they made use of a bottle in their divinations; or
as Schindler (e) observes, being possessed, they swelled and were
inflated like bottles; and being interrogated, they gave forth answers
out of their bellies, concerning things past, present, and to come: and
this speaking out of their bellies might be done, without the possession
of a real spirit, and much less was it from God, as Plutarch (f), an
Heathen himself, observes;

"it is foolish and childish, to think that God, as the ventriloquists
formerly called Eurycleans, and now Pythonists, should hide himself in
the bodies of the prophets, using their mouths and voices as instruments
to speak with, for this was done by turning their voices down their
throats.''

The first of this sort was one Eurycles, of whom Aristophanes (g) makes
mention; and the Scholiast upon him says, that he was a ventriloquist,
and was said by the Athenians to prophesy by a "demon" that was in him,
when it was only an artificial way of speaking; Tertullian affirms he
had seen such women that were ventriloquists, from whose secret parts a
small voice was heard, as they sat and gave answers to things asked:
Caelius Rhodiginus writes, that he often saw a woman a ventriloquist, at
Rhodes, and in a city of Italy his own country; from whose secrets, he
had often heard a very slender voice of an unclean spirit, but very
intelligible, tell strangely of things past or present, but of things to
come, for the most part uncertain, and also often vain and lying; and
Wierus relates of one Peter Brabantius, who as often as he would, could
speak from the lower part of his body, his mouth being open, but his
lips not moved, whereby he deceived many by this cunning; and there was
a man at court in King James the First's time here in England, who could
act this imposture in a very lively manner (h): but now whether the
spirit that was in this maid was a cheat, an imposture of this kind, is
not so easy to say; it seems by the dispossession that follows, that it
was a real spirit that possessed her; though some think it was no other
than a deluding, devilish, imposture:

which brought her masters much gain by soothsaying: divining or
prophesying; it seems she had many masters, who had a propriety in her,
and shared the gain she brought; unless by them are meant her master and
mistress: vast treasures were brought to the temple at Delphos, by
persons that applied to the Pythian oracle there; and great quantities
were got by particular persons, who pretended to such a spirit, by which
they told fortunes, and what should befall people hereafter, or where
their lost or stolen goods were, and such like things; and of such sort
were the magical boys and servants Pignorius (i) makes mention of, out
of Apuleius, Porphyry, and others, who either for gain or pleasure,
performed many strange things.

\(y\) Phurnutus de natura deorum, p. 94. Vid. Schol. Aristoph. Plut. p.
6. & Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 17. (z) Homer. Hymn. in Apollo, v. 372,
&c. (a) Pausan. l. 10. p. 619. (b) Alex. ab. Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 6.
c. 2. (c) R. Moses Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora, pr. neg. 36, 38. (d) Misn.
Sanhedrin, c. 7. sect. 7. (e) Lex. Pentaglott. col. 34. (f) De defectu
oracul. p. 691. (g) Vespae, p. 502. (h) See Webster's Displaying of
supposed Witchcraft, p. 122, 124. (i) De Servis, p. 355.

[Acts 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">act 16:17</span></span>

The same followed Paul and us,.... Silas, Luke, and Timothy; the Arabic
version reads, "the same followed Paul and Silas"; as they were going to
the oratory:

and cried, saying, these men are the servants of the most high God; not
of Python, or Apollo, as she and her masters were; or of any of the
deities of the Gentiles; nor of sin, nor of Satan, nor of men, but of
the one only true and living God, one of whose titles is "Elion", the
"Most High", [Gen 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022.md) and these men
were his servants, not merely by right of creation, as all men are, or
should be; nor only through the power of divine grace upon their souls,
bringing them into a willing obedience to him, as all the saints are;
but by office, being ministers of the word: wherefore it follows,

which show unto us the way of salvation; which is not by the works of
men; for by them the justice of God cannot be satisfied, nor his law
fulfilled; God has declared against this way of salvation; it would make
void the death of Christ, and frustrate the design of God in it; which
is to magnify his grace, and exclude boasting in man: to which may be
added, that the best works of men being imperfect, and attended with
much sin, would rather damn than save; wherefore it is sinful,
dangerous, and vain, to attempt salvation in this way. The only way of
salvation is by the Lord Jesus Christ, by whom the law is fulfilled,
satisfaction is made for sin, peace and pardon are procured, an
everlasting righteousness is brought in, and through whom grace and
glory are given: and this is a way of salvation, agreeable to all the
perfections of God; in which the vilest sinner made sensible of his
sins, and of his need of this, has no reason to despair; it is exceeding
suitable to his case, and is a way in which none ever perish, that are
directed to it: and now this way of salvation is only shown in the
Gospel, by the ministers of it; not by the light of nature, for to men
who only have that, it is foolishness; nor by the law of Moses, for to
such who are under that, it is a stumbling block; nor by the carnal
reason of men, it is not of men, nor after men, but by divine
revelation: and therefore the natural man receives it not, it is hid
from such; and therefore they project various ways of salvation, which
are pleasing in their own eyes, but the end of them are the ways of
death; the way to life and immortality, is only brought to light in the
Gospel: whether she said this of her own accord, or was obliged to it by
divine impulse; and whether it was through fear of Paul, and in flattery
to him, or was with a good or bad design, is not easy to determine:
however, certain it is, what she said was truth; and sometimes the devil
himself, the father of lies, is obliged to speak it.

[Acts 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">act 16:18</span></span>

And this she did many days,.... As the apostle and his company passed to
and from the oratory, being for that time at Lydia's house; she followed
them, and repeated the above words. This she was suffered to do, time
after time; not that the apostle and his friends wanted such a
testimony, or that it was of any use to them; but that the expulsion of
the evil spirit might be more manliest, and more taken notice of:

but Paul being grieved; at the unhappy condition the maid was in, being
possessed with such a spirit: and that the people were so imposed upon
and deluded by it; and that it should be thought that there was any
combination and agreement between that and him:

turned; himself to her, who was behind him, she following him, as is
said in the preceding verse; this is left out in the Syriac version:

and said to the spirit; or to that spirit, as the same version renders
it; to the spirit of Python, or Apollo, or of divination, that was in
the maid; the Ethiopic version reads, "and he said", "in", or "by the
Holy Spirit"; being under a more than ordinary influence and impulse of
his; but not the spirit by which he spake, but the spirit to which he
spake, is here meant:

I command thee in the name of Jesus Christ to come out of her, and he
came out the same hour; this is an instance of that power which Christ
gave to his apostles to cast out devils in his name,

[Acts 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">act 16:19</span></span>

And when her masters saw,.... As they might by her sedateness and
composure; she not being wild and frantic, and not having such motions
and agitations she had whilst under the possession of the evil spirit:

that the hope of their gains was gone; the Syriac version adds, "out of
her"; namely, the evil spirit which was the ground and foundation of all
their hope of gains, they expected to acquire for themselves; that being
gone, they had no more work to do, nor tricks to play, nor profit to
expect from the maid: wherefore

they caught Paul and Silas; they being the chief speakers, and
principally concerned in the ejection of the evil spirit; they laid hold
on them, took them by the collar, or held them by their clothes,

and drew them into the market place: or rather into the court of
judicature, as the word also signifies; there to accuse them, and to
have them tried, condemned, and punished:

unto the rulers; the judges of the court, it may be the Decuriones; for
in a Roman colony as Philippi was, they chose out every tenth man, that
was of capacity and ability, to make and establish a public council, and
who therefore were called by this name.

[Acts 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">act 16:20</span></span>

And brought them to the magistrates,.... The same as before; wherefore
the Syriac version omits them there, and reads them both together here,
calling them the magistrates and chief men of the city; though the word
here used, properly signifies military captains, captains of the Roman
militia: but that they were the same with the Decuriones, or ten men
before mentioned, appears from what Harpocratian says (k), that every
year were chosen "ten magistrates", the word here used:

saying, these men being Jews, do exceedingly trouble our city; they call
Paul and Silas Jews, either because they knew them to be so, or because
they attended at the Jewish oratory, or place of worship; and it was
common with the Romans to call the Christians Jews; they were generally
included in the same name; and this name of the Jews was become very
odious with the Romans; a little after this, Claudius commanded them,
the Jews, to depart from Rome, [Act
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#002.md) they were commonly looked upon as
a troublesome and seditious sort of people, and indeed this was the old
charge that was fastened upon them, [Ezr
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015.md). So that it was enough to say
that Paul and Silas were Jews, to prove them to be disturbers of the
public peace: and it is to be observed, that their accusers make no
mention of the dispossessing of the maid, who was their private
property, and which was a private affair; but pretend a concern for the
public welfare, and bring a charge of public disturbance and detriment,
to which their malice and revenge prompted them, hoping in this way the
better to succeed: the Arabic version reads, "these two men trouble our
city, and they are both Jews".

\(k\) Lexicon, p. 274.

[Acts 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">act 16:21</span></span>

And teach customs,.... The Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions read in
the singular number, "custom or law"; referring to the doctrine of
salvation by Christ, in whose name the spirit of divination was cast out
of the maid, and whom they took for a new deity; and so concluded that
the apostle and his company were introducing a new religious law or
custom, the worship of another God:

which are not lawful for us to receive, neither to observe, being
Romans; for the city of Philippi was a Roman colony, and so the
inhabitants of it called themselves Romans; or these men might be
strictly such, who were transplanted hither; and with the Romans, it was
not lawful to receive, observe, and worship, a new or strange deity,
without the decree of the senate (l).

\(l\) Tertull. Apolog. c. 5. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 2.

[Acts 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">act 16:22</span></span>

And the multitude rose up together against them,.... The crowd of people
that were gathered together in the court on this occasion; being no
doubt spirited up by the proprietors of the maid, out of whom the spirit
of divination was cast, and encouraged by the rulers, and being provoked
at the hearing of unlawful customs being introduced among them;

and the magistrates rent off their clothes; not their own clothes, as
did the high priest, [Mar 14:63](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#063.md) but
the clothes of Paul and Silas; and so reads the Arabic version, "and the
rulers rent the garments of both of them"; which removes the ambiguity
in the words; for at the whipping or beating of malefactors, they did
not pluck off their garments, but rent and tore them off, and so whipped
or beat them naked: this was the custom with the Jews (m); it is asked,

"how did they whip anyone? his hands are bound to a pillar here and
there, and the minister of the synagogue (or the executioner) takes hold
of his clothes; and if they are rent, they are rent, and if they are
ripped, they are ripped, (be it as it will,) until he has made his
breast bare, &c.''

And in like manner the Lectors, or executioners among the Romans, used
to tear the garments of malefactors, when they beat them; this the
magistrates themselves did here, unless they may be said to do it,
because they ordered it to be done, as follows:

and commanded to beat them; that is, with rods: this was one of the
three times the apostle was beat in this manner, [Co2
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#025.md) and of this shameful treatment
at Philippi, he makes mention in [Th1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#002.md).

\(m\) Misn. Maccot, c. 3. sect. 12. & Maimon. Hilchot Sanhedrin c. 16.
sect. 8.

[Acts 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">act 16:23</span></span>

And when they had laid many stripes upon them,.... Even above measure,
as in [Co2 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#035.md).

They cast them into prison; designing doubtless to inflict some greater
punishment upon them, after they had further examined into their
affairs:

charging the jailer to keep them safely; suggesting, that he must be
answerable for them, should they escape, either through his favour or
his negligence; and they might rather give this strict charge, because
they perceived that they were uncommon men, possessed of a strange
power, which they had exerted in the casting out of the evil spirit,
which might come to their knowledge by some means or other; they might
look upon them to be a sort of magicians, and therefore were to be
narrowly watched, that they did not make use of their art to deliver
themselves; however, they judged it necessary to use all the precautions
they could, to secure them: some have thought this jailer to be the same
with Stephanas, [Co1 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#016.md) but this is
not certain, nor very probable.

[Acts 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">act 16:24</span></span>

Who having received such a charge,.... So strict an one from the
magistrates, was doubly careful and diligent:

thrust them into the inner prison: the innermost part of it, the lowest
or furthest part of the prison; so that there were the more doors,
bolts, and bars, to break open, and pass through, should they attempt to
make their escape:

and made their feet fast in the stocks; or "wood", a wooden machine, in
which the feet of prisoners were put for security, and which we call
"the stocks"; some say it was such an one, in which the neck as well as
the feet were put, and so might be the same with our "pillory".

[Acts 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">act 16:25</span></span>

And at midnight Paul and Silas prayed, When others were asleep, and all
things were still and quiet; See Gill on [Psa
119:62](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#062.md), and they prayed doubtless for
themselves, for their deliverance in God's time and way, and for support
under their present afflictions; and for supplies of grace, to enable
them to bear with patience and cheerfulness, until an issue was put to
them; and for their enemies, and, particularly it may be for the jailer,
who had used them so ill; and for the churches of Christ, for all the
saints, and for the spread and success of the Gospel:

and sang praises unto God; or "sang an hymn to God", very likely one of
David's psalms, or hymns: for the book of Psalms is a book, of hymns,
and several of the psalms are particularly called hymns; this showed not
only that they were cheerful, notwithstanding the stripes that were laid
upon them, and though their feet were made fast in the stocks, and they
were in the innermost prison, in a most loathsome and uncomfortable
condition; and though they might be in expectation of greater
punishment, and of death itself; but also that they were thankful and
glorified God, who had counted them worthy to suffer for his name's
sake:

and the prisoners heard them; for it seems there were other prisoners
besides them, and who were in the outer prison: and from hence it
appears, that their prayer was not merely mental; nor was their singing
praises only a making melody in their hearts, but were both vocal; and
it might be chiefly for the sake of the prisoners, that they both prayed
and praised in this manner, that they might hear and be converted; or at
least be convicted of the goodness of the cause, for which the apostles
suffered.

[Acts 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">act 16:26</span></span>

And suddenly there was a great earthquake,.... An extraordinary and
unusual one; which did not arise from natural causes, from wind being
pent up in the earth, but from the prayers and praises of the saints,
going up to heaven; when God was pleased to testify his presence and
power this way; and the effects which followed upon this earthquake,
show it to be a supernatural one:

so that the foundations of the prison were shaken; not the roof and
walls only, as is common in earthquakes, but the very foundation also;
and yet the edifice was not thrown down, as is usual when the foundation
is shaken:

and immediately all the doors were opened; both of the outer and inner
prisons, which is another unusual effect of earthquakes:

and everyone's bands were loosed; not only the bands of Paul and Silas,
but of the rest of the prisoners; though the Arabic version reads, "all
the fetters and bands of both were loosed", referring it only to Paul
and Silas; this circumstance shows also, that the earthquake was
miraculous, for when was it ever known that such an effect ever followed
one?

[Acts 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">act 16:27</span></span>

And the keeper of the prison awaking out of his sleep,.... Not so much
by the loud voices of Paul and Silas, as by the uncommon motion of the
earth, which so shook him, as thoroughly to awake him:

and seeing the prison doors open; which was the first thing in his
fright he was looking after, and careful of, and which he might
perceive, though it was midnight, and though as yet he had no light:

he drew out his sword; from its scabbard, which was girt about him; for
it may be he had slept with his clothes on, and his sword girt to him;
or if he had put on his clothes upon awaking, he had also girt himself
with his sword:

and would have killed himself, supposing that the prisoners had been
fled; especially Paul and Silas, concerning whom he had received such a
strict charge from the magistrates; and he knew that according to law,
he must suffer the same punishment that was designed for them; and
therefore in fear of the magistrates, and what they would inflict upon
him, he was just going to destroy himself.

[Acts 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">act 16:28</span></span>

But Paul cried with a loud voice,.... Knowing by divine revelation, what
the jailer was about to do; though being in the innermost prison, in a
dark dungeon, he could not see him, unless it can be thought, that the
opening of the doors had let in light sufficient; and it may be also,
that he knew in the same way, what designs of grace God had towards this
man and his family:

saying, do thyself no harm; which is an instance of great tenderness,
humanity, and love, to one that had used him and his companion with so
much severity and cruelty:

for we are all here; not only Paul and Silas, but the rest of the
prisoners also; who either being so intent upon hearing the prayers and
praises of the apostles, or so terrified with the earthquake, that they
took no notice of their bands being loosed, and so never thought or
attempted to make their escape; and as for Paul and Silas, all this
happened to them, not for their deliverance in this way, as in the case
of Peter, but to show the power of God, what he could do, and his
presence with his servants.

[Acts 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">act 16:29</span></span>

Then he called for a light,.... Or "lights"; he ordered his servants to
bring in some candles; the Syriac version renders it, "he lighted a
light for himself"; and the Ethiopic version, "he brought a light":
whilst he was under the influence of Satan, and going about a work of
darkness, namely, to destroy himself, he was in no concern for a light;
but when he was delivered from the temptation and snare, he calls for
light:

and sprang in; leaped in at once, in all haste, into the inner prison:

and came trembling; not as before, because of the prisoners and their
escape; nor merely or so much on account of the earthquake, though the
terror of that might not be as yet over; but chiefly through the horror
of his conscience, and the dreadful sense he had of himself as a sinner,
and of his lost state and condition by nature; the law had entered into
his conscience, and had worked wrath there; the Spirit of God had
convinced him of his sin and misery, and there was a fearful looking for
of fiery indignation in him:

and fell down before Paul and Silas; not in a way of religious
adoration, for they would never have admitted that; but in token of
civil respect unto them, and of his great veneration for them, as was
the manner of the eastern people; the Syriac version renders it, "he
fell down at their feet", and so in Velesius's readings; at those feet,
which he had before made fast in the stocks: a strange change and sudden
alteration this! what is it that almighty power and efficacious grace
cannot do?

[Acts 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">act 16:30</span></span>

And brought them out,.... Of the inner prison, to some part of the
prison that was more free and open:

and said, Sirs, what must I do to be saved? he treats them with great
reverence now, and addresses them under a title and character of honour
and respect; whom but a few hours ago he despised and abhorred, and
perhaps knew no name bad enough for them; he now saw himself lost and
perishing, and wanted their instructions, advice, and assistance; and as
most persons under first awakenings are, so he was, upon the foot of
works; thinking he must do something to procure his salvation, and
desires to know what it was he must do, that he might set about it
directly; and it may be he had heard what the damsel possessed with a
spirit of divination had frequently said of Paul and Silas, that they
were the servants of the most high God, and showed unto men the way of
salvation, [Act 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017.md) and therefore he
desires that they would acquaint him with it: his language shows, he was
in earnest, and expresses great eagerness, importunity, and haste.

[Acts 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">act 16:31</span></span>

And they said, believe in the Lord Jesus Christ,.... Not with a bare
historical faith, as only to believe that he was the Son of God, and the
Messiah, and that he was come in the flesh, and had suffered, and died,
and rose again, and was now in heaven at the right hand of God, and
would come again to judge both quick and dead, for there may be such a
faith and no salvation; but so as to look unto him alone for life and
salvation, to rely upon him, and trust in him; to commit himself, and
the care of his immortal soul unto him, and to expect peace, pardon,
righteousness, and eternal life from him; the answer is much the same
our Lord returned to the Jews, when they asked, though not with the same
affection and sincerity as this man, what they must do to work the works
of God, [Joh 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#028.md).

And thou shalt be saved; from sin, and all its miserable effects and
consequences; from the curses of the law, from the power of Satan, from
the evil of the world, from the wrath of God, hell and damnation: this
is to be understood of a spiritual and eternal salvation; for it is
said, after that the jailer was inquiring about it, being terrified in
his conscience with a sense of sin and wrath; and between believing in
Christ, and being saved with an everlasting salvation, there is a strict
and inseparable connection, [Mar 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016.md)
though not faith, but Christ is the cause and author of salvation; faith
spies salvation in Christ, goes to him for it, receives it from him, and
believes unto it:

and thy house; or family, provided they believe in Christ also, as they
did, [Act 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#034.md) or otherwise there can
be no salvation, for he that believeth not shall be damned.

[Acts 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">act 16:32</span></span>

And they spake unto him the word of the Lord,.... That is, the Gospel;
which comes from the Lord Jesus Christ, as the author of it; and is
concerning him, as the subject matter of it, and is what was preached by
himself when on earth; this is the word, which is called the word of
salvation, the word of reconciliation and peace, the word of life, the
word of righteousness, and the word of faith; because it publishes
salvation by Christ, peace and reconciliation by his blood, life by his
death, his righteousness for justification, and proposes him as the
object of faith, and encourages souls to believe in him; and faith comes
by it, and it contains things to be believed: and this word Paul and
Silas spake to the jailer, and opened and explained it to him for his
comfort, and for the encouragement of his faith in Christ:

and to all that were in his house; his whole family, who were all
alarmed by the earthquake, and were got together into the prison; for it
seems as if, after this, the jailer had them into his dwelling house,
[Act 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#034.md). These appear to be adult
persons, such as were capable of having the word of the Lord spoken to
them, and of hearing it, so as to believe in it, and rejoice at it, for
faith came to them by hearing.

[Acts 16:33](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">act 16:33</span></span>

And he took them the same hour of the night,.... After they had done
preaching to him, and to his family:

and washed their stripes; which were very many and heavy, and whereby
they were covered with blood; and which by this time began to fester,
and to produce corrupt matter; and all this in a pool, which Grotius
supposes was within the bounds of the prison, he washed off from them:
his faith worked by love, and showed itself in fruits of charity and
righteousness, and in obedience to Christ, and submission to his
ordinance, as follows:

and was baptized, he and all his, straightway; by immersion, that being
the only way in which baptism was administered, or can be, so as to be
called a baptism: and which might be administered, either in the pool,
which Grotius supposes to have been in the prison; or in the river near
the city, where the oratory was, [Act
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#013.md) and it is no unreasonable
thought to suppose, that they might go out of the prison thither, and
administer the ordinance, and return to the prison again before morning
unobserved by any; and after that, enter into the jailer's house and be
refreshed, as in the following verse; and as this instance does not at
all help the cause of sprinkling, so neither the baptism of infants; for
as the jailer's family were baptized as well as he, so they had the word
of the Lord spoken to them as well as he, and believed as well as he,
and rejoiced as he did; all which cannot be said of infants; and
besides, it must be proved that he had infants in his house, and that
these were taken out of their beds in the middle of the night, and
baptized by Paul, ere the instance can be thought to be of any service
to infant baptism.

[Acts 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">act 16:34</span></span>

And when he had brought them into his house,.... After he and his family
had been baptized, either in the pool in the prison, or in the river
near the city of Philippi:

he set meat before them; he spread a table for them, with provisions to
refresh them after all their fatigue; partly by stripes and
imprisonment, partly by the exercises of prayer and praise, and also by
the ministration of the word, and the administration of the ordinance of
baptism to the jailer and his family:

and rejoiced, believing in God with all his house; he and his rejoiced
at the good news, of peace and pardon, righteousness, life, and
salvation, which the Gospel brought unto them; they rejoiced in Christ
Jesus, in his person, offices, grace and righteousness; believing in him
who is truly and properly God, they were filled with joy unspeakable,
and full of glory; with a joy that always attends true faith, and which
a stranger intermeddles not with; and they rejoiced that they were
admitted to the ordinance of Christ, and were among his baptized
followers; so the eunuch, after baptism, went on his way rejoicing, [Act
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#039.md).

[Acts 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">act 16:35</span></span>

And when it was day,.... In one copy Beza says, these words are added,

"the magistrates came together in one place in the court, and
remembering the earthquake that was made, they were afraid, and sent the
sergeants;''

but they seem to be no other than a gloss, which crept into the text;
however, it seems reasonable to suppose, that in the morning the
magistrates met together, to consider what was further to be done with
Paul and Silas; when upon cooler thoughts, they judged it best to be
content with what punishment they had inflicted on them, and dismiss
them; and if they had felt anything of the earthquake, or had heard of
it in the prison, and of the converts that had been made there, they
might be the more induced to let them go:

the magistrates sent the sergeants, saying, let these men go; the Arabic
version reads, "these two men"; that is, Paul and Silas: who these
sergeants were, is not very certain; they seem to be so called in the
Greek language, from their carrying rods, or little staves in their
hands, and were a sort of apparitors; by these the magistrates sent
orders, either by word of mouth, or in writing, to the jailer, to let
Paul and Silas out of prison, and set them at liberty, to go where they
would; the same power that shook the foundations of the prison, and
loosed the bands of the prisoners, wrought upon the hearts of the
magistrates, to let the apostles go free.

[Acts 16:36](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">act 16:36</span></span>

And the keeper of the prison told this, saying to Paul,.... The Ethiopic
version adds, "and to Silas"; this was the same person with the jailer,
whom Paul had baptized; and indeed, the same word is here used, though a
little differently rendered, who no doubt reported this message to Paul
with great joy:

the magistrates have sent to let you go; they have sent an order to let
you out of prison:

now therefore depart, and go in peace; which expresses the jailer's
pleasure of mind, and joy of heart, in executing his orders; and his
sincere and hearty wishes for peace and prosperity to go along with them
wherever they went, who had been instrumental of so much good to him and
his family.

[Acts 16:37](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">act 16:37</span></span>

But Paul said unto them,.... The sergeants, who were present when the
jailer reported to Paul the message they came with from the magistrates;
though the Syriac version reads in the singular number, "Paul said to
him", to the jailer:

they have beaten us openly uncondemned, being Romans, and have cast us
into prison; what the magistrates ordered to be done to them, is
reckoned all one as if they had done it themselves; and which was done
"openly", before all the people, in the most public manner; to their
great reproach, being put to open shame, as if they had been the most
notorious malefactors living; when they were "uncondemned", had done
nothing worthy of condemnation, being innocent and without fault, as the
Syriac and Ethiopic versions render the word; nor was their cause heard,
or they suffered to make any defence for themselves; and what was an
aggravation of all this, that this was done in a Roman colony, and by
Roman magistrates; and to persons that were Romans, at least one of
them, Paul, who was of the city of Tarsus: for, according to the Porcian
and Sempronian laws, a Roman citizen might neither be bound nor beaten
(n); but these magistrates, not content to beat Paul and Silas, without
knowing the truth of their case, had cast them into prison as
malefactors, and for further punishment:

and now do they thrust us out privily? nay, verily; or so it shall not
be: this shows, that the apostle was acquainted with the Roman laws, as
well as with the rites and customs of the Jews; and acted the wise and
prudent, as well as the honest and harmless part; and this he did, not
so much for the honour of the Roman name, as for the honour of the
Christian name; for he considered, that should he and his companion go
out of the prison in such a private manner, it might be taken for
granted, that they had been guilty of some notorious offence, and had
justly suffered the punishment of the law for it, which would have been
a reproach to Christianity, and a scandal to the Gospel: wherefore the
apostle refuses to go out in this manner, adding,

but let them come themselves, and fetch us out; that by so doing, they
might own the illegality of their proceedings, and declare the innocence
of the apostles.

\(n\) Cicero orat. 10. in Verrem, l. 5. p. 603. & orat. 18. pro Rabirio,
p. 714.

[Acts 16:38](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">act 16:38</span></span>

And the sergeants told these words unto the magistrates,.... They
returned to them, and acquainted them with what the prisoners said:

and they feared when they heard that they were Romans; they were not
concerned for the injury they had done them; nor for the injustice and
cruelty they had been guilty of; nor did they fear the wrath of God, and
a future judgment; but they were put into a panic, when they found the
men they had so ill used were Romans; lest they should be called to an
account by the Roman senate, and be found guilty, and have their places
taken away from them, and their persons punished.

[Acts 16:39](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">act 16:39</span></span>

And they came,.... To the prison in person, as Paul had insisted on they
should:

and besought them; that they would put up the injury that had been done
them, and quietly depart out of prison:

and brought them out; that is, out of prison; took them by the arms, and
led them out, as they had put them in, which was what the apostle
required:

and desired them to depart out of the city; lest there should be any
further disturbance about them: in Beza's most ancient copy, and in
another manuscript copy, this verse is read thus, and which more clearly
explains the passage;

"and they came with many friends unto the prison, and desired them to go
out, saying, we are not ignorant of your case, that you are righteous
men; and bringing them out they besought them, saying, go out of this
city, lest they (the people) should turn again upon you, crying against
you;''

which looks as if they took along with them some persons, who were
friends to the apostles as well as to them, to prevail upon them to
depart quietly; and they excuse themselves by attributing what had
passed to popular rage and fury, and pretend they consulted the safety
of the apostles, by desiring them to go out of the city.

[Acts 16:40](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">act 16:40</span></span>

And they went out of the prison,.... In a public manner, with great
honour and reputation, at the request of the magistrates that put them
there:

and entered into the house of Lydia; whom Paul had baptized, [Act
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014.md). The word "house" is rightly
supplied, for the sense is not, that they went into the country of
Lydia, as some have been tempted to think; but they went to the woman
Lydia, whose heart the Lord had opened, and was become a disciple and
follower of Christ; they went to her house it being in the city of
Philippi, where she now abode,

and when they had seen the brethren: the men of Lydia's house, her
servants, who were converted, and had been baptized with her, and are
therefore called brethren; and whomsoever else they might have been
instrumental in the conversion of, who might meet them in Lydia's house:
in Beza's above mentioned copy, it is here added, "they declared what
the Lord had done for them"; they related the earthquake and the effects
of it, and how they had been useful for the conversion of the jailer and
his family, who had been baptized by them, and by what means they were
released from prison; all which they ascribe to the Lord, who has all
power, and the hearts of all in his hands: and thus,

they comforted them; with what God had done for them, or exhorted them:
to cleave to the Lord, to continue in the faith, and abide by the truths
and ordinances of the Gospel:

and departed; that is, out of the city of Philippi; this is wanting in
the Syriac and Arabic versions here, but is placed in the beginning of
the next chapter: and now these two families, Lydia's and the jailer's,
laid the foundation of a Gospel church in this city of Philippi, and
which continued for ages after; Erastus, of whom mention is made in [Act
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#022.md) is said to be bishop of this
church, and it may be also Epaphroditus, for there were more bishops
than one in this church in the apostle's time, [Phi
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001.md), in the "second" century there was
a church, to which Ignatius and Polycarp are said to send epistles; and
there are epistles to the Philippians which go under their names, that
are still extant: in the "third" century, Tertullian (o), among other
churches, makes mention of the church at Philippi, as sound in the
faith; and in the "fourth" and "fifth" centuries we read of a church in
this place; in the "seventh" century, when it went by the name of
Chrysopolis, there was a church in it, and a bishop of it, who was
present at the sixth council in Constantinople; there were Christians
dwelling here in the "ninth" century (p).

\(o\) De praescript. Heret. c. 36. (p) Magdeburg. Hist. Eccles. cent. 4.
c. 2. p. 6. & cent. 5. c. 2. p. 6. cent. 7. c. 2. p. 3, 5. cent. 9. c.
2. p. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Acts Chapter 17](act017.md)

</div>
