<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Amos Index](amo.md)  
  [Previous](amo000)  [Next](amo002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md)

INTRODUCTION TO AMOS 1

This chapter begins with the general title of the book, in which the
author is described by name, and by his condition of life, and by his
country, and the time of his prophecy fixed, [Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md). He first foretells a drought in
the land of Israel, in the most fruitful places, which would cause
mourning among the shepherds, [Amo
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002.md); then the captivity of the
Syrians, whose metropolis was Damascus, [Amo
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003.md). Next the destruction of the
Philistines, whose principal cities were Gaza, Ashdod, Askelon, and
Ekron, [Amo 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006.md). After that the ruin
of Tyre, with the reason of it, [Amo
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009.md); then the calamities that should
come upon Edom, whose chief places were Teman and Bozrah, [Amo
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011.md); and lastly the desolations of
the Ammonites, whose metropolis, Rabbah, should be destroyed, and their
king and princes go into captivity, [Amo
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013.md); and all this for the sins of
each of these nations.

[Amos 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 1:1</span></span>

The words of Amos,.... Not which he spoke of or for himself, but from
the Lord; all the prophecies, visions, and revelations made unto him,
are intended:

who was among the herdsmen of Tekoa; which was not in the tribe of
Asher, as Kimchi; nor of Zebulun, as Pseudo-Epiphanius (i); but in the
tribe of Judah, [Ch2 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#005.md). It lay to
the south, and was six miles from Bethlehem. Mr. Maundrell (k) says it
is nine miles distant, to the south of it; and, according to Jerom (l),
it was twelve miles from Jerusalem; though he elsewhere (m) says,
Thecua, or Tekoa, is a village at this day, nine miles from Aelia or
Jerusalem, of which place was Amos the prophet, and where his sepulchre
is seen: either there is a mistake of the number, or of Aelia for
Bethlehem; the former rather seems to be the case; according to Josephus
(n), it was not far from the castle of Herodium. The Misnic doctors (o)
speak of it as famous for oil, where the best was to be had; near to it
was a wilderness, called the wilderness of Tekoa; and Jerom (p) says,
that beyond it there was no village, nor so much as huts and cottages,
but a large wilderness, which reached to the Red sea, and to the borders
of the Persians, Ethiopians, and Indians, and was full of shepherds,
among whom Amos was; whether he was a master herdsman, or a servant of
one, is not said. The word is used of the king of Moab, who is said to
be a "sheepmaster", [Kg2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004.md); he
traded in cattle, and got riches thereby; and so the Targum here renders
it,

"who was lord or master of cattle;''

and Kimchi interprets it, he was a great man among the herdsmen; and so
it was a piece of self-denial to leave his business, and go to
prophesying; but rather he was a servant, and kept cattle for others,
which best agrees with [Amo 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#014.md); and
so is expressive of the grace of God in calling so mean a person to such
a high office. The word used signifies to mark; and shepherds were so
called from marking their sheep to distinguish them, which seems to be
the work of servants; and, in the Arabic language, a kind of sheep
deformed, and of short feet, are so called:

which he saw concerning Israel; or, against Israel (q), the ten tribes,
to whom he was sent, and against whom he prophesied chiefly; for he says
very little of Judah. Words are more properly said to be spoken or
heard; but here they are said to be seen; which shows that not bare
words are meant, but things, which the prophet had revealed to him in a
visionary way, and he delivered; see [Isa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#001.md);

in the days of Uzziah king of Judah; who was also called Azariah, [Kg2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001.md);

and in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel; so he is
called to distinguish him from Jeroboam the son of Nebat; this king was
the grandson of Jehu; he was, as Jerom says, before Sardanapalus reigned
over the Assyrians, and Procas Sylvius over the Latines:

two years before the earthquake; which was well known in those times,
and fresh in memory. Zechariah speaks of it many years after, from whom
we learn it was in the days of Uzziah, [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005.md). The Jewish writers generally say
that it was when Uzziah was smote with leprosy for invading the priest's
office; and was in the year in which he died, when Isaiah had a vision
of the glory of the Lord, and the posts of the house moved, [Isa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#001); and with whom Josephus (r.md)
agrees; who also relates, that the temple being rent by the earthquake,
the bright light of the sun shone upon the king's face, and the leprosy
immediately seized him; and, at a place before the city called Eroge,
half part of a mountain towards the west was broken and rolled half a
mile towards the eastern part, and there stood, and stopped up the ways,
and the king's gardens; but this cannot be true, as Theodoret observes;
since, according to this account, Amos must begin to prophesy in the
fiftieth year of Uzziah; for he reigned fifty two years, and he began
his reign in the twenty seventh year of Jeroboam, [Kg2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001.md); who reigned forty one years,
[Kg2 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#023.md); so that Uzziah and he were
contemporary fourteen years only, and Jeroboam must have been dead
thirty six years when it was the fiftieth of Uzziah; whereas they are
here represented as contemporary when Amos began to prophesy, which was
but two years before the earthquake; so that this earthquake must be in
the former and not the latter part of Uzziah's reign, and consequently
not when he was stricken with the leprosy.

\(i\) De Vita Prophet. c. 12. (k) Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem, p.
88. (l) Proem. in Amos & Comment. in Jer. vi. 1. (m) De locis Hebr. in
voce Elthei, fol. 91. B. (n) De Bello Jud. l. 4. c. 9. sect. 5. (o)
Misn. Menachot, c. 8. sect. 3. (p) Proem. in Amos. (q) "contra
Israelem", so some in Drusius. (r) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 10. sect. 4.

[Amos 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 1:2</span></span>

And he said,.... That is, the Prophet Amos, before described; he, being
under divine inspiration, said as follows:

the Lord will roar from Zion, and utter his voice from Jerusalem; not
from Samaria, nor from Dan and Bethel, but from Zion and Jerusalem,
where the temple of the Lord stood; and out of the holy of holies in it,
where was the seat of the divine Majesty; and his voice being compared
to the roaring of a lion, denotes his wrath and vengeance; and is
expressive of some terrible threatening prophecy he would send from
hence, by one or other of his prophets; perhaps Amos may mean himself;
and who, having been a shepherd or herdsman in the wilderness, had often
heard the terrible roaring of the lion, to which he compares his
prophecy concerning the judgments of God on nations. Some think
reference is had to the earthquake, as Aben Ezra; and which might be
attended with thunder and lightning, the voice of God:

and the habitations of the shepherds shall mourn; that is, the huts or
cottages they dwell in, erected for the more convenient care of their
flocks; these, by a figure, are said to mourn, because exposed to the
violent heat of the sun in this time of drought; or because forsaken by
the shepherds; or it may design the shepherds themselves that dwelled in
them, that should mourn because there was no pasture for their flocks,
the grass being dried up, and withered away: and indeed it may be
rendered, "the pastures of the shepherds shall mourn" (s); being
destroyed by the drought, as the cattle upon them are said to mourn and
groan, [Joe 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#018.md);

and the top of Carmel shall wither; a fruitful mountain in the land of
Israel; there were two of this name, one in the tribe of Judah, near
which Nabal dwelt, [Sa1 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#002.md); another
in the tribe of Asher, near to Ptolemais or Aco; some think the former
is meant, as being nearer Tekoa, and more known to Amos; others the
latter, because Israel or the ten tribes are prophesied against; though
Carmel may be taken for any and all fruitful places in the land; and the
top or chief of it withering may signify the destruction of everything
pleasant and useful. Some think Amos speaks figuratively in the language
of a herdsman or shepherd, as artificers and mechanics do in their own
way (t); and so by "shepherds" he means kings and princes; and, by their
"habitations", their kingdoms, cities, towns, and palaces; and, by
"Carmel", their wealth, riches, and precious things, which should all be
destroyed; and to this agrees the Targum,

"the habitations of kings shall become desolate, and the strength of
their fortresses shall be made a desert.''

\(s\) "pascua pastorum", Vatablus, Piscator, Grotius, Burkius. (t)
"Navita de ventis, de tauris narrat arator, Enumerat miles vulnera,
pastor oves". Propert. I. 2. Eleg. 1.

[Amos 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 1:3</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord,.... Lest it should be thought that the words that
Amos spoke were his own, and he spake them of himself, this and the
following prophecies are prefaced in this manner; and he begins with the
nations near to the people of Israel and Judah, who had greatly
afflicted them, and for that reason would be punished; which is
foretold, to let Israel see that those judgments on them did not come by
chance; and lest they should promise themselves impunity from the
prosperity of these sinful nations; and to awaken them to a sense of
their sin and danger, who might expect the visitation of God for their
transgressions; as also to take off all offence at the prophet, who
began not with them, but with their enemies:

for three transgressions of Damascus, and for four, I will not turn away
the punishment thereof; Damascus was an ancient city; it was in the
times of Abraham, [Gen 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002.md). It was
the "metropolis" of Syria, [Isa 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008.md);
and so Pliny calls it, "Damascus of Syria" (u). Of the situation of this
place, and the delightfulness of it; see Gill on [Jer
49:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#025.md); and of its founder, and the
signification of its name; see Gill on [Act
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002.md); to which may be added, that
though Justin (w) says it had its name from Damascus, a king of it
before Abraham and Israel, whom he also makes kings of it; and Josephus
(x) would have Uz the son of Aram the founder of it, to which Bochart
(y) agrees; yet the Arabic writers ascribe the building of it to others;
for the Arabs have a tradition, as Schultens (z) says, that there were
Canaanites anciently in Syria; for they talk of Dimashc the son of
Canaan, who built the famous city of Damascus, and so it should seem to
be called after his name; and Abulpharagius (a) says, that Murkus or
Murphus, as others call him, king of Palestine, built the city of
Damascus twenty years before the birth of Abraham: from this place many
things have their names, which continue with us to this day, as the
"damask" rose, and the "damascene" plum, transplanted from the gardens
that were about it, for which it was famous; and very probably the
invention of the silk and linen called "damasks" owes its rise from
hence. It is here put for the whole country of Syria, and the
inhabitants of it, for whose numerous transgressions, signified by
"three" and "four", the Lord would not turn away his fury from them,
justly raised by their sins; or the decree which he had passed in his
own mind, and now made a declaration of, he would not revoke; or not
inflict the punishment they had deserved, and he had threatened. The
sense is, that he would not spare them, or have mercy on them, or defer
the execution of punishment any longer; he would not forgive their
transgressions. So the Targum,

"I will not pardon them.''

De Dieu refers it to the earthquake before mentioned, that God would not
turn away that, but cause it to come, as he had foretold, for the
transgressions of these, and other nations after spoken of; but rather
it refers to Damascus; and so some render it, "I will not turn", or
"convert it" (b); to repentance, and so to my mercy; but leave it in its
sins, and to my just judgments. Kimchi thinks that this respects four
particular seasons, in which Damascus, or the Syrians, evilly treated
and distressed the people of Israel; first in the times of Baasha; then
in the times of Ahab; a third time in the days of Jehoahaz the son of
Jehu; and the fourth in the times of Ahaz; and then they were punished
for them all:

because they have threshed Gilead with threshing instruments of iron;
that is,

"the inhabitants of the land of Gilead,''

as the Targum; this country lay beyond Jordan, and was inhabited by the
Reubenites and Gadites and the half tribe of Manasseh; who were used in
a very cruel manner, by Hazael king of Syria, as was foretold by Elisha,
[Kg2 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#012.md); not literally, as in [Sa2
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031.md); but by him they were beat,
oppressed, and crushed, as the grain of the threshingfloor; which used
to be threshed out by means of a wooden instrument stuck with iron
teeth, the top of which was filled with stones to press it down, and so
drawn to and fro over the sheaves of corn, by which means it was beaten
out, to which the allusion is here; See Gill on [Co1
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009.md). This was done by Hazael king of
Syria, who is said to destroy the people, and make them "like the dust
by threshing", [Kg2 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#032.md).

\(u\) Nat. Hist. l. 36. c. 8. (w) E Trogo, l. 36. c. 2. (x) Antiqu. l.
1. c. 6. sect. 4. (y) Phaleg. l. 2. c. 8. (z) Apud Universal History,
vol. 2. p. 280. (a) Hist. Dynast. p. 13. (b) "non convertam eam",
Montanus, Vatablus, Drusius.

[Amos 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 1:4</span></span>

But I will send a fire into the house of Hazael,.... For so doing; into
his family, his sons' sons, one of whom perhaps was Rezin, that
Tiglathpileser king of Assyria slew, as Aben Ezra observes. This denotes
the judgments of God upon his posterity for his cruel usage of the
Israelites; and designs an enemy that should come into his country, and
war made in the midst of it, by which it should be depopulated; and this
being by the permission and providence of God, and according to his
will, is said to be sent by him:

which shall devour the palaces of Benhadad; a name frequently given to
the kings of Syria; there was one of this name the immediate predecessor
of Hazael, whose servant he was; and he left a son of the same name that
succeeded him, [Kg2 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2007.htm#007.md); these may
denote the royal palaces of the kings of Syria, which should not be
spared in this time of desolation; though rather by them may be intended
the temples, which he and Hazael are said by Josephus (c) to build in
the city of Damascus, whereby they greatly adorned it; and for these and
other acts of beneficence they were deified by the Syrians, and
worshipped as gods; and even to the times of Josephus, he says, their
statues were carried in pomp every day in honour of them; and so, the
house of Hazael, in the preceding clause, may signify a temple that was
either built by him, or for the worship of him, since he was deified as
well as Benhadad; and it may be observed, that as Adad was a common name
of the kings of Syria; for, according to Nicholas of Damascus (d), ten
kings that reigned in Damascus were all called Adad; so this is a name
of the god they worshipped. Pliny speaks of a god worshipped by the
Syrians, whose name must be Adad; since, according to him; the gem
"adadunephros" had its name from him (e); and Macrobius (f) is express
for it, that the chief god of the Assyrians was called Adad, which
signifies one; See Gill on [Isa 66:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#017.md).

\(c\) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 4. sect. 6. (d) Apud Joseph. Antiqu. l. 7. c. 5.
sect. 8. (e) Nat. Hist. l. 27. c. 11. (f) Saturnal. l. 1. c. 23.

[Amos 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 1:5</span></span>

I will break also the bar of Damascus,.... Or bars, the singular for the
plural, by which the gates of the city were barred; and, being broken,
the gates would be easily opened, and way made for the enemy to pass
into the city and spoil it; or it may signify the whole strength and all
the fortifications of it. So the Targum,

"I will break the strength of Damascus:''

and cut off the inhabitant from the plain of Aven; or, "of an idol", as
the Vulgate Latin version. It is thought to be some place where idols
were worshipped by the Syrians; their gods were the gods of the valleys,
which they denied the God of Israel to be, [Kg1
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#023). Mr. Maundrell (g.md) says, that
near Damascus there is a plain still called the valley of Bocat, and
which he thinks is the same with this Bicataven, as it is in the Hebrew
text; and which lies between Libanus and Antilibanus, near to the city,
of Heliopolis and the Septuagint and Arabic versions here call this
valley the plain of On, which Theodoret interprets of an idol called On.
Father Calmet (h) takes it to be the same with Heliopolis, now called
Balbec, or Baalbeck, the valley of Baal; where was a famous temple
dedicated to the sun, the magnificent remains whereof are still at this
day visible. Balbec is mentioned by the Arabians as the wonder of Syria;
and one of their lexicographers says it is three days' journey from
Damascus, where are wonderful foundations, and magnificent vestiges of
antiquity, and palaces with marble columns, such as in the whole world
are nowhere else to be seen; and such of our European travellers as have
visited it are so charmed with what they beheld there, that they are at
a loss how to express their admiration. On the southwest of the town,
which stands in a "delightful plain" on the west foot of Antilibanus, is
a Heathen temple, with the remains of some other edifices, and, among
the rest, of a magnificent palace (i): Some late travellers (k) into
these parts tell us, that

"upon a rising ground near the northeast extremity of this "plain", and
immediately under Antilibanus, is pleasantly situated the city of
Balbec, between Tripoli of Syria, and Damascus, and about sixteen hours
distant from each.----This plain of Bocat (they say) might by a little
care be made one of the richest and most fertile spots in Syria; for it
is more fertile than the celebrated vale of Damascus, and better watered
than the rich plains of Esdraelon and Rama. In its present neglected
state it produces grain, some good grapes, but very little wood.--It
extends in length from Balbec almost to the sea; its direction is from
northeast by north, to southwest by south; and its breadth from Libanus
to Antilibanus is guessed to be in few places more than twelve miles, or
less than six.''

It seems to be the same with Bicatlebanon, or the valley of Lebanon,
[Jos 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#017.md); and with that which Strabo
(l) calls the hollow plain; the breadth of which to the sea (he says) is
twenty five miles, and the length from the sea to the midland is double
that:

and him that holdeth the sceptre from the house of Eden; that is, the
king from his pleasure house; or it may be understood of the name of
some place in Syria, where the kings of it used sometimes to be, and had
their palace there, called Betheden; and it seems there is still a place
near Damascus, on Mount Libanus, called Eden, as the above traveller
says; and Calmet (m) takes it to be the same that is here spoken of:

and the people of Syria shall go into captivity unto Kir, saith the
Lord; which last clause is added for the certainty of it, and
accordingly it was punctually fulfilled; for in the times of Rezin,
which was about fifty years after this prophecy of Amos, though Kimchi
says but twenty five, Tiglathpileser king of Assyria came up against
Damascus, took it, and carried the people captive to Kir, [Kg2
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009.md). The Targum and Vulgate Latin
version call it Cyrene, which some understand of Cyrene in Egypt; see
[Act 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#010.md); but this cannot be, since
it was in the hands of the king of Assyria; but rather Kir in Media is
meant; see [Isa 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006.md); which was under
his dominion; and so Josephus says (n), that he carried captive the
inhabitants of Damascus into Upper Media.

\(g\) Journey from Aleppo to Jerusalem, p. 119, 120. Ed. 7. (h)
Dictionary, in the word "Heliopolis". (i) Universal History, vol. 2. p.
266. (k) Authors of "The Ruins of Balbec". (l) Geograph. l. 16. p. 519.
(m) Dictionary, in the word "Eden". (n) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 12. sect. 3.

[Amos 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">amo 1:6</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of Gaza,.... The chief
city of the Philistines, and put for the whole country, and designs the
inhabitants of it:

and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; See Gill on
[Amo 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003.md);

because they carried away captive the whole captivity; which cannot be
understood of the captivity of the whole nation, either of Israel or
Judah, who were never carried captive by the Philistines; but of their
carrying away all the substance of the house of Jehoram king of Judah,
and of all his sons and his wives, and left him not one son but the
youngest, [Ch2 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#017.md);

to deliver them up to Edom: or, "to shut them up in Edom" (o); which
country also revolted from Jehoram, when he and the captains of his
chariots going out against them, were corn passed in by them, [Amo
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#008.md). Some think this refers to the
time when Sennacherib invaded Judea, and many of the Jews fled to
Palestine for help, but instead of being sheltered were delivered up to
the Edomites; but this was in the times of Hezekiah, after Amos had
prophesied, and therefore cannot be referred to; and for the same reason
this cannot be applied to the Edomites and Philistines invading and
smiting Judah, and carrying them captive, [Ch2
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#017.md).

\(o\) , Sept. "ut concluderent eam in Idumea", V. L. "ad concludeadum in
Edom", Montanus.

[Amos 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 1:7</span></span>

But I will send a fire on the wall of Gaza,.... An enemy that shall pull
down and destroy the walls of it: this was fulfilled in the times of
Uzziah, under whom Amos prophesied; and very likely in a very short time
after this prophecy, who went out and warred against the Philistines,
and broke down the wall of Gaza, [Ch2
26:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#006.md); or else in the times of
Hezekiah, who smote the Philistines unto Gaza, and the borders thereof,
[Kg2 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#008.md); or however in the times of
Nebuchadnezzar, according to the prophecy of Jeremiah, [Jer
25:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#020.md); as also in the times of
Alexander the great, who, after he had taken Tyre, besieged Gaza, and
after two months' siege took it, as Diodorus Siculus relates (p); the
wall being undermined and thrown down, he entered in at the ruins of it,
as Curtius (q) says; in the times of the Maccabees the suburbs of it
were burnt by Jonathan, and the place taken:

"61 From whence he went to Gaza, but they of Gaza shut him out;
wherefore he laid siege unto it, and burned the suburbs thereof with
fire, and spoiled them. 62 Afterward, when they of Gaza made
supplication unto Jonathan, he made peace with them, and took the sons
of their chief men for hostages, and sent them to Jerusalem, and passed
through the country unto Damascus.'' (1 Maccabees 11)

which shall devour the palaces thereof; the palaces of the governor, and
of other great men in it; (the governor of it, when Alexander took it,
was Batis;) and the stately towers of it, of which there were many. This
city was about fifteen miles south of Askelon, and about four or five
north of the river Bezor, and at a small distance from the
Mediterranean. It was situated on an eminence, surrounded with the most
beautiful and fertile valleys, watered by the above mentioned river, and
a number of other springs; and at a further distance encompassed on the
inland side with hills, all planted with variety of fine fruit trees.
The city itself was strong, both by its situation, and by the stout
"walls" and stately "bowers" that surrounded it, and built after the
Philistine manner (r) Arrian also says (s), it was a great city built on
high ground, and encompassed with a strong wall, and was distant from
the sea at least two and a half miles; See Gill on [Act
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#026.md).

\(p\) Bibliothec. tom. 2. l. 17. p. 526. (q) Hist. l. 4. c. 5, 6. (r)
Universal History, vol. 2. p. 490. (s) De Expeditione Alex. l. 2. p.
150.

[Amos 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 1:8</span></span>

I will cut off the inhabitants from Ashdod,.... The same with Azotus,
[Act 8:40](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#040.md); another principal city of
the Philistines: this perhaps was fulfilled when Tartan was sent against
it by Sargon king of Assyria, and took it, [Isa
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#001.md); or however in the times of the
Maccabees, when Jonathan took it, and burnt it, and the cities round
about it; and took their spoils, and burnt the temple of Dagon, and
those that fled to it; and what with those that were burnt, and those
that fell by the sword, there perished about eight thousand,

"84 But Jonathan set fire on Azotus, and the cities round about it, and
took their spoils; and the temple of Dagon, with them that were fled
into it, he burned with fire. 85 Thus there were burned and slain with
the sword well nigh eight thousand men.'' (1 Maccabees 10)

this was so strong a place, that, according to Herodotus (t), it held
out a siege of twenty nine years, under Psammitichus king of Egypt. It
was, according to Diodorus Siculus (u), thirty four miles, from Gaza
before mentioned; and it was about eight or nine from Ashkelon, and
fourteen or fifteen from Ekron after mentioned:

and him that holdeth the sceptre from Ashkelon; another of the five
lordships of the Philistines, whose king or governor should be cut off,
with the inhabitants of it; this was done by Nebuchadnezzar, [Jer
47:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#005.md). This place was about fifteen
miles from Gaza, Mr. Sandys (w) says ten, but it was eight or nine miles
from Ashdod; and, as Josephus (x) says, was sixty five miles from
Jerusalem. It was the birth place of Herod the great, who from thence is
called an Ashkelonite; but the king or governor of it was cut off before
his time. It was governed by kings formerly. Justin (y) makes mention of
a king of Ashkelon; according to the Samaritan interpreter, [Gen
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001.md); it is the same with Gerar, which
had a king in the times of Abraham; hence a sceptre is here ascribed to
it:

and I will turn mine hand against Ekron: to destroy that; another of the
chief cities of the Philistines. It was about ten miles from Gath; four
of the five lordships are here mentioned, but not Gath, which was the
fifth; see [Sa1 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#017.md); because, as
Kimchi says, it was in the hands of Judah. All these places were
inhabited by Heathens, and guilty of gross idolatry, which must be one
of the transgressions for which they were punished. Gaza was a place
much given to idolatry, as it was even in later times; when other
neighbouring cities embraced the Christian religion, the inhabitants of
it were violent persecutors; hence that saying of Gregory Nazianzen (z),

"who knows not the madness of the inhabitants of Gaza?''

here stood the temple of the god Marnas (a), which with the Syrians
signified the lord of men: at Ashdod or Azotus stood the temple of
Dagon, where he was worshipped, [Sa1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#002.md);

"But Jonathan set fire on Azotus, and the cities round about it, and
took their spoils; and the temple of Dagon, with them that were fled
into it, he burned with fire.'' (1 Maccabees 10:84)

Near Ashkelon, as Diodorus Siculus (b) relates, was a large and deep
lake, full of fishes; and by it was a temple of a famous goddess, called
by the Syrians Derceto, who had a woman's face, but the rest of her body
in the form of a fish; being, as the fable goes, changed into one upon
her casting herself into the above lake on a certain occasion; hence the
Syrians abstained from fishes, and worshipped them as gods. Herodotus
(c) calls this city a city of Syria, and speaks of a temple dedicated to
Urania Venus; and in the Talmud (d) mention is made of the temple of
Zeripha, or of a molten image at Ashkelon; and, besides idolatry, this
place seems to have been famous for witchcraft; for it is said (e) that
Simeon ben Shetach hung on one day at Ashkelon fourscore women for being
witches; and, at Ekron, Baalzebub or the god of the fly was worshipped:

and the remnant of the Philistines shall perish, saith the Lord God; all
the other towns and cities belonging to them, besides those mentioned;
which very likely had its accomplishment in the times of the Maccabees,
when they fell into the hands of the Jews.

\(t\) Euterpe, sive l. 2. c. 157. (u) Bibliothec. l. 19. p. 723. (w)
Travels, p. 151. (x) De Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 2. sect. 1. (y) E Trogo, l.
19. c. 3. (z) Orat. 3. adv. Julian. p. 87. (a) Hieronymul in lsa. xvii.
fol. 39. K. (b) Bibliothec. l. 2. p. 92. (c) Clio, sive l. 1. c. 105.
(d) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 11. 2. (e) T. Hieros. Sanhedrin, fol. 23.
3.

[Amos 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 1:9</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of Tyrus,.... Or Tyre, a
very ancient city in Palestine; of which See Gill on [Isa
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001.md);

and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; See Gill on
[Amo 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003.md);

because they delivered up the whole captivity to Edom: such of the
Israelites that fell into their hands, or fled to them for shelter, they
delivered up to the Edomites, their implacable adversaries, or sold them
to them, as they did to the Grecians, [Joe
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#006.md);

and remembered not the brotherly covenant; either the covenant and
agreement that should be among brethren, as the Jews and Edomites were
which the Tyrians should have remembered, and persuaded them to live
peaceably; and not have delivered the one into the hands of the other,
to be used in a cruel manner as slaves: or else the covenant made
between Hiram king of Tyre, and David king of Israel, and which was
renewed between Hiram and Solomon, on account of which they called each
other brethren, [Sa2 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011.md). The
Phoenicians, of whom, the Tyrians were the principal, are noted for
being faithless and treacherous (f). "Punica fides" (g) was the same as
"French faith" now; the perfidy of Hannibal is well known (h). Cicero
(i) says the Carthaginians, which were a colony of the Tyrians, were a
deceitful and lying people; and Virgil (k) calls the Tyrians themselves
"Tyrios bilingues", "double tongued Tyrians", which, Servius interprets
deceitful, as referring more to the mind than to the tongue; and
observes from Livy the perfidy of the Phoenicians in general, that they
have nothing true nor sacred among them; no fear of God, no regard to an
oath, nor any religion; and which are the three or four transgressions
for which they are said here they should be punished; for, besides their
ill usage of the Jews, their idolatry no doubt came into the account:
the god that was worshipped at Tyre was Hercules, by whom was meant the
sun, as Macrobius (l) observes; and as there were several Heathen gods
of this name, he whom the Tyrians worshipped is the fourth of the name
with Cicero (m); the same is the Melicarthus of Sanchoniatho (n), which
signifies the king of the city, by which Bochart (o) thinks Tyre is
intended. To be a priest of Hercules was the second honour to that of
king, as Justin (p) observes; and so careful were the Tyrians of this
deity, that they used to chain him, that he might not depart from them;
see [Jer 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#004.md); and a most magnificent
temple they had in honour of him, and which, they pretended, was
exceeding ancient, as old as the city itself, the antiquity of which
they speak extravagantly of Herodotus (q) says he saw this temple, and
which was greatly ornamented, and particularly had two pillars, one of
gold, and another of emerald; and inquiring of the priests, they told;
him it was built when their city was, ten thousand three hundred years
before that time; but according to their own historians (r), Hiram, who
lived in the days of Solomon, built the temple of Hercules, as well as
that of Astarte; for though she is called the goddess of the Sidonians,
she was also worshipped by the Tyrians; as he also ornamented the temple
of Jupiter Olympius, and annexed it to the city, which deity also it
seems had worship paid it in this place.

\(f\) Alex. ab Alex. Genial Dier. l. 5. c. 10. (g) Vid. Reinesiura de
Ling. Punic. c. 2. sect. 12. (h) Vid. Valer. Maxim. l. 9. c. 6. (i)
Contra Rullum, Orat. 16. (k) Aeneid. l. 1. (l) Saturnal. l. 1. c. 20.
(m) De Naturn Deorum, l. 3. (n) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 2. p.
38. (o) Canaan, l. 2. col. 709. (p) E Trogo, l. 18. c. 4. (q) Euterp,
sive l. 2. c. 44. (r) Meander & Dius apud Joseph. Antiqu. l. 8. c. 5.
sect. 3.

[Amos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 1:10</span></span>

But I will send a fire on the wall of Tyrus,.... An enemy to destroy the
walls of it: this was done either by Shalmaneser king of the Assyrians,
in the times of Eulaeus king of the Tyrians, of whose expedition against
it Josephus (s) makes mention: or by Nebuchadnezzar, who took it after
thirteen years' siege of it, in the time of Ithobalus (t): or by
Alexander, by whom it was taken, as Curtius (u) relates, after it had
been besieged seven months:

which shall devour the palaces thereof; of the governor, the great men
and merchants in it. Alexander ordered all to be slain but those that
fled to the temples, and fire to be put to the houses; which made it a
most desolate place, as the above historian has recorded.

\(s\) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 14. sect. 2. (t) Hist. Phoenic. apud Joseph.
contr. Apion. l. 1. c. 21. (u) Hist. l. 4. c. 4.

[Amos 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 1:11</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord for three transgressions of Edom,.... Or the
Edomites, the posterity of Esau, whose name was Edom, so called from the
red pottage he sold his birthright for to his brother Jacob:

and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; See Gill on
[Amo 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003.md). Among these three or four
transgressions, not only what follows is included, but their idolatry;
for that the Edomites had their idols is certain, though what they were
cannot be said; see [Ch2 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014.md);

because he did pursue his brother with the sword: not Esau his brother
Jacob; for though he purposed in his heart to slay him, which obliged
him to flee; and frightened him, upon his return, by meeting him with
four hundred men; yet he never pursued him with the sword; but his
posterity, the Edomites, not only would not suffer the Israelites their
brethren to pass by their borders, but came out against them with a
large army, [Num 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#018.md); and in the
times of Ahaz they came against Judah with the sword, and smote them,
and carried away captives, [Ch2 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#017.md);
and were at the taking and destruction of Jerusalem, and assisted and
encouraged in it, [Psa 137:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#007.md); though
to these latter instances the prophet could have no respect, because
they were after his time:

and did cast off all pity; bowels of compassion, natural affection, such
as ought to be between brethren, even all humanity: or "corrupted", or
"destroyed all pity" (w); showed none, but extinguished all sparks of
it, as their behaviour to the Israelites showed, when upon their borders
in the wilderness:

and his anger did tear perpetually; it was deeply rooted in them; it
began in their first father Esau, on account of the blessing and
birthright Jacob got from him; and it descended from father to son in
all generations, and was vented in a most cruel manner, like the
ravening of a lion, or any other beast of prey:

and kept his wrath for ever; reserved it in their breasts till they had
an opportunity of showing it, as Esau their father proposed to do, [Gen
27:41](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#041.md).

\(w\) "corrupert misericordias suas", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus;
"corrumpens miserationes suas", Junius & Tremellius; "corrupit",
Piscator, Cocceius.

[Amos 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 1:12</span></span>

But I will send a fire upon Teman,.... A principal city of Edom or
Idumea, so called from Teman a grandson of Esau, [Gen
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#011). Jerom (x.md) says there was in his
time a village called Theman, five miles distant from the city Petra,
and had a Roman garrison; and so says Eusebius (y); who places it in
Arabia Petraea; it is put for the whole country; it signifies the south.
So the Targum renders it,

"a fire in the south.''

The "fire" signifies an enemy that should be sent into it, and destroy
it: this was Nebuchadnezzar, who, as Josephus (z) says, five years after
the destruction of Jerusalem led his army into Coelesyria, and took it;
and fought against the Ammonites and Moabites, and very probably at the
same time against the Edomites:

which shall devour the palaces of Bozrah; another famous city of the
Edomites; there was one of this name in Moab; either there were two
cities so called, one in Edom, and another in Moab; or rather this city
lay, as Jarchi says, between Edom and Moab; and so sometimes is placed
to one, and sometimes to another, its it might belong to the one and to
the other, according to the event of war. It is the same with Bezer in
the wilderness, appointed a Levitical city, and a city of refuge, by
Joshua, [Jos 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008.md); and belonged to the
tribe of Reuben; but being on the borders of that tribe, and of Moab and
Edom, it is ascribed to each, as they at different times made themselves
masters of it. It is the same with Bostra, which Ptolemy (a) places in
Arabia Petraea; and being on the confines of Arabia Deserts, and
surrounded on all sides with wild deserts, it is commonly spoken of as
situated in a wilderness, Jerom (b) speaks of it as a city of Arabia in
the desert, to the south, looking to Damascus; and, according to the
Persian (c) geographer, it is four days' journey southward from
Damascus; and Eusebius places it at the distance of twenty four miles
from Adraa or Edrei. The destruction of this place is prophesied of by
Jeremiah, [Jer 48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024.md); and perhaps
these prophecies were accomplished when Nebuchadnezzar made war with the
Ammonites and Edomites, as before observed; or however in the times of
the Maccabees, when Judas Maccabeus took this city, put all the males to
the sword, plundered it, and then set fire to it, which literally
fulfilled this prophecy,

"Hereupon Judas and his host turned suddenly by the way of the
wilderness unto Bosora; and when he had won the city, he slew all the
males with the edge of the sword, and took all their spoils, and burned
the city with fire,'' (1 Maccabees 5:28)

It was afterwards rebuilt, and became a considerable city; in the time
of the above Persian geographer (d), it had a very strong castle
belonging to it, a gate twenty cubits high, and one of the largest
basins or pools of water in all the east. In the fourth century there
were bishops of this place, which assisted in the councils of Nice,
Antioch, Ephesus, and Chalcedon, as Reland (e) observes; though he
thinks that Bostra is not to be confounded with the Bezer of Reuben, or
with the Bozra of Moab and Edom; though they seem to be all one and the
same place.

\(x\) De locis Hebr. fol. 95. B. (y) Onomast. ad vocem (z) Antiqu. l.
10. c. 9. sect. 7. (a) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17. (b) De locis Hebr. in voce
"Trachonitis", fol. 95. B. (c) Apud Calmet, Dictionary, on the word
"Bosor". (d) Apud Calmet, ut supra. (e) Palestina Illustrata, tom. 2. l.
3. p. 666.

[Amos 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 1:13</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, for three transgressions of the children of
Ammon,.... These are the descendants of Benammi, a son of Lots, by one
of his daughters, [Gen 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#038.md); are
distinguished from the Ammonites, [Ch2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#001.md); were near neighbours of the
Jews, but great enemies to them, though akin:

and for four, I will not turn away the punishment thereof; See Gill on
[Amo 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#003.md). Among these transgressions,
for which God would punish these people, are to be reckoned, not only
their ill treatment of the Gileadites after mentioned, but other sins,
which are all included in this number, and particularly their idolatry;
for idolaters they were, though the children of Lot; and originally
might have had better instruction, from which they departed. Mo or
Milcom, which signifies a king, was the abomination or idol of the
Ammonites, [Kg1 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005.md). The image of
this idol, according to the Jews, had seven chapels, and he was within
them; and his face was the face of a calf or ox; and his hands were
stretched out as a man stretches out his hands to receive anything of
his friend; and they set it on fire within, for it was hollow; and
everyone according to his offering went into these chapels; he that
offered a fowl went into the first chapel; he that offered a sheep, into
the second chapel; if a lamb, into the third; a calf, into the fourth; a
bullock, into the fifth; an ox, into the sixth; but he that offered his
son, they brought him into the seventh; and they put, the child before
Mo, and kindled a fire in the inside of him, until his hands were like
fire; and then they took the child, and put him within its arms; and
beat upon tabrets or drums, that the cry of the child might not be heard
by the father (f). Benjamin of Tudela (g) reports, that in his time, at
Gibal, the border of the children of Ammon, a day's journey from
Tripoli, was found the remains of a temple of the children of Ammon; and
an idol of theirs sitting upon a throne; and it was made of stone, and
covered with gold; and there were two women sitting, one on its right
hand, and the other on its left; and before it an altar, on which they
used to sacrifice and burn incense to it, as in the times of the
children of Ammon. Chemosh also was worshipped by the Ammonites, [Jdg
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#024.md); which was also the god of the
Moabites; of which See Gill on [Jer
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007.md);

because they have ripped up the women with child of Gilead, that they
might enlarge their border; this Hazael king of Syria did, according to
Elisha's prophecy; and very likely the children of Ammon might join with
him, inasmuch as they bordered on the countries which he smote, [Kg2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#012.md). This was an instance of shocking
cruelty and inhumanity, to destroy at once the innocent and the
impotent, though frequently done by enemies, [Kg2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#016.md). The reason of it was not only
that they might possess their land, but keep it when they had got it;
there being no heir to claim it, or molest them in the possession of it;
see [Jer 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001.md); though some read the
words, "because they divided, or cleaved the mountain of Gilead" (h); so
Aben Ezra and Kimchi, though they mention the other sense: this they did
to get into the land of Gilead, as Hannibal cut through the Alps; or
rather to remove the borders of it, and lay it even with their own, and
so enlarge theirs; which, as Kimchi says, was a very great iniquity,
being one of the curses written in the law, [Deu
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017.md); thus one sin leads on to
another. Some by "mountains" understand towers or fortified cities as
Kimchi and Ben Melech observe; such as were built on mountains, which
sense is approved by Gussetius (i).

\(f\) Yelammedenu apud Yalkut Simeoni in Jer. vii. 31. fol. 61. 4. (g)
Itinerarium, p. 33. (h) "eo quod sciderint montes", Pagninus; so some in
Drusius. (i) Ebr. Comment. p. 216.

[Amos 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 1:14</span></span>

But I will kindle a fire in the wall of Rabbah,.... Which was the
metropolis of the children of Ammon, and their royal city, [Sa2
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026.md). This is to be understood of an
enemy that should destroy it, perhaps Nebuchadnezzar; or of war being
kindled and raised in their country; this place being put for the whole;
See Gill on [Jer 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#002.md);

and it shall devour the palaces thereof; the palaces of the king, and
his nobles:

with shouting in the day of battle; with the noise of soldiers when they
make their onset, or have gained the victory; see [Jer
49:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#002.md);

with a tempest in the day of the whirlwind; denoting that this judgment
should come suddenly, and at an unawares, with great force,
irresistibly; and a tempest added to fire, if literally taken, must
spread the desolation more abundantly, and make it more terrible.

[Amos 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">amo 1:15</span></span>

And their king shall go into captivity,.... Not only the common people
that are left of the sword shall be carried captive, but their king
also. This was, Baalis their last king, who was accessary to the murder
of Gedaliah, [Jer 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#014.md); whom the king
of Babylon had set over the remnant of the Jews left in Judea; which
might provoke him to send Nebuzaradan his general against him, who put
his country to fire and sword, destroyed his chief city Rabbah, and
carried him and his nobles into captivity. Some understand this of
Milchom, or Mo, the god of the children of Ammon, who should be so far
from saving them, that he himself should be taken and carried off; it
being usual with the conquerors to carry away with them the gods of the
nations they conquered; see [Jer 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007.md).
So Ptolemy Euergetes king of Egypt, having conquered Callinicus king of
Syria, carried captive into Egypt the gods he then took, [Dan
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#008.md); and it was usual with the Romans
to carry the gods of the nations captive which they conquered, and to
carry them in their triumphs as such; so Marcellus was blamed for
rendering the city of Rome envied and hated by other nations, because
not men only, but the gods also, were carried in pomp as captives: and
of Paulus Aemylius it is said, that the first day of his triumph was
scarce sufficient for the passing along of the captive statues,
pictures, and colosses, which were drawn on two hundred and fifty
chariots (k):

he and his princes together, saith the Lord: which is repeated, and
especially the last words added, for the confirmation of it. The
Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions, read, "their priests and their
princes", as in [Jer 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#003.md). This was
fulfilled five years after the destruction of Jerusalem, as Josephus (l)
relates.

\(k\) Vid. Plutarch. in Vita Marcelli & Aemylii. (l) Antiqu. l. 10. c.
9. sect. 7. Vid. Judith i. 12.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Amos Chapter 2](amo002.md)

</div>
