<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Amos Index](amo)  
  [Previous](amo008)  [Next](oba000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Amos Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)

[Amos](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">amo 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO AMOS 9

This chapter contains the fifth and last vision the prophet saw; which
represents the certain desolation of the land, city, and temple, and the
slaughter of all sorts of persons, high and low, none should escape it,
[Amo 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001); be they where they would,
they should be found out, whether in hell or heaven, on the tops of the
highest mountains, or in the bottom of the sea, or in a foreign land,
since the eyes of the Lord were upon them for evil, [Amo
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002); nor could they hope to escape,
when they considered his greatness and his power, and what he could do,
and had done; and how they had behaved towards him, even though they
were the people he had brought out of Egypt, [Amo
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#005); but though the sinful kingdom
should be destroyed, yet not utterly, a remnant should be saved, [Amo
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008); and the chapter is concluded with
gracious promises of raising up the tabernacle of David fallen down, and
of the return of the people of Israel to their own land; and of their
settlement and continuance in it, never more to depart from it, [Amo
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011).

[Amos 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">amo 9:1</span></span>

And I saw the Lord standing upon the altar,.... Either upon the altar of
burnt offerings in the temple of Jerusalem, whither he had removed from
the cherubim; signifying his being about to depart, and that he was
displeased, and would not be appeased by sacrifice: so the Targum,

"said Amos the prophet, I saw the glory of the Lord removing from the
cherub, and it dwelt upon the altar;''

and the vision may refer to the destruction of the Jews, their city and
temple, either by the Chaldeans, or by the Romans: or rather, since the
prophecy in general, and this vision in particular, seems to respect the
ten tribes only, it was upon the altar at Bethel the Lord was seen
standing, as offended at the sacrifices there offered, and to hinder
them from sacrificing them, as well as to take vengeance on those that
offered them, [Kg1 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001);

and he said; the Lord said, either to the prophet in vision, or to one
of the angels, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi; or to the executioners of his
vengeance, the enemies of the people of Israel:

smite the lintel of the door, that the posts may shake; the upper
lintel, on which pomegranates and flowers were carved, and therefore
called "caphtor", as Kimchi thinks; this was the lintel of the door,
either of the temple at Jerusalem, as the Jewish writers generally
suppose; or rather of the temple at Bethel, see [Kg1
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#031); which was to be smitten with
such three, that the posts thereof should shake; signifying the
destruction of the whole building in a short time, and that none should
be able to go in and out thereat:

and cut them in the head, all of them; and I will slay the last of them
with the sword; which shows that the lintel and doorposts are not to be
taken literally, but figuratively; and that the smiting and cutting of
them intend the destruction of men; by the "head", the king, and the
princes, and nobles, or the priests; and, by "the last of them", the
common people, the meanest sort, or those that were left of them, as
Aben Ezra and Kimchi:

he that fleeth of them shall not flee away; he that attempts to make his
escape, and shall flee for his life, shall not get clear, but either be
stopped, or pursued and taken:

and he that escapeth of them shall not be delivered; he that does get
out of the hands of those that destroy with the sword shall not be
delivered from death, but shall die by famine or pestilence. The Targum
is,

"and he said, unless the people of the house of Israel return to the
law, the candlestick shall be extinguished, King Josiah shall be killed,
and the house destroyed, and the courts dissipated, and the vessels of
the house of the sanctuary shall go into captivity; and the rest of them
I will slay with the sword, &c.''

referring the whole to the Jews, and to the destruction of the temple at
Jerusalem.

[Amos 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">amo 9:2</span></span>

Though they dig into hell, thence shall mine hand take them,.... That
is, they that endeavour to make their escape from their enemies, though
they seek for places of the greatest secrecy and privacy; not hell, the
place of the damned; nor the grave, the repository of the dead; neither
of which they chose to he in, but rather sought to escape them; but the
deepest and darkest caverns, the utmost recesses of the earth, the very
centre of it; which, could they get into, would not secure them from the
power and providence of God, and from their enemies in pursuit of them,
by his permission:

though they climb up to heaven, thence will I bring them down; the
summit of the highest mountains, and get as near to heaven, and at as
great a distance from men, as can be, and yet all in vain. The Targum
is,

"if they think to be hid as it were in hell, from thence their enemies
shall take them by my word; and if they ascend the high mountains, to
the top of heaven, thence will I bring them;''

see [Psa 139:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#008).

[Amos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">amo 9:3</span></span>

And though they hide themselves in the top of Carmel,.... One of the
highest mountains in the land of Israel; in the woods upon it, and caves
in it:

I will search and take them out from thence: by directing their enemies
where to find them: so the Targum,

"if they think to be hid in the tops of the towers of castles, thither
will I command the searchers, and they shall search them:''

and though they be hid from my sight in the bottom of the sea; get into
ships, going by sea to distant parts; or make their escape to isles upon
the sea afar off, where they may think themselves safe:

thence will I command the serpent, and he shall bite them; the dragon
that is in the sea, [Isa 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001); the
great whale in the sea, or the leviathan, so Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben
Melech; and is that kind of whale which is called the "Zygaena", as
Bochart (w) thinks; and which he, from various writers, describes as
very monstrous, horrible, and terrible, having five rows of teeth, and
very numerous; and which not only devours other large fishes, but men
swimming it meets with; and, having such teeth, with great propriety may
be said to bite. It appears from hence that there are sea serpents, as
well as land ones, to which the allusion is. Erich Pantoppidan, the
present bishop of Bergen (x), speaks of a "see ormen", or sea snake, in
the northern seas, which he describes as very monstrous and very
terrible to seafaring men, being of seven or eight folds, each fold a
fathom distant; nay, of the length of a cable, a hundred fathom, or six
hundred English feet; yea, of one as thick as a pipe of wine, with
twenty five folds. Some such terrible creature is here respected, though
figuratively understood, and designs some crafty, powerful, and cruel
enemy. The Targum paraphrases it, though hid

"in the isles of the sea, thither will I command the people strong like
serpents, and they shall kill them;''

see [Psa 139:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#009).

\(w\) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 5. c. 13. p. 747. (x) Natural History of
Norway, par. 2. p. 198, 199, 207.

[Amos 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">amo 9:4</span></span>

And though they go into captivity before their enemies,.... Alluding to
the manner in which captives are led, being put before their enemies,
and so carried in triumph; see [Lam
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#005); though some think this refers to
their going voluntarily into a foreign country, in order to escape
danger, as Johanan the son of Kareah with the Jews went into Egypt, [Jer
43:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#005); in whom Kimchi instances:

thence will I command the sword, and it shall slay them; or them that
kill with the sword, as the Targum; so that though they thought by going
into another country, or into an enemy's country of their own accord, to
escape the sword of the enemy, or to curry favour with them, yet should
not escape:

and I will set mine eyes upon them for evil, and not for good: this is
the true reason, why, let them be where they will, they cannot be safe,
because the eyes of the omniscient God, which are everywhere, in heaven,
earth, hell, and the sea, are set upon them, for their ruin and
destruction; and there is no fleeing from his presence, or getting out
of his sight, or escaping his hand. The Targum is,

"my Word shall be against them.''

[Amos 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">amo 9:5</span></span>

And the Lord God of hosts is he that toucheth the land, and it shall
melt,.... Which is another reason why it is impossible to escape the
hands of a sin revenging God, because he is omnipotent as well as
omniscient; he is the Lord of all the armies above and below; and if he
but touch the land, any particular country, as the land of Israel, it
shakes and trembles, and falls into a flow of water, or melts like wax;
as when he toucheth the hills and mountains they smoke, being like fuel
to fire; see [Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032);

and all that dwell therein shall mourn; their houses destroyed, their
substance consumed, and all that is near and dear to them swallowed up:

and it shall rise up wholly like a flood, and shall be drowned as by the
flood of Egypt; See Gill on [Amo 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#008).

[Amos 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">amo 9:6</span></span>

It is he that buildeth his stories in the heaven,.... The three
elements, according to Aben Ezra, fire, air, and water; the orbs, as
Kimchi, one above another; a word near akin to this is rendered "his
chambers", which are the clouds, [Psa
104:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#003); perhaps the heaven, and the
heaven of heavens, which are three stories high, may be meant; we read
of the third heaven, [Co2 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#002); and
particularly the throne of God is in the highest heaven; and the
"ascents" (y) to it, as it may be rendered. The Targum is,

"who causeth to dwell in a high fortress the Shechinah of his glory:''

and hath founded his troop in the earth; this Kimchi interprets of the
three above elements. So the words are translated in the Bishops' Bible
in Queen Elizabeth's time,

"he buildeth his spheres in the heaven, and hath laid the foundation of
his globe of elements in the earth.''

Aben Ezra interprets it of animals; it may take in the whole compass of
created beings on earth; so Jarchi explains it of the collection of his
creatures; though he takes notice of another sense given, a collection
of the righteous, which are the foundation of the earth, and for whose
sake all things stand. Abarbinel interprets it of the whole of the tribe
of Israel; and so the Targum paraphrases it of his congregation or
church on earth: he beautifies his elect, which are "his bundle" (z), as
it may be rendered; who are bound up in the bundle of life with the Lord
their God, and are closely knit and united, as to God and Christ, so to
one another; and perhaps is the best sense of the words (a):

he that calleth for the waters of the sea, and poureth them out upon the
face of the earth, the Lord is his name; either to drown it, as at the
general deluge; or to water and refresh it, as he does by exhaling water
from the sea, and then letting it down in plentiful showers upon the
earth; See Gill on [Amo 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#008); now all
these things are observed to show the power of God, and that therefore
there can be no hope of escaping out of his hands.

\(y\) "ascensiones suus", Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, Tigurine version,
"gradus suo", Vatablus, Drusius, Cocceius. (z) "fasciculum suum",
Montanus, Munster, Mercerus, Vatablus, Drusius, Burkius. (a) Schultens
in Observ. ad Genesin, p. 197, 198, observes, that "agad", with the
Arabs, signifies primarily to "bind", and is by them transferred to a
building firmly bound, and compact together; and so may intend here in
Amos the Lord's building, the church, which he hath founded in the
earth; and so with Golius and Castellus is a building firmly compacted
together. is used for a bunch of hyssop, Exod. xii. 27. and in the
Misnic language for a handful or bundle of anything; see Buxtorf. Lex.
Talmud. rad.

[Amos 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">amo 9:7</span></span>

Are ye not as children of the Ethiopians unto me, O children of Israel?
saith the Lord,.... And therefore had no reason to think they should be
delivered because they were the children of Israel, of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob; since they were no more to God than the children of the
Ethiopians, having behaved like them; and were become as black as they
through sin, and were idolaters like them; and so accustomed to sin, and
hardened in it, that they could no more change their course and custom
of sinning than the Ethiopian could change his skin, [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023); The Ethiopians are represented
by Diodorus Siculus (b) as very religious, that is, very idolatrous; and
as the first that worshipped the gods, and offered sacrifice to them;
hence they were very pleasing to them, and in high esteem with them;
wherefore Homer (c) speaks of Jupiter, and the other gods, going to
Ethiopia to an anniversary feast, and calls them the blameless
Ethiopians; and so Lucian (d) speaks of the gods as gone abroad, perhaps
to the other side of the ocean, to visit the honest Ethiopians; for they
are often used to visit them, and, as he wittily observes, even
sometimes without being invited. Jarchi suggests the sense to be, that
they were as creatures upon the same foot, and of the same descent, with
other nations; and paraphrases it thus,

"from the sons of Noah ye came as the rest of the nations.''

Kimchi takes the meaning to be this,

"as the children of the Ethiopians are servants so should ye be unto
me.''

The Targum is very foreign from the sense,

"are ye not reckoned as beloved children before me, O house of Israel?''

the first sense is best:

have not I brought up Israel out of the land of Egypt? and therefore it
was ungrateful in them to behave as they have done; nor can they have
any dependence on this, or argue from hence that they shall be indulged
with other favours, or be continued in their land, since the like has
been done for other nations, as follows:

and the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir? that is,
have I not brought up the one from the one place, and the other from the
other? the Philistines and Caphtorim are mentioned together as brethren,
[Gen 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014); and the Avim which dwelt
in the land of Palestine in Hazerim unto Azzah were destroyed by the
Caphtorim, who dwelt in their stead, [Deu
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023); from whom, it seems by this, the
Philistines were delivered, who are called the remnant of the country of
Caphtor, [Jer 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004). Aben Ezra
understands it as if the Israelites were not only brought out of Egypt,
but also from the Philistines, and from Caphtor: others take these two
places, Caphtor and Kir, to be the original of the Philistines and
Syrians, and not where they had been captives, but now delivered: so
Japhet,

"ye are the children of one father, God, who brought you out of Egypt,
and not as the Philistines from Caphtor, and the Syrians from Kir, who
were mixed together;''

and R. Joseph Kimchi thus,

"from Caphtor came destroyers to the Philistines, who destroyed them;
and from Kir came Tiglathpileser, the destroyer, to the Syrians, who
carried them captive there.''

Of the captivity of the Philistines, and their deliverance from the
Caphtorim, we nowhere read; the captivity of the Syrians in Kir Amos
prophesied of, [Amo 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005); and if he
speaks here of their deliverance from it, he must live at least to the
times of Ahaz; for in his times it was they were carried captive
thither, [Kg2 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009). Caphtor some take
to be Cyprus, because it seems to be an island, [Jer
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004); but by it the Targum,
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac and Arabic versions understand
Cappadocia; and the Cappadocians used to be called by the Greeks and
Persians Syrians, as Herodotus (e) and others, observe. Bochart (f) is
of opinion that that part of Cappadocia is intended which is called
Colchis; and the rather since he finds a city in that country called
Side, which in the Greek tongue signifies a pomegranate, as Caphtor does
in Hebrew; and supposes the richness of the country led the Caphtorim
thither, who, having stayed awhile, returned to Palestine, and there
settled; which expedition he thinks is wrapped up in the fable of the
Greek poets, concerning that of Typhon out of Egypt to Colchis and from
thence to Palestine; and indeed the Jewish Targumists (g) every where
render Caphtorim by Cappadocians, and Caphtor by Cappadocia, or
Caphutkia; but then by it they understand a place in Egypt, even
Pelusium, now called Damiata; for the Jewish writers say (h) Caphutkia
is Caphtor, in the Arabic language Damiata; so Benjamin of Tudela says
(i), in two days I came to Damiata, this is Caphtor; and no doubt the
Caphtorim were in Egypt originally since they descended from Mizraim;
but Calmet (k) will have it that the island of Crete is meant by
Caphtor; and observes, theft, the Philistines were at first called
strangers in Palestine, their proper name being Cherethites, or
Cretians, as in [Eze 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze025.htm#016); as the
Septuagint render that name of theirs; and that the language, manners,
arms, religion and gods, of the Philistines and Cretians, are much the
same; he finds a city in Crete called Aptera, which he thinks has a
sensible relation to Caphtor; and that the city of Gaza in Palestine
went by the name of Minoa, because of Minos king of Crete, who, coming
into that country, called this ancient city by his own name. The Targum
and Vulgate Latin version render Kir by Cyrene, by which must be meant,
not Cyrene in Africa, but in Media; so Kir is mentioned along with Elam
or Persia in [Isa 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006); whither the
people of Syria were carried captive by Tiglathpileser, as predicted in
[Amo 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005); and, as the above writer
observes (l), not certainly into the country of Cyrene near Egypt, where
that prince was possessed of nothing; but to Iberia or Albania, where
the river Kir or Cyrus runs, which discharges itself into the Caspian
sea; and Josephus (m) says they were transported into Upper Media; and
the above author thinks that the Prophet Amos, in this passage, probably
intended to comprehend, under the word "Cyr" or "Kir", the people beyond
the Euphrates, and those of Mesopotamia, from whence the Aramaeans in
reality came, who were descended from Aram the son of Shem; and he adds,
we have no certain knowledge of their coming in particular out of this
country, where the river Cyrus flows; and, upon the whole, it is
difficult to determine whether this is to be understood of the origin of
these people, or of their deliverance from captivity; the latter may
seem probable, since it is certain that the prophet speaks of the
deliverance of Israel from the captivity of Egypt; and it is as certain
that the Syrians were carried captive to Kir, and, no doubt, from thence
delivered; though we have no account of the Philistines being captives
to Caphtor, and of their deliverance from thence; however, doubtless
these were things well known to Amos, and in his times, he here speaks
of. In some of our English copies it is read Assyrians instead of
Syrians, very wrongly; for "Aram", and not "Ashur", is the word here
used.

\(b\) Bibliothec. l. 3. p. 143, 144. (c) Ibid. 1. l. 423. (d) In Jupiter
Tragaedus. (e) Clio, sive l. 1. 72. Terpsichore, sive l. 5. c. 40. &
Polymnia, sive l. 7. c. 72. Vid. Strabo. Geograph. l. 22. p. 374. (f)
Phaleg. l. 4. c. 32. col. 291, 292. (g) Targum Onkelos, Jon. & Jerus. in
Gen. x. 4. & Ben Uzziel in Jer. xlvii. 4. & in loc. (h) Maimon. &
Bartenora in Misn. Cetubot, c. 13. sect. 11. (i) Itinerarium, p. 125.
(k) Dictionary in tile word "Caphtor". (l) Dictionary, in the word
"Cyrene". (m) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 12. sect. 3.

[Amos 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">amo 9:8</span></span>

Behold, the eyes of the Lord God are upon the sinful kingdom,.... God is
omniscient, and his eyes are everywhere, and upon all persons, good and
bad, and upon all kingdoms, especially upon a sinful nation: "the
sinning kingdom" (n), or "the kingdom of sin" (o), as it may be
rendered; that is addicted to sin, where it prevails and reigns; every
such kingdom, particularly the kingdom of Israel, Ephraim, or the ten
tribes, given to idolatry, and other sins complained of in this
prophecy; and that not for good, but for evil, as in [Amo
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#004); in order to cut them off from
being a people:

and I will destroy it from off the face of the earth: so that it shall
be no more, at least as a kingdom; as the ten tribes have never been
since their captivity by Shalmaneser; though Japhet interprets this of
all the kingdoms of the earth, being sinful, the eyes of God are upon
them to destroy them, excepting the kingdom of Israel; so Abarbinel:

saving that I will not utterly destroy the house of Jacob, saith the
Lord; and so it is, that though they have been destroyed as a kingdom,
yet not utterly as a people; there were some of the ten tribes that
mixed with the Jews, and others that were scattered about in the world;
and a remnant among them, according to the election of grace, that were
met with in the ministry of the apostles, and in the latter day all
Israel shall be saved; see [Jer 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010).

\(n\) "hoc regnum peccans", V. L. Junius & Tremellius, Drusius,
Mercerus; "peccatrix", Piscator. (o) "Regnum peccati", Pagninus,
Montanus.

[Amos 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">amo 9:9</span></span>

For, lo, I will command,.... What follows; which is expressive of
afflictive and trying dispensations of Providence, which are according
to the will of God, by his appointment and order, and overruled for his
glory, and the good of his people:

and I will sift the house of Israel among all nations, as corn is sifted
in a sieve; this is to be understood of spiritual Israel, of those who
are Israelites indeed, who are like to corns of wheat, first die before
they live; die unto sin, and live unto righteousness; grow up gradually,
and produce much fruit; or like to wheat for their choiceness and
excellency, being the chosen of God and precious, and the excellent in
the earth; and their whiteness and purity, as clothed with Christ's
righteousness washed in his blood, and sanctified by his Spirit; and for
their substance and fulness, being filled out of Christ's fulness, and
with all the fulness of God, with the Spirit and his graces, and with
all the fruits of righteousness; and for weight and solidity, not as
chaff driven to and fro, but are firm and constant, settled and
established, in divine things; and yet have the chaff of sin cleaving to
them, and have need of the flail and fan of affliction; and this is the
sieve the Lord takes into his hands, and sifts them with; whereby
sometimes they are greatly unsettled, and tossed to and fro, have no
rest and ease, but are greatly distressed on all sides, and are
thoroughly searched and tried, and the chaff loosened and separated from
them; and sometimes the Lord suffers them to be sifted by the
temptations of Satan, whereby they are brought into doubts and fears,
and are very wavering and uncomfortable, are sadly harassed and
buffeted, and in great danger, were it not for the grace of God, and the
intercession of the Mediator, [Luk
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#031);

yet shall not the least grain fall upon the earth; or, "the least stone"
(p); which is in the spiritual building, and laid on the rock and
foundation Christ; or the least corn of wheat, so called because of its
weight, solidity, and substance. The meaning is, that the least true
Israelite, or child of God, who is the least in the kingdom of heaven,
and has the least share of grace and spiritual knowledge, that is even
less than the least of all saints, shall not be lost and perish; though
they fall in Adam, yet they are preserved in Christ; though they fall
into actual sins and transgressions, and sometimes into gross ones, and
from a degree of steadfastness in the faith, yet not totally and
finally, or so as to perish for ever; no, not a hair of their head shall
fall to the ground, or they be hurt and ruined; see [Sa1
14:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#045); for they are beloved of God
with an everlasting love, ordained, by him to eternal life, adopted into
his family, justified by his grace, and are kept by his power, according
to his promise, which never fails; they are Christ's property, given him
of his Father, to whom he stands in the relation of Head and Husband;
are the purchase of his blood, closely united to him, and for whom he
intercedes, and makes preparations in heaven. The Spirit of God is their
sanctifier and sealer; he dwells in them as their earnest of heaven; and
the glory of all the divine Persons is concerned in their salvation;
hence it is that not one of them shall ever perish.

\(p\) "lapillus", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Munster, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius, Cocceius; so Ben Melech.

[Amos 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">amo 9:10</span></span>

All the sinners of my people shall die by the sword,.... By the sword of
the Assyrians, and of others, into whose countries they shall flee for
shelter, [Amo 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#001); even all such who
are notorious sinners, abandoned to their lusts, obstinate and
incorrigible; live in sin, and continue therein; repent not of sin,
disbelieve the prophets of the Lord, and defy his threatenings, and put
away the evil day far from them:

which say, the evil shall not overtake nor prevent us; the evil
threatened by the prophet, the sword of the enemy, the desolation of
their land, and captivity in a foreign land; these evils, if they came
at all, which they gave little credit to, yet would not in their days;
they would never come so near them, or so close to their heels as to
overtake them, and seize them, or to get before them, and stop them
fleeing from them; they promised themselves impunity, and were in no
pain about the judgments threatened them; so daring and impudent, so
irreligious and atheistical, were they in their thoughts, words, and
actions; and therefore should all and everyone of them be destroyed.

[Amos 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">amo 9:11</span></span>

In that day will I raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen,....
Not in the day of Israel's ruin, but in the famous Gospel day, so often
spoken of by the prophets; and this prophecy is referred to the times of
the Messiah by the ancient (q) Jews; and one of the names they give him
is taken from hence, "Barnaphli" (r), the Son of the fallen. R. Nachman
said to R. Isaac, hast thou heard when Barnaphli comes? to whom he said,
who is Barnaphli? he replied, the Messiah; you may call the Messiah
Barnaphli; for is it not written, "in that day will I raise up the
tabernacle of David that is fallen down?" and they call him so, not
because the son of Adam; but because he was the son of David, and was to
spring from his family, when fallen into a low and mean condition; yea,
they sometimes seem by the tabernacle of David to understand the dead
body of the Messiah to be raised, whose human nature is by the New
Testament writers called a tabernacle, [Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002); see [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014); for, having mentioned (s) that
passage in [Jer 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009); "they shall
serve the Lord their God, and David their King, whom I will raise up
unto them", add, whom I will raise up out of the dust; as it is said, "I
will raise up the tabernacle of David that is fallen down"; but
elsewhere (t) it is better interpreted of the Messiah's raising up
Israel his people out of captivity; they say,

"her husband shall come, and raise her out of the dust; as it is said,
"I will raise up the tabernacle of David", &c. in the day the King
Messiah shall gather the captivity from the ends of the world to the
ends of it, according to [Deu 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004);''

and which they understand of their present captivity, and deliverance
from it, as in [Amo 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#014). Tobit (u)
seems to have reference to this passage, when he thus exhorts Zion,

"praise the everlasting King, that his tabernacle may be built again in
thee;''

and expresses (w) his faith in it, that so it would be,

"afterwards they (the Jews) shall return from all places of their
captivity, and build up Jerusalem gloriously; and the house of God shall
be built in it, as the prophets have spoken concerning it, for ever;''

agreeably to which Jarchi paraphrases it,

"in the day appointed for redemption;''

and so the Apostle James quotes it, and applies it to the first times of
the Gospel, [Act 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#015). The Targum
interprets this "tabernacle" of the kingdom of the house of David: this
was in a low estate and condition when Jesus the Messiah came, he being
the carpenter's son; but it is to be understood of the spiritual kingdom
of Christ, the church; Christ is meant by David, whose son he is, and of
whom David was an eminent type, and is often called by his name, [Eze
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023); and the church by his
"tabernacle", which is of his building, where he dwells, and keeps his
court; and which in the present state is movable from place to place:
and this at the time of Christ's coming was much fallen, and greatly
decayed, through sad corruption in doctrine by the Pharisees and
Sadducees; through neglect of worship, and formality in it, and the
introduction of things into it God never commanded; through the wicked
lives of professors, and the small number of truly godly persons; but
God, according to this promise and prophecy, raised it up again by the
ministry of John the Baptist, Christ and his apostles, and by the
conversion of many of the Jews, and by bringing in great numbers of the
Gentiles, who coalesced in one church state, which made it flourishing,
grand, and magnificent; and thus the prophecy was in part fulfilled, as
the apostle has applied it in the above mentioned place: but it will
have a further and greater accomplishment still in the latter day, both
in the spiritual and personal reign of Christ: and though this
tabernacle or church of Christ is fallen to decay again, and is in a
very ruinous condition; the doctrines of the Gospel being greatly
departed from; the ordinances of it changed, or not attended to; great
declensions as to the exercise of grace among the people of God; and
many breaches and divisions among them; the outward conversation of many
professors very bad, and few instances of conversion; yet the Lord will
raise it up again, and make it very glorious: he will

close up the breaches thereof, and will raise up his ruins; the
doctrines of the Gospel will be revived and received; the ordinances of
it will be administered in their purity, as they were first delivered;
great numbers will be converted, both of Jews and Gentiles; and there
will be much holiness, spirituality, and brotherly love, among the
saints:

and I will build it as in the days of old; religion shall flourish as in
the days of David and Solomon; the Christian church will be restored to
its pristine glory, as in the times of the apostles.

\(q\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 96. 2. (r) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 96. 2. (s)
Zohar in Gen. fol. 53. 2. (t) Zohar in Exod. fol. 4. 2. (u) Ch. xiii.
10. (w) Ch. xiv. 7.

[Amos 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">amo 9:12</span></span>

That they may possess the remnant or Edom, and of all the Heathen, which
are called by my name,.... Or that these may be possessed; that is, by
David or Christ, who shall have the Heathen given him for his
inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession,
[Psa 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008); when the remnant, according
to the election of grace, in those nations that have been the greatest
enemies to Christ and his Gospel, signified by Edom, shall be converted,
and call upon the name of the Lord, and worship him; and be called by
his name, Christians, and so become his inheritance and possession. The
Targum understands, by the Heathen or people, all the people of the
house of Israel; and Kimchi, Aben Ezra, and Ben Melech, think the words
are to be inverted, thus,

"that all the people on whom my name is called, nay possess the remnant
of Edom;''

and the forager says, that all the Edomites shall be destroyed in the
days of the Messiah, but Israel shall inherit their land; and Aben Ezra
says, that if this prophecy is interpreted of the Messiah, the matter is
clear; as it is in the sense we have given, and as the apostle explains
it; See Gill on [Act 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#017). Some
render the words, "that the remnant of Edom, and of all the Heathen,
that are" (that is, shall be) "called by my name, may possess me the
Lord" (x). The truth and certainty of its performance is expressed in
the following clause,

saith the Lord, that doeth this: whose word is true, whose power is
great, whose grace is efficacious, to accomplish all that is here
promised and foretold.

\(x\) "Ut possideant reliquiae Edom", De Dieu. See Bishop Chandler's
Defence of Christianity, p. 172.

[Amos 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">amo 9:13</span></span>

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord,.... Or "are coming" (y); and
which will commence upon the accomplishment of the above things, when
the church of Christ is raised up and established, the Jews converted,
and the Gentiles brought in:

that the ploughman shall overtake the reaper; or "meet the reaper" (z);
or come up to him, or touch him, as it may be rendered; and so the
Targum; that is, before the reaper has well cut down the grain, or it is
scarce gathered in, the ploughman shall be ready to plough up the ground
again, that it may be sown, and produce another crop:

and the treaders of grapes him that soweth seed; or "draweth seed" (a);
out of his basket, and scatters it in the land; signifying that there
should he such an abundance of grapes in the vintage, that they would
continue pressing till seedtime; and the whole denotes a great affluence
of temporal good things, as an emblem of spiritual ones; see [Lev
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#005); where something of the like
nature is promised, and expressed in much the same manner:

and the mountains shall drop sweet wine; or "new wine" (b); intimating
that there shall be abundance of vines grow upon the mountains, which
will produce large quantities of wine, so that they shall seem to drop
or flow with it:

and all the hills shall melt; with liquors; either with wine or honey,
or rather with milk, being covered with flocks and herds, which shall
yield abundance of milk; by all which, plenty of spiritual things, as
the word and ordinances, and rich supplies of grace, as well as of
temporal things, is meant; see [Joe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018).

\(y\) "dies venientes", Montanus, Burkius. (z) "et vel cum occurret
arator messori", Vatablus, Drusius; "attingent arator messorem",
Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "accedet arator ad
messorem", Cocceius. (a) "trahentem semen", Montanus, Liveleus, Drusius,
Mercerus. (b) "mustum", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator, Mercerus; "musto",
Drusius, Cocceius.

[Amos 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">amo 9:14</span></span>

And I will bring again the captivity of my people of Israel,.... Which
is not to be understood of the captivity of the Jews in Babylon, and
their return from thence, with whom some of the ten tribes of Israel
were mixed; for they were not then so planted in their own land as no
more to be pulled up again, as is here promised; for they afterwards
were dispossessed of it by the Romans, and carried captive, and
dispersed among the nations again; but the captivity both of Judah and
Israel is meant, their present captivity, which will be brought back,
and they will be delivered from it, and return to their own land, and
possess it as long as it is a land; see [Jer
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#003); as well as be freed from the
bondage of sit, Satan, and the law, under which they have been detained
some hundreds of years; but now shall be delivered into the glorious
liberty of the children of God, of Christians, with which Christ has
made them free:

and they shall build the waste cities, and inhabit them; literally the
cities in Judea wasted by the Turks, and others; and mystically the
churches of Christ, of which saints are fellow citizens, and will be in
a desolate condition before the conversion of the Jews, and the
gathering in the fulness of the Gentiles; but by these means will be
rebuilt, and be in a flourishing condition, and fall of inhabitants:

and they shall plant vineyards, and drink the wine thereof; they shall
also make gardens, and eat the fruit of them; which, as before, will be
literally true; and in a spiritual sense may signify the churches of
Christ, compared to vineyards and gardens, which will be planted
everywhere, and be set with pleasant and fruitful plants, and will turn
to the advantage of those who have been instruments in planting them;
see [Sol 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#002).

[Amos 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">amo 9:15</span></span>

And I will plant them upon their land,.... The land of Israel, as trees
are planted; and they shall take root and flourish, and abound with all
good things, temporal and spiritual:

and they shall no more be pulled up out of their land which I have given
them, saith the Lord thy God; by which it appears that this is a
prophecy of things yet to come; since the Jews, upon their return to
their own land after the Babylonish captivity, were pulled up again, and
rooted out of it by the Romans, and remain so to this day; but, when
they shall return again, they will never more be removed from it; and of
this they may he assured; because it is the land the Lord has, "given"
them, and it shall not be taken away from them any more; and, because he
will now appear to be the "Lord their God", the "loammi", [Hos
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009), will he taken off from them; they
will be owned to be the Lords people, and he will be known by them to be
their covenant God; which will ensure all the above blessings to them,
of whatsoever kind; for this is either said to the prophet, "the Lord
thy God", or to Israel; and either way it serves to confirm the same
thing.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Obadiah Introduction](oba000)

</div>
