<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](kg2025)  [Next](ch1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

[1 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch1 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 CHRONICLES

This and the following book were reckoned by the Jews as one book, as
appears by the Masoretic note at the end of the second book, and as is
affirmed by Origen (a) and Jerom (b); and they were by the ancients (c)
called Chronicles, as they are by us; but they are different from the
book of the chronicles of the kings of Israel and Judah, so often
mentioned in the preceding books, seeing several things there referred
to, as in them, are not to be found here; though no doubt many things
here recorded were taken from thence under a divine direction. In the
Greek version, and so in the Vulgate Latin version after that, they are
called "Paralipomena", that is, things passed over or omitted, because
they contain several anecdotes which are not to be found in the books of
Samuel and Kings. The Hebrew title of them is, "Dibre Hayamim", words of
days, day books or diaries, and what the Greeks call "Ephemerides";
though, as "yamim" sometimes signifies years, they may be named
"annals"; and so the Arabic inscription is,

"the Books of Annals;''

and because they chiefly respect the kings of Judah, the Syriac
inscription is,

"the Book of the Things that were done in the Times of the Kings of
Judah.''

The Targum is,

"the Book of Genealogies, the Words of Days, which were from the Days of
the World;''

because the first ten chapters consist of genealogies beginning from
Adam. The inspired penman of these books must live after the return of
the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, since he carries down the
genealogy of the kings and princes of Judah beyond that time, [Ch1
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#017). It is generally thought by the
Jews and Christians that Ezra was the writer of them, with which agrees
the age in which he lived; and as it may seem, from the last of these
books ending with the same words with which that under his name begins:
so the Talmudists (d) say, that Ezra wrote his own book, and the
genealogy of the chronicles unto his own, or unto Velo, "and he had
brethren", [Ch2 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#002) and Jarchi
affirms that he wrote them by the hand or means of Haggai, Zechariah,
and Malachi, inspired prophets; though some Jewish writers (e) suppose
they were written partly by him, and partly by Nehemiah; that all to
[Ch2 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#002) were written by Ezra, and
the rest by Nehemiah. Kimchi thinks that Ezra was not the first author
and writer of these books, but that the books of Chronicles and Annals
of the kings of Judah, and of the kings of Israel, were separately
written before him; but that he only revised them, and with the men of
the great synagogue added the genealogies, and put them into the canon
of the Scriptures (f). Spinosa (g) fancies they were written after Judas
Maccabaeus had restored the temple, since the historian tells what
families dwelt in Jerusalem in the times of Ezra, [Ch1
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#001) and speaks of the porters, [Ch1
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#017) two of which are mentioned, [Neh
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#019) as if Ezra could not describe
the families that lived when he did, or name the porters of the temple,
since it was finished and dedicated in his time, [Ezr
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#015), but however there is no doubt to
be made of the authenticity of these books, since not only they have
always been acknowledged by the Jews as a part of the canonical
Scripture, and by ancient Christians, as appears by the catalogues of
Melito (h) and Origen (i); but there are plain references to them in the
New Testament. The genealogy of Christ, by the evangelists, is formed
out of them; the doxology in [Rev 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012)
as some have observed, comes very near to what is used by David, [Ch1
29:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#011) and the passages in [Act
7:48](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#048) contain the sense of what is
expressed in [Ch2 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#005). The use and
design of these books are chiefly to give a larger account of the
kingdom of Judah, especially after the division of it from the ten
tribes, and of the kings thereof, than what is given in the preceding
books, as in the last of these books; and particularly they ascertain
the genealogy of Christ, that it might be clear and plain of what tribe
and family the Messiah came, that he descended from the tribe of Judah,
and from the kings of the house of David, as in this first book. They
both contain an history from Adam, to the deliverance of the Jews from
their captivity in Babylon. The first of these books reaches, according
to Hottinger (k), to A. M. 2985, and the latter is an history of four
hundred and seventy two years. According to Bishop Usher (l) the former
contains a course of 2990 years, and the latter of four hundred and
seventy eight.

\(a\) Apud Eusch. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 25. (b) Ad Dominionem, tom. 3.
fol. 7. C. (c) Hieron. Praefat. in lib. Reg. tom. 3. fol. 6. B. (d) T.
Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 15. 1. (e) Shalssalet Hakabala, Abarbinel in
Josuam, fol. 3. 3. (f) Vid. Buxtorf. de Punct. Antiqu. par. 1. p. 182.
(g) Tract. Theolog. Politic. c. 10. p. 184. (h) Apud Euseb. Eccl. Hist.
l. 4. c. 26. (i) Apud ib. l. 6. c. 25. (k) Thesaur. Philolog. l. 2. c.
1. p. 514, 515. (l) Annal. Vet. Test. p. 56. (m) Tiberias, c. 14.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 1](ch1001)

</div>
