<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Chronicles Index](ch1)  
  [Previous](ch1011)  [Next](ch1013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Chronicles Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO 1 CHRONICLES 12

This chapter gives an account of those that came to David at different
times, and joined and assisted him both before the death of Saul, and
when persecuted by him, and after he was made king of Judah in Hebron,
and before he was king of all Israel, in order to it; of the
Benjaminites that came to him when at Ziklag, [Ch1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001) of the Gadites that came to him
when in the hold, [Ch1 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008) of some of
Judah and Benjamin, who came to him in the same place, [Ch1
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#016), and of the Manassites at the
time he came with the Philistines against Saul, [Ch1
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#019) and the number of the several
tribes are given, that came to him at Hebron to make him king over all
Israel, [Ch1 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#023).

[1 Chronicles 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch1 12:1</span></span>

Now these are they that came to David to Ziklag,.... Given him by Achish
to live in, when he fled from Saul, [Sa1
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#006).

while he yet kept himself close, because of Saul the son of Kish; when
he was an exile from his own country, and obliged to live retired in a
foreign one, because of Saul's persecution of him, and seeking to take
away his life:

and they were among the mighty men, helpers of the war; not against
Saul, with whom David had none, but with the Amalekites, and others,
[Sa1 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#008).

[1 Chronicles 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch1 12:2</span></span>

They were armed with bows,.... Much used in war in those times:

and could use both the right hand and the left, in hurling stones, and
shooting arrows out of a bow; they were ambidextrous; who could sling
stones, or shoot arrows, with either, which was no small advantage to
them:

even of Saul's brethren of Benjamin; they were of the tribe of Benjamin,
of which Saul was, and so his brethren; and they might be, at least some
of them, his relations and kinsmen; who observing the unreasonableness
of Saul's enmity to David, and detesting his cruelty, and sensible of
the innocence of David, and of the service he had done his country; and
perhaps not being ignorant of his divine right and title to the kingdom,
went over to him, to comfort, strengthen, and assist him.

[1 Chronicles 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch1 12:3</span></span>

The chief was Ahiezer, then Joash, the sons of Shemaah the
Gibeathite,.... Who was of Gibeah, in the tribe of Benjamin, sometimes
called Gibeah of Benjamin, and of Saul, it being his birthplace, see
[Sa1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#004) and so these might be some
of his kindred:

and Jeziel, and Pelet, the sons of Azmaveth; there is one of this name
in the posterity of Jonathan, [Ch1
8:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#036) who might be so called after some
of his relations:

and Berachah, and Jehu the Antothite; or Anethothite, as the Vulgate
Latin version, who was of Anathoth, a city in the tribe of Benjamin, the
native place of Jeremiah the prophet.

[1 Chronicles 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch1 12:4</span></span>

And Ishmaiah the Gibeonite, a mighty man among the thirty, and over the
thirty,.... That came with him, and he had the command of; this man was
of Gibeon, another city in the tribe of Benjamin, [Jos
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025).

and Jeremiah, and Jahaziel, and Johanan, and Josabad, the Gederathite;
one of Gederah, a city in the tribe of Judah, perhaps on the borders of
that and Benjamin; Joram speaks of it as belonging to the country of the
city Aelia or Jerusalem.

[1 Chronicles 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch1 12:5</span></span>

Eluzai, and Jerimoth, and Bealiah, and Shemariah, and Shephatiah the
Haruphite. A native of Haruph or Hariph, see [Neh
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#024).

[1 Chronicles 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch1 12:6</span></span>

Elkanah, and Jesiah, and Azareel, and Joezer, and Jashobeam, the
Korhites. Not Korahites, descendants of Levi, [Ch1
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#019), but the posterity of Korah a
Benjaminite.

[1 Chronicles 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch1 12:7</span></span>

And Joelah, and Zebadiah, the sons of Jeroham of Gedor. A city in the
tribe of Judah, [Jos 15:58](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#058) and might
now belong to Benjamin; or this was another city of the same name in
that tribe.

[1 Chronicles 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch1 12:8</span></span>

And of the Gadites there separated themselves unto David, into the hold
to the wilderness,.... Men of the tribe of Gad, who lived on the other
side Jordan; these separated themselves from the rest of their tribe,
from their families and dwellings, and from the government of Saul, and
came over to David, and joined him either when he was in some strong
hold in the wilderness of Ziph, or Maon, [Sa1
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014), or, as some think, when he was
at Ziklag, in the hold there, said to be in the wilderness of Judah:

men of might, and men of war, fit for the battle, that could handle
shield and buckler; warlike, valiant, and courageous men, well skilled
in military discipline: whose faces were like the face of lions; bold,
stern, and fierce. The philosopher observes (d), that of all creatures
the lion most resembles a man, having a great mouth, a square face and
forehead, large eye brows, &c.

and were as swift as the roes upon the mountains; which are remarkable
for their swiftness on the mountains, see [Sol
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017). Aelianus (e) speaks of one sort
of them that run as swift as a tempest. These Gadites, as with their
undaunted looks and courage, intimidated their enemies, and put them to
flight, so they were swift to pursue them, and overtake them.

\(d\) Aristot. Physiognom. c. 5. (e) De Animal. l. 14. c. 14.

[1 Chronicles 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch1 12:9</span></span>

Ezer the first,.... This, and those that follow, are the names of the
Gadites given, according to their age, or merit, or order in coming to
David: Obadiah, Eliab, Mishmannah, Jeremiah, Attai, Eliel, Johanan,
Elzabad, Jeremiah, Machbanai; in all eleven.

[1 Chronicles 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch1 12:14</span></span>

These were of the sons of Gad, captains of the host,.... Of the militia
in their own country, and of the men they brought with them; or they
were such afterwards in David's army:

one of the least was over one hundred, and the greatest over thousand;
not that they were so when they came, or brought over such a number of
men with them under their command; but they were promoted by David, when
he came to the throne, to be centurions and chiliarchs; according to
Jarchi, the sense is, that the least of them would put to flight and
pursue one hundred, and the greatest of them 1000, and so fulfilled the
passage in [Lev 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#008).

[1 Chronicles 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch1 12:15</span></span>

These are they that went over Jordan in the first month,.... The month
Nisan or Ab; as they must come over Jordan to come to David, since they
dwelt on the other side of it:

when it had overflown all its banks; as it did at this time of the year,
see [Jos 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015) which is observed to
show both the time of the year when they came over, and their zeal and
ardour to assist David, and their boldness and intrepidity; fearless of
danger, they threw themselves into Jordan, and swam over it, in all
probability when the waters of it were so deep they could not ford it,
and so rapid that they were in danger of being carried away with them:

and they put to flight all them of the valleys, both towards the east,
and towards the west; who dwelt in the valleys, or plains of Jordan east
and west; who seeing a number of men come over, took them for enemies,
and fled, so Kimchi; or, as others think, these were the Philistines,
who, on the defeat of Saul, took possession of the cities of Israel, in
the valleys forsaken by them, [Sa1
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1031.htm#007) or rather these were the Moabites
or Arabs, who made incursions into the land of Israel for prey, the
Gadites met with, when they came over Jordan.

[1 Chronicles 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch1 12:16</span></span>

And there came of the men of Benjamin, and of Judah,.... Besides those
before mentioned, [Ch1 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#002),

to the hold unto David; the same as in [Ch1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#008).

[1 Chronicles 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch1 12:17</span></span>

And David went out to meet them,.... Out of the hold where he was;
either out of respect and deference to them, some of them being persons
of eminence; or it may be out of suspicion, fearing they were not his
friends, being, it may be, chiefly of the tribe of Benjamin, and
therefore was desirous of sounding them before he admitted them:

and said unto them, if ye be come peaceably unto me to help me; if they
were come with a good will to him, and intention to help him against his
enemy, and protect him:

mine heart shall be knit unto you; they should have such a share in his
affections, that their hearts would be as one, as his and Jonathan's
were, [Sa1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001),

but if ye be come to betray me to mine enemies; into the hands of Saul,
and his courtiers, that sought his life:

seeing there is no wrong in mine hands; no injury done by him to Saul,
or to them, or to any other:

the God of our fathers look thereon, and rebuke it; he that sees all
things, let him revenge it; and it is not only a wish that he would, but
a prayer of faith that so it would be.

[1 Chronicles 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch1 12:18</span></span>

Then the spirit came upon Amasai,.... Or "clothed" (f) him; a spirit of
fortitude, as the Targum, of strength, courage, and presence of mind,
with which he was endowed, covered, and clothed as with a garment; this
was a sister's son of David's, see [Sa2
17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#025).

who was chief of the captains; of them that came at this time with him
to David; he was afterwards Absalom's general, and designed to be
David's, but was murdered by Joab:

and he said, thine are we, David, and on thy side, thou son of Jesse;
which being spoken in this short and concise manner, as the supplement
shows, denotes the vehemency with which he spake, and is expressive of
their cordial fidelity to him, and their resolution to abide by him at
all events:

peace, peace be unto thee, and peace be to thine helpers; wishing all
prosperity, temporal and spiritual, to him and all his confederates and
auxiliaries, among whom they reckoned themselves:

for thy God helpeth thee; which they perceived by the remarkable
deliverances of him out of the hand of Saul, when in imminent danger;
the Targum is,"for the Word of the Lord is for thy help:"

then David received them; into the hold, and admitted them as his
friends:

and made them the captains of the band; they brought with them; or in
later times, when he came to the throne.

\(f\) "induit", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[1 Chronicles 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch1 12:19</span></span>

And there fell some of Manasseh to David,.... Of the tribe of Manasseh;
they took his part, and on his side, and joined him:

when he came with the Philistines against Saul to battle; which was a
strong proof of their cordial attachment to him:

but they helped them not: the Philistines; neither David nor his men,
nor the Manassites that joined them:

for the lords of the Philistines, upon advisement; counsel taken among
themselves: sent him away; that is, David and his men:

saying, he will fall to his master Saul, to the jeopardy of our heads;
meaning, that he would go off with his troops to Saul, and betray them
into his hands, and with their heads make his peace with him, see [Sa1
29:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1029.htm#004).

[1 Chronicles 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch1 12:20</span></span>

As he went to Ziklag, there fell to him of Manasseh,.... Others besides
the former, who joined him when he went with the Philistines; these
joined him when he was dismissed from them, and was returning to Ziklag:
namely:

Adnah, and Jozabad, and Jediael, and Michael, and Jozabad, and Elihu,
and Zilthai, captains of the thousands that were of Manasseh; that tribe
being, as the rest were, divided into hundreds and thousands; these were
captains over the thousands of the militia of the tribe.

[1 Chronicles 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch1 12:21</span></span>

And they helped David against the band of the rovers,.... The
Amalekites, who, while he was gone with the Philistines, had seized on
Ziklag, and burnt it, and carried the women captive, with what spoil
they could make; these coming to David thus opportunely, assisted him in
his pursuit and defeat of them:

for they were all mighty men of valour, and were captains in the host;
or army of David.

[1 Chronicles 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ch1 12:22</span></span>

For at that time, day by day, there came to David to help him,....
Particularly after the defeat of Saul by the Philistines, unto the time
that David came to Hebron:

until it was a great host, like the host of God; the heavenly host, the
angels; so the Targum.

[1 Chronicles 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ch1 12:23</span></span>

And these are the numbers of the bands that were ready armed to the
war,.... That were trained up to it, and accounted for it:

and came to David to Hebron; after the death of Ishbosheth and Abner,
and when David had reigned seven years in Hebron:

to turn the kingdom of Saul to him; to transfer it to him and his
family:

according to the word of the Lord; by Samuel, which they were acquainted
with; and the number of those of the children of Judah, who made him
their king already, and so there was the less need of a numerous
appearance of them, were 6800 armed men, [Ch1
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#024), of the tribe of Simeon, valiant
men, 7100, [Ch1 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#025), of the children
of Levi 4600, [Ch1 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#026), of the
Aaronites or priests, with Jehoiada the son of Benaiah, according to
Jarchi and Kimchi, at the head of them, 3700, [Ch1
12:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#027), besides Zadok, a young man of
the line of Eleazar, who was made high priest in the time of Solomon,
who brought with him twenty two captains, [Ch1
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#028) the heads of the courses of the
priests, which were afterwards twenty four, [Ch1
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#004) of the tribe of Benjamin, the
kindred of Saul, the greatest part of whom had been sticklers for the
continuance of the kingdom in the family of Saul, 3000, [Ch1
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#029), of the tribe of Ephraim,
valiant men, 20,800, [Ch1 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#030), of
the half tribe of Manasseh on this side Jordan, whose names were pricked
down, being given, to make David king, 18,000, [Ch1
12:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#031), and of the tribe of Issachar,
two hundred of the heads of them; men of knowledge and understanding,
either in chronology or astrology, or in the proper seasons for
husbandry, or for the fixing the beginning of years and months, and the
intercalation of them, for keeping the several festivals; or rather were
men of prudence and wisdom, and knew that this was the proper time for
making David king, Ishbosheth and Abner his general being dead; and as
they were men in high esteem for their parts and abilities, their
brethren were at their beck and command, [Ch1
12:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#030), and of the tribe of Zebulun,
warlike men, skilful in war, and well armed, 50,000 men; and their
numerous appearance showed that they were hearty and sincere, being the
greatest number of all the tribes, [Ch1
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#033), and of the tribe of Naphtali,
1000 captains, and with them armed men, 37,000, [Ch1
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#034) and of the tribe of Dan, men
skilled in war, 28,600, [Ch1 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#035) and
of the tribe of Asher, warlike men, 40,000, [Ch1
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#036) and of the Reubenites, Gadites,
and half tribe of Manasseh, on the other side Jordan, military men, well
armed, 120,000, [Ch1 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#037), which in
all made 348,800 men, and upwards.

[1 Chronicles 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">ch1 12:38</span></span>

All these men of war that could keep rank,.... Well disciplined men:

came with a perfect heart to Hebron to make David king over Israel; they
were all of one mind, and quite hearty and sincere in fixing David on
the throne of all Israel:

and all the rest also of Israel were of one heart also to make David
king; those who came not were of the same mind; it was the unanimous
voice of the people that he should be their king.

[1 Chronicles 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">ch1 12:39</span></span>

And there they were with David three days, eating and drinking,....
Keeping a festival, to testify their joy on this occasion:

for their brethren had prepared for them; not the inhabitants of Hebron
only, but all the country round about, brought in provisions on this
joyful occasion; otherwise the men of Hebron would not have been able to
have provided what was sufficient for such a vast number, as appears by
what follows.

[1 Chronicles 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">ch1 12:40</span></span>

Moreover, they that were nigh,.... To Hebron, or bordered on the tribe
of Judah:

even unto Issachar, and Zebulun, and Naphtali; as far as to those
tribes, and including them:

brought bread on asses, and on camels, and on mules; all which were
creatures used to carry burdens:

and on oxen; who, though commonly employed in ploughing, yet, on this
occasion, might be made use of either in drawing wagons laden with
provisions, such as follow, or in carrying loads on their backs; though,
as Tully (g) observes, their backs show they were not formed to receive
and carry burdens:

and meat, meal, cakes of figs, and bunches of raisins, and wine, and
oil, and oxen, and sheep abundantly, that is, food made of flour,
pastries, besides bread, before mentioned, with dried figs, pressed and
made into cakes, and clusters of grapes dried, and of liquids, wine and
oil, which make cheerful, and beef and mutton in great plenty:

for there was joy in Israel; that their civil wars were ended; that they
were united into one kingdom again; and had a king over them according
to their hearts' desire, the darling of the people, of whom they had
raised expectations; being a valiant, prudent, and good man, who studied
the good both of church and state, and, above all, was one of God's
choosing, appointing, and anointing: greater joy there will be, when
David's son and antitype, Zion's King, reigns, when he shall be King
over all the earth, and there will be one Lord, and his name one, [Psa
97:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001).

\(g\) De Natura Deorum, l. 2. prope finem.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Chronicles Chapter 13](ch1013)

</div>
