<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2011)  [Next](ch2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 12:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 12

Rehoboam and his people forsaking the law of the Lord, Shishak king of
Egypt is allowed by God to invade his land, and take his fenced cities,
[Ch2 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001), upon which a prophet of the
Lord was sent to him and his princes, to show them the reason of it;
whereupon they humbled themselves, and the Lord was pleased not to allow
the enemy utterly to destroy them, yet to reduce them to servitude, and
take away their riches, [Ch2 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#005), and
the chapter is closed with an account of the reign and death of
Rehoboam, [Ch2 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#013).

[2 Chronicles 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 12:1</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Rehoboam had established the kingdom,.... Or
when the kingdom of Rehoboam was established; the tribes of Judah and
Benjamin being firmly attached to him, and great numbers from the other
tribes coming over to him, and things going on peaceably and
prosperously during the three years that he and his people abode by the
pure worship of God:

and had strengthened himself; built fortified cities for the defence of
himself and kingdom, [Ch2 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#005), he
forsook the law of the Lord; after he had reigned three years, and was
become strong, and thought himself safe and secure on the throne,
trusting to his strength:

and all Israel with him; the greater part of them following the example
of their king; of this defection, and the sins they fell into, see [Kg1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#022).

[2 Chronicles 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 12:2</span></span>

And it came to pass in the fifth year of Rehoboam,.... In the fourth
year, the apostasy of him and his people began; and, in the year
following, what is next related happened, as a punishment of it:

Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem; of whom see [Kg1
11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040),

because they transgressed against the Lord; transgressed the law of the
Lord by falling into idolatry and other abominable evils; the Targum
is,"against the Word of the Lord.''

[2 Chronicles 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 12:3</span></span>

With twelve hundred chariots, and threescore thousand horsemen; and the
people were without number,.... The foot soldiers; their number,
according to Josephus (h) was 400,000:

that came with him out of Egypt; the above numerous army came from
thence with him, which was famous for horses and chariots of war, see
[Exo 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007), what follow seem to have
joined him after he came out of Egypt, or whom he subdued in his way;
the Lubim or Lybians, inhabitants of Libya, a country near Egypt the
same with the Lehabim; of whom see [Gen
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013),

the Sukkiims; who were either the Scenite Arabs, who dwelt in tents, as
this word signifies; or the Troglodytes, according to the Septuagint and
Vulgate Latin versions, who dwelt in dens and caves, in which sense the
word "Succah" is sometimes used, [Job
38:40](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#040) and in their country was a town
called Suchae, mentioned by Pliny (i); they inhabited near the Red sea;
and if Shishak is the same with Sesostris, as is thought, these people
were subdued by him, as Herodotus (k) and Strabo (l) testify:

and the Ethiopians; some think these were the Cushite Arabs, and that
Sesostris came into Arabia is testified by the above writers; though
rather the proper Ethiopians are meant, since they are joined with the
Lubim or Africans; and since, as Herodotus (m) says, he ruled over
Ethiopia; and Diodorus Siculus (n) says he fought with them, and obliged
them to pay him tribute.

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 10. sect. 2. (i) Nat. Hist. l. 6. c. 29. (k)
Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 102. (l) Geograph. l. 16. p. 529. (m) Ut supra,
(Euterpe, sive, l. 2.) c. 110. (n) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 50.

[2 Chronicles 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 12:4</span></span>

And he took the fenced cities which pertained to Judah,.... Which
Rehoboam had lately built, and placed his sons in them, [Ch2
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#005), these he took without any
opposition:

and came to Jerusalem; there being no army to oppose him; and so
Sesostris took many countries without fighting, and among the rest
Phoenicia, as Manetho (o) relates, in which Judea may be included.

\(o\) Apud Joseph. contr. Apion. l. 1. c. 15.

[2 Chronicles 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 12:5</span></span>

Then came Shemaiah the prophet to Rehoboam,.... The same as in [Ch2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#002), there called the man of God:

and to the princes of Judah that were gathered together to Jerusalem
because of Shishak; through fear of him, and for safety and protection
from him, and to consult what was to be done at this critical juncture,
whether to fight him, or make peace with him on the best terms they
could:

and said unto them, thus saith the Lord, ye have forsaken me; his law,
his word, worship, and ordinances, [Ch2
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#001),

and therefore have I also left you in the hand of Shishak; suffered him
to invade their land, take their fenced cities, and come up to Jerusalem
without any opposition, as a punishment of their apostasy; and to
explain this providence to them, and call them to repentance, was the
prophet sent.

[2 Chronicles 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 12:6</span></span>

Whereupon the princes of Israel and the king humbled themselves,....
Both by words acknowledging their sins, and the justice of God, and by
deeds, perhaps putting on sackcloth, as was usual on such occasions, and
betaking themselves to fasting and prayer:

and they said, the Lord is righteous; in giving them up into the hand of
their enemies, seeing they had forsaken him, and sinned against him.

[2 Chronicles 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 12:7</span></span>

And when the Lord saw that they humbled themselves,.... Though but
externally; the Lord takes notice of external humiliation, as he did of
Ahab's, [Kg1 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029),

the word of the Lord came to Shemaiah, saying, they have humbled
themselves, therefore I will not destroy them; not now, at least not
altogether, [Ch2 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#012),

but I will grant them some deliverance; yet not a complete one, for they
were brought into servitude by Shishak, [Ch2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#008), or only for a short time:

and my wrath shall not be poured out against Jerusalem by the hand of
Shishak; that is, to the uttermost; that was reserved to another time,
and to be done by another hand, Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon.

[2 Chronicles 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 12:8</span></span>

Nevertheless, they shall be his servants,.... tributaries to the king of
Egypt:

that they may know my service, and the service of the kingdoms of the
countries; the difference between them, how easy the one, which they
might perform without taxes and tributes, and how hard and heavy the
other, through the exactions and exorbitant demands of those to whom
they became subjects.

[2 Chronicles 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 12:9</span></span>

So Shishak king of Egypt came up against Jerusalem,.... The Vulgate
Latin version is,"departed from Jerusalem,''as he did, having taken it,
and spoiled it of its riches, and settled a yearly tax on the
inhabitants of the land; of this, and the two following verses; see Gill
on [Kg1 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#026). [Kg1
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#027). [Kg1
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#028).

[2 Chronicles 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 12:12</span></span>

And when he humbled himself,.... That is, Rehoboam; or broke his heart,
as the Targum, was of a contrite spirit seemingly, for it was merely
external:

the wrath of the Lord turned from him; which appeared by the departure
of Shishak's army:

that he would not destroy him altogether; or make an utter destruction
of him and his people:

and also in Judah things went well; prospered and succeeded after this
affair of Shishak was over: or "in Judah there were good things" (p);
there were some good men, priests, Levites, and many of the common
people, that did good things, kept up and abode by the pure worship and
service of God; and which was another reason why the Lord would not
destroy them altogether now, see [Gen
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#031).

\(p\) "opera bona", V. L. "res bonae", Tigurine version, Vatablus,
Rambachius.

[2 Chronicles 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 12:13</span></span>

So Rehoboam strengthened himself in Jerusalem,.... Fortified that yet
more for the defence of himself, after Shishak departed:

and reigned; twelve years more, for he reigned in all seventeen, and
this was in his fifth year; of what follows in this verse; see Gill on
[Kg1 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021).

[2 Chronicles 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 12:14</span></span>

And he did evil,.... Committed idolatry, relapsed into that, his
humiliation not being hearty and sincere:

because he prepared not his heart to seek the Lord; by prayer and
supplication, and by an attendance on the service and worship of God;
for though he did these things outwardly, yet not sincerely and
heartily; he did not engage in them seriously and in good earnest, with
affection and fervour.

[2 Chronicles 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 12:15</span></span>

Now the acts of Rehoboam,.... Of these two verses; see Gill on [Kg1
14:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#029). [Kg1
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#030). [Kg1
14:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#031).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 13](ch2013)

</div>
