<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2024)  [Next](ch2026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 25:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 25

This chapter begins with the reign of Amaziah, and some of the first
acts of it, slaying those that killed his father, [Ch2
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#001), raising a large army in his own
kingdom, to which he added 100,000 more he hired out of Israel, whom yet
he sent home by the advice of a prophet, [Ch2
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005), and with his own army marched
against the Edomites, and obtained a victory over them, [Ch2
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#011), but the Israelites being
displeased with him for dismissing them, fell on some of his cities, and
slew many in them, [Ch2 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#013), and
such was his stupidity, as to worship the gods of the Edomites he had
conquered, for which he was reproved by a prophet, [Ch2
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014) and being elated with his
victory, he sent a challenge to the king of Israel, who accepting of it,
a battle ensued, in which Judah was worsted, their king taken, and
treasuries spoiled, [Ch2 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#017), and
the chapter is closed with the death and burial of Amaziah, [Ch2
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#025).

[2 Chronicles 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 25:1</span></span>

Amaziah was twenty five years old when he began to reign,.... Of these
verses; see Gill on [Kg2 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#002). See
Gill on [Kg2 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#003). See Gill on [Kg2
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#005). See Gill on [Kg2
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#006).

[2 Chronicles 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 25:5</span></span>

Moreover Amaziah gathered Judah together,.... The inhabitants thereof:

and made them captains over thousands, and captains over hundreds,
according to the houses of their fathers, throughout all Judah and
Benjamin; he divided the people, according to their families throughout
his kingdom, into thousands and hundreds, and out of their respective
families appointed captains over them:

and he numbered them from twenty years old and above; the usual age men
were numbered at for war, to the fiftieth, according to Josephus; the
Roman law (a) obliged none to be soldiers after fifty, nor might any be
dismissed before (b); the age of military men with the Romans was from
seventeen to forty six, or, as some, forty five; but with the Persians
from twenty as here to fifty (c):

and found them three hundred thousand choice men, able to go forth to
war, that could handle spear and shield; which shows that their number
was greatly decreased since the times of Jehoshaphat, [Ch2
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#014), occasioned by the wars under
Jehoram, Ahaziah, and Joash; some copies of the Vulgate Latin (d) have
only 30,000.

\(a\) Seneca de Brevitate Vitae, c. 20. (b) Liv. Hist. l. 42. c. 33. (c)
Alex. ab. Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 1. c. 20. (d) Ed. of Sixtus V. the
Lovain and MSS. in James's Corruption of the Fathers, p. 295.

[2 Chronicles 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 25:6</span></span>

He hired also one hundred thousand mighty men of valour out of
Israel,.... The ten tribes, judging his own army not sufficient for his
expedition against the Edomites he was meditating:

for one hundred talents of silver; which amounted to 35,300 pounds
sterling, and according to Beckius (e) were about five florins and a
half to each soldier.

\(e\) Not. in Targum in loc.

[2 Chronicles 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 25:7</span></span>

But there came a man of God to him,.... Who the Jews say (f) was the
brother of the king, Amos, the father of Isaiah, but without foundation:

saying, O king, let not the army of Israel go with thee; to war against
Edom; meaning the 100,000 men he had hired, and suggesting that to have
them with him would not be to his advantage, but his detriment, for the
following reason:

for the Lord is not with Israel, to wit:

with all the children of Ephraim; they being idolaters, worshippers of
the calves; and as they had forsaken the Lord, he had forsaken them;
therefore no help could be expected from them; the Targum is,"the Word
of the Lord is not their help.''

\(f\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 20. Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 11. 2.

[2 Chronicles 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 25:8</span></span>

But if thou wilt go, do it, be strong for the battle,.... An ironical
expression; if thou wilt not be advised, take them with thee, and try
what thou canst do; exert all thy courage, and use thy military skill,
and mark the issue:

God shall make thee fall before the enemy; notwithstanding the number of
thy troops, and those of thy auxiliaries; though some take them to be
spoken seriously, and read the words, "but go thou"; that is, alone,
without the hired troops, and fight boldly and courageously; or
otherwise "God shall make thee fall", &c.

for God hath power to help and to cast down; to help with a few, and to
cast down with many; to help without the hired Israelites, and to cast
down with them.

[2 Chronicles 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 25:9</span></span>

And Amaziah said to the man of God, but what shall we do for the one
hundred talents which I have given to the army of Israel?.... They will
be lost, there is no demanding them back again; this he spake with some
concern, as loath to lose so much money:

and the man of God answered, the Lord is able to give thee much more
than this; whose is the earth, and the fulness thereof, the gold and
silver, and all the riches of it; and therefore he had no need to
trouble himself about the loss of his money, which, if obedient to the
will of God, he might expect it would be abundantly repaid him.

[2 Chronicles 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 25:10</span></span>

Then Amaziah separated them,.... From his army, among whom they were
incorporated and ranked, to wit:

the army that was come to him out of Ephraim; which he had hired of the
ten tribes, these he singled out:

to go home again; to their own country:

wherefore their anger was greatly kindled against Judah, and they
returned home in great anger; it being a great slight put upon them, and
a reproach to them, to be thus dismissed, as they thought; and
especially if they understood that it was because they were idolaters;
and the rather as they might have hoped to have had their share in the
plunder of the Edomites.

[2 Chronicles 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 25:11</span></span>

And Amaziah strengthened himself, and led forth his people,.... To go to
war with the Edomites; not discouraged by the dismission of the hired
troops, but trusting in the promise and power of God, he went forth with
boldness and intrepidity:

and went to the valley of salt, and smote of the children of Seir, ten
thousand; the Edomites; so called, not because they were the posterity
of Seir, but because they dwelt in Seir, from whence they drove the
descendants of Seir, and dwelt in their stead; see [Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007).

[2 Chronicles 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 25:12</span></span>

And other ten thousand left alive did the children of Judah carry away
captive,.... The rest of the army of the Edomites, which amounted to the
same number, fell into their hands, and they took them, and carried them
off:

and brought them unto the top of the rock; very probably the same on
which the city Petra, the metropolis of Edom, was built, called also
Selah, [Kg2 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007) both which names
signify a rock. Josephus (g) calls it the great rock in Arabia; that is,
Arabia Petraea:

and cast them down from the top of the rock, that they were broken all
in pieces; burst asunder, bones broken, and limb from limb separated.
This sort of punishment was inflicted by the Romans on various
malefactors, by casting them down from the Tarpeian rock (h); and in
Greece, according to the Delphian law, such as were guilty of sacrilege
were led to a rock, and cast down headlong from thence (i): and now in
Turkey, at a place called Constantine, a town situated on the top of a
great rock, the usual way of executing great criminals is by pushing
them from off the cliff (k); see [Luk
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#029), but to use captives taken in war
after this manner seems cruel and barbarous; and what should be the
reason of such treatment of them is not easy to say.

\(g\) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 9. sect. 1. (h) Liv. Hist. l. 6. c. 20. Patercul.
Hist. Roman. l. 2. Aurel. Victor. de Vir. Illustr. c. 27, 70. Vid,
Rycquium de Capitol. Roman. c. 4. p. 45, &c. (i) Aelian. Var. Hist. l.
11. c. 5. (k) Pitt's Account of the Mahometans, ch. 1. p. 10.

[2 Chronicles 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 25:13</span></span>

But the soldiers of the army which Amaziah sent back, that they should
not go with him to battle, The 100,000 men hired out of Israel, whom he
dismissed before he went against Edom:

fell upon the cities of Judah, from Samaria even unto Bethhoron; which,
though it formerly belonged to Ephraim, had been taken by the men of
Judah; they did not fall on these as they returned home, for then it
would have been said from Bethhoron to Samaria: but after they had
returned home, they meditated this piece of revenge for the ill
treatment of them, as they reckoned it:

and smote three thousand of them; of the inhabitants of the cities, who
rose up and opposed them:

and took much spoil; out of them, and went their way with it.

[2 Chronicles 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 25:14</span></span>

Now it came to pass, after that Amaziah was come from the slaughter of
the Edomites,.... Instead of returning thanks to God for the victory
obtained, and giving him the glory of it:

that he brought the gods of the children of Seir, and set them up to be
his gods; what were the gods of the Edomites is nowhere said in
Scripture; only Josephus (l) speaks of the priests of Coze, which he
says was a god of the Idumaeans:

and bowed himself before them, and burned incense unto them; which was
the greatest piece of sottishhess and stupidity imaginable, to worship
the gods of a nation conquered by him; for since they could not save
them, what help could he expect from them?

\(l\) Antiqu. l. l5. c. 7. sect. 9.

[2 Chronicles 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 25:15</span></span>

Wherefore the anger of the Lord was kindled against Amaziah,....
Idolatry being always highly displeasing to the Lord; and this was a
most provoking instance of it, that when the Lord had given him victory
over his enemies, that he should forsake him, and worship their gods:

and he sent unto him a prophet; whether the same as before, is not
certain:

which said unto him, why hast thou sought after the gods of the people
which could not deliver their own people out of thine hand? and
therefore it was madness in him to seek after them, and worship them.

[2 Chronicles 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch2 25:16</span></span>

And it came to pass, as he talked with him, that the king said unto him,
art thou made of the king's council?.... He was not indeed one of his
privy council, made so by him, but he was appointed a counsellor to him
by the Lord, the King of kings, to expostulate with him about his
idolatry, and to advise him to relinquish it, to whose counsel he ought
to have hearkened:

forbear, why shouldest thou be smitten? bidding him hold his peace, and
threatening him, that if he did not, he must expect to be smitten; that
is, with death, as Zechariah the prophet was by the order of his father:

then the prophet forbore; left off speaking, only added this at parting:

and said, I know that God hath determined to destroy thee; being given
up to hardness of heart, so as to pay no regard to the Lord and his
prophets, which was a sure presage of destruction:

because thou hast done this; committed such idolatry, and persisted in
it:

and hast not hearkened to my counsel; to reform from it.

[2 Chronicles 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch2 25:17</span></span>

Then Amaziah king of Judah took advice,.... Not of God, nor of his
prophets, but of some of his nobles like himself:

and sent to Joash--king of Israel; of his message to him here, and his
answer in the two following verses, see the following notes: See Gill on
[Kg2 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#008). See Gill on [Kg2
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#009). See Gill on [Kg2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#010).

[2 Chronicles 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 25:20</span></span>

But Amaziah would not hear,.... What the king of Israel advised him to,
not to meddle to his hurt:

for it came of God, that he might deliver them into the hand of their
enemies; Amaziah and his army into the hands of Joash and his; this was
the will of God, and was brought about by his providence; and that it
might be, Amaziah was given up to blindness and hardness of heart, as a
punishment of his idolatry:

because they sought after the gods of Edom; he and his nobles, and many
of the people following his example; from hence to the end of the
chapter the same things are recorded as in [Kg2
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#011), see the notes there; see Gill
on [Kg2 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#011), [Kg2
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#012), [Kg2
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013), [Kg2
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#014), [Kg2
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#015), [Kg2
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#016), [Kg2
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017), [Kg2
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#018), [Kg2
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#019), [Kg2
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#020)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 26](ch2026)

</div>
