<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2030)  [Next](ch2032) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 31:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 31

This chapter begins with the destruction of idolatrous worship, the
appointment of the courses of the priests and Levites, and the royal
bounty for sacrifices, [Ch2 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001), next
follows the order Hezekiah gave, that the people at Jerusalem, and
throughout the land, should make the proper provision for the priests
and Levites, as the law directed; and which was cheerfully complied
with, and the firstfruits and tithes were brought in, in great
abundance, insomuch that there was enough, and plenty left, [Ch2
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#004), wherefore chambers were prepared
in the temple to lay it up in, and persons appointed to be the overseers
of it, and to distribute it faithfully to their brethren and their
families, to small and great, [Ch2
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#011), and the chapter is closed in
praise of the works of Hezekiah, and the success that attended him, [Ch2
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#020).

[2 Chronicles 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 31:1</span></span>

Now when all this was finished,.... The temple cleansed, the priests and
Levites sanctified, the passover and feast of unleavened bread observed,
and other seven days of rejoicing kept:

all Israel that were present went out to the cities of Judah, and brake
the images in pieces, and cut down the groves, and threw down the high
places and the altars out of all Judah and Benjamin; which had been
erected by Ahaz, [Ch2 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#002) at or about
this time also the brasen serpent was broke to pieces, [Kg2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004),

in Ephraim also and Manasseh, until they had utterly destroyed them all;
which must be understood of such cities in those tribes that had been
taken in former times by the kings of Judah from the kings of Israel; or
such as were now in the hands of the Assyrians, who might not concern
themselves in matters of religion; or this might be done at the
connivance of Hoshea king of Israel, who had no regard to any other
idolatry than the worship of the calves; and besides, having met with
trouble from the Assyrians, and fearing more, might be willing to have
his kingdom cleared of idolatry, in hope the divine displeasure would be
removed:

then all the children of Israel returned every man to his possession
into their own cities; and not till then, when all monuments of idolatry
were removed.

[2 Chronicles 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 31:2</span></span>

And Hezekiah appointed the courses of the priests, and the Levites after
their courses,.... As they were fixed by David, and were in the times of
Jehoshaphat, and had been since interrupted, and which Hezekiah now
restored, and placed them in their regular order:

every man according to his service, the priests and Levites for burnt
offerings, and for peace offerings, to minister and to give thanks, and
to praise in the gates of the tents of the Lord; or camp of the Lord,
where they were posted, and lay as an host encamped, to keep the watch
of the house of the Lord; the priests, they were appointed to offer the
sacrifices of every sort; the Levites to minister to them in what they
needed and required of them, and others of them to be singers in time of
service, and others to be porters at the gate.

[2 Chronicles 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 31:3</span></span>

He appointed also the king's portion of his substance,.... Out of his
own treasury, of his royal bounty, over and above what was usual for
kings to give for their own sacrifices, the treasury of the temple being
exhausted, and the people being brought into low circumstances in the
last reign:

for the burnt offerings, to wit, for the morning and evening burnt
offerings; the daily sacrifice offered morning and evening, which had
been neglected, but now revived:

and the burnt offerings for the sabbaths, and for the new moons, and for
the set feasts; when beside the daily sacrifice there were additional
ones: as it is written in the law of the Lord; in [Num
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#009).

[2 Chronicles 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 31:4</span></span>

Moreover, he commanded the people that dwelt in Jerusalem to give the
portion of the priests and the Levites,.... What was assigned unto them
by the law of God by tithes, firstfruits, &c.

that they might be encouraged in the law of the Lord; in the study of
it; that they might gain greater knowledge of it themselves, and be
better able to instruct the people, which of late had been much
neglected; and that they might be more at leisure for such service, and
be free from all worldly business, care, and distraction of mind, was
the design of this edict.

[2 Chronicles 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 31:5</span></span>

And as soon as the commandment came abroad,.... Not only was published
in the city of Jerusalem, but the report of it, or rather that itself,
was spread throughout the cities of Judah:

the children of Israel brought in abundance the firstfruits of corn,
wine, and oil, and honey; the three first of these are expressed in the
law, [Deu 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#004) but not honey;
wherefore the Targum here, and the Jewish writers in general, interpret
it of the "dubsa" of the palm tree, as they call it, the fruit and
liquor of that, which is of a sweet taste, and which the Scenite Arabs
called "dabusa", as Pliny (w) from Juba relates; for so it should be
read, and not "dabulan" or "dablan", as in some copies: but though honey
was forbid to be used in sacrifice, it was not forbidden to be eaten;
and as the land of Judea abounded with honey, properly so called, the
priests might have the firstfruits of that as of other liquors; See Gill
on [Deu 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008),

and of all the increase of the field; of the trees of it, vines, fig
trees, pomegranates, &c. as Kimchi:

and the tithe of all things; even of herbs, as the same writer, and so
the Talmud (x), which were free from tithes by the law, see [Mat
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023),

brought they in abundantly; even of all that their vineyards,
oliveyards, and fields produced.

\(w\) Nat. Hist. l. 13. c. 4. (x) T. Bab. Nedarim, fol. 55. 1.

[2 Chronicles 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 31:6</span></span>

And concerning the children of Israel and Judah, that dwelt in the
cities of Judah,.... As for the supplement "concerning", I see no need
of it; the sense is, that when the king's edict was known by the
inhabitants of the cities in the country, as well as at Jerusalem:

they also brought in the tithes of oxen, and sheep; according to the law
in [Lev 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev027.htm#032).

and the tithe of holy things, which were consecrated unto the Lord their
God; which Jarchi understands of the second tithe the Levites were to
give to the priests; but Kimchi of things consecrated to sacred uses,
and no longer for their own, and which were even free from tithing:

and laid them by heaps: heaps upon heaps, such large quantities were
brought in.

[2 Chronicles 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 31:7</span></span>

In the third month they began to lay the foundation of the heaps.....
The month Sivan, as the Targum, in which month was the feast of
Pentecost, called the feast of the harvest, [Exo
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016), for then barley harvest was
ended, and wheat harvest began, and the firstfruits were brought:

and finished them in the seventh month; the month Tisri, as the Targum,
in which was the feast of tabernacles, sometimes called the feast of
ingathering, of the fruits of the earth, the wine, oil, &c. and so a
proper time for bringing the tithes of all.

[2 Chronicles 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 31:8</span></span>

And when Hezekiah and the princes came and saw the heaps,.... Of the
tithes and firstfruits:

they blessed the Lord; for the great increase of the fruits of the
earth, and for making the people so willing to bring in the dues to the
priests and Levites:

and his people Israel; wished all happiness and prosperity to them,
being found in the way of their duty.

[2 Chronicles 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 31:9</span></span>

Then Hezekiah questioned with the priests and the Levites concerning the
heaps. How they came to be so large, or why they let them lie where they
did.

[2 Chronicles 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 31:10</span></span>

And Azariah the chief priest of the house of Zadok answered him,.... Who
was the high priest of the family of Eleazar, in the line of Zadok, made
high priest in Solomon's time, when Abiathar was thrust out; Jarchi
takes him to be the same Azariah that was in the days of Uzziah, [Ch2
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#017),

and said, since the people began to bring the offerings into the house
of the Lord we have had enough to eat, and have left plenty; which were
now four mouths since; and the priests and Levites, and their families,
had partaken of them, and eat to satiety, and yet there was great plenty
remaining:

for the Lord hath blessed his people: the Targum is,"the Word of the
Lord has blessed them,''given them large crops this year, and a ready
willing mind to bring in what is due for the service of the temple:

and that which is left is this great store; the heaps the king and
princes saw, and inquired about; or what is left is for the great
multitude of the priests and Levites, and their families, both at
Jerusalem, and in the cities in the country; so Kimchi interprets it.

[2 Chronicles 31:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 31:11</span></span>

Then Hezekiah commanded to prepare chambers in the house of the
Lord,.... Either to build new ones, or fit up those that were built:

and they prepared them; got them ready to lay up the stores in.

[2 Chronicles 31:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 31:12</span></span>

And brought in the offerings, and the tithes, and the dedicated things,
faithfully,.... Kept nothing back for their own private use, but
faithfully delivered in and laid up the whole that was brought which
remained; this was done by the priests and Levites, in whose hands and
care they were:

over which Cononiah the Levite was ruler, and Shimei his brother was the
next; these two had the charge and care of the whole, the one as deputy
to the other.

[2 Chronicles 31:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 31:13</span></span>

And Jehiel, and Azaziah, and Nahath, and Asahel, and Jerimoth, and
Jozabad, and Eliel, and Ismachiah, and Mahath, and Benaiah, were
overseers under the hand of Cononiah and Shimei his brother,.... These
ten were assistants to the other two, were under them, and at their
command, and were to be ready at hand to do what they should order and
direct them:

at the commandment of Hezekiah the king, and Azariah the ruler of the
house of God; these were fixed in their post under the other two by the
king and the high priest, to whom also the other two were accountable.

[2 Chronicles 31:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 31:14</span></span>

And Kore the son of Imnah the Levite, the porter towards the east,....
At the east gate of the temple; see [Ch1
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#017).

was over the freewill offerings of God, to distribute the oblations of
the Lord; to the priests and Levites, for whose use they were; or to
deliver out the fine flour, oil, and wine, and frankincense, for the
meat and drink offerings:

and the most holy things; which belonged to the priests only to eat of,
as the remainder of the meat offerings, the sin and trespass offerings,
and the shewbread.

[2 Chronicles 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 31:15</span></span>

And next to him were Eden and Mijamin, and Jeshua, and Shemaiah,
Amariah, and Shecaniah,.... As Kore was the principal, and his business
lay chiefly with the priests in the temple, and in Jerusalem, these men
under him were employed in distributing to the priests:

in the cities of the priests; in the several parts of the country:

in their set office; or faithfully:

to give to their brethren by courses, as well to the great as to the
small; to communicate of the stores under their hands, according to
their several courses, both priests and Levites, and to all in their
families, small and great.

[2 Chronicles 31:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ch2 31:16</span></span>

Beside their genealogy of males, from three years old and upwards,....
Their office was not only to give to the priests, but to those of their
males in their genealogy, who were three years old and upwards; for
under that age, according to Kimchi, they were not fit to come into the
temple; nor have they knowledge to keep what is put into their hands;
nor fit to handle offerings, lest they should defile them; but at that
age they might be taught how to hold them, and be used to it; but as for
females, he says, they were not admitted at any age:

even unto everyone that entereth into the house of the Lord; of the said
age, and in the genealogy and register of the priests:

his daily portion for their service in their charges, according to their
courses; food for every day, in consideration of their service in their
several wards, according to their courses in turn.

[2 Chronicles 31:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ch2 31:17</span></span>

Both to the genealogy of the priests by the house of their fathers,....
As to the priests registered according to their families from the age
before observed, a portion was given: so to the Levites:

from twenty years old and upward, in their charges, by their courses;
for though originally they were not admitted into the tabernacle till
twenty five years of age, nor to officiate till thirty, but in David's
time they were allowed at twenty years of age and upwards, [Ch1
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#024).

[2 Chronicles 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ch2 31:18</span></span>

And to the genealogy of all their little ones, their wives, and their
sons, and their daughters, through all the congregation,.... These were
all genealogized and registered, wives and children, sons and daughters,
whether small or grown up; and a portion was distributed to them
according to their number, greater or lesser:

for in their set office they sanctified themselves in holiness; which is
to be understood either of the overseers, who, in their set office,
faithfully distributed the holy things to the persons before described;
or else to the priests, and Levites, to whom, and to whose families, the
distribution was made, because they wholly devoted themselves to the
holy service of God.

[2 Chronicles 31:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ch2 31:19</span></span>

Also of the sons of Aaron the priests, which were in the fields of the
suburbs of their cities, in every several city,.... Which were allowed
to them out of the several tribes, and where they dwelt, when it was not
the turn of their course to officiate in the temple; now to these, as
well as to those in Jerusalem, a portion was distributed for the support
of them and their families:

the men that were expressed by name; before mentioned, [Ch2
31:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#013), though some understand it of
such as were nominated and appointed by them, and to act under them in
the country:

to give portions to all the males among the priests, and to all that
were reckoned by genealogies among the Levites: as before declared.

[2 Chronicles 31:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ch2 31:20</span></span>

And thus did Hezekiah throughout all Judah,.... Settled the courses of
the priests and Levites, and made a provision for them and their
families:

and wrought that which was good and right and truth before the Lord his
God: or did that which was truly right and good, according to the law
and will of God, in the sincerity and uprightness of his soul, and as in
the presence of the omniscient God, he approving and accepting it for
Christ's sake.

[2 Chronicles 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2031.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ch2 31:21</span></span>

And in every work that he began in the service of the house of God,....
In cleansing the temple, providing sacrifices, placing the priests and
Levites order, taking care of the maintenance of them:

and in the law and in the commandments; in the observation of all the
laws, statutes, and judgments of God, moral, ceremonial, and judicial:

to seek his God; and serve and worship him, and therein his honour and
glory:

he did it with all his heart; in the most cordial, sincere, and upright
manner:

and prospered; he succeeded in all he undertook, God being with him, and
blessing him in his civil and religious concerns.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 32](ch2032)

</div>
