<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2)  
  [Previous](ch2013)  [Next](ch2015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 14:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 14

This chapter relates the death of Abijah, and the succession of Asa in
his stead, [Ch2 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001), gives a good
character of the latter for his reformation in religion, and for the
care he took for the safety and protection of his subjects, [Ch2
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#002), and an account is given of a
large army of Ethiopians that came against him, over whom he crying to
the Lord, and trusting in him, by his help obtained a complete victory,
[Ch2 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009).

[2 Chronicles 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 14:1</span></span>

So Abijah slept with his fathers, [Kg1
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#008).

and Asa his son reigned in his stead; in his days the land was quiet ten
years; the Targum is, the land of Israel; but much better the
Septuagint, the land of Judah; these ten years, in which it had rest
from war, were the first three years of Asa's reign, and the first seven
of Baasha's, according to Jarchi, and which seems right; after which
there was war between them all their days, see [Kg1
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#032).

[2 Chronicles 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 14:2</span></span>

And Asa did that which was good and right,.... See [Kg1
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#011).

[2 Chronicles 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 14:3</span></span>

For he took away the altars of the strange gods,.... Or of a strange
people, of the Zidonians, Ammonites, and Moabites, which had remained
from the times of Solomon, and which he built for his wives, [Kg1
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007).

and the high places; built for idols; for as for those on which the true
God was worshipped, they were not removed in his days, [Kg1
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#014).

and brake down the images: or statues, or pillars, erected to the honour
of idols, and on which the images of them were placed:

and cut down the groves; in the midst of which they stood.

[2 Chronicles 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 14:4</span></span>

And commanded Judah to seek the Lord God of their fathers,.... To pray
to him, and him only, and attend his worship and service; this he did by
a public edict:

and to do the law and the commandment: to observe all the laws of God,
moral, ceremonial, and civil.

[2 Chronicles 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 14:5</span></span>

Also he took away out of all the cities of Judah the high places and the
images,.... Perhaps the high places in [Ch2
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#003) design only the high places and
altars in Jerusalem, and near it; these in all the rest of the cities of
the land; the "images were", as the word signifies, "sun images", either
made in the form of the sun, or dedicated to it, or temples for it; See
Gill on [Lev 26:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#030),

and the kingdom was quiet before him; he had no foreign enemy to molest
him, and so took that opportunity to reform divine worship, and in that
he met with no opposition from his people.

[2 Chronicles 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ch2 14:6</span></span>

And he built fenced cities in Judah,.... For his defence against the
kingdom of Israel and other nations, as Rehoboam had done before him;
and which might have been demolished by Shishak king of Egypt, when he
took them, [Ch2 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#005).

for the land had rest; according to the Targum, the land of Israel
rested, and gave no disturbance to the kingdom of Judah, not having
recovered the blow given them by Abijah; but it is rather to be
understood of the land of Judah, which, as it did not attempt the
reduction of the ten tribes, so it was neither attacked by them, nor any
other enemy: and he had no war in those years; in the ten years
mentioned, [Ch2 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#001), neither with
Israel nor any other nation: because the Lord had given him rest; that
he might be at leisure to do the above things; all rest is from the
Lord, civil, spiritual, and eternal.

[2 Chronicles 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 14:7</span></span>

Therefore he said unto Judah,.... To the nobles and principal men of the
kingdom:

let us build these cities; which he, no doubt, particularly mentioned by
name, and pointed at; that is, repair and fortify them, and put them
into a better condition of defence:

and make about them walls and towers, gates and bars; which are always
made to fortified places, to protect the inhabitants, and keep out an
enemy:

while the land is yet before us; in our power, no enemy in it, nor any
to hinder or molest:

because we have sought the Lord our God, we have sought him, and he hath
given us rest on every side; had set up his pure worship, reformed
abuses in it, and removed idolatry from it, and closely attended to the
service of the sanctuary, which was well pleasing to God; the happy
effect of which they experienced, rest from all their enemies round
about them:

so that they built, and prospered; they began, and went on, and
finished, there being nothing to hinder them.

[2 Chronicles 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 14:8</span></span>

And Asa had an army of men that bare targets and spears, out of Judah
three hundred thousand,.... These were armed with a large sort of
shield, to protect them, and with spears, to push at an enemy when they
came near them, and to close quarters with them:

and out of Benjamin, that bare shields and drew bows, two hundred and
fourscore thousand; these had also a lesser sort of shields, to defend
their bodies, and bows and arrows, to annoy an enemy at a distance:

all these were mighty men of valour; able bodied men, valiant and
courageous; perhaps Asa gathered these together, on hearing that the
Ethiopians were preparing to attack him, as follows.

[2 Chronicles 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 14:9</span></span>

And there came out against them Zerah the Ethiopian, with an host of
thousand thousand, and three hundred chariots,.... According to Josephus
(b), this army consisted of 900,000 foot, and 100,000 horsemen, and
certain it is there were horsemen among them, [Ch2
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#008) some say these were not the
Ethiopians in Africa, beyond Egypt, being, as is said, too far off for
such an army to travel, and it would be hard to say what should induce
them to it; and besides it is urged, the king of Egypt would never have
suffered them to pass through his dominions, as they must to come to
Judea; but that they were the Cushite Arabs, that inhabited Midian, part
of Arabia Petraea, and Arabia Felix, near Judaea; see Gill on [Num
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/num012.htm#001), but since this great host
consisted of Lubim or Libyans, inhabitants of Africa, as well as of
Ethiopians, [Ch2 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#008), these
Ethiopians seem to be rather those in Africa, who were masters of Egypt
and Libya, as well as Ethiopia, quickly after the death of Shishak, or
Sesostris, see [Ch2 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#002), which
accounts for the size of this army, and their passage through Egypt:
that there were two sorts of Ethiopians, the western and eastern ones,
the one that dwelt in Africa, the other in Asia, appears clearly from
Homer (c), Herodotus (d), and Heliodorus (e), the former of which seem
here meant; nor need this army be thought incredible, especially since
they were joined by the Lubim or Libyans, and assisted by the
Philistines, as appears by what follows; besides, the two armies of
Israel and Judah we read of in the preceding chapter, when put together,
exceed this; see also [Ch2 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2017.htm#014), so
the armies of Tamerlane and Bajazet, that of the former being 1,600,000,
and that of the latter 1,400,000 (f):

and came unto Mareshah; a city in the tribe of Judah, on the borders of
it, [Ch2 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#008).

\(b\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 12. sect. 1. (c) Odyss. 1. ver. 23, 24. (d)
Polymnia, sive, l. 7. c. 69, 70. (e) Ethiopic. l. 9. c. 6. (f) Laonic.
Chalcocond. de rebus Turc. l. 3. p. 98, 102.

[2 Chronicles 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 14:10</span></span>

Then Asa went out against him,.... Notwithstanding he brought so great
an army with him:

and they set the battle in array in the valley of Zephathah at Mareshah;
where the Ethiopians were; he did not stay till they got further into
his country, but marched against them when on the frontiers of it, and
chose the valley to pitch in, as being more to the advantage of his
smaller army; see [Jdg 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#017).

[2 Chronicles 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 14:11</span></span>

And Asa cried unto the Lord his God,.... Or prayed, as the Targum, with
vehemence, being in distress; this he did before the battle began, at
the head of his army, and for the encouragement of it:

and said, Lord, it is nothing with thee to help; nothing can hinder from
helping, his power being superior to all others, and even infinite, and
none besides him could:

whether with many, or with them that have no power; numbers make no
difference with him, nor the condition they are in; whether numerous and
mighty, or few and feeble; he can as easily help the one as the other,
see [Sa1 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#006),

help us, O Lord our God; who are few and weak in comparison of the
enemy:

for we rest on thee; trust in thee, and rely upon thee for help; the
Targum is,"on thy Word we lean:"

and in thy name we go against this multitude; expressing faith in him,
expecting help from him, encouraging and strengthening themselves in
him, going forth not in their own name and strength, but in his; the
Targum is,"in the name of the Word of the Lord:"

O Lord, thou art our God: and thou only we know, and serve no other, and
we are thy people, called by thy name:

let not man prevail against thee; for should this enemy prevail against
them, it would be interpreted prevailing against their God.

[2 Chronicles 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 14:12</span></span>

So the Lord smote the Ethiopians before Asa, and before Judah,.... With
consternation and terror; they were thrown into a panic:

and the Ethiopians fled; before them, just as Jeroboam and Israel had,
as related in the preceding chapter, [Ch2
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#015).

[2 Chronicles 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 14:13</span></span>

And Asa, and the people that were with him, pursued them unto Gerar,....
A city of the Philistines, [Gen 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001),

and the Ethiopians were overthrown, that they could not recover
themselves; they were thrown into such a fright, and into so much
confusion, that they could not put themselves in order, and rally again;
or there fell such a vast number of them, that there were scarce any
remaining alive, which seems to be the sense of the words used:

for they were destroyed before the Lord, and before his host; the army
of Israel, which the Lord was, as it were, the Commander of, fought for,
and led them in the pursuit, and gave them victory; or it may mean an
host of angels, employed in destroying this great army; and so the
Syriac and Arabic versions of [Ch2
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#012) read,"the angel of the Lord
smote the Ethiopians:"

and they carried away very much spoil; which they found in their camp,
and with their slain; even much gold and silver, as Josephus (g) says.

\(g\) Ut supra, (Antiq. l. 8. c. 12.) sect. 2.

[2 Chronicles 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 14:14</span></span>

And they smote all the cities round about Gerar,.... The cities of the
Philistines, who were auxiliaries and confederates with these
Ethiopians, and colonies from them, according to Theodoret, and who
says, about Eleutheropolis was a place, called, in his time, Geraron
Saton:

for the fear of the Lord came upon them; so that they had no power to
defend themselves, and oppose the men of Judah:

and they spoiled all the cities; of the goods and substance that were in
them:

for there was exceeding much spoil in them; great wealth and riches of
one kind or another.

[2 Chronicles 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ch2 14:15</span></span>

They smote also the tents of cattle,.... The people that dwelt in tents
for the sake of the pasturage of their cattle; the Scenite Arabs, so
called from dwelling in tents:

and carried away sheep; which those Arabs were feeding in Palestine, and
which this great army brought with them for their support:

and camels in abundance; which is another circumstance proving them to
be Arabs, who abounded with camels:

and returned to Jerusalem; with their spoil, and with great joy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 15](ch2015)

</div>
