<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2015)  [Next](ch2017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001.md)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 16:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 16

Baasha coming up against Judah, and building Ramah, Asa made a league
with the king of Syria, and hired him to make a diversion in his favour,
and cause Baasha to leave off building, which succeeded, [Ch2
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001.md), for which he was reproved by a
prophet of the Lord, with whom he was so angry for it as to put him in
prison, and oppress others, [Ch2 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007.md),
and the chapter is closed with an account of his disease and conduct
under it, and of his death and burial, [Ch2
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#011.md).

[2 Chronicles 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 16:1</span></span>

In the thirty and sixth year of the reign of Asa Baasha king of Israel
came up against Judah,.... How this is to be reconciled with the reign
of Baasha, which was but twenty four years, and was begun in the third
of Asa, and therefore must have been dead nearly ten years before this
year of Asa's reign; see Gill on [Kg1
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#017.md) where, and in the following
verses, are the same things related as here, to the end of the sixth
verse; the explanation of which the reader is referred to.

[2 Chronicles 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 16:7</span></span>

And at that time Hanani the seer came to Asa king of Judah,.... Being
sent by the Lord to reprove him:

and said unto him, because thou hast relied on the king of Syria; on the
covenant he made with him, on the promises the Syrian king made to him
upon receiving his money, and so trusted to an arm of flesh, and even an
Heathen king:

and not relied on the Lord thy God; his promises, power, and providence,
which he had reason to believe would have been engaged on his behalf,
had he placed his confidence in him as he ought to have done: the Targum
is,"and not relied on the Word of the Lord thy God:"

therefore is the host of the king of Syria escaped out of thine hand;
which otherwise would have fallen into it, had he left him to continue
in league with the king of Israel, and not solicited him to break it;
for then he would have come with him against Asa, and the Lord would
have delivered him to him.

[2 Chronicles 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 16:8</span></span>

Were not the Ethiopians and the Lubim a huge host, with very many
chariots and horsemen?.... They were no less than 1,000,000 men, and
three hundred chariots, [Ch2 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009.md), the
Lubim were the Libyans, a people near Egypt, that dwelt in Africa;
according to an Arabic writer (l), they were the Nubians:

yet, because thou didst rely on the Lord, he delivered them into thine
hand; and with equal ease could and would have delivered the Syrian army
unto him, had he as then trusted in the Lord.

\(l\) Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. dyn. 3. p. 57.

[2 Chronicles 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 16:9</span></span>

For the eyes of the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth,....
The eyes of his omniscience are everywhere, and the eyes of his mercy
and goodness, of his care and providence, are here and there, and in
every place throughout the whole world at once, see [Zac
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#010.md),

to show himself strong in the behalf of them whose heart is perfect
towards him; or, as in the margin, "strongly to hold" with such, to be
on their side, take their part, strengthen them, support and supply
them, and to protect and defend them who are sincere and upright in
heart; whose graces are sincere and unfeigned, though not complete, nor
they free from sin, and who, with the heart, sincerely believe in God,
in which Asa at this time failed, though otherwise his heart is said to
be perfect, [Kg1 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#004.md), it was so in
the general bent of it, and especially with respect to the worship of
God, though there was something lacking in his faith at this time, as
there often is in the best of men:

herein thou hast done foolishly; to trust in man, and not in the Lord,
to part with his money, and lose the opportunity of having the whole
Syrian army fall into his hands:

therefore from henceforth thou shalt have wars; which, though we read
not of, was doubtless his case; some interpret it of his posterity.

[2 Chronicles 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ch2 16:10</span></span>

Then Asa was wroth with the seer,.... For this faithful reproof of him,
which was another instance of his sin and folly:

and put him in a prison house; in a very strait place, in which he could
not turn himself, what we call "little ease"; some say it was the
stocks, others a pillory he put him into:

for he was in a rage with him because of this thing; his passion rose
very high, and to which he gave way, and was his infirmity:

and Asa oppressed some of the people the same time; by fines and
imprisonments, such as perhaps expressed their disapprobation of his
league with the king of Syria, and of his ill usage of the prophet.

[2 Chronicles 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ch2 16:11</span></span>

And, behold, the acts of Asa, first and last,.... See Gill on [Kg1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#023.md).

[2 Chronicles 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ch2 16:12</span></span>

And Asa in the thirty ninth year of his reign was diseased in his
feet,.... This was about two years before his death, and his disease is
generally thought to be the gout in his feet, and a just retaliation for
putting the prophet's feet into the stocks:

until his disease was exceeding great; it increased upon him, and became
very severe and intolerable, and the fits were frequent, as well as the
pain sharper; though the sense of the Hebrew (m) phrase may be, that his
disease got upwards, into a superior part of his body, head, or stomach,
which, when the gout does, it is dangerous. A very learned physician (n)
is of opinion, that not the gout, but what he calls an "aedematous"
swelling of the feet, is meant, which insensibly gets up into the
bowels, and is successively attended with greater inconveniences; a
tension of the abdomen, difficulty of breathing, very troublesome to the
patient, and issues in a dropsy, and death itself:

yet in his disease he sought not to the Lord; his seeking to physicians
for help in his disease, perhaps, would not have been observed to his
reproach, had he also sought unto the Lord, whom he ought to have sought
in the first place; and when he applied to the physicians, he should
have implored the blessing of God on their prescriptions; but he so much
forgot himself as to forget the Lord: this is the first time we read of
physicians among the Jews, and some think these were Heathens, and a
sort of enchanters: the Jews entertained a very ill opinion of
physicians; the best of them, they say (o), deserve hell, and they
advise (p) men not to live in a city where the chief man is a physician;
but the author of the book of Ecclesiasticus gives a great encomium of
them, and exhorts to honour and esteem them,"1 Honour a physician with
the honour due unto him for the uses which ye may have of him: for the
Lord hath created him. 2 For of the most High cometh healing, and he
shall receive honour of the king. 3 The skill of the physician shall
lift up his head: and in the sight of great men he shall be in
admiration. 4 The Lord hath created medicines out of the earth; and he
that is wise will not abhor them. 5 Was not the water made sweet with
wood, that the virtue thereof might be known? 6 And he hath given men
skill, that he might be honoured in his marvellous works. 7 With such
doth he heal men, and taketh away their pains. 8 Of such doth the
apothecary make a confection; and of his works there is no end; and from
him is peace over all the earth,'' (Sirach 38)Julian (q) the emperor
greatly honoured them, and observes, that it is justly said by the
philosophers, that the art of medicine fell from heaven.

\(m\) "usque ad supra", Montanus; "usque ad summum", Vatablus; "usque ad
sursum", Piscator. (n) Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 4. p. 645. (o) T.
Bab. Kiddashin, fol. 32. 1. Gloss. in ib. (p) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol.
113. 1. (q) Opera, par. 2. p. 154.

[2 Chronicles 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ch2 16:13</span></span>

And Asa slept with his fathers, and died in the forty first year of his
reign. See [Kg1 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#010.md).

[2 Chronicles 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ch2 16:14</span></span>

And they buried him in his own sepulchres which he had made for himself
in the city of David,.... Where was the burying place of the kings of
Judah; here Asa had ordered a vault to be made for himself and his
family, and therefore called sepulchres, because of the several cells
therein to put separate bodies in:

and laid him in the bed; not only laid him out, as we express it, but
laid him on a bed of state, where he lay in great pomp; or the funeral
bed, which, with other nations (r), used to be strowed with sweet
smelling flowers and herbs, as follows:

which was filled with sweet odours, and divers kinds of spices prepared
by the apothecaries art; or rather confectioner or druggist; for it is a
question whether there were then any such we call apothecaries; this bed
was strowed with spices, myrrh, aloes, cassia, cinnamon, &c. and which
perhaps might be made up into a liquid, which was sprinkled over the bed
and shroud in which he lay:

and they made a very great burning for him; not that they made a great
fire, and burned his body; for burning was not used with the Jews; but
they burnt spices and other things in great quantity, in honour of him:
See Gill on [Jer 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#005.md), and this custom
continued to the times of Herod, at whose funeral there were five
hundred of his domestics and freed men bearing spices (s).

\(r\) Herodian. Hist. l. 4. c. 3. Vid. Kirchman. de Funer. Roman. l. 1.
c. 11. & Alstorph. de Lect. Vet. c. 19. p. 151, 152. (s) Joseph. de
Bello Jud. l. 1. c. 33. sect. 9.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 17](ch2017.md)

</div>
