<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Chronicles Index](ch2.md)  
  [Previous](ch2021)  [Next](ch2023.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Chronicles Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#001.md)

[2 Chronicles](../../../bib/kjv/ch2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ch2 22:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CHRONICLES 22

In this chapter we have an account of the wicked reign of Ahaziah the
son of Jehoram, [Ch2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#001.md) of his
death, the occasion and manner of it, [Ch2
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#005.md) and of his mother Athaliah
destroying all the royal seed, excepting one, who was hid by the king's
sister, and assuming the government to herself, [Ch2
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#010.md).

[2 Chronicles 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ch2 22:1</span></span>

And the inhabitants of Jerusalem made Ahaziah his youngest son king in
his stead,.... He being the only surviving one of the sons of Jehoram,
the same with Jehoahaz, [Ch2 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#017.md) who
was saved when the rest were taken captive and slain, by his mother
Athaliah, and he made his escape, and that she also escaped is clear
from [Ch2 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#010.md).

for the band of men that came with the Arabians to the camp; that is, of
the Philistines, [Ch2 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#016.md), which
band seems to be a band or company of thieves and robbers, as the
Septuagint, cruel and barbarous, as the action ascribed to them shows:

for they had slain all the eldest; sons of Jehoram; the Philistines and
Arabians only carried them away captives, but those slew them in cold
blood:

so Ahaziah the son of Jehoram king of Judah reigned; being declared his
successor by the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

[2 Chronicles 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ch2 22:2</span></span>

Forty two and years old was Ahaziah when he began to reign,.... In [Kg2
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#026.md), he is said to be but twenty two
years old at his accession to the throne, which is undoubtedly most
correct; for this makes him to be two years older than his father when
he died, who was thirty two when he began to reign, and reigned eight
years, [Ch2 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#020.md), different ways are
taken to solve this difficulty; some refer this to Jehoram, that he was
forty two when Ahaziah began to reign, but he was but forty when he
died; others to the age of Athaliah his mother, as if he was the son of
one that was forty two, when he himself was but twenty two; but no
instance is given of any such way of writing, nor any just reason for
it; others make these forty two years reach to the twentieth of his son
Joash, his age twenty two, his reign one, Athaliah six, and Joash
thirteen; but the two principal solutions which seem most to satisfy
learned men are, the one, that he was twenty two when he began to reign
in his father's lifetime, and forty two when he began to reign in his
own right; but then he must reign twenty years with his father, whereas
his father reigned but eight years: to make this clear they observe (b),
as Kimchi and Abarbinel, from whom this solution is taken, that he
reigned eight years very happily when his son was twenty two, and taken
on the throne with him, after which he reigned twenty more ingloriously,
and died, when his son was forty two; this has been greedily received by
many, but without any proof: the other is, that these forty two years
are not the date of the age of Ahaziah, but of the reign of the family
of Omri king of Israel; so the Jewish chronology (c); but how
impertinent must the use of such a date be in the account of the reign
of a king of Judah? all that can be said is, his mother was of that
family, which is a trifling reason for such an unusual method of
reckoning: it seems best to acknowledge a mistake of the copier, which
might easily be made through a similarity of the numeral letters, forty
two, for twenty two (d); and the rather since some copies of the
Septuagint, and the Syriac and Arabic versions, read twenty two, as in
Kings; particularly the Syriac version, used in the church of Antioch
from the most early times; a copy of which Bishop Usher obtained at a
very great price, and in which the number is twenty two, as he assures
us; and that the difficulty here is owing to the carelessness of the
transcribers is owned by Glassius (e), a warm advocate for the integrity
of the Hebrew text, and so by Vitringa (f): and indeed it is more to the
honour of the sacred Scriptures to acknowledge here and there a mistake
in the copiers, especially in the historical books, where there is
sometimes a strange difference of names and numbers, than to give in to
wild and distorted interpretations of them, in order to reconcile them,
where there is no danger with respect to any article of faith or
manners; and, as a learned man (g) has observed of the New Testament,"it
is an invincible reason for the Scripture's part, that other escapes
should be so purposely and infinitely let pass, and yet no saving and
substantial part at all scarce moved out of its place; to say the truth,
these varieties of readings, in a few by-places, do the same office to
the main Scriptures, as the variation of the compass to the whole magnet
of the earth, the mariner knows so much the better for these how to
steer his course;''and, with respect to some various readings in the Old
Testament, Dr. Owen (h) observes, God has suffered this lesser variety
to fall out, in or among the copies we have, for the quickening and
exercising of our diligence in our search of his word:

he reigned one year in Jerusalem. His mother's name also was Athaliah,
the daughter of Omri, see [Kg2 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#026.md).

\(b\) In Hieron. Trad. Heb. in Paralip. fol. 85. E. (c) Seder Olam
Rabba, c. 17. So Ben Gersom. (d) See Kennicott's Dissert. 1. p. 98. (e)
Philolog. Sacr. p. 114. (f) Hypotypol Hist. Sacr. p. 67. (g) J.
Gregory's Preface to his Works. (h) Divine Original of the Scripture, p.
14.

[2 Chronicles 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ch2 22:3</span></span>

He also walked in the ways of the house of Ahab,.... As his father
Jehoram had, [Ch2 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2021.htm#006.md).

for his mother was his counsellor to do wickedly; to commit idolatry,
who was of that idolatrous house.

[2 Chronicles 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ch2 22:4</span></span>

Wherefore he did evil in the sight of the Lord, like the house of
Ahab,.... See [Kg2 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#027.md).

for they were his counsellors, after the death of his father, to his
destruction; both of soul and body; for they gave him bad advice, both
in religious and civil things; these were some of the family or court of
the king of Israel, that his mother sent for after his father's death to
be of his council.

[2 Chronicles 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ch2 22:5</span></span>

He walked also after their counsel,.... Did as they advised him, as in
matters of religion, so in political things, of which there is an
instance in this and the next verse; of which see Gill on [Kg2
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#028.md), [Kg2
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#029.md).

[2 Chronicles 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ch2 22:7</span></span>

And the destruction of Ahaziah was of God by coming to Joram,.... Of his
appointing; it was according to his purpose and decree, and was brought
about by his overruling Providence, ordering the occasion and manner of
it very justly for his sins:

for when he was come, he went out with Jehoram against Jehu the son of
Nimshi; see [Kg2 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#021.md),

whom the Lord had anointed to cut off the house of Ahab; raised up to be
king of Israel for that purpose, [Kg2
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#006.md), the Targum is,"whom Elijah
anointed by the command of the Word of the Lord;''but it was not Elijah,
but a prophet by the order of Elisha, that anointed him, [Kg2
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001.md), and this being done by direction
of the Lord, is ascribed to him.

[2 Chronicles 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ch2 22:8</span></span>

And it came to pass, that when Jehu was executing judgment on the house
of Ahab,.... On Joram, his son, and seventy more sons, his kinsfolks,
courtiers, and priests:

and found the princes of Judah, and or even the sons of the brethren of
Ahaziah; whose number was forty two:

that ministered to Ahaziah; had offices in his court, or in obedience to
his will, went to visit the children of the king and queen of Israel:

and he slew them; Jehu did; of the occasion, time, and place of his
meeting with them, and slaying them, see [Kg2
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#012.md).

[2 Chronicles 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ch2 22:9</span></span>

And he sought Ahaziah,.... Who fled on Joram's being wounded by Jehu:

and they caught him; the soldiers of Jehu, who were sent after him, and
bid to smite him:

for he was hid in Samaria; either in some part of the kingdom of
Samaria, or in the city itself, whither he fled:

and brought him to Jehu: who was at Jezreel; see Gill on [Kg2
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#027.md),

and when they had slain him they buried him; not at Jezreel, but
delivered him to his servants to carry him to Jerusalem, and there bury
him in the sepulchres of his fathers, [Kg2
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#028.md),

because, said they, he is the son of Jehoshaphat, who sought the Lord
with all his heart; a grandson of his, and therefore out of respect to
the memory of his name, these being religious men, ordered his burial
there:

so the house of Ahaziah had no power to keep still the kingdom; his
brethren and their sons being slain, and his own children being young
fell into the hands of Athaliah, who murdered them all, but one, hid by
his aunt, and so got the government into her own hands, as may be
observed in the following verses, [Ch2
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#010.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Chronicles Chapter 23](ch2023.md)

</div>
