<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1000)  [Next](co1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO 1 CORINTHIANS 1

This chapter contains the general inscription of the epistle, the usual
salutation, and a special thanksgiving for blessings received; after
which the apostle intimates the occasion of his writing, the divisions
about their ministers, which gives him an opportunity of discoursing
concerning the nature, end, use, and efficacy of the preaching of the
Gospel. The inscription is in [Co1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001), in which an account is given of
the persons concerned in this epistle; and first of Paul, the only
inspired writer of it, who is described by his name, by which he went
among the Gentiles; by his office, an apostle of Jesus Christ; and by
the manner in which he came into it, being called to it not through any
merit of his own, but through the sovereign will and pleasure of God:
and next mention is made of Sosthenes, a brother minister of the Gospel,
who was with the apostle, and joined in the salutation of the church, to
whom the epistle is written; who are described, by their general
character, a church of God; by the place of their abode, and seat of
their church state, Corinth; and by their special characters, sanctified
in Christ by election, and saints through the effectual calling; and
with them are joined all other saints in Achaia, that belonged to them
and the apostle, that called upon the name of the Lord; and then follows
the salutation in [Co1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#003), usual in
all the epistles; after that a thanksgiving to God for the grace they
had by Christ in general, [Co1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004),
and particularly for their gifts of utterance and knowledge, which were
plentifully bestowed upon them, [Co1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005), and were a confirmation to them
of the Gospel of Christ, [Co1 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006), and
by which it appeared, that they were not behind other churches in these
things; and are commended for their waiting for the coming of Christ,
[Co1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007), by whom the apostle assures
them, they would be so confirmed in the mean while, as to be presented
blameless by him in that day, [Co1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#008), of which they might be assured
from the faithfulness of God, who had called them to communion with
Christ, [Co1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009), upon which he
exhorts them to unity of affection and judgment, for this end, that
there might be no schisms among them; and this he does in a way of
entreaty, and that by the name of Christ, and from the consideration of
their being brethren, [Co1 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010),
suggesting hereby, that there were divisions among them: and signifies,
that he had good reason to believe it, having had an account of them
from a family of repute among them, [Co1
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#011), and then expressly mentions what
their differences were about, namely, their ministers, [Co1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012), and uses arguments to dissuade
them from their dividing principles and practices; showing, that one was
their Lord and master, Christ, who was crucified for them, and in whose
name they were baptized, and not his ministers, [Co1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013), and since some among them made
an ill use of their having been baptized by the apostle, he is thankful
that he had baptized no more of them, and mentions by name those that he
had baptized, [Co1 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014), and gives a
reason for it, taken from the principal end of his mission by Christ,
which was to preach the Gospel, and not only or chiefly to baptize, [Co1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017). The manner in which he was sent
to preach, and did preach it, is observed by him, not in the words of
human wisdom; and that for this reason, lest either the Gospel should be
of no use, or the effect of it should be ascribed to a wrong cause; and
then be obviates an objection that might be made to this way of
preaching, that hereby the Gospel would be brought into contempt; to
which he answers, by granting that it would be, and was reckoned
foolishness by them that were blinded and were lost; and by observing on
the other hand, that it was effectual to saving purposes to others, [Co1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018), and though the former sort might
be the wise and prudent of this world, this need seem no strange thing,
since the infatuation of such persons is no other than what was foretold
would be, as appears from a testimony out of [Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014), cited in [Co1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019), upon which some questions are
put, and inquiries made, after men of wisdom and learning, whose wisdom
God made foolish, [Co1 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020), the
reason of which was, because they did not make a right use of their
natural wisdom in the knowledge of God, wherefore it was his pleasure to
save men by means esteemed foolishness by them, [Co1
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021), and these wise men, who
accounted the preaching of the Gospel foolishness, are distinguished
into two sorts, Jews and Gentiles; the one requiring miracles to confirm
it, the other seeking wisdom in it, [Co1
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022), but finding neither, though
there were really both, the preaching of a crucified Christ was a
stumbling to the one, and folly to the other, [Co1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023), though those that were called by
grace from among them, whether Jews or Gentiles, had different
sentiments of it, and of Christ preached in it, in whose esteem he was
the power and wisdom of God, [Co1
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024), the reason of which was, because
there are superior wisdom and power in Christ and his Gospel, which the
apostle, an ironical concession, calls the foolishness and weakness of
God, to the wisdom and power of men, [Co1
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025), and instances in the effectual
calling and conversion of the Corinthians, who for the most part were
not the wise, the mighty, and noble, [Co1
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026), but the foolish, weak, and base;
and the end of God, in the call of such, was to draw a veil over and
bring to confusion the wisdom and power of men, [Co1
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027), and also that no creature
whatever should dare to glory before him, [Co1
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029), but the true object of glorying
in is pointed at, the Lord Jesus Christ; and the reason of it, all
blessings of grace being in him, and from him, is suggested, [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030), so that whoever glories, should
glory in him, [Co1 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031).

[1 Corinthians 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 1:1</span></span>

Paul called to be an apostle of Jesus Christ,.... The author, or rather
the writer of the following epistle; for the Holy Ghost was the author
and dictator of it, and which was never doubted: he is described by his,
name Paul, though his Jewish name was Saul; and very probably he being a
Jew by birth, and yet born in a Roman city, might have two names, the
one Jewish, the other Gentile; and by the one he went when among the
Jews, and by the other when concerned with the Gentiles: and also by his
office, "an apostle of Jesus Christ"; immediately called, and sent forth
by him; had the Gospel from him by immediate revelation, and a
commission to preach it; and which high office was confirmed by signs
and wonders, and mighty deeds; by the extraordinary gifts of the Holy
Ghost conferred on him, and on others under his ministry; and by the
eminent success which attended the preaching of the Gospel by him. This
his character he the rather mentions, because some in this church,
through the insinuations of the false apostles, demurred upon it;
whereas this was not a mere name given him by men, and by which he was
only commonly called by them, but was an office he was "called" to by
Christ; he did not rush into it, or assume it of himself, but had a
divine warrant for it; for he was invested with it,

through the will of God: both by the secret will and purpose of God, by
which he was a chosen vessel, to bear the name of Christ among the
Gentiles, [Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015); and by the
revealed will of God, signified by the Spirit of God, who said,
"separate me Saul and Barnabas, for the work whereunto I have called
them", [Act 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002), and shows, that it
was not owing to any worth or merit in him, but purely to the free grace
and sovereign will and pleasure of God, that he was made an apostle of
Christ:

and Sosthenes our brother. This seems to be the same man, who was the
chief ruler of the synagogue of the Jews at Corinth; and was converted
to the Christian faith by the Apostle Paul whilst there, as appears from
his favouring the cause of the apostle, for which the Jews beat him
before the judgment seat, and yet Gallio the Roman deputy took no notice
of it, [Act 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017), in the Syriac
dictionary (a) mention is made of one Sosthenes, governor of a city, one
of the seventy disciples, who was educated at Pontus, and cast into the
sea by the order of Nouna; and is also said to be bishop of Colophon in
Ionia; see Gill on [Luk 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001); but
without any reason. This person the apostle joins with him, not as in
equal office with him, but as a brother in Christ, and very probably a
ministering brother, and a companion of his; and the rather, because he
might be well known to the Corinthians, and respected by them; wherefore
he chose to join him with him, to show their agreement in doctrine and
discipline, and in advice to them, which might have the greater weight
with them; see [Act 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#017).

\(a\) Bar Bahluli apud Castel. Lex. Polyglott. col. 2444. Vid. Euseb,
Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 12.

[1 Corinthians 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 1:2</span></span>

Unto the church of God which is at Corinth,.... This epistle is
inscribed to the saints at Corinth; who are described by their being
"the church of God", a particular congregated church; a number of
persons gathered out of the world, and joined together in holy
fellowship, carrying on the worship of God together, and walking in all
the commandments and ordinances of the Lord; a very high character this,
to be called the church of God, which is the pillar and ground of truth:
and it may be observed, that this is here given to a people, among whom
were many irregularities, errors, disorders, and divisions; which shows,
that a church of God is not to be unchurched for everything that is
amiss in them: they are further described by the place of their abode,
Corinth, the "metropolis" of Achaia; a very large and opulent city, a
place of great trade and commerce, and famous both for its wealth and
wisdom; but not so famous for anything as this, that there was a church
of Christ in it; of the city of Corinth; see Gill on [Act
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001); and of the church; see Gill on
[Act 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008). The members of it in
general, for it cannot be thought to hold good of every individual, are
said to be

sanctified in Christ Jesus; not by baptism, for they were sanctified
before that; but were set apart, or chosen in Christ from all eternity,
to grace here, and glory hereafter; justified by the blood and
righteousness of Christ, in which sense the word "sanctified" is
sometimes used; and to whom Christ was made "sanctification" and
righteousness; and in consequence of which they were sanctified by his
Spirit in his name, out of that fulness of grace and holiness which is
in him: wherefore it follows,

called to be saints; for though they were chosen to holiness in Christ,
and through sanctification of the Spirit unto salvation, yet before
calling were unholy; though Christ had given himself for them to
sanctify and purify them, yet whilst uncalled were impure; they fell in
Adam, and became both guilty and filthy through his transgression; and
by their first birth were unholy and unclean, and were so in their lives
and conversations; nor are any holy by natural descent: these were not
born saints, nor made so by their own free will, but were become such
through the powerful grace of God in the effectual calling; in which not
only desires after holiness, but principles of holiness were wrought in
them; and by which they were called to the practice of external
holiness, or to live an holy life and conversation. And this epistle is
not only inscribed to these saints at Corinth, but to them,

with all that in every place call upon the name of Jesus Christ our
Lord; as in Corinth, so in any part of Achaia, of which Corinth was the
chief city. Invocation of the name of Christ not only respects prayer to
him, but includes the whole of religious worship: see [Rom
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013); and this being given to Christ,
and perforated in his name, is a very considerable proof of his true and
proper deity; and the Ethiopic version here styles him, "God, our Lord
Jesus Christ"; for none but God is to be invoked; nor can any but a
divine person, one that is truly and properly God, without idolatry, be
regarded as the object of religious worship and adoration. The phrase

both theirs and ours, either, as some think, refers to "every place" and
so read the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions; and the sense
is, that the apostle inscribes his epistle to all that call upon the
name of Christ, whether in Judea or in the Gentile world, in the place
where the apostle was, or the Corinthians were, or any of the other
saints in Achaia were; signifying, that invocation of God is not
confined to any particular place, but that men may now lift up holy
hands prayer to God everywhere; or rather it refers to "our Lord", and
shows that Christ is the common Lord of his people, whom they all
invoke, and by whom they are called, and therefore ought to love one
another.

[1 Corinthians 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 1:3</span></span>

Grace be unto you, and peace from God,.... This is an usual salutation
in all Paul's epistles; See Gill on [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007).

[1 Corinthians 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 1:4</span></span>

I thank my God always on your behalf,.... Now follows a thanksgiving for
various blessings bestowed upon this church, which is a proof of the
apostle's great affection for it, and how much its welfare lay at his
heart. The object of thanksgiving is God, for as he is the author of all
mercies, the glory and praise of them ought to be given to him. The
apostle styles him "my God", to distinguish him from others; and to
express his faith of interest in him; and to observe to this church,
that all the good things they enjoyed came from him, who was his God and
their God, his Father and their Father; and for which reason he returned
thanks to him for them, and by so doing set them an example: the persons
on whose behalf he gave thanks were not at this time himself and
Sosthenes, but the members of the church at Corinth; and the continuance
of his thankfulness for them, is "always", as often as he went to the
throne of grace, or at any other time thought of them: what he
particularly gives thanks to God for in this verse is,

for the grace which is given you by Jesus Christ: and includes all sorts
of grace, adopting, justifying, pardoning, regenerating, and sanctifying
grace; every particular grace of the Spirit, as faith, repentance, hope,
love, fear, humility, self-denial, &c. all are gifts of God, and
entirely owing to his free grace, and not to man's free will and power,
or to any merits of his; and all come through the hands of Christ, and
are given forth by him, as the Mediator of the covenant, and in
consequence of his blood, righteousness, sacrifice, and merit.

[1 Corinthians 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 1:5</span></span>

That in everything ye are enriched by him,.... This is still a
continuation of the thanksgiving for this church, that they were
"enriched", or plentifully and abundantly provided for by Christ, with
all grace, with all the riches of grace; with his own unsearchable
riches, of which they were made partakers, and the riches of glory, to
which they were entitled by him; and all which come to them through his
poverty, which makes his grace in the donation of these riches the more
illustrious: and particularly the apostle is thankful, that they were
enriched by Christ

in all utterance, and in all knowledge; that not only they had the
knowledge of the truths and doctrines of the Gospel, concerning the
person, offices, grace, and righteousness of Christ in the theory of
them, or a speculative notion of them; but for the most part had a
spiritual experimental knowledge of these things; and many of them had
such large gifts of knowledge, elocution, and utterance, that they were
richly qualified to preach the Gospel to others; nay, even had the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, so as to speak with divers tongues,
as the Spirit gave them utterance.

[1 Corinthians 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 1:6</span></span>

Even as the testimony of Christ was confirmed in you. By "the testimony
of Christ" is meant the Gospel of Christ, which bears a testimony to his
deity, his incarnation, his obedience, sufferings, and death, his
resurrection from the dead, ascension to heaven, session at God's right
hand, and intercession for the saints; to redemption by his blood,
justification by his righteousness, pardon and atonement of sin by his
sacrifice, and complete salvation by his obedience and death. This, as
it had been preached to the Corinthians, was confirmed and established
among them, by the signs and miracles with which it was attended; by the
extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, particularly of prophecy bestowed on
many of them; and by the internal power and energy of the Spirit,
accompanying and applying it to their souls.

[1 Corinthians 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 1:7</span></span>

So that ye come behind in no gift,.... Ordinary or extraordinary; a
detail of the gifts which were bestowed on them is made in [Co1
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#008); by which it appears that they
were not inferior in gifts to any of the churches:

waiting for the coming; or "the revelation"

of our Lord Jesus Christ; who will appear a second time, come in great
glory, will raise the dead, and judge both quick and dead; when gifts
will cease and be of no more use, and when they must all be accounted
for; and therefore, till that time comes, should be diligently made use
of, and improved to the interest and service of Christ; who will surely
come again, and call his servants and churches to an account for the
talents he has intrusted them with; and whose coming is to be believed,
loved, looked, and hoped for by all, that love him in sincerity and
truth.

[1 Corinthians 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 1:8</span></span>

Who shall also confirm you unto the end,.... The author of this blessing
of confirmation is not the Lord Jesus Christ, though he is mentioned in
the latter part of [Co1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#007); and seems
to be the antecedent to the relative "who" in this, but is not, for this
confirmation is made in him; see [Co2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021); and besides, it is in order that
the saints might be blameless in the day of Christ, and so must design
some other person distinct from him, which is God the Father, [Co1
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#004), to whom the apostle gives thanks,
and continues to do so unto this verse; in which he assures the saints
of confirmation in grace by God, the author and giver of all grace: and
which may be understood of their confirmation in the love and favour of
God, from which there can be no separation; and of their establishment
in the person of Christ, and in the doctrines of grace; and of the
permanency of the grace of the Spirit in them, and of their perseverance
in faith and holiness unto the end: that is, of their days; even until
the day of Christ, when the good work begun in them shall be performed
and finished; that is, "for ever", as the Ethiopic version reads it; for
the love of God to his people always continues; their interest in Christ
can never be lost; grace in them is an immortal seed; nor shall they be
ever finally and totally moved away from the hope of the Gospel:

that ye may be blameless; not in themselves, for no man is without his
faults; none of God's children are without their failings and
infirmities; they have whereof to blame themselves, and may be blamed by
God too in a providential way; but they are so in Christ their head,
being justified by his righteousness, and washed in his blood; and so in
the sight of God, as considered in Christ; and will appear such

in the day of our Lord Jesus Christ, when he shall descend from heaven,
and take his saints to him, and present them to himself a glorious
church, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing.

[1 Corinthians 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 1:9</span></span>

God is faithful, by whom ye were called,.... These words contain
arguments, assuring the saints of their confirmation in grace, and of
their being preserved blameless to the day of Christ, taken from the
faithfulness of God, who is always true to his promises: whatever he has
said, he will do it; he will never suffer his faithfulness to fail; and
since he has made so many promises concerning the establishment of his
people, and their perseverance to grace, they may assure themselves of
them; and also from his having called them by his grace, for whom he
effectually calls by his grace, he glorifies; and particularly from his
having called them

into the fellowship of his Son Jesus Christ our Lord; to partake of his
grace, and to be heirs of glory with him; to enjoy communion with him in
private and public exercises of religion, which is an evidence of being
in him, and of union to him; for it is not merely into the fellowship of
his saints or churches, but into the fellowship of his Son they are said
to be called; and such are members of Christ, of his body, of his flesh,
and of his bone; and shall never be lost and perish, but shall be
confirmed to the end; be preserved in him blameless, and presented to
him faultless, and have everlasting life.

[1 Corinthians 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 1:10</span></span>

Now I beseech you, brethren,.... The apostle having observed the many
favours and blessings bestowed on this church, proceeds to take notice
of the divisions and contentions which were fomented in it; and in the
most kind and tender manner entreats them to take every proper step to
prevent schisms among them: he does not use his apostolical power and
authority, or lay his injunctions and commands upon them, which he might
have done, but most affectionately beseeches them; styling them
brethren, as they were in a spiritual relation, being children of the
same Father, members of the same body, and partakers of the same grace,
and is a reason why they should not fail out by the way: and this
obsecration is made

by the name of the Lord Jesus; which he wisely judged must have its
weight and influence on many of them, to whom that name must be dear and
precious, and which they called upon and were called by; and shows, that
he was not acting in his own name, and seeking his own profit; but was
concerned in and for the name of Christ, and for his honour and
interest, which lay at stake by their contentions. His earnest request
to them is,

that ye speak the same thing; profess the same truths, and express them
in the same words; which shows the lawfulness, yea, necessity and
usefulness, of confessions and articles of faith, being made and agreed
to by members of churches; and which should be drawn up in a form of
sound words, and abode by; for the introducing of new words and phrases
is often the means of bringing in new doctrines, and of raising great
contentions and animosities; wherefore using the same words to express
truth by is a very proper and prudent expedient to prevent them:

and that there be no divisions, or schisms

among you; which are generally made by innovations in doctrine, or
worship; by forming new schemes of religion, new articles of faith, and
modes of discipline: but

that ye be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same
judgment; which regards not only the sameness of love and affection, to
one another, being, as the first Christians were, of one heart and of
one soul; but their agreement in their judgments and sentiments, of both
doctrine and discipline; and such an entire harmony and symmetry among
them, as in the members of the body, where each member and bone being in
their proper place, exactly answer to, and tally with each other; and
which is the most effectual way to speak the same things, and so bar
against all schisms and divisions; and such an agreement is absolutely
necessary to the peace, comfort, and well being of a church; for how
should "two", and much less more, "walk together", unless they are
"agreed?" [Amo 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#003).

[1 Corinthians 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 1:11</span></span>

For it hath been declared unto me, of you, my brethren,.... Lest the
above advice of the apostle should be thought to be impertinent and
needless, and to proceed upon groundless suspicions and jealousies of
his, he signifies that he not only had some broad hints of their
contentions and divisions, but the whole affair was laid open, and made
manifest to him: the thing was a clear point to him; he had no reason at
all to doubt of the truth of it; nor could they deny it, the proof was
so strong, the evidence so full, being given

by them which are of the house of Chloe. Some take Chloe to be the name
of a place; a city so called is said to have been in Cappadocia; but it
seems rather to have been the name of a woman. Horace (b) several times
makes mention of a woman of this name, and so does Martial (c).
Pausanias (d) calls the goddess Ceres by it, the goddess of husbandry;
the word signifying green grass of the field. The person the apostle
speaks of was one that very probably lived at Corinth, and was a member
of the church there, and at the head of a family of great worth and
credit; who being grieved at the growing animosities, and disturbances
there raised, wrote to the apostle, and gave him a distinct account of
them, desiring him to use his interest to put a stop to them. He
mentions this family by name, to show that he had not took up an idle
tale, and received reports from anybody, nor from a single person only,
but from a family of repute among them; and who could have no other
views in the relation of it to him, than the good of the church, and the
glory of God: and what they had made out clearly to him was,

that there are contentions among you; about their ministers, as appears
afterward, as well as about opinions in doctrines, and ceremonies in
worship, which occasioned undue heats, and great indecencies, tending to
make rents and schisms among them,

\(b\) Carrain. l. 3. Ode 7, 9, 19. (c) L. 4. Epigr. 22. & l. 9. Epigr.
13. (d) L. 1. sive Attica, p. 38.

[1 Corinthians 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 1:12</span></span>

Now this I say that everyone of you saith,.... This the apostle affirms
not upon his own personal knowledge, but upon the credit of the report
the house of Chloe had made unto him; and his meaning is not that every
individual member of this church, but that many of them, and the far
greater number of them, were in the following factions, some being for
one minister, and some for another: one part of them said,

I am of Paul; he had been instrumental in their conversion: he had
baptized some of them, and first laid the foundation of a Gospel church
among them; was a solid, brave, and bold preacher of the Gospel, and was
set for the defence of it; wherefore he was the minister for them, and
they were desirous of being called and distinguished by his name: but
there was another party that said,

and I of Apollos; in opposition to Paul, whom they despised, as a man
whose aspect was mean; his bodily presence weak, made no figure in the
pulpit; his speech low and contemptible; his discourses plain, not
having that flow of words, and accuracy of expression, as Apollos had;
who was an eloquent man, and mighty in the Scriptures, who coming to
Corinth after the Apostle Paul, many were taken with his way of
preaching; he was the preacher for them, and they chose to be called
after him, and in distinction from others: whilst another company of
them said,

and I of Cephas; or Peter, in opposition both to Paul and Apollos; who
with them were new upstart ministers, in comparison of Peter, who was
with Christ from the beginning, and saw his miracles, and heard his
doctrines; and, besides, had the apostleship and Gospel of the
circumcision, on which account they highly valued him; for these must be
supposed to be the converted Jews among them, who still retained a
regard to the ceremonies of the law; wherefore they fixed on Peter as
their minister, and to be called by his name: but others said,

and I of Christ; which some take to be the words of the apostle,
declaring who he was of, and for, and belonged unto; intimating that
they, as he, should call no man father, or master, on earth, or be
called by any other name than that of Christ. Others consider them as
the words of the Corinthians, a small part of them who were very mean
and contemptible, and therefore mentioned last, who chose to be known
and called by no other name than that of Christians; but I rather think
that these design a faction and party, to be condemned as the others.
These were for Christ, in opposition to Paul, Apollos, and Cephas, and
any other ministers of the word. They were for Christ without his
ministers; they were wiser than their teachers; they were above being
under any ministrations and ordinances; as the others attributed too
much to the ministers of the Gospel, these detracted too much from them,
and denied them to be of any use and service. Some persons may be, in
such sense, for Christ, as to be blame worthy; as when they use his name
to deceive men, or divide his interest.

[1 Corinthians 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 1:13</span></span>

Is Christ divided?.... Some read the words as an assertion, "Christ is
divided"; that is, his body, the church, is divided by such factions and
parties; though in some copies the note of interrogation, is put before
the clause, and so to be rendered, "is Christ divided?" no; his human
body was not to be divided; a bone of him was not to be broken, [Joh
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#036); the seamless garment he wore
was not to be rent asunder, [Joh
19:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#023); nor is his mystical body, the
church, to be torn in pieces by schisms and divisions; nor is anyone
part of his Gospel different from, or opposite to another part of it;
his doctrine is the same as preached by one minister and another, and is
all of a piece, uniform and harmonious. Christ is not divided from his
Father, not in nature; though he is to be distinguished from him, yet
not to be divided; he is one in nature with him, though he is a distinct
person from him; nor is he, nor can he, or will be ever separated from
him; nor is he to be divided from him in his works and actions, with
whom he was jointly concerned in creation, providence, and grace; and
such are to be blamed as dividers of Christ from the Father, who talk of
Christ to the exclusion of the Father, or to the dropping and neglect of
any of his acts of grace; as his everlasting love to his chosen ones,
the eternal election of them in Christ, the covenant of grace made with
him, and the instance of his grace in the gift and mission of his Son:
nor is Christ divided from himself, not in his nature and person; the
two natures, human and divine, are united in one person; they are to be
distinguished, and not to be confounded, yet not to be separated as to
wake two distinct persons: nor in his offices; a whole Christ is to be
received; Christ in his kingly as well as in his priestly office; to
claim him as a Saviour and disown him as a King, is dishonourable to
him; it is to make one end of his death void, as much as in such lies,
which is, that he may be Lord of dead and living; and argues a carnal
selfish spirit, and that faith in him is not right: such are to be
blamed for being for Christ, and as dividers of him, who talk of being
saved by him, and yet would not have him to rule over them. Nor is he
divided from his Spirit, not from the person of the Spirit; he is to be
distinguished from him as a person, but is one in nature with him; nor
from his gifts and graces, which he has as man and Mediator without
measure; nor from the work of the Spirit; for it is his grace the Spirit
of God implants in the hearts of men: it comes from him, it centres in
him, it makes men like him, and glorifies him; such who cry up Christ,
and cry down the work of his Spirit upon the soul, are to be blamed for
being for Christ, and to be reckoned dividers of them as much as in them
lies: nor is Christ divided from his church and people; there is a close
union between them, and he dwells in them, and among them; and they are
to be blamed that talk of Christ, and never meet with his saints in
public service and worship: nor is he divided from his ministers, word,
and ordinances; Christ is the sum of the ministry of the word; the
ordinances are instituted by him; he submitted to them himself, and is
the substance of them, and has promised his presence in them to the end
of the world: and what God has put together, let no man put asunder,

Was Paul crucified for you? no; he had taught them another doctrine;
namely, that Christ was crucified for them, that he died for their sins,
and had bought them with the price of his own blood; and therefore they
were not to be the servants of men, or to call any man master, or to be
called by his name, or any other man's, only by Christ's, who had
redeemed them by his blood; so that they were not their own, nor any
other's, but his, and ought to glorify him with their souls and bodies,
which were his,

Or were ye baptized in the name of Paul; no; but in the name of the
Father, of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. The apostle did not pretend
to be the author of a new revelation, or the propagator of a new
religion, but was a preacher of the Gospel, and an administrator of the
ordinances of Christ; wherefore he baptized not in his own name, but in
the name of Christ: to whose worship and service such as are baptized
are devoted, and not to the service of men, and therefore not to be
called after their names.

[1 Corinthians 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 1:14</span></span>

I thank God that I baptized none of you,.... The Alexandrian copy and
the Syriac version read, "I thank my God"; not that the apostle disliked
the ordinance of baptism, or the administration of it; and much less
that he thought it criminal, or an evil in him to perform it; nor was he
at any time displeased at the numbers of persons who desired it of him;
but on the contrary rejoiced where proper subjects of it were brought to
a submission to it; but inasmuch as some persons in the church at
Corinth made such an ill use of his having baptized them, he was greatly
thankful that it was so ordered in providence, that the far greater part
of them were baptized by other ministers, either by those who were with
him, or came after him; and that he baptized none of them with his own
hands,

but Crispus and Gaius. The former of these was the chief ruler of the
Jewish synagogue at Corinth, who hearing the apostle, and believing in
Christ, was baptized by him, [Act 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#008)
and the latter was a very liberal and hospitable man, and was the
apostle's host, whilst he was at Corinth; see [Rom
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023).

[1 Corinthians 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 1:15</span></span>

Lest any should say that I had baptized in my own name. The Alexandrian
copy, and some others, and the Vulgate Latin version, read, "lest anyone
should say that ye were baptized in my name"; and the Ethiopic version
renders it, "that ye might not say we have been baptized in his name".
This gives the true reason why the apostle was so thankful he had
baptized no more of the members of this church, lest either some should
reproach him, as having done it in his own name, and as seeking his own
honour and interest; or lest others should affect, from their being
baptized by him, to be called by his name, as if he was the author and
patron of a new sect.

[1 Corinthians 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 1:16</span></span>

And I also baptized the household of Stephanas,.... The same name with
"Stephanios", or "Stephanio" in Pliny (e). Before he says he had
baptized none but Crispus and Gaius; but recollecting things, he
corrects himself, and observes, that he had also baptized the household
of Stephanas, who by the Greek writers is thought to be the same with
the jailer baptized by the apostle at Philippi, but was now removed from
thence to Corinth, and was become a famous and useful man there. No
argument can be formed from the baptism of his household in favour of
infant baptism, since it must be first proved that he had any infants in
his family, and that these were baptized; and if his household and the
jailer's are the same, it is certain that his household were such who
were capable of having the word of God spoke to them, and who actually
did believe in God. And if they were not the same, yet it is clear that
this household of Stephanas consisted of adult, converted, and very
useful persons; they were the firstfruits of Achaia, and had addicted
themselves to the ministry of the saints, [Co1
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#015).

Besides, that is, the above mentioned persons,

I know not whether I baptized any other; meaning at Corinth, for he
might have baptized, and doubtless did baptize many more in other
places, for anything that is here said to the contrary: of this he would
not be positive; for though he might fully know, and well remember, on
recollection, who, and how many, were baptized by him with his own hands
there, yet he could not tell but that some persons might have removed
thither, and become members of the church in that place, who had been
baptized by him elsewhere,

\(e\) Nat. Hist. l. 7. c. 48.

[1 Corinthians 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 1:17</span></span>

For Christ sent me not to baptize,.... Some think the apostle refers to
his particular mission from Christ, [Act
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016) in which no mention is made of
his administering the ordinance of baptism; but no doubt he had the same
mission the rest of the apostles had, which was to baptize as well as
preach; and indeed, if he had not been sent at all to baptize, it would
have been unlawful for him to have administered baptism to any person
whatever; but his sense is, that baptism was not the chief and principal
business he was sent about; this was to be done mostly by those
preachers of the word who travelled with him, or followed after him: he
was not sent so much about this work,

but to preach the Gospel; for which he was most eminently qualified, had
peculiar gifts for the discharge of it, and was greatly useful in it.
This was what he was rather sent to do than the other, and this "not
with wisdom of words". Scholastic divinity, or the art of disputation,
is by the (f) Karaites, a sect among the Jews, called , "wisdom of
words": this the apostle seems to refer to, and signifies he was not
sent with, or to preach, with words of man's wisdom, with human
eloquence and oratory, with great swelling words of vanity, but in a
plain, humble, modest manner; on which account the false teachers
despised him, and endeavoured to bring his ministry into contempt with
others: but this way and manner of preaching he chose for this reason,

lest the cross of Christ should be made of none effect; that is, either
lest men's ears and fancies should be so tickled and pleased with the
eloquence of speech, the elegancy of diction, and accuracy of
expression, the cadency of words, and beauty of the oration, with the
manner, and not with the matter of preaching, and so the true use, end,
and design of the doctrine of a crucified Christ be defeated; or lest
the success of the ministry should be attributed to the force of
enticing words, and the strength and persuasion of oratory, and not to
the energy of divine power attending the doctrine of the cross,

\(f\) Sepher Cosri Orat. 5. Sign. 15, 16. fol. 277. 2. 278. 1.

[1 Corinthians 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 1:18</span></span>

For the preaching of the cross,.... Not of the Christian's cross, which
he is to take up and bear for the sake of Christ; though this is a
doctrine taught by Christ, and his apostles, and found to be true by the
saints in all ages; and is what is had in great aversion and contempt,
being very disagreeable to the natural man: but of the cross of Christ,
the doctrine of salvation by a crucified Christ; or the doctrine of
peace and reconciliation by the blood of his cross, and of
righteousness, pardon, atonement, and satisfaction by the offering up of
himself upon it as a sacrifice for sin, is here intended; and which

is foolishness in the esteem of many; and that because man's wisdom has
no hand either in forming the scheme of it, or in the discovery of it to
the sons of men; and besides, being revealed, it is very disagreeable to
the carnal reason of man. This way of preaching is very impolite and
unfashionable, and therefore despised; it is a doctrine which is not
received by the wise and learned, but has been in all ages loaded with
reproach, stigmatized either as a novel or licentious doctrine, and
attended with persecution; though the only doctrine God owns for
conversion, which administers comfort to distressed souls, and is food
for the faith of believers; yea, it is a display of the highest wisdom;
is what angels approve of, and desire to look into; is wiser than the
wisdom of men; it has made foolish the wisdom of this world, and is what
is only able to make a man wise unto salvation; and yet this doctrine is
accounted foolish, yea foolishness itself; but to whom is it so?

to them that perish. All mankind are in a lost and perishing condition,
by reason of sin, and want of righteousness. There are some who shall
not perish; the Father has chose them unto salvation, the Son has
redeemed them, and the Spirit sanctifies them; but there are others who
do perish in their sins; wicked and ungodly men, Carried away with their
own lusts and blinded by Satan, the god of this world: these are they
that are lost, to whom the Gospel is hid, and who judge it foolishness;
but their judgment of it is not to be regarded, being no more capable to
judge of the glory and wisdom of the Gospel, than a blind man is of
colours: but unto us which are saved; who are chosen in Christ unto
salvation; whose persons and grace are secured in Christ, and in the
everlasting covenant; for whom Christ has wrought out salvation; and to
whom it is applied by the Spirit of God; and who are kept unto the full
enjoyment of it by divine grace: to thest is the power of God;
organically or instrumentally; it being the means of quickening them
when dead in sin, of enlightening their dark minds, of unstopping their
deaf ears, of softening their hard hearts, and of enemies making them
friends to God, Christ, and his people: and it is likewise so
declaratively, there being a wonderful display of the power of God in
the ministration of it; as may be seen when observed who were the first
preachers of it, men of no figure in life, of no education, illiterate
mechanics, very mean and abject; into these earthen vessels were put the
treasure of the Gospel, that the excellency of the power might appear to
be of God, and not man; as also the doctrine they preached, a crucified
Christ, disagreeable to the wisdom of men; the manner in which they
spread it, not by force of arms, by carnal weapons, but spiritual ones;
moreover, the opposition they met with from rabbins, philosophers,
princes, kings, and emperors, and all the states and powers of the
world; and yet in how short a time, maugre all opposition, did they
carry the Gospel throughout the whole world, to the conversion of
millions of souls, and the planting of churches everywhere; and which
Gospel has continued and increased, notwithstanding the efforts of
persecutors and false teachers, and all the power and artifice of men
and devils; all which can be attributed to nothing else but the mighty
power of God: add to this, that the Gospel is the power of God in the
esteem of the saints, who know it to be so by inward experience; they
have felt the power of it on their hearts; it has wrought effectually in
them, and therefore they are the best judges, and are capable of giving
the best account of it.

[1 Corinthians 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 1:19</span></span>

As it is written,.... The passage referred to is in [Isa
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#014) where it is read, "the wisdom of
their wise men shall perish; and the understanding of their prudent men
shall be hid"; and is rendered by the Septuagint, "I will destroy the
wisdom of the wise, and will hide the understanding of the prudent":
which is much the same with the apostle's version of it: and the sense
of the prophecy is, that in the times of the Messiah, under the Gospel
dispensation, the mysteries of grace should be hid from the wise rabbins
among the Jews, the Scribes and Pharisees, who, with all their sagacity,
parts, and learning, would not be able to comprehend the doctrines of
the Gospel; by these their wisdom and understanding would be nonplussed,
so that they would reject them as foolishness, because their carnal
reason could not reach them; which shows what an infatuation they were
given up to: and if this should be the case, as it was with the wise and
learned philosophers among the Gentiles, it need not be wondered at; it
was what was foretold in prophecy concerning the Jews, who had the
oracles of God, and the advantage of a divine revelation; and therefore
it need not be stumbling to them that are saved, that the Gospel should
meet with so much scorn and contempt among them that perish in the
Gentile world. These words are very pertinently cited by the apostle,
since they are acknowledged by the Jews themselves to signify the
departure of wisdom from the wise men of Israel, in the times of the
destruction of the temple, as Jarchi on the place observes.

[1 Corinthians 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 1:20</span></span>

Where is the wise? where is the Scribe?.... These are the apostle's own
words; though he may allude to [Isa
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#018) where there are some phrases
much like these, but the meaning is very different. Though they are
interpreted by the Talmudists (g) in a sense pretty near the apostle's;
for thus they remark upon them,

"where is the Scribe? he that counts all the letters which are in the
law; "where is the receiver, or weigher?" who weighs all the light and
heavy things in the law; "where is he that counted the towers?" he who
counts, or teaches the three hundred traditions:

so that they understand these of their Scribes and Misnic doctors, and
such that are curious searchers into the hidden senses of Scripture. The
apostle also seems to allude to a distinction that obtained among the
Jews, of wise men, Scribes, and mystical interpreters of the word. They
had their "wise men", which was a general name for men of learning and
knowledge; and their "Scribes", who interpreted the law in the literal
and grammatical sense; and their "preachers, or disputers", who
diligently searched into the hidden meaning of the Scriptures, and
sought for and delivered out the mystical and allegorical sense of them,
and who used to dispute about them in their schools. These three are
sometimes to be met with together, and as distinct from each other. They
say (h) that "God showed to the first man every generation, "and its
expounders, or disputers"; and every generation, "and its wise men"; and
every generation, "and its Scribes."

And the apostle's sense is, "where is the wise?" the man that boasts of
his superior wisdom and knowledge in the things of nature, whether among
the Jews or Gentiles; "where is the Scribe?" the letter learned man, who
takes upon him to give the literal sense of the law,

where is the disputer of this world? the Jewish world, who pretends to
the knowledge of the more abstruse and secret senses of Scripture; where
are these men? they are not to be found among those that God employs in
the ministration of the Gospel; he has laid them aside, and chosen
others, where are they? what use have they been of to men? are men under
their instructions the better, either in principle or practice? where
are the thousands that have been turned to God by their wisdom, as can
be shown by the faithful ministers of the Gospel? where are they? let
them come and produce their cause, and bring forth their strong reasons
against the Gospel they account foolishness, and try if these will stand
before its superior power and wisdom; where are they? are they not
fools, with all their wisdom and learning? The words may be rendered,
"where is the searcher, or inquirer of this world?" and may design the
same sort of persons whom the Jews call , "the wise men of search, or
inquiry" (i), and sometimes , "the men of search, or inquiry" (k); by
whom they seem to intend such who search into the nature of things, who
study natural philosophy,

Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? by bringing in the
Gospel scheme, which the men of the world, the greatest wits in it, are
not able to understand; by laying their wisdom aside as useless in the
business of salvation; by showing it to be vain and empty, and of no
service in things spiritual and divine; by detecting, through the
ministration of the Gospel, the sophisms of men, and showing that the
schemes both Jews and Gentiles give into abound with folly, with stupid
notions, and are full of gross errors and fatal mistakes,

\(g\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 106. 2. & Chagiga, fol. 15. 2. (h)
Bereshit Rabba Parash. 24. fol. 21. 1. Vid. T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 5.
1. & Sanhedrin, fol. 38. 2. (i) Kimchi in Sopher Shorashim, rad. & in
Psal. cii. 26. (k) Aben Ezra in Psal. civ. 29.

[1 Corinthians 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 1:21</span></span>

For after that in the wisdom of God,.... These words contain a reason
proving the infatuation of men, with respect to "the wisdom of God"; by
which may be meant either Christ, who is the wisdom of God, was in the
world, and yet the world of the Jews, and their chief Rabbins among
them, with all their wisdom, neither knew him, nor God his Father; or
the Gospel, which is also so called, and though this was come, both into
the Jewish and Gentile world, yet neither of them, by their natural
wisdom, knew the God of grace, so manifestly revealed in it; or rather
the works of creation, in which there is such a visible display of the
wisdom of God: yet "the world by wisdom knew not God"; the author of
them: the Gentiles knew him not in any spiritual and saving manner, as
in Christ, or the God of all grace; yea, they knew him not as the God of
nature to be the one, only, true God; they knew him not so as to glorify
him as God, or to worship him in a right way and manner: wherefore,

it pleased God by the foolishness of preaching to save them that
believe; it was his purpose and decree within himself; it was his
sovereign good will and pleasure; it was what he, without any motion
from, or merit in the creature, resolved of himself from all eternity
that he would "save", not the wise man, the Scribe, the disputer of this
world, the rationalist, the talker, nor the worker, but "them that
believe" in his Son; that look unto him, venture on him, and commit the
care and keeping of their souls to him, however weak, mean, and
despicable they may otherwise be; or whether they believe with a weak,
or a strong faith, so be it, it is but true: the Ethiopic version reads,
"that believe in this foolish doctrine"; and this he determined to do,
and did, "by the foolishness of preaching"; or by that sort of
preaching, which both for the matter of it, Christ, that itself, and the
manner of it, the world reckons foolishness; and which are the things of
the Father's grace in election, of the Son's grace in redemption, and
the Spirit's in regeneration: so the wise men of the world, with all
their wisdom, are left ignorant of God, and perish in their sins, whilst
the Gospel they despise is the power of God unto salvation to all that
believe in Christ; this, through efficacious grace, becomes the means of
regenerating and quickening men, showing them their need of salvation,
and where it is, and of working faith in them to look to Christ for it.

[1 Corinthians 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 1:22</span></span>

For the Jews require a sign,.... The Jews had always been used to
miracles, in confirmation of the mission of the prophets sent unto them,
and therefore insisted on a sign proving Jesus to be the true Messiah;
except signs and wonders were wrought, they would not believe; and
though miracles were wrought in great numbers, and such as never man
did, they remained incredulous, and persisted in demanding a sign from
heaven, and in their own way; and it was told them that no other sign
should be given them, but that of the prophet Jonah, by which was
signified the resurrection of Christ from the dead; this was given them,
and yet they believed not, but went on to require a sign still; nothing
but miracles would do with them, and they must be such as they
themselves pleased: the Alexandrian copy, and some others, and the
Vulgate Latin version, read "signs", in the plural number:

and the Greeks seek after wisdom; the wisdom of the world, natural
wisdom, philosophy, the reason of things, the flowers of rhetoric, the
ornaments of speech, the beauties of oratory, the justness of style and
diction; as for doctrines they regarded none, but such as they could
comprehend with, and account for by their carnal reason, everything else
they despised and exploded. Hence we often read (l) of , "the Grecian
wisdom", or wisdom of the Greeks; which, the Jews say (m), lay in
metaphors and dark sayings, which were not understood but by them that
were used to it; the study of it was forbidden by them, though some of
their Rabbins were conversant with it (n),

\(l\) T. Bab Menachot, fol 99. 2. Bava Kama, fol. 82. 2. (m) Maimon &
Bartenora in Misn. Sota, c. 9. sect. 14. (n) Shalshelet Hakabala, fol.
25. 1. Ganz. Tzemach David, par. 3. fol. 31. 2.

[1 Corinthians 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 1:23</span></span>

But we preach Christ crucified,.... Regardless of the sentiments and
opinions of Jews and Gentiles, of what the one required and the other
sought after; and in opposition to all their senseless and groundless
cavils, the apostle and his fellow ministers continued preaching the
doctrine of salvation by a crucified Christ, and him only; though it was

unto the Jews a stumblingblock; as was prophesied it should be, and as
it came to pass; for they not only stumbled at the meanness of his
birth, parentage, and education, at his ministry, miracles, company and
audience; but especially at his sufferings and death: it was a stumbling
to them that he should die at all, for they understood out of their law,
that Christ should abide for ever; and it was more so that he should die
the death of the cross, by which, according to their law, he appeared to
be accursed; and most of all this was stumbling to them, because they
expected a temporal kingdom to be set up by him:

and unto the Greeks foolishness; as that the Son of God should be
crucified; that riches should come through his poverty, and men be
brought to a kingdom and glory through one so mean and abject; that
there should be life for men in his death, and salvation through his
crucifixion, or the shameful death of the cross; that blessings should
come through his being made a curse; and that his death should be an
expiatory sacrifice for the sins of men; and that justification should
be by one that was condemned; and peace and pardon should be by his
blood; and that he should be raised again from the dead. These things
were the subject of their ridicule and banter, and, in their opinion,
deserved rather to be laughed at than credited. The Alexandrian copy,
and others, and the Vulgate and all the Oriental versions, read, "unto
the Gentiles".

[1 Corinthians 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 1:24</span></span>

But unto them which are called,.... Effectually, by the grace of God,
not merely externally, but internally; these have other sentiments of
Christ, and the doctrine of salvation by him; for being called out of
darkness, and savingly illuminated by the Spirit of God, they see
wisdom, beauty, glory, excellency, and suitableness in Christ, and in
his Gospel; and having felt the power of it upon their souls, with them,

both Jews and Greeks, of whatsoever nation they be, and whatsoever their
prejudices have been, Christ, to them is,

the power of God, and the wisdom of God: he is "the power of God"; this
is opposed to the Jews who stumbled at his weakness, his sufferings and
death, even the death of the cross; and is to be understood of him, not
as God, in which sense he is Mighty, yea, the Almighty, and which
appears by his works of creation and providence; but as Mediator, and of
him in his low and mean estate, and even when he was crucified through
weakness; in respect to that very thing in which he was weakness, and so
stumbling, to others, he is to them that are called the power of God; as
is clear by his bearing all the sins of his people in his own body, on
the tree, the cross whereon he was crucified, and all the punishment due
thereunto; and yet he failed not, nor was he discouraged, nor did he
give out, till he had satisfied law and justice perfectly, and made a
full end of sin, and an entire reconciliation for iniquity; as also by
destroying, by his death, the devil, who had the power of death, and
spoiling all his principalities and powers, triumphing over them on his
cross; by redeeming his people from all their sins, and the curse of the
law, and from him that was stronger than they; by abolishing death, and
at last raising himself from the dead; all which show him, even when and
"though" crucified, to be the power of God, or to be possessed of
Almighty power; for these are things which a mere creature could never
have done: and he is "the wisdom of God", also, in the account of these
persons; and which likewise is to be understood, it being opposed to the
opinions the Greeks had of him, not of him as the essential wisdom of
God, as he is the wise Creator and Governor of the universe; but of him
as Mediator, and in respect to that for which the Greeks accounted him
foolishness: for in redemption and salvation by a crucified Christ, God
hath abounded towards us in all wisdom and prudence: there is in this
article a high display of the wisdom of God; for hereby justice was
satisfied in that nature which sinned, and Satan destroyed in that
nature which he himself had been the ruin of; hereby sin was condemned,
and yet the sinner saved; pardon and justification came to be in a way
of grace, and yet of strict justice; all the divine perfections
harmonize, and are glorified, and God has hereby executed his wise
designs and counsels of old; yea, even the wisdom of God is seen in
Christ's dying the death of the cross, whereby he appeared to be made a
curse for us, that he might redeem us from the curse of the law, and
that the blessing of Abraham might come upon us.

[1 Corinthians 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 1:25</span></span>

Because the foolishness of God,.... Not that there is any such thing as
"foolishness" in God, nor the least degree of weakness in him; but the
apostle means that which the men of the world esteem so, and therefore,
by an ironical concession, calls it by those names; by which is intended
either Christ, who, as crucified, is counted foolishness; yet he "is
wiser than men": yea, even than Solomon, who was wiser than all men
besides; Christ is greater than he in wisdom, having all the treasures
of wisdom and knowledge in him; yea, in redemption by the blood of his
cross, which is accounted such an egregious instance of folly, there is
such a display of wisdom as surpasses all the wisdom of men and angels:
and though he is, as crucified, esteemed as

the weakness of God, yet in this respect,

is stronger than men; stronger than the strong man armed; and has done
that by his own arm, has brought salvation for his people, which neither
men nor angels could ever have done: or all this may be understood of
the Gospel of Christ, which is condemned as folly and weakness, and yet
has infinitely more wisdom in it, than is to be found in the best
concerted schemes of the wisest philosophers; and has had a greater
influence on the minds and manners of men than theirs ever had; it is
the manifold wisdom of God, and the power of God unto salvation.
Moreover, these words may be applied to the saints, called in [Co1
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027).

the foolish and weak things of the world; and yet even these, in the
business of salvation, how foolish soever they may be in other respects,
are wiser than the wisest of men destitute of the grace of God; and
however weak they are in themselves, in their own esteem, and in the
account of others, they are able to do and suffer such things, through
the strength of Christ that no other men in the world are able to
perform or endure. The phrases here used seem to be a sort of proverbial
ones; and the sense of them is, that whatever, in things divine and
spiritual, has the appearance of folly and weakness, or is judged to be
so by carnal men, is wiser and stronger not only than the wisdom and
strength of men, but than men themselves with all their wisdom and
strength. It is very likely, that proverbial expressions of this kind,
with a little alteration, were used by the Jews. The advice the young
men gave to Rehoboam is thus paraphrased by the Targumist (o), , "my
weakness is stronger than the strength of my father"; which is very near
the same with the last clause of this verse,

\(o\) In 2 Chron. x. 10.

[1 Corinthians 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 1:26</span></span>

For ye see your calling, brethren,.... That is, those that were called
by the grace of God among them; for as circumcision and uncircumcision
stand for circumcised and uncircumcised persons, and election for elect
persons, and righteousness for righteous persons, [Rom
3:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030) so here "calling" designs men
called by grace; the manner of whose calling, and what sort of persons
they were, the apostle signifies, they did or might, or ought, to see,
observe, and consider; for respect is here had, not, as some have
thought, to the first preachers of the Gospel, who were mechanics,
fishermen, illiterate persons, very mean and despicable; but to the
members of the church at Corinth, whether public preachers, or private
members. The city of Corinth had in it many noble families, of high
birth and quality, abounded with learned philosophers and rich
merchants; and yet it was easy to be seen,

how that not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many
noble are called. The apostle does not say that there were none of the
wise, the mighty, and noble called; for there were Crispus, and
Sosthenes, rulers of the synagogue, and Gains a rich hospitable man, and
Erastus the chamberlain of the city, and it may be some others of a like
or better figure in life; but there were not many of them; instances of
this kind are but few recorded in the Scripture; as Joseph of Arimathea
a rich counsellor, Paulus Sergius a Roman deputy, Dionysius the
Areopagite, and some in Caesar's palace; which show that nobility,
riches, and learning, as they do not at all contribute towards a man's
salvation, so neither can they hinder it where grace takes place; but,
generally speaking, God has thought fit, for wise reasons, to choose and
call persons of different characters.

[1 Corinthians 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 1:27</span></span>

But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world,.... So the Jews, in
distinction from their wise Rabbins and doctors, call others, , "the
fools of the world" (p); the persons whom God made choice of from all
eternity, as appears by his calling them in time, are such who with
respect to the wisdom of the world are foolish; have not those natural
parts and abilities, that sagacity and penetration in things natural and
civil, that knowledge and learning which many others have; and are
therefore esteemed foolish by the men of the world, in comparison of
whom; who are the wise and prudent, they are but babes: and God's end in
his choice of them, and calling them, is

to confound the wise; who sooner or later will be brought to shame and
confusion, to see such idiots, as they took them to be, wiser than they
in the business of salvation; having been directed and influenced by
divine grace to choose that good part, which shall never be taken from
them, when they will be stripped of their nobility, wealth, and wisdom;
to see these men go into the kingdom of heaven, and they themselves shut
out:

and God hath chosen the weak things of the world; who cannot boast of
their birth and pedigree, of their ancient and illustrious families;
have no titles of honour to aggrandize them, nor estates, possessions,
and worldly substance to support themselves with; and this he has done,

to confound the things which are mighty; as Haman was by the advancement
of Mordecai. It will be to the utter confusion of the rich and mighty,
to see persons of the lowest class in life made kings and priests by
Christ, set among princes, and upon the throne of glory; and they
themselves fleeing, and calling to the mountains to fall upon them, and
cover them from the sight of him that sits on the throne, and the Lamb,

\(p\) Zohar in Numb. fol. 63. 3. & 65. 4.

[1 Corinthians 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 1:28</span></span>

And base things of the world,.... Who are reckoned the filth of the
world, and the offscouring of all things; men of mean birth, education,
and business of life:

and things that are despised; and set at nought, as poor persons
generally are; yet God

hath chosen them; even the poor of this world, rich in faith, and heirs
of a kingdom:

yea, and things which are not; some think the Gentiles are here
intended, who by the Jews are called "things that are not": as in the
apocryphal books:

"O Lord, give not thy sceptre unto "them that be nothing", and let them
not laugh at our fall; but turn their device upon themselves, and make
him an example, that hath begun this against us.'' [Est
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/est014.htm#011)

"56 As for the other people, which also come of Adam, thou hast said
that "they are nothing", but be like unto spittle: and hast likened the
abundance of them unto a drop that falleth from a vessel. 57 And now, O
Lord, behold, these heathen, which have ever been "reputed as nothing",
have begun to be lords over us, and to devour us.'' (2 Esdras 6)

See Gill on [Rom 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#017) for note on
non-entities, or such who are not in being, are meant; but who are not
accounted of, or are reckoned as nothing; and these the Lord calls by
his grace, as a fruit and evidence of electing love:

to bring to nought things that are; who, on the account of their noble
birth, large possessions, and high attainments in knowledge and
learning, thought themselves something; all which will one day be
abolished, and will stand them in no stead with regard to future
happiness and glory. The Jews (q) have a saying quite contrary to all
this, that "the Shekinah, or presence of God, does not dwell on any but
upon a wise man, a mighty man, and a rich man.

\(q\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 92. 1.

[1 Corinthians 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 1:29</span></span>

That no flesh should glory in his presence. That is, "in the presence of
God", as some copies, and the Arabic and Ethiopic versions read; not in
their blood, birth, families, lineage, and natural descent; nor in their
might, power, and dominion; nor in their riches, wealth, and substance;
nor in their wisdom, learning, and parts: for however these may be
gloried in before men, yet not before God. These are of no account with
him, nor will they be regarded by him, or men on account of them; and he
has taken a method in choosing and calling the reverse of these, to
stain the glory of all flesh, that no man may attribute his salvation to
any thing of the creature, but wholly to the sovereign grace and good
pleasure of God.

[1 Corinthians 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 1:30</span></span>

But of him are ye in Christ Jesus,.... These words, as they direct to
the proper object of glorying, Christ, so they show the high honour the
called ones are brought to in and through Christ, and are opposed to
their outward meanness, folly, weakness, poverty, and contempt. They are
first of God the Father, of his own rich free grace and goodness,
without any regard to any motive, merit, or desert of theirs, put into
Christ by electing grace, in whom they are preserved and blessed; and
which is their original secret being in him; and is made manifest by
regenerating grace, by their being made new creatures; which also is not
owing to their blood, or to the will of the flesh, or to the will of
man, but to God and his free favour in Christ: and in consequence of
their being in Christ, as their head and representative, he becomes all
to them, which is here expressed,

who of God is made unto us wisdom. Though they are foolish creatures in
their own and the world's esteem, yet Christ is their wisdom; he is so
"efficiently", the author and cause of all that spiritual wisdom and
understanding in divine things they are possessed of; he is so
"objectively", their highest wisdom lying in the knowledge of his
person, blood, and righteousness, of interest in him, and salvation by
him; with which knowledge eternal life is connected: and he is so
"representatively"; he is their head, in whom all their wisdom lies; he
acts for them as their wisdom to God, he is their Counsellor, their
Advocate, who pleads and intercedes for them, and as their wisdom to
men, and gives them a mouth and wisdom which their adversaries are not
able to gainsay; and having the tongue of the learned, he speaks a word
in season to themselves, when weary, distressed, and disconsolate, and
for them in the court of heaven; he is their wisdom, to direct their
paths, to guide them with his counsel, in the way they should go, safe
to his kingdom and glory:

and righteousness. He is the "author" of righteousness; he has wrought
out and brought in one for them, which is well pleasing to God,
satisfying to his justice, by which his law is magnified and made
honourable; which justifies from all sin, and discharges from all
condemnation, is everlasting, and will answer for them in a time to
come; this he has brought in by the holiness of his nature, the
obedience of his life, and by his sufferings and death: and which is
"subjectively" in him, not in themselves; nor does it lie in any thing
wrought in them, or done by them; but in him as their head and
representative, who by "imputation" is made righteousness to them; and
they the same way are made the righteousness of God in him; or in other
words, this righteousness, by an act of the Father's grace, is imputed,
reckoned, and accounted to them as their justifying righteousness:

and sanctification; Christ is the sanctification of his people, through
the constitution of God, the imputation of the holiness of his nature,
the merits of his blood, and the efficacy of his grace, he is so
"federally" and "representatively"; he is their covenant head, and has
all covenant grace in his hands for them, and so the whole stock and
fund of holiness, which is communicated to them in all ages, until the
perfection of it in every saint: this is sanctification in Christ, which
differs from sanctification in them in these things; in him it is as the
cause, in them as the effect; in him as its fountain, in them as the
stream; in him it is complete, in them it is imperfect for the present:
and they have it by virtue of union to him; sanctification in Christ can
be of no avail to any, unless it is derived from him to them; so that
this sanctification in Christ does not render the sanctification of the
Spirit unnecessary, but includes it, and secures it: likewise Christ is
the sanctification of his people "by imputation", as the holiness of his
human nature is, together with his obedience and sufferings, imputed to
them for their justification; Christ assumed an holy human nature, the
holiness of it was not merely a qualification for his office as a
Saviour, or what made his actions and sufferings in that nature
significant and useful, or is exemplary to men; but is a branch of the
saints justification before God: the law required an holy nature, theirs
is not holy; Christ has assumed one not for, himself, but for them, and
so is the end of the law in all respects: and this may be greatly
designed in the whole of this passage; "wisdom" may stand in general for
the wise scheme of justification, as it is laid in Christ;
"sanctification" may intend the holiness of his nature; "righteousness"
the obedience of his life; and "redemption" his sufferings and death, by
which it is obtained: but then justification and sanctification are not
to be confounded; they are two distinct things, and have their proper
uses and effects; sanctification in the saints does not justify, or
justification sanctify; the one respects the power and being of sin, the
other the guilt of it. Moreover, Christ is the sanctification of his
people "meritoriously"; through the shedding of his blood, whereby he
has sanctified them, that is, expiated their sins, and made full
atonement for them; see [Heb 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#010).
Once more, he is their sanctification "efficiently"; by his Spirit, as
the author, and by his word, as the means; he is the source of all
holiness, it all comes from him, and is wrought by his Spirit in the
heart; which lies in filling the understanding with spiritual light and
knowledge; the mind with a sense of sin, and a detestation of it; the
heart with the fear of God; the affections with love to divine objects
and things; the will with submission and resignation to the will of God
in all respects; and is exercised in living a life of faith on Christ,
and in living soberly, righteously, and godly, before God and man: and
this, though imperfect now, will be perfected from and by Christ,
without which it is impossible to see the Lord:

and redemption; which he is by the appointment of his Father, being
foreordained to it before the foundation of the world; and this sense of
the word made will agree with every clause in the text; and he is so
efficiently, having obtained eternal redemption from sin, Satan, the
law, and this present evil world, for his people; and "subjectively", it
being in him, and every other blessing which is either a part of it, and
comes through it, or is dependent on it, as justification, adoption, and
remission of sins. Moreover, this may have respect not only to
redemption past, which is obtained by Christ; but to that which draws
near, the saints are waiting for, and to which they are sealed up by the
Spirit of God; even their redemption and deliverance from very being of
sin, from all sorrow and sufferings, from death and the grave, and
everything that is afflicting and distressing.

[1 Corinthians 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 1:31</span></span>

That, according as it is written,.... [Jer
9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023).

He that glorieth, let him glory in the Lord; not in his own wisdom,
riches, and strength; but in Christ, as his wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 2](co1002)

</div>
