<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Corinthians Index](co1)  
  [Previous](co1006)  [Next](co1008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Corinthians Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001)

[1 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co1 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 CORINTHIANS 7

In this, chapter, various cases concerning marriage being proposed to
the apostle, are answered by him; and he discourses of the nature, use,
and end of marriage, and of the duties of married persons to one
another; and gives advice to such as were unmarried, and points at the
advantages of a single state, where it can be continued in without
danger. Some of the Corinthians having written to him upon these heads,
he returns for answer in general, that abstinence from marriage was most
advisable; that is, at that time of persecution, and by those who had
the gift of continence, and for reasons after mentioned, [Co1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001) though, in order to avoid
fornication, it was absolutely necessary for truth who had not that gift
to enter into it, and act agreeably thereunto, [Co1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#002) and therefore advises both parties
in such a state to yield due benevolence to each other, [Co1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003) giving this as a reason for it,
that neither of them had power over their own bodies, but over each
other's, [Co1 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#004) wherefore abstinence
from the marriage bed ought not to be but with the following
limitations; that it be by mutual agreement, and only for a time, and
that only for the sake of devotion but that they come together again,
lest Satan should take an advantage of their incontinency, and tempt
them to evil, [Co1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005) though in all
this the apostle would be understood to speak, not in an authoritative,
but a permissive way, and rather by way of counsel than of command, [Co1
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#006) and expresses his hearty wish,
that everyone was, and would continue, in a single state, as he himself;
though he corrects himself by observing, that it was not the pleasure of
God to bestow the gift of continency on everyone, and therefore
suggests, that it was right for everyone to act according to the gift he
had received, [Co1 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007) and then
addresses persons in a single state, whether they had ever been married
or not, and advises them so to abide, partly by his own example, and
partly by the profitableness of it, [Co1
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#008) but if they had not the gift of
continency, his counsel is, that they enter into a marriage state,
giving this reason for it, that it is better to enter into such a state
than to be inflamed with lust, [Co1
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009) and then he directs himself to
married persons; and these he commands, not in his own name, but in the
name of the Lord, to live together; and particularly, that the wife
should not leave her husband for any trivial matter, or on account of
any difference that might arise between them, [Co1
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#010) and that if she so did, she ought
to remain unmarried, or seek to be reconciled to her husband, and come
to him again; and, on the other hand, the husband ought not to divorce
his wife, unless in case of adultery and wilful obstinate desertion,
[Co1 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#011). And as to another case of
conscience which was moved unto him, whether a believer, having married
an unbeliever, should live together; he answers, that if a Christian
brother had married an unbelieving wife, and she thought fit to continue
with him, he should not put her away, [Co1
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#012). And so a Christian woman that
had married an unbelieving husband, if it was his pleasure to dwell with
her, she ought not to forsake him, [Co1
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#013) giving this reason for it,
because they were legally married to each other, or otherwise their
children must be reckoned bastards; whereas by maintaining the validity
of their marriage, and abiding by it, they would appear to be
legitimate, [Co1 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#014) but if the
unbeliever, whether man or woman, thinks fit to desert the believing
wife or husband, so be it, the party deserted may make themselves easy,
nor are they under obligation to remain unmarried: however, as they are
called to peace they ought to seek it, and endeavour to live quietly
together, [Co1 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015) and that for this
reason, because they may be the means of the conversion, and so of the
salvation of the unbelieving party, [Co1
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#016) hence the apostle takes an
occasion to exhort every man in general to walk and abide in the calling
wherein he is called, this being an order he had given to all the
churches, [Co1 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#017) and which he
exemplifies by particular instances, as that those who are called in
circumcision, or in uncircumcision, should abide so, [Co1
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#018) because these are nothing, or
indifferent things, which may be, or may not be; but keeping the
commandments is binding, and not to be dispensed with, [Co1
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#019) wherefore the general rule is
repeated, that it might be the more regarded and observed, [Co1
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#020). And another instance given,
illustrating it, as that if a man is called while a servant, he should
make himself easy, and continue so; though if he can have his freedom it
is most eligible, [Co1 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#021). The
reason persuading him to be satisfied with his condition is, because he
that is called by grace, though a servant in a civil sense, is the
Lord's freeman in a spiritual sense; and, on the other hand, he who is
free in a civil sense when called, is in a spiritual sense a servant of
Christ, [Co1 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#022) as clearly appears
by his being bought with the price of his blood; and therefore neither
one nor the other should be servants of men in matters of religion, [Co1
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023). Wherefore, as before, it becomes
every man to abide in the station in which he is called, until it please
God in his providence to change his situation, [Co1
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#024). After this the apostle returns
to his former subject about marriage, and addresses the virgins
particularly, concerning whom he declares he had no express commandment
from the Lord, but however was willing to give his judgment and advice,
with all sincerity and uprightness, as one that had the honour to be
counted faithful by the Lord himself, [Co1
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025) and his judgment was, that
considering the present persecution of the churches of Christ, it was
better for single persons, men or women, to remain so, [Co1
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#026) though he advises those that were
married by no means to desert one another, or seek to dissolve the
marriage bond; as, on the other hand, those that were free from it, he
would not have them seek out for a wife, [Co1
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#027) though should they, it would not
be criminal in them; and whether young men or maidens, it was not
unlawful for them to marry, only it was not so convenient for the
present; and such therefore must expect trouble in the world, [Co1
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028). However, it was proper, since
time was short, and every worldly enjoyment was fading and perishing,
that care be taken that there be no abuse of any, in whatsoever state
and condition, or circumstance men were in; neither to be too much
depressed with afflictive providences, nor too much elated with
prosperous ones; and by no means to indulge to lasciviousness and
luxury, [Co1 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029). And whereas the
married life is a careful one, and the apostle was desirous the persons
he writes to should be without any distressing care, he advised so
strongly as he did to a single state; and in order to persuade to it, he
puts the difference between an unmarried and a married man, who though
they both had their cares, yet about different things; the former about
divine and religious things, in order to please the Lord; the latter
about worldly things, in order to please his wife, [Co1
7:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#032). And just the like difference he
observes there is between a wife and a virgin; the virgin, she is
concerned about and taken up in religious matters, that she may increase
in holiness, both inward and outward; and the wife is engaged in worldly
and domestic affairs, which engross her thoughts and time, in order to
please her husband, [Co1 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034)
wherefore the advice he had given to continue single, was manifestly for
the profit and advantage of such persons in spiritual things; though he
gave it with no design to ensnare any, who had not the gift of
continence, but advised to it, when it could be done, in a comely
manner, and that they might attend upon the worship of God, without
distraction by worldly cares for their families, [Co1
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035) but in case, when a virgin is
ripe for marriage, and there is a necessity for it, it is by no means
advisable in parents to behave uncomely to her, and refuse to marry her,
and so deprive her of the remedy against incontinence; when such is the
case, she ought to marry, that being not sinful, yea, it would be sinful
to do otherwise, [Co1 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#036) yet where
there is no necessity, where persons have the gift of continency, are
steadfastly determined not to marry, but, to keep their virginity, this
is commendable as well as profitable, [Co1
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#037) whence this conclusion is drawn,
that they that marry do well, rather than burn in lust, or commit sin,
but they that do not marry, having the gift of continency, do better,
both for themselves, and for the Lord, [Co1
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#038). And whereas whilst an husband is
living, the wife is bound by law to continue with him; and when he is
dead, she may marry whom she will, So be it she seeks the Lord, and has
his glory in view, [Co1 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039) yet in
the judgment of the apostle she would be a much more happy person should
she continue a widow; and this was not only his own private judgment,
but he had reason to believe it was according to the mind of the Spirit
of God, [Co1 7:40](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#040).

[1 Corinthians 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co1 7:1</span></span>

Now concerning the things whereof ye wrote unto me,.... Though the false
apostles had greatly influenced the members of this church, yet there
were many among them that had a very great respect for the apostle, and
kept up a correspondence with him, though at a distance from him, by
writing; in which way they informed him of their doubts and
difficulties, that arose in their minds about certain things, and
desired his judgment in them, to which they paid a very great deference.
The things they wrote to him about, here referred to, may be collected
from the contents of this chapter, and some others following; as whether
a Christian man ought not to abstain from the use of women; whether a
believer ought to live with an unbelieving yoke fellow; whether such as
had been circumcised should not make use of some methods to draw on the
foreskin of their flesh; whether apprentices, who were called by the
grace of God, ought to serve out their time with their masters; and
concerning celibacy or virginity, the eating of things offered to idols,
and the maintenance of ministers: and he begins with the first; to which
he answers,

it is good for a man not to touch a woman; which is to be understood,
not of merely touching a woman, which can neither be criminal, nor in
all cases inexpedient, or be attended with any ill, or dangerous
consequences; nor of the matrimonial contract, which is lawful and
honourable; but of the act of carnal copulation with a woman: in this
sense the Jews use the phrase,

"there are three (they say (r)) that fled from transgression, and the
blessed God joined his name with them; and they are these, Joseph, and
Joel, and Phalti. Joseph, as appears from what is said, [Psa
81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005) "a testimony in Joseph is his
name"; what is the meaning of the phrase "in Joseph?" this testifies
concerning him, , "that he did not touch Potiphar's wife" (i.e. he did
not lie with her); Jael, as is clear from what is said, [Jdg
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#018) "and Jael went forth to meet
Sisera, and she covered him with a mantle"; what is the meaning of the
phrase, (which is rendered, "with a mantle";) our Rabbins here (in
Babylon) say with a linen cloth; but our Rabbins there (in the land of
Israel) say with bed clothes; says Resh Lekish, if we run over the whole
Scripture, we shall not find any household goods so called; wherefore
what is it? it is all one as , "my name is thus": and the meaning is, my
name witnesses concerning her, , "that that wicked one (Sisera) did not
touch her" (s); (i.e. had not carnal knowledge of her;) Phalti, as is
evident from hence, one Scripture says, "and Saul gave Michal his
daughter to Phalti", [Sa1 25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044) and
another Scripture says Phaltiel; sometimes he is called Phalti, and
sometimes he is called Phaltiel; who takes Phalti? and who gives
Phaltiel? but I testify concerning him; , "that he did not touch David's
wife"; (i.e. did not lie with her;)''

see [Gen 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006). And in this sense also
is the word "touch" used, both by Greek and Latin authors. The apostle's
meaning is not that it is unlawful to marry, or that it is sinful to lie
with a woman in lawful wedlock; but that it is much better, and more
expedient on several accounts, to abstain from the use of women, when
persons have the gift of continency.

\(r\) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 23. fol. 164. 4. & 165. 1. Vid Shemot Rabba,
sect. 1. fol. 91. 4. (s) Vid. Kimchi in Jud. iv. 18.

[1 Corinthians 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co1 7:2</span></span>

Nevertheless, to avoid fornication,.... Or "fornications"; meaning
either the frequent commission of that sin; or all sorts of uncleanness
and pollution, which may be avoided by wedlock, and the proper use of
the marriage bed, where the gift of continency is not bestowed:
wherefore to prevent unlawful copulations, as of single persons with one
another, or of a married person with a single one, the apostle advises,
as being what is right and proper,

let every man have his own wife, and let every woman have her own
husband; that is, let every man that has a wife enjoy her, and make use
of her, and let every woman that has an husband, receive him into her
embraces; for these words are not to be understood of unmarried persons
entering into a marriage state, for the words suppose them in such a
state, but of the proper use of the marriage bed; and teach us that
marriage, and the use of it, are proper remedies against fornication;
and that carnal copulation of a man with a woman ought only to be of
husband and wife, or of persons in a married state; and that all other
copulations are sinful; and that polygamy is unlawful; and that one man
is to have but one wife, and to keep to her; and that one woman is to
have but one husband, and to keep to him.

[1 Corinthians 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co1 7:3</span></span>

Let the husband render unto the wife due benevolence,.... The Syriac
version renders it, , "due love"; and so the Arabic; and may include all
the offices of love, tenderness, humanity, care, provision, and
protection, which are to be performed by the husband to his wife; though
it seems chiefly, if not solely, here to respect what is called, [Exo
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#010) "her marriage duty", as distinct
from food and raiment to be allowed her; and what is meant by it the
Jewish doctors will tell us: one says (t), it is , "the use of the
marriage bed"; and, says another (u), , "it is to lie with her",
according to the way of all the earth. And so the phrase here, "due
benevolence", is an euphemism, and designs the act of coition; which as
it is an act of love and affection, a sign of mutual benevolence, so of
justice; it is a due debt from divine ordination, and the matrimonial
contract. The Jewish doctors have fixed and settled various canons (w)
concerning the performance, of this conjugal debt: and the apostle may
not be altogether without some view to the rules and customs which
obtained in his own nation.

And, likewise also the wife unto the husband; she is not to refuse the
use of the bed when required, unless there is some just impediment,
otherwise she comes under the name of a "rebellious wife"; concerning
whom, and her punishment, the Jews (x) give the following rules:

"a woman that restrains her husband from the use of the bed, is called
rebellious; and when they ask her why she rebels, if she says, because
it is loathsome to me, and I cannot lie with him; then they oblige him
to put her away directly, without her dowry; and she may not take any
thing of her husband's, not even her shoe strings, nor her hair lace;
but what her husband did not give her she may take, and go away: and if
she rebels against her husband, on purpose to afflict him, and she does
to him so or so, and despises him, they send to her from the sanhedrim,
and say to her, know thou, that if thou continuest in thy rebellion,
thou shalt not prosper? and after that they publish her in the
synagogues and schools four weeks, one after another, and say, such an
one has rebelled against her husband; and after the publication, they
send and say to her, if thou continuest in thy rebellion, thou wilt lose
thy dowry; and they appoint her twelve months, and she has no sustenance
from her husband all that time; and she goes out at the end of twelve
months without her dowry, and returns everything that is her
husband's.''

This account, with a little variation, is also given by Maimonides (y).

\(t\) Mosis Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora, praecept. neg. 81. Sol. Jarchi in
Exod. xxi. 10. (u) Maimon. Hilch. Isbot, c. 12. sect. 2. Vid. Aben Ezra
in Exod. xxi. 10. (w) Vid. Misn. Cetubot, c. 5. sect. 6. & Mikvaot, c.
8. sect. 3. (x) Mosis Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora, pr. neg. 81. (y) Hilch.
Ishot, c. 14. sect. 8, 9, 10. Vid. Misn. Cetubot, c. 5. sect. 7. &
Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[1 Corinthians 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co1 7:4</span></span>

The wife hath not power of her own body,.... To refrain the use of it
from her husband; or to prostitute it to another man:

but the husband; he has the sole power over it, and may require when he
pleases the use of it:

and likewise also the husband has not power over his own body: to
withhold due benevolence, or the conjugal debt from his wife; or abuse
it by self-pollution, fornication, adultery, sodomy, or any acts of
uncleanness: but the wife; she only has a power over it, a right to it,
and may claim the use of it: this power over each other's bodies is not
such, as that they may, by consent, either the husband allow the wife,
or the wife the husband, to lie with another.

[1 Corinthians 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co1 7:5</span></span>

Defraud ye not one the other,.... By withholding due benevolence,
denying the use of the marriage bed, refusing to pay the conjugal debt,
and which is called a "diminishing of her marriage duty", [Exo
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#010) where the Septuagint use the
same word "defraud", as the apostle does here; it is what both have a
right to, and therefore, if either party is denied, it is a piece of
injustice, it is properly a defrauding; though with proper conditions,
such as follow, it may be lawful for married persons to lie apart, and
abstain from the use of the bed, but then it should never be done,

except it be with consent: because they have a mutual power over each
other's bodies, and therefore the abstinence must be voluntary on each
side; otherwise injury is done to the person that does not consent, who
is deprived against will of just right; but if there is agreement, then
there is no defrauding, because each give up their right; and such a
voluntary abstinence is commended by the Jews (z);

"everyone that lessens the use of the bed, lo, he, is praiseworthy; and
he who does not make void, or, cause to cease the due benevolence, but ,
"by consent of his wife";''

i.e. he also is praiseworthy: another condition of this abstinence is
that it be only for a time; which shall be agreed unto, and fixed by
both parties; not for ever which would be contrary to the will of God;
the institution and end of marriage, and of dangerous consequence to
either party. The Jews allow of a vow of continency for a while; and
which they limit to different persons; thus (a),

"if a man by a vow excludes, wife from the use of the bed, the school of
Shammai say it is for the space of two weeks, the school of Hillell say
one week; scholars go out to learn the law, without leave of their
wives, thirty days, workmen one week;''

which vow, for such a limited time, they seem to allow of, without
mutual consent; and herein they disagree with the rule the apostle
gives; and who further observes, the end to be had in view by such a
voluntary separation for a time,

that ye may give yourselves to fasting and prayer; not that this was
necessary for the ordinary discharge of such service, as for private
acts of devotion among themselves, and constant family prayer; but
either when times of fasting and prayer on some emergent occasions were
appointed by themselves, or by the church, or by the civil government on
account of some extraordinary and momentous affairs; and this seems to
be observed by the apostle, in agreement with the customs and rules of
the Jewish nation, which forbid the use of the bed, as on their great
and annual fast, the day of atonement (b), so on their fasts appointed
by the sanhedrim for obtaining of rain (c): the word "fasting" is
omitted in the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions, and so it is in the
Alexandrian copy, two of Stephens's; and others: the apostle adds,

and come together again; to the same bed, and the use of it, and that
for this reason,

that Satan tempt you not for your incontinence; for not having the gift
of continency, should they pretend to keep apart long: Satan, who knows
the temperament and disposition of men and women, may tempt them not
only to hatred of, and quarrels with one another, but to impure lusts
and desires, to fornication, adultery, and all uncleanness; a very good
reason why, though abstinence from the marriage bed for a short time, by
the consent of both parties, for religious purposes, may be lawful, yet
ought not to be continued; since Satan may hereby get an advantage over
them, and draw them into the commission of scandalous enormities. The
Jews have a notion of Satan's being a tempter, and of his tempting men
to various sins, which they should guard against, as idolatry, &c. So
say they (d),

"thou mayest not look after idolatry, according to [Deu
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019) and again, thou must take heed
lest this be a cause of it to thee, , "and Satan tempt thee" to look
after them, and do as they do:''

and again (e), frequently should a man think

"upon the unity of the blessed God, lest there should be anything above
or below, before him or behind him, or by him, and so, , "Satan tempt
him", and he come into heresy.''

\(z\) Maimon. Hilch. Ishot, c. 21. sect. 11. (a) Misn. Cetubot, c. 5.
sect. 6. (b) Misn. Yoma, c. 8. sect. 1. (c) Misn. Taanith, c. 1. sect.
6. (d) Mosis Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora, pr. neg. 14. (e) Mosis Kotsensis
Mitzvot Tora, pr. neg. 15.

[1 Corinthians 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co1 7:6</span></span>

But I speak this by permission,.... Referring either to what he had said
before, though not to all; not to [Co1
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#002) that for the avoiding of
fornication, every man should make use of his own wife, and every woman
of her own husband; since this is not by permission, but by command,
[Gen 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024) that carnal copulation
should be between one man and one woman in a married state; nor to [Co1
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#003) for that married persons ought to
render due benevolence to, and not defraud each other, having a power
over each other's bodies, is a precept, and not a permission, [Exo
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#010) but to [Co1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005) their parting for a time, and
coming together again: it is not an absolute command of God that they
should separate for a time, on account of fasting and prayer, but if
they thought fit to do so by agreement, they might; nor was there any
positive precept for their coming together again directly, after such
service was over. The apostle said this,

not of commandment; but, consulting their good, gives this advice, lest
Satan should be busy with them, and draw them into sin; but if they had
the gift of continence, they might continue apart longer; there was no
precise time fixed by God, nor did the apostle pretend to fix any: or it
may refer to what follows after, that he would have all men be as he
was; though he laid no injunction, but left them to their liberty;
unless it can be thought to regard marriage in general, and to be said
in opposition to a Jewish notion, which makes marriage a "command";

"a man, they say (f), is bound to this command at seventeen years of
age, and if he passes twenty and does not marry, he transgresses, and
makes void an affirmative precept;''

but the apostle puts it as a matter of choice, and not of obligation.

\(f\) Maimon. Hilch, Isbot, c. 15. sect. 2.

[1 Corinthians 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co1 7:7</span></span>

For I would that all men were even as I myself,.... The apostle speaks
not of his state and condition, as married or unmarried, for it is not
certain which he was; some think he had a wife, others not: it looks,
however, as if he had not at this time, as appears from [Co1
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#008) but be it which it will, it can
hardly be thought he should wish all men to be in either state, either
all married, or all unmarried; but he speaks of the gift of continency,
which he had, as the following words show; and this he desires for all
men, that they might not be in any danger from Satan's temptations, and
that they might be more fit for and intent upon the service of Christ.
The Syriac version adds, in "purity", or "chastity"; which may be
preserved in a marriage state, as well as in single life:

but every man hath his proper gift of God, one after this manner, and
another after that: all the gifts of nature and grace which men have,
they have of God, and not of themselves; and every man has a gift proper
to himself; no one man has all gifts, but some one, and some another;
and with respect to the case in hand, one man has the gift of
continency, another the gift of marriage; all cannot contain themselves,
only to whom it is given: and all are not disposed to marriage; some are
inclined to a single life, and some to a marriage state; and of those
that are married, some can abstain from the use of the marriage bed
longer than others, without being in danger of being tempted by Satan
for their incontinency; and such a disposition is desirable.

[1 Corinthians 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co1 7:8</span></span>

I say therefore to the unmarried and widows,.... Not by way of command,
but advice: by the "unmarried" he means, either such men who never were
in a married state, or else such who had been married, but their wives
were dead; which latter sense seems more agreeable, since they are
joined with "widows", who had lost their husbands:

it is good for them if they abide; unmarried, and do not change their
condition any more; not that it was sinful to marry again, for he allows
of it in the next verse, in case they have not the gift of continence;
and therefore "good" here, is not opposed to evil, only signifies that
it would be better for them, more expedient and profitable for them;
they would be more free from the cares of life, have less trouble, and
be more at leisure to serve the Lord; and which he knew by experience,
and therefore, proposes himself as an example:

even as I; that is, as he was then; for at that time it seems certain
that he had no wife; though whether he had had one, and she was now
dead, or whether he had never been married, may be matter of dispute;
the former seems most agreeable, since he proposes himself as an example
to widowers and widows; and having known what a married and single state
both were, was better able to give his judgment of both, and proper
advice to such persons which must come with more force and strength, and
a better grace, from such an one.

[1 Corinthians 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co1 7:9</span></span>

But if they cannot contain, &c. Or "if they do not contain", as the
words may be rendered, and as almost all versions do render them; if
they have not the gift of continency; if they are not willing, and do
not think fit to contain, for none are to be compelled; if either
therefore they want a will or power to contain, let them marry; it is
not only lawful for them to marry, but it is right and best for them;
hence it appears that second marriages are lawful, which were condemned
by some of the ancients: for it is better to marry than to burn; or be
burnt; not with material fire, as Judah ordered Tamar to be brought
forth and burnt with, for whoredom; nor with hell fire, the just demerit
of uncleanness; but with the fire of lust itself; and so the Syriac
version reads it, "it is better to marry than to be burnt" "with lust";
when persons not only find in them some lustful motions and desires, and
a glowing heat of concupiscence; but are as it were all on fire with the
lusts of the flesh, and in great danger of being drawn into the
commission of fornication, adultery, or other pollutions, and even
unnatural lusts; it is much better to enter into a marriage state,
though it may have its cares, inconveniences, and difficulties, than to
be under temptations and inclinations to such defilements: so the Jews
often express the lust of concupiscence by fire; they tell (g) us a

"story of R. Amram, that he redeemed all the captives, men and women;
and the women and the virgins dwelt in a chamber in his house alone; one
time, Satan kindled in him, , "the fire of lust", and he set a ladder to
go up to them, and when he came upon the steps of the ladder, he began
to cry with a loud voice, , "fire in the house of Amram, fire in the
house of Amram": and the men came to quench the fire, and found nothing
burning; for it was only his intention to cause to cease from him the
fire of lust; and his thought ceased and his mind grew cool; and they
asked him, why he mocked them? he replied, for this is a greater "fire"
than all the fires in the world, for it is the fire of hell:''

This story is also told in the Talmud (h), with some little variation:
so we read of one that is , "inflamed" (i), or all on fire "with the
corruption of nature", who does not direct his heart to God: and such a
man that finds his corruptions prevail over him, he ought to marry, they
say (k), as a proper remedy against it:

"he whose mind is intent upon the law continually, and learns it as Ben
Azzai, and cleaves to it all his days, and does not marry a wife, there
is no iniquity in his hands, and that because his corruption does not
prevail over him; but if his corruption prevails over him, , "he ought
to marry a wife":''

and that for the very reason the apostle here gives. The Ethiopic
version reads, "it is better to marry than to commit fornication"; that
and adultery both are expressed by fire and burning, with the Jews, as
they prove from [Hos 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#004) (l).

\(g\) Caphtor, fol. 62. 1. (h) T. Bab. Kiddushin, fol. 81. 1. (i) Zohar
in Lev. fol. 21. 1. (k) Maimon. Hilch. Ishot, c. 15. sect. 3. (l) Vet.
Nizzachon, p. 43, 44.

[1 Corinthians 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co1 7:10</span></span>

And unto the married I command,.... To the unmarried and widows he spoke
by permission, or only gave advice and counsel to remain unmarried,
provided they could contain; but if not, it was advisable to marry; but
to persons already in a married state, what he has to say to them is by
commandment, enjoining what they are under obligation to observe, not
being at liberty to do as they will:

yet not I, but the Lord; not as if he took upon him the dominion over
them, to make laws for them, and, in an imperious authoritative way,
oblige them to obedience to them; no; what he was about to deliver, was
not a law of his own enacting and obtruding, but what their Lord, their
Creator, head, husband, and Redeemer, had ordered and enjoined; and this
grave solemn way of speaking he makes use of, to excite their attention,
command awe and reverence, make the greater impression upon their minds,
and show the obligation they were under to regard what was said:

let not the wife depart from her husband; for the same law that obliges
a man to cleave to his wife, obliges the wife to cleave to her husband,
[Gen 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024) and those words of Christ,
"what God hath joined together, let no man put asunder", [Mat
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006) regard the one as well as the
other; and the rules he has given, forbidding divorces only in case of
adultery, [Mat 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032) are as binding
upon the wife as upon the husband. The wife therefore should not depart
from her husband upon every slight occasion; not on account of any
quarrel, or disagreement that may arise between them; or for every
instance of moroseness and inhumanity; or because of diseases and
infirmities; nor even on the score of difference in religion which, by
what follows, seems to be greatly the case in view. The apostle observes
this, in opposition to some rules and customs which obtained among Jews
and Gentiles, divorcing and separating from one another upon various
accounts; not only husbands put away their wives, but wives also left
their husbands: for women to put away, or leave their husbands, were not
in former times allowed of among the Jews, but from other nations crept
in among them; indeed if a man married one under age, and she did not
like him for her husband, she might refuse him, and go away without a
bill of divorce; the manner of refusal was, by saying before two
witnesses, I do not like such an one for my husband, or I do not like
the espousals, with which my mother or my brother espoused me, or in
such like words; and sometimes a written form of refusal was given (m);
but otherwise where marriage was consummated, such a departure of the
wife was not allowed. Salome, the sister of Herod, is thought to be the
first that introduced it, who sent a bill of divorce to Costobarus (n)
her husband; and in this she was followed by Herodias, the daughter of
Aristobulus, who left her husband, and married Herod Antipas (o); and it
seems certain, that this practice prevailed in Christ's time, since not
only such a case is supposed, [Mar
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#012) but a very flagrant instance is
given in the woman of Samaria, [Joh
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#018) who had had five husbands, not in
a lawful regular manner, one after another upon their respective deaths,
but she had married them, and put them away one after another: and as
for the Gentiles, the account the Jews (p) give of them is, that though
they had

"no divorces in form, they put away one another; R. Jochanan says, , "a
man's wife might put him away", and give him the dowry:''

though, according to other accounts, they had divorces in form, which,
when a man put away a woman, were called , "letters of dismission"; and
when a woman left her husband, , "letters of dereliction", such as
Hipparchia the wife of Alcibiades gave to him (q); and Justin Martyr (r)
gives us an instance of a Christian woman, who gave her husband what the
Roman senate called a divorce.

\(m\) Maimon. Hilch. Gerushim, c. 11. 1. 8. 11. & Ishot, c. 4. sect. 3.
(n) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 15. c. 7. sect. 10. (o) lb. l. 18. c. 6. sect. 1.
(p) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 18. fol. 15. 3. (q) Plutarch. in Alcibiade.
(r) Apolog. 1. p. 41, 42.

[1 Corinthians 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co1 7:11</span></span>

But and if she depart,.... This is said, not as allowing of such a
departure, which only in case of fornication is lawful; but supposing it
a fact, that a woman cannot be prevailed upon to stay with her husband,
but actually forsakes him upon some difference arising between them,

let her remain unmarried: she ought not to marry another man; her
departure does not make the marriage void; nor is it to be made void by
any difference between them, either on religious or civil accounts, only
in case of adultery; and therefore, if upon such separation she marries,
she is guilty of adultery:

or be reconciled to her husband; which is rather to be chosen, than to
remain separate, though unmarried; if she has given the offence, and is
the cause of the separation, she ought to acknowledge it, and ask
forgiveness of her husband, and return to him and live in peace with
him; and if the fault is on his side, she ought to make use of all
proper methods to convince him of it, bring him into good temper,
forgive any injury done her, and live peaceably and comfortably
together:

and let not the husband put away his wife; as the Jews were wont to do,
upon every trifling occasion; See Gill on [Mat
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031), [Mat
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032)

[1 Corinthians 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co1 7:12</span></span>

But to the rest speak I, not the Lord,.... He had spoken before to
married persons in general, and had delivered not his own sentiments
barely, but the commandment of the Lord, that such should never separate
from, or put away each other; in which he has respect to such as were
upon equal foot in matters of religion, who were both of them believers
in Christ; but now he speaks to the rest, to such as were unequally
yoked, the one a believer, the other an unbeliever; and what he delivers
on this head, concerning their living together, there being no express
determination of this matter by the Lord himself, he under divine
inspiration gives his sense of it; as that such marriages were valid,
and that such persons ought to live together, and not separate on
account of difference in religion: or the sense is, that as "to the
rest" of the things they had wrote to him about, besides what he had
given answer to already, he should speak to under divine illumination;
though he had not an express law of Christ to point unto them, as the
rule of their conduct: and particularly, whereas they had desired his
judgment and advice upon this head, whether one who before conversion
had married an unbeliever, ought to live with such an one, or whether it
would not be advisable to leave, or put such away, to it he answers,

if any brother hath a wife that believeth not; that is, if any man who
is now a brother, one called by the grace of God, and is in church
fellowship, has a wife to whom he was married whilst in a state of
unregeneracy and infidelity; who is as she was when he married her,
entirely destitute of faith in Christ; not one that is weak in the
faith, or only makes an outward profession, but that has no faith at all
in Christ, nor in his Gospel, not so much as an historical one; who
disbelieves, denies, and rejects, the truths of the Gospel:

and she be pleased to dwell with him; loves her husband, chooses to
continue with him, notwithstanding their different sentiments of
religion:

let him not put her away; infidelity is no reason for a divorce. The
Gospel revelation does not dissolve the natural obligations men and
women are in to one another. The Jews had a law prohibiting marriages
with Heathens and idolaters; and such marriages were dissolved, and such
wives put away, [Exo 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#016) but this
was a law peculiar to that people, and was not obligatory on other
nations, and especially has no place under the Gospel dispensation.

[1 Corinthians 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co1 7:13</span></span>

And the woman which hath an husband that believeth,.... The apostle puts
the case both ways, there being the same reason for one as for another;
that if she that was a sister, who was partaker of the grace of God, and
a member of the church, had a husband to whom she was married before her
conversion; who was an unbeliever, had no faith in Christ, nor any
notion of the Gospel, but an infidel to both:

and if he be pleased to dwell with her; loves her, and is willing to
continue with her; neither puts her away from him, nor departs from her
on account of her Christianity:

let her not leave him; but continue, and cohabit with him as man and
wife; this is the advice the apostle gives, as agreeably to the light of
nature and reason; as becoming the Gospel of Christ, and as what might
serve to recommend it, and spread the knowledge of it.

[1 Corinthians 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co1 7:14</span></span>

For the unbelieving husband is sanctified by the wife,.... That is, "by
the believing wife"; as the Vulgate Latin and Syriac versions read, and
so it is read in some copies; and likewise in the next clause the same
is read,

by the believing husband; this is a reason given by the apostle why they
should live together. This cannot be understood of internal
sanctification, which is never the case; an unbeliever cannot be
sanctified by a believer in this sense, for such a sanctification is
only by the Spirit of God; nor external sanctification, or an outward
reformation, which though the unbelieving yoke fellow may sometimes be a
means of, yet not always; and besides, the usefulness of one to another
in such a relation, in a spiritual sense, urged as a reason for living
together, in [Co1 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#016) nor merely of
the holiness of marriage, as it is an institution of God, which is
equally the same in unbelievers as believers, or between a believer and
an unbeliever, as between two believers; but of the very act of
marriage, which, in the language of the Jews, is expressed by being
"sanctified"; instances almost without number might be given of the use
of the word in this sense, out of the Misnic, Talmudic, and Rabbinic
writings; take the following one instead of a thousand that might be
produced (s).

"The man "sanctifies", or espouses a wife by himself, or by his
messenger; the woman "is sanctified", or espoused by herself, or by her
messenger. The man "sanctifies", or espouses his daughter, when she is a
young woman, by himself or by his messenger; if anyone says to a woman,
"be thou sanctified", or espoused to me by this date (the fruit of the
palm tree,) "be thou sanctified", or espoused to me by this (any other
thing); if there is anyone of these things the value of a farthing, "she
is sanctified", or espoused, and if not she is not "sanctified", or
"espoused"; if he says, by this, and by this, and by this, if there is
the value of a farthing in them all, "she is sanctified", or espoused;
but if not, she is not "sanctified", or espoused; if she eats one after
another, she is not "sanctified", or espoused, unless there is one of
them the value of a farthing;''

in which short passage, the word which is used to "sanctify", or be
"sanctified", in the Hebrew language, is used to espouse, or be espoused
no less than "ten" times. So the Jews (t) interpret the word
"sanctified", in [Job 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005) he espoused
to them wives; in the Misna, the oral law of the Jews, there is a whole
treatise of "sanctifications" (u), or espousals; and in the Gemara or
Talmud (w) is another, full of the disputes of the doctors on this
subject. Maimonides has also written a treatise of women and wives (x),
out of which might be produced almost innumerable instances in proof of
the observation; and such as can read, and have leisure to read the said
tracts, may satisfy themselves to their heart's content. Let it be
further observed; that the preposition which is in most versions
rendered "by", should be rendered "in" or "to" or "unto", as it is in
the next verse, and in many other places; see [Mat
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#012) [Col
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#023) if it be rendered in the former
way, "in", it denotes the near union which by marriage the man and woman
are brought into; if in the latter, it designs the object to which the
man or woman is espoused, and the true sense and even the right
rendering of the passage is this: "for the unbelieving husband is
espoused to the wife, and the unbelieving wife is espoused to the
husband"; they are duly, rightly, and legally espoused to each other;
and therefore ought not, notwithstanding their different sentiments of
religion, to separate from one another; otherwise, if this is not the
case, if they are not truly married to one another, this consequence
must necessarily follow; that the children born in such a state of
cohabitation, where the marriage is not valid, must be spurious, and not
legitimate, and which is the sense of the following words:

else were your children unclean, but now are they holy; that is, if the
marriage contracted between them in their state of infidelity was not
valid, and, since the conversion of one of them, can never be thought to
be good; then the children begotten and born, either when both were
infidels, or since one of them was converted, must be unlawfully
begotten, be base born, and not a genuine legitimate offspring; and
departure upon such a foot would be declaring to all the world that
their children were illegitimate; which would have been a sad case
indeed, and contains in it another reason why they ought to keep
together; whereas, as the apostle has put it, the children are holy in
the same sense as their parents are; that as they are sanctified, or
lawfully espoused together, so the children born of them were in a civil
and legal sense holy, that is, legitimate; wherefore to support the
validity of their marriage, and for the credit of their children, it was
absolutely necessary they should abide with one another. The learned Dr.
Lightfoot says, that the words "unclean" and "holy" denote not children
unlawfully begotten, and lawfully begotten; but Heathenism and
Christianism; and thinks the apostle alludes to the distinction often
made by the Jews, of the children of proselytes being born in
"holiness", or out of it, that is, either before they became proselytes
or after; but it should be observed, that though the word "holiness" is
used for Judaism, yet not for Christianity; and besides, the marriages
of Heathens were not looked upon as marriages by the Jews, and
particularly such mixed ones as of a Jew and Gentile, they were not to
be reckoned marriages; for so they say (y),

"he that espouses a Gentile woman, or a servant, , "they are not
espousals"; but lo, he is after the espousals as he was before the
espousals; and so a Gentile, or a servant, that espouses a daughter of
Israel, , "those espousals are no espousals";''

nor do they allow children begotten of such persons to be legitimate.
This learned writer himself owns such a tradition, and which he cites
(z),

"that a son begotten in uncleanness is a son in all respects, and in
general is reckoned as an Israelite, though he is a bastard, , "but a
son begotten on a Gentile woman is not his son";''

all which are just the reverse of what the apostle is here observing;
and who, it must be remarked, is speaking of the same sort of holiness
of children as of parents, which cannot be understood of Christianity,
because one of the parents in each is supposed to be an Heathen. The
sense I have given of this passage, is agreeable to the mind of several
interpreters, ancient and modern, as Jerom, Ambrose, Erasmus,
Camerarius, Musculus, &c. which last writer makes this ingenuous
confession; formerly, says he, I have abused this place against the
Anabaptists, thinking the meaning was, that the children were holy for
the parents' faith; which though true, the present place makes nothing
for the purpose: and I hope, that, upon reading this, everyone that has
abused it to such a purpose will make the like acknowledgment; I am sure
they ought.

\(s\) Misn. Kiddushin, c. 2. sect. 1. (t) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 7. fol.
152. 1. (u) Massech. Kiddushin. (w) T. Bab. & Hieros. Kiddushin. (x)
Hilch Ishot. c. 3. & 4. & 5. & 6. & 7. & 8. & 9. (y) Maimon. Hilch.
Ishot, c. 4. sect. 15. (z) Maimon. Hilch. Issure Bia, c. 12. sect. 7.
Vid. Ib. Hilch. Nechalat, c. 2. sect. 12.

[1 Corinthians 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co1 7:15</span></span>

But if the unbelieving depart,.... If the unbelieving party, man or
woman, separate themselves from the believing party on account of
religion, and in hatred to it, and will not live with the believer
unless Christ is denied, his Gospel abjured, and his ordinances and
worship relinquished:

let him depart; he or she, though not without making use of all proper
means to retain them; but if, after all, they will go, unless such
things are complied with as are unreasonable and sinful, they are not to
be held, but let go; and the deserted person may sit down contented,
being not to be blamed, the fault entirely lying upon the deserter:

a brother or a sister is not under bondage in such cases. The Ethiopic
version reads it, "to such an one"; one that is called by grace a church
member, and so a brother or sister in Christ, is not to be subject to an
unbeliever in matters of conscience, in things appertaining to the
worship of God, and the service and glory of Christ; nor, being in such
circumstances, that either Christ must be forsaken, or the unbeliever
will depart, are they obliged to yield to such an one, but rather suffer
a departure; nor are they bound to remain unmarried, but are free to
marry another person, after all proper methods have been tried for a
reconciliation, and that appears to be impracticable; desertion in such
a case, and attended with such circumstances, is a breach of the
marriage contract, and a dissolution of the bond, and the deserted
person may lawfully marry again; otherwise a brother, or a sister in
such a case, would be in subjection and bondage to such a person:

but God hath called us to peace; which ought to be sought after and
maintained, so far as it can be consistent with truth, the glory of God,
the honour of Christ, and interest of religion. The believing party
being threatened with a desertion, ought as much as possible to seek for
peace and reconciliation, and do all that can be to prevent a departure;
for saints are called by the grace of God, to follow after and cultivate
peace, not only with one another in their Christian communion as saints,
but with all men, even their enemies, and especially with such as are so
nearly allied; wherefore the departure should not be easily admitted, or
a new marriage be suddenly entered into, reconciliation, if it can be
obtained, being most eligible and becoming a Christian.

[1 Corinthians 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co1 7:16</span></span>

For what knowest thou, O wife,.... These words may be understood, as
containing a reason either why the believing party should be easy at the
departure of the unbeliever, after all proper methods have been used in
vain to retain him or her; taken from the uncertainty and improbability
of being of any use to them, to bring them to the knowledge of Christ,
and salvation by him; "for what knowest thou, O wife"; thou dost not
know, thou canst not know, thou canst not be sure,

whether thou shall save thy husband? be the means of bringing of him
under the means of grace, and so of his conversion and salvation; there
is no likelihood of it, since he is such an implacable enemy to Christ,
and so bitterly averse to the Gospel, and the ordinances of it; and
therefore since he is determined to separate, even let him go: or else,
as rendering a reason why the believer should seek for peace and
reconciliation, and by all means, if possible, continue to dwell with
the unbeliever; taken from hopes of being serviceable under a divine
influence and blessing, for their spiritual and eternal good, the wife
for the good of the husband; by whose conversation he may be won over,
and prevailed upon to entertain a better opinion of the Christian
religion; to take a liking to the Gospel, and to attend upon the
ministry of the word, which may be made the power of God unto salvation
to him:

or how knowest thou, O man, whether thou shall save thy wife; this may
possibly be done, in the same manner as now suggested: persons in such a
relation have often great influence upon one another, and are by divine
Providence often great blessings to each other, in things spiritual as
well as temporal. This puts me in mind of a case related by the Jewish
doctors (a):

"it happened to a holy man that he married a holy woman, and they had no
children; say they, we are of no manner of profit to the blessed God;
they stood up and divorced one another; he went and married a wicked
woman, and she made him wicked; she went and married a wicked man, "and
she made him righteous";''

or, to use the apostle's phrase, "saved him".

\(a\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 17. fol. 14. 4.

[1 Corinthians 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co1 7:17</span></span>

But as God hath distributed to every man,.... This text is so placed,
and the words of it so expressed, as that it may have regard both to
what goes before, and follows after; it may have respect to every man's
proper gift, whether of continence, or of disposition to marriage, which
every man has of God, [Co1 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#007), and
accordingly ought to live in a single, or in a married state; or it may
refer to the last verse,

what knowest thou, &c. and , which we render "but", be translated either
"unless"; and then the sense is, thou knowest not, O man or woman,
whether thou shalt save thy wife or husband, nor any other, unless God,
who distributes his, grace to everyone as he pleases; or else it may be
rendered if "not", and the sense be, if thou shouldst not save thy
husband, or thou, man, shouldst not save thy wife; yet "as God hath
distributed to every man" his own proper gift, both as to nature and
grace; his proper sphere of usefulness, and the station in which he
would have him be, and the place he would have him fill up, and the
business he must do in life; so let him act, and

as the Lord hath called everyone; which is to be understood of that
particular station of life, and those circumstances of it, in which men
are providentially placed by God, or are found in when he calls them by
his grace; as whether married or unmarried; whether joined to a believer
or an unbeliever; whether circumcised or uncircumcised; whether bond or
free; a servant or a master; and so may refer to what follows, as well
as to what goes before:

so let him walk; contented with his station and kind of life, agreeably
to the profession he makes of the Gospel, doing all the good he can to
those he is concerned with:

and so ordain I in all churches; the decisions and determinations he had
made, in the cases proposed to him about marriage, the rules and orders
he had prescribed, what he had given out by way of precept or
permission, by command or counsel, or what he was about to deliver, were
no other than what he in common enjoined other churches; and therefore
they ought not to think that they were used with more strictness and
severity than others; and might be induced hereby to attend to what was
advised or enjoined, since it was what was common to all the churches.

[1 Corinthians 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co1 7:18</span></span>

Is any man called being circumcised?.... That is, if any man that is a
Jew, who has been circumcised in his infancy, is called by the grace of
God, as there were many in those days, and many of them in the church at
Corinth:

let him not become uncircumcised; or "draw on" the foreskin; as some did
in the times of Antiochus, for fear of him, and to curry favour with
him, who, it is said, 1 Maccab. 1:15, "made themselves uncircumcised",
and forsook the holy covenant; and so did Menelaus, and the sons of
Tobias, as Josephus reports (b); and there were many, in the days of Ben
Cozba, who became uncircumcised by force, they had their foreskins drawn
on by the Gentiles against their wills, and when he came to reign were
circumcised again (c); for, according to the Jews, circumcision must be
repeated, and not only four or five times (d), but a hundred times, if a
man becomes so often uncircumcised (e) They make mention of several
particular persons who voluntarily became uncircumcised, or, to use
their phrase, and which exactly answers to the word used by the apostle,
"that drew over his foreskin"; as Jehoiachin (f), Achan (g), yea even
the first Adam (h); one guilty of this, they say, makes void the
covenant (i); it was accounted a very great sin, so great that he that
committed it was reckoned (k) among them that shall have no part in the
world to come, but shall be cut off and perish; physicians say, this may
be done by the use of an instrument they call spaster, which has its
name from the word used in the text. The apostle's sense is, that such
as had been circumcised, and had now embraced the faith of Christ, had
no reason to be uneasy, or take any methods to remove this mark from
their flesh, because it was abolished by Christ, and now of no
significance; since as it did them no good, it did them no hurt:

is any called in uncircumcision? let him not become circumcised?; that
is, if a Gentile who was never circumcised is called by grace, let him
not submit to circumcision, which is now abrogated, and is altogether
unnecessary and unprofitable in the business of salvation; yea, hurtful
and pernicious if done on that account, since it makes men debtors to do
the whole law, and Christ of none effect unto them.

\(b\) Antiqu. l. 12. c. 5. sect. 1. (c) Hieros. Yebamot, fol. 9. 1. &
Sabbat, fol. 17. 1. T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 72. 1. & Gloss. in ib. (d)
Bereshit Rabba, sect. 46. fol. 41. 4. (e) T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 72. 1.
(f) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 19. fol. 161. 1. (g) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol.
44. 1. (h) Ib. fol. 38. 2. Zohar in Gen. fol. 27. 1. & 40. 4. (i)
Hieros, Peah, fol. 16. 2. & Sanhedrin, fol. 27. 3. Bereshit Rabba, fol.
41. 4. (k) Maimon. Hilch. Teshuba, c. 3. sect. 6. & Milah, c. 3. sect.
8.

[1 Corinthians 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co1 7:19</span></span>

Circumcision is nothing,.... In the affair of justification before God,
and acceptance with him; it cannot make any man righteous in the sight
of God, nor recommend him to the divine favour; it is no evidence of a
man's calling, or of his having the truth or grace of God in him; nor is
it of any avail in the business of salvation. It was something formerly;
it was a command and an ordinance of God, to Abraham and his natural
seed; it pointed at the corruption and pollution of nature; was typical
of the effusion of the blood of Christ, for pardon, and cleansing, and
of the internal circumcision of the heart; it was a sign and seal to
Abraham, that he should be the father of many nations, and that the
righteousness of faith should come upon the uncircumcised Gentiles; and
was a distinguishing character of the people of the Jews, until the
Messiah came: but now it is nothing, nor has it any of these uses, being
with the rest of the ceremonies abolished by Christ; it gives no
preference to the Jew above the Gentile; he that has this mark in his
flesh, is not a whir the better for it, and he that is without it, is
not at all the worse; and is a reason why both the one and the other
should be easy, and not attempt any alteration in themselves with regard
to this, or think the better or worse of themselves on account of it.
This is said in direct opposition to the sentiments of the Jews, who
extol circumcision to the skies. The apostle says it is nothing, and
they say it is everything, and everything is nothing without it; they
say, it is the hinge of their whole law (l), and that it is equal to all
the precepts in the law (m); their extravagant commendations of it take
in the following passage (n);

"says R. Eliezar ben Azariah, uncircumcision is rejected, because by it
the wicked are defiled, as it is said, "for all the Gentiles are
uncircumcised"; says R. Ishmael, , "great is circumcision"; for on
account of it, thirteen covenants were made; says R. Jose, "great is
circumcision", for it drives away the sabbath, the weighty (command in
the law, that is, it is obliged to give way to it); R. Joshua ben Korcha
says, "great is circumcision", for it was not suspended to Moses the
righteous one full hour; R. Nehemiah says, "great is circumcision", for
it drives away plagues; says Rabba, "great is circumcision", for
notwithstanding all the commands which Abraham our father did, he was
not called perfect until he was circumcised; as it is said, "walk before
me, and be thou perfect"; says another, "great is circumcision", for had
it not been for that, the holy blessed God would not have created his
world; as it is said, "thus saith the Lord, if my covenant be not with
day and night, and if I have not appointed the ordinances of heaven and
earth",''

More of this kind might be produced, but enough of this.

And uncircumcision is nothing; it does not hinder any having an interest
in, and partaking of the blessings of grace; nor their enjoyment of the
Gospel and Gospel ordinances; nor their communion and fellowship with
the churches of Christ, much less their everlasting salvation, as say
(o) the Jews;

"the holy blessed God (say they) rejects the uncircumcised, and brings
them down to hell; as it is said, [Eze
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#018) "son of man, wail for the
multitude of Egypt, and cast them down"; and so says Isaiah, [Isa
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#014) "therefore hell hath enlarged
herself and opened her mouth", ; that is, to him that hath not the law
of circumcision; as it is said, [Psa
105:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#010) "and confirmed the same unto
Jacob for a law, and to Israel for an everlasting covenant"; for no
circumcised persons go down to hell:''

but the keeping of the commandments of God; that is something; not that
the commands of God, and the observance of them, are of any avail to
procure the pardon of sin, acceptance with God, justification in his
sight, and eternal salvation; yet they are of moment, as they are the
commands and ordinances of God; and ought to be kept in faith and fear,
as they were delivered from a principle of love, and with a view to the
glory of God; and though for keeping of them there is no reward of debt,
yet in keeping of them there is a reward of grace; peace of mind is had,
and the presence of God enjoyed; obedience to them, upon Gospel
principles and motives, is a fruit of grace, an evidence of faith, and
of the new creature; it is the ornament of a Christian profession, and
is profitable to men.

\(l\) Shebet Judah, p. 94. Ed. Gent. (m) Zohar in Lev. fol. 6. 1. T.
Bab. Nedarim, fol 32. 1. Caphtor, fol. 9. 2. (n) Misn. Nedarim, c. 3.
sect. 11. Maimon. Hilch. Milah, c. 3. sect. 8, 9. (o) Shemot Rabba,
sect. 19. fol. 104. 4. Vid. Maimon. in Misn. Sabbat, c. 19. sect. 6.

[1 Corinthians 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co1 7:20</span></span>

Let every man abide in the same calling,.... Civil calling, station, and
business of life,

wherein he was called; that is, in which he was when he was called by
the grace of God; and is to be understood of such a calling, station,
and business of life, as is lawful, honest, and of good report;
otherwise he ought not to abide in it, but betake himself to another, as
Matthew and Zacchaeus, when called by grace, left the scandalous
employment of a publican: nor is it the apostle's sense, that a man that
is in an honest way of living, may not change that for another that is
equally so, as if a man was bound down to that sort of business he is in
when first called; for no doubt it may be lawful, and there may be just
reason for it in Providence, why a man should change his calling and
station in life; though this ought not to be done rashly and
unadvisedly, and without wise and good reasons; but the chief view of
the apostle is to teach contentment in every condition, and station of
life, and that persons should not be uneasy and restless in it, and seek
for an alteration when there is no just occasion; and particularly he
seems to have reference, either to the different state of married and
unmarried persons, he had before been speaking of; see [Co1
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#027) or to the different circumstances
of Jew and Gentile, as circumcised or uncircumcised, as in the foregoing
verse; or to the different condition of bond and free, servant and
master, in the following verse; and persuades them to remain easy and
satisfied, for that the Christian religion does not necessarily require
a change in a man's civil circumstances of life.

[1 Corinthians 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co1 7:21</span></span>

Art thou called being a servant?.... That is, called by grace whilst in
the condition of a servant,

care not for it; do not be troubled at it, and uneasy with it; be not
anxiously solicitous to be otherwise; bear the yoke patiently, go
through thy servitude cheerfully, and serve thy master faithfully; do
not look upon it as any objection to thy calling, any contradiction to
thy Christian liberty, or as unworthy of, and a reproach upon thy
profession of Christ:

but if thou mayest be made free, use it rather. The Syriac renders the
last clause, , "choose for thyself to serve"; perfectly agreeable to the
sense given of the words, by several great critics and excellent
interpreters, who take the apostle's meaning to be, that should a
Christian servant have an opportunity of making his escape from his
master, or could he by any art, trick, and fraudulent method, obtain his
liberty, it would be much more advisable to continue a servant, than to
become free by any such means: yea, some seem to carry the sense so far,
that even if servants could be made free in a lawful way, yet servitude
was most eligible, both for their own and their master's good: for their
own to keep them humble and exercise their patience; for their master's
not only temporal, but spiritual good; since by their good behaviour
they might be a means of recommending the Gospel to them, and of gaining
them to Christ; but one should rather think the more obvious sense is,
that when a Christian servant has his freedom offered him by his master,
or he can come at it in a lawful and honourable way, this being
preferable to servitude, he ought rather to make use of it; since he
would be in a better situation, and more at leisure to serve Christ, and
the interest of religion: however, certain it is, that the apostle's
design is, to make men easy in every station of life, and to teach them
how to behave therein; he would not have the freeman abuse his liberty,
or be elated with it, nor the servant be uneasy under his servitude, nor
be depressed by it, for the reasons following.

[1 Corinthians 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co1 7:22</span></span>

For he that is called in the Lord,.... Which is to be understood, not of
any civil calling, or of calling to an office; or of the outward call by
the ministry of the word only; but of an internal, special, powerful,
evangelical, and saving call by the grace of God; which is of persons
out of darkness into light, out of bondage into liberty, from their
sinful companions to the company and society of Christ and his people,
from off themselves and their own righteousness, to the grace and
righteousness of Christ, and out of the world unto a kingdom and glory.
And this may be said to be, in the Lord; either because it is by him, he
is the efficient cause of it, his grace the moving cause, and his glory
the end; or because it is in consequence of being in him, united to him,
persons are first in the Lord, and then called by him; or because they
are called into fellowship and communion with him; the whole is true,
and make up the sense of the text; for he that is effectually called by
grace, is called by the Lord, and by virtue of being chosen in him, and
in union to him, and to partake of all the blessings of grace and glory
that are with him. And such an one,

being a servant; in a natural and civil sense when called, in a
spiritual sense

is the Lord's freeman; he is free from sin, not from the being, but from
the servitude, guilt, and damning power of it: he is free from Satan,
not from his temptations and insults, but from his dominion and
captivity; he is ransomed from him, by the redemption of Christ, and is
turned from his power in conversion; he has not that influence over him
he before had; and he is so safe and secure from him, that he can never
be destroyed by him, and in a short time Satan will be bruised under his
feet: he is free from the law, the observance of the ceremonial law, and
all its numerous burdensome rites; and from the moral law, not from
obedience to it, as in the hands of Christ, but from the bondage, curse,
and condemnation of it, as ministered by Moses: he is free of the
company of saints, of the church of God below, and of heaven, the city
God has built and prepared for his; he is free to the use of all things
indifferent, provided it is done in faith, the peace of weak brethren
secured, and the glory of God preserved; he is free to all the
privileges and immunities of the house of God, and to the throne of
grace, come when he will; and therefore though a servant, in another
sense he is a very happy man; he is free indeed, and can never be
disenfranchanised, or arrested, or cast into prison; the various
privileges he is free unto and enjoys, show him to be a happy man; and
the effects following on his freedom prove it, as peace with God, the
presence of Christ, joy in the Holy Ghost, fellowship with saints, and a
well grounded hope of glory; he is not only called to the liberty of
grace, which he enjoys, but will be delivered into the glorious liberty
of the children of God; and therefore has no reason to be uneasy with
his civil servitude: on the other hand,

likewise he that is called being free; he that is called by the grace of
God, with an holy and effectual calling, being a freeman, his own
master, and it may be the master of others in a civil sense, he, in a
spiritual one,

is Christ's servant: he is bought by Christ with his money, with the
price of his blood; and therefore he has a right unto him, and a claim
to his service; and he becomes a voluntary servant to him, through the
power of his grace upon him; and though he serves his Lord Christ
without mercenary views, freely, readily, and cheerfully, from a
principle of love and gratitude, he shall not fail of a reward of grace;
he shall be honoured of God, approved of men, and shall receive the
reward of the inheritance: Christian liberty, and the service of Christ,
are not at all inconsistent; nor should we entertain any other notions
of liberty, but what are consistent with serving the Lord; whatever
liberty contradicts, that is no true liberty; though it may have the
face of it, it is no other than bondage.

[1 Corinthians 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co1 7:23</span></span>

Ye are bought with a price,.... Some read these words interrogatively,
as [Co1 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#018), "are ye bought with a
price?" and suppose them directed to such who had bought out their time
of servitude with a sum of money, and ought not to return to their
former condition; but they are rather to be read affirmatively, and to
be understood of all, whether freemen or servants, that are bought with
the inestimable price of Christ's blood, as in [Co1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#020) and contain in them a reason why
such as are called by the grace of God, whilst in a state of civil
servitude, are Christ's freemen, because they are redeemed by him from
sin, Satan, the law, and from among men; and also why such as are called
by the grace of God, being in a state of civil liberty, are Christ's
servants, because he has purchased them with his blood, and therefore
has a right unto them, both to their persons and service:

be not ye the servants of men: not that the apostle dissuades such as
are redeemed by Christ, and are believers in him, from being the
servants of men in a civil sense; for this would be to contradict
himself, who here and elsewhere exhorts servants to continue in the
service of their masters, and to perform it heartily and cheerfully, and
with great sincerity and integrity; but his meaning is, that since they
were redeemed from a vain conversation by the blood of Christ, they
should not be servants to the lusts of men, nor obey them in things
sinful and wicked, which were contrary to law and Gospel, and which were
made unlawful by the word of God, and were a breach of the command of
their Lord and master Christ; nor should they in matters of religion and
the worship of God submit to the authority of any set of men whatever,
or be subject to the doctrines and commandments of men; whether these
relate to Jewish ceremonies, or Gentile superstitions, or be a mixture
of both: they were to call no man master upon earth; nor suffer any to
lord it over them, as the false teachers very much did in this church;
but to acknowledge Christ, who had bought them to be their only Lord and
master. The allusion seems to he to a tradition of the Jews, that the
Israelites being redeemed out of Egypt were the servants of God, and not
of men (p);

"R. Jochanan ben Zaccai was explaining this Scripture, [Exo
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#006) how different the ear is from all
the members of the body; says the holy blessed God, the ear that heard
my voice on Mount Sinai, at the time I said, the children of Israel are
my servants, , and "not servants to servants"; and this goes and gets
itself a master, let it be bored: R. Simeon ben Ribbi was explaining the
same Scripture, how different the door and the door post were from all
the parts of the house; says the holy blessed God, the door and the door
post, which were witnesses in Egypt, at the time that I passed by the
threshold, and by the two door posts, and I said, the children of Israel
are my servants, and not servants to servants, and I brought them out of
bondage to liberty; and this goes and gets itself a master, let it be
bored before them.''

\(p\) T. Bab. Kiddushin, fol. 22. 2.

[1 Corinthians 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co1 7:24</span></span>

Brethren, let every man wherein he is called, The apostle repeats the
advice given in [Co1 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#020) and prefaces
it with that tender and affectionate appellation, "brethren", the more
to engage them to attend to it; showing also that whatever difference
there was in their civil state and condition, there was none in their
religious one; they were all brethren, one of another, they were his
brethren, yea, even the brethren of Christ:

therein abide with God; that is, abide in his civil calling and station
of life, be it what it will, as knowing he is in that state it is the
will of God he should be in; and as in the sight of God, who knows all
men, and what is best for them, and who sees and observes all their
actions and conduct of life; and with whom there is no respect of
persons, of bond or free, of masters or servants; they are admitted
equally to enjoy the same favours and privileges in the house of God;
have the same access to the throne of grace, and enjoy the same
communion with God; and therefore should be content in their present
situation, discharging the several duties of their station aright, and
exercise a good conscience both towards God and man.

[1 Corinthians 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">co1 7:25</span></span>

Now concerning virgins,.... Whether they should continue in the same
state or not, whether they should marry or not, was one of the cases put
to the apostle, and which the Corinthians wrote to him about, and to
which he returns this answer:

I have no commandment of the Lord: neither in the Old Testament, in the
law of Moses, or writings of the prophets; nothing is therein enjoined
concerning celibacy, or commanding persons to live a single life; but on
the contrary there are many things directing and exciting to a marriage
state; nor had the apostle any command from the Lord Jesus Christ, under
the Gospel dispensation, obliging to virginity; nor any special orders,
or peculiar revelation from the Spirit of God, fixing and settling this
point:

yet I give my judgment, what will be most advisable, convenient, and
prudent to be done, considering persons, times, and circumstances. The
apostle does not make use of his power and authority, as such, to make
decrees, and prescribe rules, binding on the consciences of men; only
humbly and modestly gives his opinion, which if thought well of, might
be followed by them: and the more to engage them to take his advice, he
adds,

as one that hath obtained mercy of the Lord to be faithful; the meaning
of which is, not that he, through the goodness and mercy of the Lord,
had with great integrity preserved his virginity, and so proposes
himself, as an instance and example of retaining it; for it is not
certain, that though the apostle was now single, that he had never been
married; it seems rather that he had, and therefore this cannot be his
sense; nor does he refer to his faithfulness, to the Gospel committed to
his trust, and the faithful discharge of his whole ministerial service,
and which was owing to divine grace and mercy; but to that plainness,
honesty, and integrity, which appeared in the whole course and conduct
of his life, and in all his conversation with men; and particularly in
giving advice about any matter, or declaring his sentiments on any
subject: and when a man is free and faithful, and openly and honestly
tells his mind, it greatly recommends him, and commands attention and
regard to what he says; and faithfulness, it may be observed, considered
in this sense, is not of nature, but of grace; it is obtained not by a
man's own power and strength, but by the grace and mercy of God; to
which it is here ascribed.

[1 Corinthians 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">co1 7:26</span></span>

I suppose, therefore, that this is good,.... The opinion of the apostle,
the sentiment of his mind, his judgment in this case were, that it was
better, more advisable and eligible, for persons that were single to
continue so; his reason for it follows,

for the present necessity; by which is meant not the shortness of life,
and the necessity of dying, when husband and wife must part, upon which
trouble ensues; nor the various sorrows, cares, encumbrances, trials,
and exercises that attend a conjugal state, as bearing and bringing
forth, and bringing up children, provision for the family, &c. which are
common to all, and at all times more or less; but the present time of
persecution, under which the churches of Christ were; agreeably the
Syriac version reads it, , "because of the necessity of the time", or
season: using the very Greek word in text; as the Targumists (q) also
have frequently adopted it into their language, and use the phrase , "an
hour, or time of necessity", for a time of great affliction and
distress, just as the apostle does here; because this was the present
case of the Christians, he thought it most prudent for such as were
single to remain so; since as they were often obliged to move from place
to place, to fly from one city to another, this would be very
incommodious for married persons, who might have young children to take
care of, and provide for; see [Mat
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#019) upon a like account, the Jewish
doctors advise to the same the apostle here does (r);

"from the day that the empire is extended, which decrees hard decrees
upon us, and causes the law and the commandments to cease from us, and
does not suffer us to circumcise children; it is right that we agree
among ourselves, , not to marry, and beget children:''

I say it is good for a man so to be; to remain unmarried, to live a
single life, to be a virgin; for the word "virgin", as here used,
relates to men as well as maidens, and denotes the single state of
either. The apostle does not add, "even as I"; as he does in [Co1
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#008) which seems to confirm the
conjecture already made, that he was not a bachelor, but a widower;
otherwise he would doubtless have enforced this advice by his own
example, as before.

\(q\) Targum Jon. & Hieros. in Gen. xxii. 14. & xxxviii. 25. & Targum
Sheni in Esth. v. 1. (r) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 60. 2.

[1 Corinthians 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">co1 7:27</span></span>

Art thou bound unto a wife?.... Or to a woman; either by promise, or by
espousal, or by consummate marriage; either of which is a tic, or
obligation, a bond, and especially the latter; marriage is such a bond
as cannot be dissolved, but by the death of one of the parties; see [Rom
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#002) unless in case of adultery, or of
wilful desertion: and it is a bond which mutually obliges; as the
husband is bound by the law of marriage to live chastely and lovingly
with his wife, and to take care of her, and provide for her; so the wife
is bound by the same law to live in like manner with her husband, and to
submit unto him, and obey him:

seek not to be loosed; do not depart from her, nor seek to be divorced,
nor even desire to be loosed by death:

art thou loosed from a wife? being either never married, or else if
having been married the wife is dead, or legally divorced for a just
cause:

seek not a wife, or woman; make no inquiry after one; be content to live
without one; enter not into a marriage state, nor take any step towards
it; it is best to continue loosed, for the reason above given, that is,
provided the person has the gift of continence, otherwise not; see [Co1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005).

[1 Corinthians 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">co1 7:28</span></span>

But and if thou marry, thou sinnest not,.... If a man that has never
been married, or one that has, if legally loosed from his wife, thinks
fit to marry, he commits no sin, he breaks no law of God, far from it;
marriage is honourable in all. The apostle would be understood, that in
the advice he before gives, he is not dissuading from marriage, as a
thing sinful and criminal; only that it was more advisable to such as
could to abstain from it, under the present circumstances of things; and
what he says of a man holds equally true of a virgin:

and if a virgin marry, she hath not sinned; the one may as lawfully
marry as another; there is no law forbidding virgins to marry, any more
than young men; and if they think fit to enter into such a state, they
break no law of God, and consequently sin not:

nevertheless such shall have trouble in the flesh; that is, such young
men and virgins, who choose to marry, and who generally promise
themselves a great deal of pleasure, shall meet with a great deal of
trouble; and that even where they expected the most satisfaction and
delight, "in the flesh"; the body, the outward man, and external
circumstances of life. This "trouble" is the same with the present
necessity before mentioned, the persecutions and tribulations the saints
should suffer in the flesh, for the sake of Christ and his Gospel; not
that married persons should be the only ones that should have trouble in
this way, but that such persons would be less able to bear it, or to
escape from it. Moreover, this may be extended to all the sorrows,
troubles, and distresses which attend a married state:

but I spare you; the sense of which is, either that the apostle, out of
his great tenderness to such who were inclined to marry, and could not
contain, just gave this hint, that such should have trouble in the
flesh; but did not dwell upon it or enter into particulars, lest they
should be discouraged from it, and fall into temptation, sin, and a
snare; or because of the great respect he had to the Corinthians, he
gave the above advice to keep themselves single, that they might the
better bear afflictions and persecutions, for the sake of their
profession, and escape many troubles which others endure.

[1 Corinthians 7:29](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">co1 7:29</span></span>

But this I say, brethren, the time is short,.... This is another reason,
with which the apostle supports his advice to virgins, and unmarried
persons, to remain so; since the time of life is so very short, and it
is even but a little while to the end of the world, and second coming of
Christ; and therefore seeing the marriage state is so full of care and
trouble, and it affords still less time for the service of Christ and
religion, he thought it most advisable for them to, continue in a single
life, that they might be more at leisure to make use of that little time
they had for their spiritual good and welfare, the edification of
others, and the glory of Christ: unless it should be rather thought that
the apostle is still enlarging upon the former argument, taken from the
present time, being a time of distress and persecution; and so the
phrase, "the time is short", or "contracted", and full of anguish and
affliction, is the same with the present necessity, and trouble in the
flesh; and since this was the case, he suggests again, that an unmarried
state was most preferable:

it remaineth that both they that have wives, be as though they had none:
and as for the rest, they that were married, his advice to them was,
that they should so behave as if they were not married; not that he
would have them put away their wives, or fancy with themselves that they
had none, or make no use of the marriage bed; but suggests a moderate
use of it; he would not have them give up themselves to lasciviousness
and carnal lusts and pleasures, even with their own wives, and spend
their time altogether in their company and embraces: but since the time
of life was short, and that full of troubles, they should spend it in
the service and worship of God, private and public, as much as possible;
and not in the indulging and satisfying of the flesh.

[1 Corinthians 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">co1 7:30</span></span>

And they that weep, as though they wept not,.... They that weep for
troubles and crosses, things adverse and afflicting in a marriage state,
for the loss of wives or children, should express their sorrow in such a
manner and degree, as if they wept not; not that the apostle here
introduces and establishes a stoical apathy, and would have persons show
no manner of concern for these things; but he directs to a moderate use
of sorrow, to such a degree as not to hinder and divert from the
exercises of piety and religion:

and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; such who are blessed
with great prosperity, and with whom everything goes well; they have
married wives, and have children, and thrive in the world; let them
rejoice on the account of these things, in such a still, silent way, as
if they rejoiced not, their hearts not being set upon their outward
felicity, nor elated with it; but rejoicing rather that their names were
written in heaven, that they had an interest in Christ and his grace,
and a right and title to the glories of another world, and at the same
time be thankful to God for what they enjoy in this:

and they that buy as though they possessed not; meaning, not any sort of
buyers, everyone is a buyer in some sense; but such as purchase estates,
buy houses and lands, and become proprietors of large tracts. These the
apostle would not have hold their substance for themselves, but hold it
as if they did not hold it, parting with it for the use of others; and
as persons that are only stewards, and not properly owners, and in a
little time must quit it all, and be accountable for their use and
disposition of it.

[1 Corinthians 7:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">co1 7:31</span></span>

And they that use this world, as not abusing it,.... Such as have a
large affluence of the things of this world, should use them in a
moderate and temperate manner; should not squander them away
extravagantly, or spend them on their lusts, and use them intemperately,
which is to abuse them:

for the fashion of this world passeth away; not the nature, matter, and
substance, but the figure and form of it; for after this world is burnt
up, a new one, as to form and fashion, will arise, in much more beauty
and glory; all that looks glorious and beautiful in the present world,
as riches, honour, &c. are all mere show and appearance, having nothing
solid and substantial in them; and are all fluid and transitory, are
passing away; there is nothing firm and permanent; in a little time, all
will be at an end, the world itself, as to its present form, and all
that is in it; when there will be no more marrying, nor giving in
marriage, no more buying and selling, no more of the present changes and
vicissitudes of prosperity and adversity, of joy and sorrow; these
scenes will be all removed, and quite a new face of things appear:
wherefore what the apostle exhorts unto, with respect to present conduct
and behaviour, must be right and good.

[1 Corinthians 7:32](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">co1 7:32</span></span>

But I would have you without carefulness,.... This is another reason, by
which the apostle confirms the advice he gives to virgins to remain
such, because the married state is full of cares, whereas the single
life is no more free from them; and therefore he wishes them to continue
in such a state, that they might be without anxious and distracting
cares of temporal things, things relating to the good decorum and
sustenance of a family, and so be more free and at leisure for the
service of God; which he illustrates, by showing the different cares
that married and unmarried persons are involved in:

he that is unmarried, careth for the things that belong to the Lord;
such as hearing the word, reading it, meditating upon it, praying to God
and attending upon all ordinances, taking every opportunity to glorify
God, and do good to others; but this is not to be understood as matter
of fact, that unmarried persons are so studiously concerned for these
things, or that this is the case of all of them; there are many
unmarried persons think nothing about them; and are not at all concerned
with them; but the meaning is, that such persons are more at leisure,
and can more conveniently attend to these things, and ought so to do;
and they that have the grace of God will be more or less solicitous to
observe them:

how he may please the Lord; for when these things are attended to in
faith and fear, from a principle of love, and with a view to the glory
of God, the good of their own souls and others, they are well pleasing
to the Lord; and though they are not meritorious of eternal life, yet
they are acceptable to God through Jesus Christ, and will be taken
notice of with approbation, and followed with a reward of grace another
day.

[1 Corinthians 7:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">co1 7:33</span></span>

But he that is married careth for the things that are of the world,....
Attending diligently to the business and calling of life, he is engaged
in, that he may provide food and clothing, and other necessaries for the
support and sustenance of his family:

how he may please his wife: and make her and his children easy and
comfortable. This also is not to be understood of every individual
person in a married state as matter of fact; for, on the one hand, there
are some who take no care to please their wives and provide for their
families, and are worse than infidels; and, on the other hand, there are
others who take a proper care to make a suitable provision for their
wives and children, to the satisfaction of both; and yet this is not
their only care, they also care for the things of the Lord, and concern
themselves much for his honour and glory: but the sense is, that,
generally speaking, persons in such a state are greatly involved in
worldly cares, and have not that leisure, and those opportunities, that
single persons have to attend religious exercises; wherefore the single
state, on this account, is, in the apostle's opinion, the more
preferable.

[1 Corinthians 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">co1 7:34</span></span>

There is difference also between a wife and a virgin,.... The word
translated "there is difference", stands in some copies at the end of
the last verse, and in the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions, by which
it is rendered, "and is divided"; referring to the married man, whose
thoughts are distracted with the cares of the world, and his mind
divided between the Lord and his wife, between the things that please
the one, and those that please the other; so that he cannot attend upon
the Lord without distraction, as the unmarried person may; see [Co1
7:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035). But the more generally received
reading is what we follow; in which words the apostle shows, that there
is just the same difference between a married and an unmarried woman, as
there is between a married and an unmarried man. There is no difference
in their nature, nor sex, but in their state and condition, and in the
cares which involve the one and the other.

The unmarried woman careth for the things of the Lord; not everyone that
is unmarried, but one that has the grace of God, being in a single
state; as such an one is more at leisure, and can more conveniently
attend on the service of the Lord, so she ought, and generally speaking
does: and her end in so doing is,

that she may be holy both in body and in spirit; not in body only, but
in spirit also; for outward chastity, without internal holiness, will be
of little avail: but as a close adherence to the Lord, and to his
worship and service, may be a means of preserving from external
pollutions of the body, so likewise of carrying on the internal work of
grace upon the soul; not that it is to be thought that unmarried persons
are the only ones that are holy in body and spirit; there are some that
are so in neither; and there are many married persons that are chaste in
their bodies, and possess their vessels in sanctification and honour,
and are blessed with inward spiritual purity.

But she that is married careth for the things of the world, how she may
please her husband; not by beautifying and adorning herself with
broidered hair, or gold, or pearls, or costly array; though this is all
that some care for; but with good works, taking care of her household
and family affairs, bringing up her children in an orderly manner,
honouring and obeying her husband, doing everything to oblige him, and
to engage his love and affection to her, as becomes her; nor is this
said of her by way of criticism, only that such is her state and
situation in life, that she has not the opportunities and advantages the
unmarried person has of serving the Lord; on which account the single
life is represented as most advisable to abide in.

[1 Corinthians 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">co1 7:35</span></span>

And this I speak for your own profit,.... The apostle suggests, that in
giving the advice he did to unmarried persons to abide single, he had
nothing else in view than their temporal and spiritual advantage; that
they might be better able to meet and grapple with persecution for the
sake of the Gospel; that they might be more free from the cares and
encumbrances of life, and more at liberty to serve the Lord; whereby not
only his glory, but their spiritual good, might be promoted; not that he
thought that marriage was unlawful, or that the single life was a more
honest, and a more chaste way of living, or that it was absolutely
necessary, and an incumbent duty upon them to remain single, nor would
he be so understood: all that he had said was by way of advice; he had
very faithfully laid before them the advantages and disadvantages of
both states, and now leaves them to their full liberty to do as they
pleased to take his advice, or not:

not that I may cast a snare on you; as fowlers on birds: had he enjoined
virginity as necessary, and insisted upon it, that it was absolutely
their duty to live a single life; this would have been laying an
obligation upon them, and an ensnaring and entangling of them: hereby
some might have engaged in a single life, who had not the gift of
continence, and so might have been drawn into the sin of fornication, or
into unnatural lust, and such impurities as would be very scandalous
unto, and highly reflect upon, the Gospel of Christ. But the apostle
delivered himself on the subject with no such view, and in such a manner
as is plain he meant not to ensnare any:

but for that which is comely, and that you may attend upon the Lord
without distraction: all he aimed at, by advising them to a single life,
was that they might more orderly and constantly, and without distraction
of mind, through the cares of the world, wait upon the Lord, and serve
him; which, in his opinion, was choosing the good part with Mary; whilst
others, like Martha, were troubled, divided, and distracted with many
things.

[1 Corinthians 7:36](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">co1 7:36</span></span>

But if any man think,.... This some understand of a man that is engaged,
or betrothed to a virgin, and protracts marriage, who may use his
prudence in consummating it, if he pleases, for any thing the apostle
has said to the contrary: but it is better to understand it of a parent,
or one that has the care and guardianship of virgins; if such an one is
of opinion,

that he behaveth himself uncomely towards his virgin: by exposing her to
contempt and reproach, in retaining her at home, and not giving her in
marriage when at proper age for such a state; it being reckoned
reproachful to be at, or past the age of marriage, or to be in years,
and not married; or by so doing lay her under temptation to do that
which is uncomely, to commit fornication, which would be uncomely, both
to him, and to her; and such a tendency has living in a single state,
contrary to inclination. The apostle may have respect to a Jewish
tradition founded upon the supposed sense of [Lev
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#029) "do not prostitute thy daughter
to cause her to be a whore" (s).

"Says R. Eliezer, this is he who marries his daughter to an old man.
Says R. Akiba, (who was contemporary with the apostle,) this is he who
detains his daughter at home when she is marriageable.''

If she pass the flower of her age; that is, one that is arrived to years
of maturity, is ripe for marriage, and is what the Jewish doctors call
who, according to them, was one of twelve years and a half old (t), at
which age virgins were judged fit to marry: hence that saying of theirs
(u).

"if thy daughter, "is ripe", or come to the flower of her age, make thy
servant free and give her to him.''

Moreover, according to their canons, such an one was no longer under her
father's power; for so runs the canon (w),

"hrgbv Nwyk "when she is at the flower of her age", she is no more under
her father's power:''

her father cannot make void her vows, though a husband can (x):

and need so require: that she be given in marriage to a man; if she has
not the gift of continence; if she is in danger of falling into the sin
of fornication, and the father or guardian are sensible of this:

let him do what he will, he sinneth not; he is under no obligation by
what the apostle had said to detain her in a single life; he may give
her in marriage if he pleases: he may

do what she will, as it may be rendered; comply with her inclination and
desire in marrying her to some person; in doing which, neither he nor
she will break any law of God, and so not sin therein:

let them marry; let parents marry their children when this is the case;
let the young men and young women marry who are so disposed; there is no
reason why they should not; there is nothing contrary to it in the word
of God, nor in the advice of the apostle; nay, according to him, it was
much better to marry than to burn, or to be exposed to any snare and
temptation.

\(s\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 76. 1. (t) Maimon. Hilchot Ishot, c. 2.
sect. 2. (u) T. Bab. Pesach. fol. 113. 1. (w) Misn. Nidda, c. 5. sect.
7. (x) Misn. Nedarim, c. 10. sect. 2. T. Bab. Nedarim, fol. 70. 2.
Maimon. Hilch. Nedarim, c. 11, sect. 7.

[1 Corinthians 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">co1 7:37</span></span>

Nevertheless, he that standeth steadfast in his heart,.... The apostle
returns to confirm his former advice, where it can be attended to with
safety; and observes, that notwithstanding what he had allowed might
lawfully be done, and was proper to be done; yet a man that had
deliberated upon, and had well weighed the matter of virginity, the case
of a single life, and was at a point about in, having no hesitation nor
fluctuation of mind concerning it: and also "having no necessity"; of
acting otherwise, either through the meanness of his circumstances, or
rather through the weakness of his virgin, she not having the gift of
continency:

but hath power over his own will; his daughter's will being the same
with his, and she entirely consenting to live a single life; otherwise
he would have no power of acting as he pleased in such a case:

and hath so decreed in his heart: it is a fixed point on mature
deliberation, in which he himself is hearty and determined, and his
child perfectly assents to it, so that on all hands it is an agreed
matter:

that he will keep his virgin; at home with him, unmarried, and not give
her to any man in marriage:

doth well: or that which is for both temporal and spiritual profit and
advantage, as before observed. Some understand all this of a man's
keeping his own virginity, and determining to continue unmarried.

[1 Corinthians 7:38](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">co1 7:38</span></span>

So then he that giveth her in marriage doth well,.... Does that which is
in its own nature good; that which is agreeable to the will of God, is
of his institution and appointment, and therefore must be good, and
answer many good ends and purposes. Such an one that marries his
daughter, he seeing a necessity for it, and a propriety in it, does a
very good thing; secures her chastity, and his own credit; prevents
fornication, and other evils that might follow; consults the good of
mankind, and the honour of religion.

But he that giveth her not in marriage doth better; not a better action
in itself, simply considered; but more profitable and advantageous under
such and such circumstances, with such and such conditions and
consequences; since hereby a single person is more fit to encounter with
and endure persecutions, is freer from the cares of life, and more at
liberty to wait upon the Lord, and give up himself to his service.

[1 Corinthians 7:39](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">co1 7:39</span></span>

The wife is bound by the law as long as her husband liveth,.... That is,
she is bound to her husband, by the law of marriage, during his life;
nor can the bond of marriage between them be dissolved but by the death
of one of them, except in the cases of adultery, and wilful desertion,
see [Rom 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#002).

But if her husband be dead; or "asleep", for so the word may be
rendered; though it designs death: death is often expressed by sleeping
in Scripture; for the dead will not always remain in such a state, but
be raised from thence at the last day, just as persons are awaked out of
sleep. The Alexandrian copy reads "dead"; and so seems the Ethiopic
version to have read.

She is at liberty to marry whom she will: so that second marriages are
lawful, though condemned by many of the ancients: the liberty of a widow
is greater than that of a virgin, because a virgin is under the power,
and at the dispose of her parents; but a widow is at her own dispose;
and death having dissolved her former obligation, she is at entire
liberty to marry, or not marry, and to marry whom she pleases, that is
not forbidden by the laws of God:

only in the Lord; not that it is absolutely necessary that her husband
should be in the Lord, a converted person, a believer in Christ; though
such an one should be most desirable and eligible: but either that she
should continue in the possession of her faith in Christ, and not
relinquish it for the sake of an husband; or that she enter into this
state in the fear of the Lord, calling upon him, and consulting him in
such an important affair; and take care that whom she marries is not
within the line prohibited by the Lord.

[1 Corinthians 7:40](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">co1 7:40</span></span>

But she is happier if she so abide,.... That is, a widow, in an
unmarried state; which is to be understood not of the happiness of
another world, but of this: the apostle's meaning is, that she would be
more free from cares, and less liable to trouble, would live with more
peace and quietness, and be more at leisure to serve the Lord, second
marriages oftentimes proving more disagreeable than the first; but in
this the apostle only gives his opinion, enjoins nothing by way of
command, or in an authoritative manner: and therefore adds,

after my judgment: according to his sense of things, and agreeably to
the advice he had before given to unmarried persons, whether virgins or
widows, such a person was likely to have most peace, and least trouble,
remaining a widow, than if married, and so consequently more happy: and
in order to engage such to regard his counsel, he further says,

and I think also that I have the Spirit of God; that though he had no
express command, nor did he pretend to any, nor did he lay any
injunction on any, but left them to their liberty; yet he could not but
think, nay, he was assured, though he thus modestly expresses himself,
that he was directed to give this advice by the Spirit of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Corinthians Chapter 8](co1008)

</div>
