<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2004)  [Next](co2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CORINTHIANS 5

The apostle, in this chapter, enlarges upon the saints' comfortable
assurance, expectation, and desire of the heavenly glory; discourses of
the diligence and industry of himself and other Gospel ministers in
preaching the word, with the reasons that induced them to it; and closes
it with a commendation of the Gospel ministry from the important
subject, sum, and substance of it. Having mentioned in the latter part
of the, preceding chapter, the eternal weight of glory, the afflictions
of the saints are working for, and the invisible realities of that state
they are looking to, here expresses the assurance that he and others had
of their interest therein; and which he signifies by an edifice, and
illustrates it by its opposition to the body, which he compares to an
house and tabernacle; the one is man's, the other of God, and not made
with hands; the one is earthly, the other in heaven; the one is to be,
and will be dissolved, the other is eternal, [Co2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001) and therefore it is no wonder that
it should be so earnestly desired, as it is said to be in [Co2
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#002) where the desire of it is
signified by groaning, which supposes something distressing, and which
makes uneasy; and by an earnest longing after deliverance and happiness,
and which is explained by a desire to be clothed upon with the house
from heaven; where the heavenly glory is not only, as before, compared
to an house, but also to a garment, which all those that are clothed
with the righteousness of Christ may justly expect to be arrayed with;
for these will not be found naked nor remain so, [Co2
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#003) which earnest desire after
immortality and glory is more fully explained, [Co2
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004) in which not only the body, in its
present state, is again compared to a tabernacle, and the saints
represented as being distressed, and so groaning whilst in it; but the
cause of this groaning is suggested, which is a burden they labour
under, both of sin and affliction; and yet such is the natural
inclination of man to remain in the body, and his unwillingness to part
from it, that he does not desire to be stripped of that, but to have the
robe of immortality put upon it, that so the present mortality that
attends it might be wholly swallowed up in it: and that the saints had
reason to believe there was such an happiness to be enjoyed, and that
they had such an interest in it is clear; because as God had prepared
that for them, he had also wrought and prepared them for that; and
besides, had given them his Spirit as the earnest and pledge of it, [Co2
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005) wherefore, as they were
confidently assured of it, and considering that they were but sojourners
and strangers whilst in the body, and in the present state of things,
and not at home in their Father's house, and absent from Christ, [Co2
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006) as is evident from their walking
by faith in the comfortable assurance, lively hope, and earnest
expectation of things future and unseen, and not in the beatific vision
of them, [Co2 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007). Hence they were
very desirous, and chose rather to quit their present dwelling, the
tabernacle of the body, that they might be at home, and enjoy the
presence of the Lord, [Co2 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#008). And
this confidence and hope of eternal things wrought in the apostle, and
other faithful ministers of the word, great carefulness and diligence to
serve the Lord acceptably, and discharge with faithfulness the trust
reposed in them, [Co2 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#009) the reason
of which concern also, or what likewise animated them to a diligent
performance of their duty, was their certain appearance before the
judgment seat of Christ; which appearance will be universal, and when
there will be a distribution of rewards and punishments to everyone
according to his works, [Co2 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010). And
besides, it was not only their own personal concern in this awful affair
that engaged them to such a conduct, but the regard they had to the good
of immortal souls, to whom the day of judgment must be terrible, unless
they are brought to believe in Christ; and for the truth of this they
could appeal both to God, and to the consciences of men, particularly
the Corinthians, [Co2 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#011). And lest
this should be imputed to pride and arrogance, the apostle suggests the
reason why he made mention of all this, that they might have wherewith
to answer the false teachers, and vindicate the faithful ministers of
the Gospel, [Co2 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012). However, let it
be construed which way it will, as the effect of madness or sobriety,
this he could with the greatest confidence affirm, that his view was the
glory of God, and the good of souls, [Co2
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#013) and to this diligence and
faithfulness in preaching the Gospel, he and others were not only moved
by their desire and expectation of happiness, by the future judgment in
which they must appear, and by their concern for immortal souls, that
they might escape the vengeance of that day; but they were constrained
thereunto by the love of Christ in dying for them, and in whom they
died, [Co2 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014) the end of which was,
that they might live not to themselves, but to him that died and rose
again, [Co2 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015). And as a further
instance of their integrity and faithfulness, the apostle observes, that
they had no regard to men on account of their carnal descent, and
outward privileges, as the Jews; nor even did they consider Christ
himself in a carnal view, or esteem of him as a temporal king, as they
once did, [Co2 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016) their sole aims
and views being the spiritual good of men, and the advancement of the
spiritual interest and kingdom of Christ; and the conclusion from hence
is, that whoever is truly in Christ, and in his kingdom, is a new
creature, and is in a new world, in a new dispensation, in which both
the old things of the law, and of Heathenism, and of his former
conversation are gone, and all things in doctrine, worship, and
conversation are become new, [Co2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017). And from hence the apostle
proceeds to a commendation of the Gospel dispensation, and the ministry
of it, from its author God, and from the subject matter of it,
reconciliation of men to God by Christ, [Co2
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018) which is more fully explained and
enlarged on, both with respect to the efficient cause of reconciliation,
the objects of it, and the means and manner in which it is brought
about, and also the publication of it in the Gospel by the ministers of
it, [Co2 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019) and who are described as
the ambassadors of Christ, acting in the name of God, and as in the
stead of Christ, for the good of men, [Co2
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020). And closes the chapter with an
account of the great propitiation, Christ, by whom reconciliation is
made; as that he was in himself without sin, and yet was by imputation
made sin for sinners, that they, in the same way, might be made
righteous in the sight of God through him, [Co2
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021).47

[2 Corinthians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 5:1</span></span>

For we know, that if our earthly house,.... By this house is meant the
body, so called from its being like a well built house, a curious piece
of architecture; as an house consists of a variety of parts fitly framed
and put together in just symmetry and proportion, and with an entire
usefulness in all, so is the body of man; which shows the power and
wisdom of God the architect: likewise, because it is the dwelling place
of the soul, which makes it appear, that the soul is more excellent than
the body, is independent of it, and capable of a separate existence from
it: it is said to be an "earthly" house, because it is from the earth;
is supported by earthly things; has its present abode on the earth, and
will quickly return to it: and the earthly house of this tabernacle, in
allusion to the tabernacles the patriarchs and Israelites of old dwelt
in; or to the tents and tabernacles of soldiers, shepherds, travellers,
and such like persons, which are soon put up and taken down, and removed
from place to place; and denotes the frailty and short continuance of
our mortal bodies. So Plato (z) calls the body , "an earthly
tabernacle"; so the Jews were wont to call the body an house, and a
"tabernacle":

"every man (they say (a)) has two houses, , "the house of the body", and
the house of the soul; the one is the outward, the other the inward
house.''

So Abarbinel (b) paraphrases those words, [Isa
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#004).

""I will consider in my dwelling place; I will return", or again
consider in my dwelling place, which is the body, for that is , "the
tabernacle of the soul".''

Now this tabernacle may, and will be, "dissolved", unpinned, and taken
down; which does not design an annihilation of it, but a dissolution of
its union with the soul, and its separation from it: and when the
apostle puts an "if" upon it, it is not to be understood as though it is
uncertain whether it would be dissolved or not, unless it be said with a
view to the change that will be on living saints at Christ's second
coming; but it is rather a concession of the matter, and may be
rendered, "though the earthly house", &c. or it points out the time when
the saints' future happiness shall begin, "when the earthly house", &c.
and signifies that being in the body, in some sense, retards the
enjoyment of it. Now it is the saints' comfort whilst they are in it,
and in a view of the dissolution of it, that they

have a building of God, an house not made with hands, eternal in the
heavens? which some understand of the glorified body upon its
resurrection, as opposed to its frail, mortal, earthly frame in its
present situation; though rather all this designs the happiness of the
saints, which will be begun, and they shall immediately enter into, at
the dissolution of their bodies, and will be consummated at the
resurrection; which is all of God's building and preparing; not made by
the hands of the creature; or obtained by works of righteousness done by
men; and it lies in the heavens, and will continue for ever. So the (c)
Jews speak of , "the holy house", in the world to come, and which they
suppose is intended in [Isa 56:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#005). In
this the saints have a present interest; they have it already built and
prepared for them; they have an indubitate right and title to it through
the righteousness of Christ; they have it secured to them in Christ,
their feoffee in trust, their head and representative; and they have the
earnest of it, the Spirit of God in their hearts; of all which they have
sure and certain knowledge: "for we know"; they are well assured of the
truth of this from the promise of God, who cannot lie, from the
declaration of the Gospel, the testimony of the Spirit, and the close
and inseparable connection there is between the grace they have already
received, and the glory that shall be hereafter.

\(z\) In Clement. Alexandr. Stromat. l. 5. p. 593. (a) Sepher Caphtor,
fol. 38. 2. (b) Mashmia Jeshua, fol. 11. 4. (c) Zohar in Exod. fol. 34.
3. & 35. 3.

[2 Corinthians 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 5:2</span></span>

For in this we groan earnestly,.... Meaning either for this happiness we
groan, or rather in this tabernacle we groan. These words are a reason
of the former, proving that the saints have a building of God; and they
know they have it, because they groan after it here; for the groanings
of the saints are under the influence and direction of the Spirit of
God, who makes intercession for them, as for grace, so for glory,
according to the will of God: and this groaning is further explained by

desiring to be clothed upon with our house which is from heaven; by
which is meant not the glorified body in the resurrection morn; for
though the bodies of the saints will be glorious, incorruptible,
powerful, and spiritual, they are not said to be celestial, nor will
they be from heaven, but be raised out of the earth: besides, the
apostle is speaking of an habitation the soul will go into, and is
desirous of going into as soon as it removes out of the earthly house of
the body, and of a clothing it desires to be clothed with as soon as it
is stripped of the garment of the flesh: wherefore, by the house from
heaven must be meant the heavenly glory, which departed souls
immediately enter into, and are arrayed with, even the white and shining
robes of purity, perfection, and glory they shall be clothed with, as
soon as ever their tabernacles are unpinned and dissolved. The Jews
indeed speak of a celestial body which the soul shall be clothed with
immediately upon its separation from the earthly body, and much in such
figurative terms as the apostle does in this, and the following verse;

"when a man's time is come, say they (d), to go out of this world, he
does not depart until the angel of death has stripped him of the
clothing of body, (see [Co2 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)) and
when the soul is stripped of the body, by the angel of death, it goes ,
"and is clothed with that other body", which is in paradise, of which it
was stripped when it came into this world; for the soul has no pleasure
but in the body, which is from thence, and it rejoices because it is
stripped of the body of this world, "and is clothed with another perfect
clothing".''

And a little after,

"the holy blessed God deals well with men, for he does not strip men of
their clothes until he has provided for them other clothes, more
precious and better than these, except the wicked of the world, who
return not to their Lord by perfect repentance; for naked they came into
this world, and naked (see [Co2 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#003))
they shall return hence.''

And in another place (e),

"the soul does not go up to appear before the Holy King, until it is
worthy to be clothed , "with the clothing which is above".''

\(d\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 62. 1, 2. (e) Zohar in Exod. fol. 92. 2. Vid.
fol. 84. 3. & in Gen. fol. 49. 3. & Caphtor, fol. 18. 2. & 78. 2.

[2 Corinthians 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 5:3</span></span>

If so be that being clothed,.... This supposition is made with respect
to the saints who shall be alive at Christ's second coming, who will not
be stripped of their bodies, and so will "not be found naked", or
disembodied, and shall have a glory at once put upon them, both soul and
body; or these words are an inference from the saints' present clothing,
to their future clothing, thus; "seeing we are clothed", have not only
put on the new man, and are clothed and adorned with the graces of the
Spirit, but are arrayed with the best robe, the wedding garment, the
robe of Christ's righteousness,

we shall not be found naked; but shall be clothed upon with the heavenly
glory, as soon as we are dismissed from hence. Some read these words as
a wish, "O that we were clothed, that we might not be found naked!" and
so is expressive of one of the sighs, and groans, and earnest desires of
the saints in their present situation after the glories of another
world.

[2 Corinthians 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 5:4</span></span>

For we that are in this tabernacle do groan,.... There are some of the
saints who are not in the tabernacle, the body. They were in it, but now
are not; their bodies are in the grave, the house appointed for all
living; and their souls are in the house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens, in everlasting habitations, in the mansions prepared in
Christ's Father's house; and they have done groaning, being delivered
from every oppressor, sin, Satan, and the world; are at rest from all
their labours, and ate free from every burden; only the saints who are
in the tabernacle of the body, in an unsettled state, groan, being in
the midst of tribulation, and not yet in the enjoyment of that happiness
they are wishing for. The reason of their groaning is, because they are

burdened with the body itself, which is a clog and incumbrance to the
soul in its spiritual exercises; and oftentimes by reason of its
disorders and diseases a man becomes a burden to himself; but what the
saints are mostly burdened with in this life, and which makes them groan
the most, is the body of sin and death they carry about with them; the
filth of it is nauseous, grievous, and intolerable; the guilt of it
oftentimes lies very heavy on the conscience; the weight of it presses
hard, and is a great hinderance to them in running their Christian race;
nor have they any relief under this burden, but by looking to a sin
bearing and sin atoning Saviour, the Lamb of God, who takes away the sin
of the world. They are also frequently burdened with Satan's
temptations, with blasphemous thoughts, solicitations to sin, the fears
of death, the pangs of it, and what will follow upon it; though God is
faithful, who will not suffer them to be tempted above that they are
able to bear; however, these temptations are great burdens, and occasion
many a groan: to which may be added the various afflictions of life,
which though comparatively "light", are in themselves heavy, grievous
burdens, and hard to be bore; the nature, number, and continuance of
them often make them so; and especially they are such, when God is
pleased to hide his face, and withhold the discoveries of his love and
mercy. The apostle goes on to explain what he means by desiring to be
clothed,

not for that we would be unclothed; that is, of our bodies; and this he
says, not through any love and liking he had to this animal life, or to
the sensual methods of living here, which make natural men in love with
life, and desirous of always living here; but from a principle of
nature, which recoils at death, does not like a dissolution, chooses any
other way of removing out of this world than by death; a translation of
soul and body together to heaven, like that of Enoch and Elijah's, is
more eligible even to a good man; or such a change as will be upon the
living saints at the coming of Christ, which the apostle seems to have
in view, who will be not unclothed of their bodies, as men are at death,

but clothed upon; as is here desired, with incorruption and immortality:

that mortality might be swallowed up of life; not that the mortal body,
or the substance of the body, which is mortal, might be consumed and
destroyed, but that mortality, that quality to which it is subject by
sin, might be no more: and he does not say, that "death may be swallowed
up of life", which will be done in the resurrection morn; but mortality,
which being swallowed up by a translation, or such a change as will be
at the last day, will prevent death: and the phrase, swallowed up,
denotes the suddenness of the change, in an instant, in a moment, in the
twinkling of an eye, and that without any pain, or such agonies as
usually attend death; and also the utter, final, and total abolition of
mortality; so that there will never be more any appearance of it; his
desire is, that it may be swallowed up "of the life", which is properly
and emphatically life, as this life is not; and means the glorious,
immortal, and everlasting life, which saints enter into as soon as they
are rid of their mortal bodies, and the mortality of them.

[2 Corinthians 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 5:5</span></span>

Now he that hath wrought us for the selfsame thing,.... By "the selfsame
thing" is meant, either the cross, the burden of sorrows and
afflictions, under which the saints groan whilst here, which God has
appointed them unto, and therefore to be bore patiently by them; or that
glory and immortality, which they, as vessels of mercy, were prepared by
him for from everlasting; for which their bodies and souls are formed by
him in creation, and for which they are made meet in regeneration, by
the curious workmanship of his Spirit and grace upon them: and seeing he
"is God", and not man, who hath wrought them for this, either by his
secret purposes and preparations of grace in eternity, or by his open
works of creation and regeneration in time; there is no doubt but they
shall certainly enjoy it, since his counsels are immutable, and he is a
rock, and his work is perfect; whatever he begins he finishes, nor is he
ever frustrated of his end: one of Stephens's copies adds, "and hath
anointed us", which seems to have been transcribed from [Co2
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#021).

Who also hath given us the earnest of the Spirit; and therefore may be
assured of possessing the inheritance, of which he is the earnest; see
[Co2 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#022).

[2 Corinthians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 5:6</span></span>

Therefore we are always confident,.... Because God has formed us for
immortality and glory, and given us his Spirit as the earnest of it, we
take heart, are of good courage, do not sink under our burdens, or
despair of happiness, but are fully assured of enjoying what we are
desirous of:

knowing that whilst we are at home in the body; or whilst we are inmates
or sojourners in the body; for the body is not properly the saints'
home; whilst they are in it, they are but pilgrims and strangers; the
time of their abode in it is the time of their sojourning: during which
time they

are absent from the Lord; not with respect to his general presence,
which is everywhere, and attends all creatures, an absence from which is
impossible; nor with respect to his spiritual presence, which though not
always sensibly enjoyed, yet frequently; nor are the children of God
ever deprived of it totally and finally; but with respect to his
glorious presence, and the full enjoyment of that. Now the knowledge and
consideration of this, that the present state and situation of the
saints, whilst in the body, is a state of pilgrimage, and so of absence
from the Lord Christ, and from their Father's house, serves to increase
their confidence and assurance, that they shall not long continue so,
but in a little time shall be at home, and for ever with the Lord.

[2 Corinthians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 5:7</span></span>

For we walk by faith, and not by sight. Faith is a grace which answers
many useful purposes; it is the eye of the soul, by which it looks to
Christ for righteousness, peace, pardon, life, and salvation; the hand
by which it receives him, and the foot by which it goes to him, and
walks in him as it has received him; which denotes not a single act of
faith, but a continued course of believing; and is expressive, not of a
weak, but of a strong steady faith of glory and happiness, and of
interest in it: and it is opposed to "sight": by which is meant, not
sensible communion, but the celestial vision: there is something of
sight in faith; that is a seeing of the Son; and it is an evidence of
things not seen, of the invisible glories of the other world; faith
looks at, and has a glimpse of things not seen, which are eternal; but
it is but seeing as through a glass darkly; it is not that full sight,
face to face, which will be had hereafter, when faith is turned into
vision.

[2 Corinthians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 5:8</span></span>

We are confident, I say, and willing rather,.... We are cheerful in our
present state, being assured of future happiness; though we choose
rather

to be absent from the body; that is, to die, to depart out of this
world. The interval between death, and the resurrection, is a state of
absence from the body, during which time the soul is disembodied, and
exists in a separate state; not in a state of inactivity and sleep, for
that would not be desirable, but of happiness and glory, enjoying the
presence of God, and praising of him, believing and waiting for the
resurrection of the body, when both will be united together again; and
after that there will be no more absence, neither from the body, nor
from the Lord:

and to be present with the Lord. This was promised to Christ in the
everlasting covenant, that all his spiritual seed and offspring should
be with him. This he expected; it was the joy of this which was set
before him, that carried him through his sufferings and death with so
much cheerfulness; this is the sum of his prayers and intercession, and
what all his preparations in heaven are on the account of. It is this
which supports and comforts the saints under all their sorrows here, and
which makes them meet death with pleasure, which otherwise is formidable
and disagreeable to nature; and even desirous of parting with life, to
be with Christ, which is far better.

[2 Corinthians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 5:9</span></span>

Wherefore we labour, that whether present or absent,.... This may be
understood either of the ministers of the Gospel in particular, who
labour in the word and doctrine, are ambitious, as the word here used
signifies, and strive to preach the Gospel, not to please men, but their
Lord and master; or of saints in general, who are intent upon this, and
whose highest ambition is, that whether living or dying they

may be accepted of him; both persons and services: such who are born
again, who are believers in Christ, and truly love him, are earnestly
desirous of doing those things which are pleasing to him; and do in the
strength of Christ endeavour to perform them. Faith is a diligent,
industrious, and operative grace, and makes persons like itself. As none
ought to be, so none are more careful to perform good works, or more
ambitious to excel others in them, and thereby please their Lord, than
believers. And these are the only persons that can please him, for
without faith it is impossible to please him; for these act from a
principle of love to him, and with a view to his glory; and may they be
but accepted of him, living and dying, both in this and the other world,
they have the highest favour they can wish for and desire.

[2 Corinthians 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 5:10</span></span>

For we must all appear,.... This is a reason why the saints are so
diligent and laborious, so earnest and intent upon it, to be accepted of
the Lord, because they must stand

before the judgment seat of Christ; who is appointed Judge of the whole
earth, who is every way qualified for it, being God omnipotent and
omniscient; and when he comes a second time will sit upon his great
white throne, a symbol of purity and integrity, and will enter on this
work, and finish it with the strictest justice and equity: and before
him "we must all appear"; all the saints as well as others, ministers
and people, persons of all ranks and conditions, of every nation, age,
and sex; there will be no avoiding this judgment, all "must appear", or
"be made manifest"; they will be set in open view, before angels and
men; their persons, characters, and actions, even the most secret will
be:

that everyone may receive the things done in his body; which he has
performed by the members of the body as instruments thereof, or
whatsoever he has done whilst in the body; and so this not only reaches
to words and actions, but includes all the secret thoughts of the mind,
and counsels of the heart, which will be made manifest: and when it is
said, that "everyone shall receive" these; the meaning is, that he shall
receive the reward of them,

according to that he hath done, whether it be good or bad; the reward of
good works will be of grace, and not of merit: good works will be
considered at the last judgment, not as causes of eternal life and
happiness, to which the saints will be adjudged; but will be produced in
open court as fruits of grace, and as evidences of the truth of faith,
which will justify the Judge in proceeding according to what he himself,
as a Saviour, has said,

he that believeth shall be saved, he that believeth not shall be damned.
The reward of bad works will be in strict and just proportion, according
to the nature and demerit of them. The Jews say (f), that

"all the works which a man does in this world, "in the body", and
spirit, he must give an account of in body and spirit before he goes out
of the world.''

And again (g), all the works of men are written in a book, , "whether
good or evil", and for them all they must give account.

\(f\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 57. 3. (g) Midrash Hanneelim in Zohar in Gen.
fol. 75. 4.

[2 Corinthians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 5:11</span></span>

Knowing therefore the terror of the Lord,.... Or the fear of the Lord;
by which is meant either the grace of the fear of the Lord, implanted in
the hearts of the apostles, and in which they acted in their ministry,
faithfully dispensing to men the mysteries of grace; from which they
could by no means be moved, because the fear of God was before their
eyes, and upon their hearts; or rather the terror of the Lord in the
last judgment, which will be very great, considering the awfulness of
the summons, arise ye dead, and come to judgment; the appearance of the
Judge, which will be sudden, surprising, and glorious; the placing of
the thrones, the opening of the books, the position of the wicked, the
dreadful sentence pronounced on them, and the immediate execution of it;
all which the ministers of the word know from the Scriptures of truth;
they know the Judge, that there will be a general judgment, and that the
day is fixed for it, though they know not the exact time: and therefore

persuade men; not that their state is good because of a little outside
morality, nor to make their peace with God, or get an interest in
Christ, or to convert themselves, neither of which are in the power of
men to do; but they endeavour to persuade them by the best arguments
they are masters of, taken from the word of God, and their own
experience, that they are in a dangerous state and condition, walking in
a way that leads to destruction; that they are liable to the curses of
the law, the wrath of God, and everlasting ruin; that present duties of
religion will not make amends for past sins, nor can their tears atone
for their crimes, or any works of righteousness done by them justify
them before God; and that salvation is only by Christ, who is both able
and willing to save the chief of sinners: and they endeavour to persuade
and encourage poor sensible sinners to venture on Christ, and believe in
him to the saving of their souls. So the Arabic version reads it, "we
persuade men to believe"; though when they have done all they can, these
persuasions of theirs are ineffectual, without the powerful and
efficacious grace of the Spirit of God; however, in so doing they
discharge a good conscience, and act the faithful part to God and men:

but we are made manifest unto God; who searches the heart, and tries the
reins, who knows all actions, and the secret springs of them; to him the
sincerity of our hearts, and the integrity of our conduct, are fully
manifest; we can appeal to him that it is his glory, and the good of
souls, we have in view in all our ministrations:

and I trust also are made manifest in your consciences; that you also
can bear witness to our faithfulness and honesty, to the unwearied pains
we have taken, and the hearty concern we have shown for the welfare of
the souls of men. One of Stephens's copies reads, "and we trust"; which
agrees with the apostle's speaking in the first person plural in this,
and the preceding verses.

[2 Corinthians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 5:12</span></span>

For we commend not ourselves again to you,.... We have no need to do so,
being well known to you; nor do we intend it when we thus speak of
ourselves, and of our ministrations:

but give you occasion to glory on our behalf; suggest some things to you
which you may make use of in our favour, for the vindicating of our
characters and conduct:

that you may have somewhat to answer them which glory in appearance, and
not in heart; by whom are meant the false apostles who gloried in an
outward show, in their learning, eloquence, and popular applause they
had acquired, and not in the sincerity of their hearts, and the
testimony of a good conscience, things which the true apostles of Christ
were most ambitious of.

[2 Corinthians 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 5:13</span></span>

For whether we be besides ourselves,.... As some took them to be, and as
Festus thought the Apostle Paul was, because of the doctrines they
preached, and the self-commendation they were obliged to enter into
through the calumnies of their adversaries; in which they did not so
much seek their own reputation, as the honour and glory of God, which
was struck at through them:

it is to God; it is for his glory, and not our own, that we act this
part, for which we are condemned as madmen.

Or whether we be sober; think and speak meanly of ourselves, and behave
with all modesty and lowliness of mind: it is for your cause; for your
instruction and imitation. The glory of God, and the good of his
churches, were what concerned them in every part of life. Some refer
this to the apostle's being, or not being, in an ecstasy or rapture.
Others to his speaking, either of the more sublime doctrines of the
Gospel, on account of which he was reckoned mad, though in the
delivering of them he had nothing else but the glory of God in view; or
of the lower and easier truths of it, which were more accommodated to
meaner capacities; in doing which he sought their edification and
advantage.

[2 Corinthians 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 5:14</span></span>

For the love of Christ constraineth us,.... Or "containeth us"; holds
and keeps us in our station and duty, as soldiers are held and kept
together under a banner, or ensign displayed; to which the church
refers, when she says, "his banner over me was love", [Sol
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#004). Nothing more effectually keeps
ministers, or other believers, in the work and service of their Lord, or
more strongly obliges and constrains them to a cheerful discharge of
their duty to him, and one another, than his love displayed in his
covenant engagements, in his assumption of human nature, and
particularly in his dying for them, which is the instance given in the
text:

because we thus judge; having well weighed, and maturely considered the
affair,

that if one died for all, then were all dead; or "seeing one died for
all"; for it is rather an assertion than a supposition, upon which the
apostle reasons. The person designed, who died for all, is Jesus Christ,
though not mentioned, and is to be supplied from the former clause. The
doctrine of Christ's dying for men was well known, so that there was no
need to mention his name; he is called "one", in distinction to the
"all" he died for, and as exclusive of all others, he being sufficient
of himself to answer the ends of his death; and therefore is to be
looked unto, and believed on, alone for salvation, and to have all the
glory of it. The manner of his dying is for, or in the room and stead of
all; so that he died not merely as a martyr, or by way of example, or
only for their good, but as their substitute, in their room and stead,
having all the sins of his people upon him, for which he made
satisfaction; and this the nature of his death shows, which was a
sacrifice, a ransom, a propitiation and atonement. The persons for whom
Christ died are all; not every individual of mankind, but all his
people, all his sheep, all the members of his church, or all the sons
he, as the great Captain of salvation, brings to glory. Wherefore this
text does not make for the doctrine of general redemption; for it should
be observed, that it does not say that Christ died for "all men", but
for "all"; and so, agreeably to the Scriptures, may be understood of all
the persons mentioned. Moreover, in the latter part of the text it is
said, that those for whom Christ died, for them he rose again; he died
for no more, nor for others, than those for whom he rose again: now
those for whom he rose again, he rose for their justification;
wherefore, if Christ rose for the justification of all men, all would be
justified, or the end of Christ's resurrection would not be answered;
but all men are not, nor will they be justified, some will be condemned;
hence it follows, that Christ did not rise from the dead for all men,
and consequently did not die for all men: besides, the "all" for whom
Christ died, died with him, and through his death are dead both to the
law and sin; and he died for them, that they might live, not to
themselves, but to him; neither of which are true of all the individuals
of mankind: to which may be added, that the context explains the all of
such who are in Christ, are new creatures, are reconciled to God, whose
trespasses are not imputed to them, for whom Christ was made sin, and
who are made the righteousness of God in him; which cannot be said of
all men. The conclusion from hence is,

then were all dead; meaning, either that those for whom Christ died,
were dead in Adam, dead in law, dead in trespasses and sins, which made
it necessary for him to die for them; otherwise, there would have been
no occasion for his death; yet it does not follow from hence, that
Christ died for all that are in such a condition; only that those for
whom Christ died were dead in this sense, admitting this to be the sense
of the passage; though death in sin seems not to be intended, since that
all men are dead in sin, would have been a truth, if Christ had died for
none; and much less is this an effect, or what follows upon the death of
Christ; nor does it capacitate, but renders men incapable of living to
Christ: wherefore a mystical death in, and with Christ, seems rather to
he meant; and so the Ethiopic version reads it, "in whom everyone is
dead". Christ died as the head and representative of his people, and
they all died in him, were crucified with him, and through his death
became dead to the law, as to its curse and condemnation; and to sin, as
to its damning power, being acquitted, discharged, and justified from
it; the consequence of which is a deliverance from the dominion of it,
whereby they become capable of living to the glory of Christ. The sense
of the passage is not, that Christ died for all that were dead, but that
all were dead for whom he died; which is true of them, whether in the
former, or in the latter sense: the article is anaphorical or relative,
as Beza and Piscator observe; and the meaning is, that if Christ died
for all, then all "those" were dead for whom he died.

[2 Corinthians 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 5:15</span></span>

And that he died for all, that they which live,.... The end of Christ's
dying for men was that they might live; live, in a legal sense, live a
life of justification; and that they which live in such a sense,

should not henceforth live unto themselves: to their own lusts, and
after their own wills, to either sinful self, or righteous self:

but unto him which died for them, and rose again; that is, for them, for
their justification; for all those for whom Christ died, for them he
rose again; and who were justified, acquitted, and discharged when he
was; which cannot be said of all mankind; and which is an obligation on
such persons to live to Christ, to ascribe the whole of their salvation
to him, and to make his glory the end of all their actions. Some copies
read, "which died for them all".

[2 Corinthians 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 5:16</span></span>

Wherefore henceforth know we no man after the flesh..... Since the death
and resurrection of Christ, which has broken down the middle wall of
partition, and has took away all distinction of men, we know, we esteem,
we value no man on account of his carnal descent, and fleshy privileges,
as being of the Jewish nation, a descendant of Abraham, and circumcised
as he was; or on account of their outward state and condition, as being
rich and honourable among men, or on account of their natural parts and
acquirements, their learning, wisdom, and eloquence; nor do we own any
man to be a Christian, that lives after the flesh, to himself, and not
to Christ; nor do we make account of the saints themselves as in this
mortal state, but as they will be in the resurrection, in consequence of
Christ's having died for them, and rose again.

Yea, though we have known Christ after the flesh: some of them had seen
him in the flesh; others valued him on account of his being of the
Jewish nation, and of his relation to them according to the flesh; and
all of them had formerly entertained carnal apprehensions of him, and
his kingdom, as though it would be a temporal one:

yet now henceforth know we him more; no more in this mortal state, being
risen from the dead; nor do we value ourselves upon having seen him in
the flesh; for though such a sight and knowledge of him was desirable,
yet a spiritual knowledge is much more preferable; and many there were
who knew him in the flesh, who neither enjoy his spiritual presence
here, nor will they be favoured with his glorious presence hereafter.
Moreover, we do not judge of him as we did before we had a spiritual
knowledge of him, and as our countrymen did, by his outward
circumstances, by his parentage and education, his poverty and
afflictions, his company and conversation, that he could not be the
Messiah, the Son of God, and therefore was worthy of death; we have
quite other thoughts and apprehensions of him now, believing him to be
the Christ of God, a spiritual Saviour and Redeemer, whose kingdom is
not of this world; we have relinquished all our national prejudices, and
former notions, concerning the Messiah, his kingdom, and people. Some
copies add, "after the flesh"; and the Arabic version, "yet now know we
him no more in that".

[2 Corinthians 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 5:17</span></span>

Therefore if any man be in Christ,.... There's a secret being in Christ
from everlasting; so all that are loved by him, espoused unto him,
chosen and preserved in him, to whom he was a covenant head, surety, and
representative, are in him, united to him, and one with him; not in such
sense as the Father is in him, and the human nature is in him, but as
husband and wife, and head and members are one: and there is an open
being in Christ at conversion, when a man believes in Christ, and gives
up himself to him; faith does not put a man into Christ, but makes him
appear to be in him: and such an one "is a new creature"; or, as some
read it, "let him be a new creature": who understand being in Christ to
be by profession, and the sense this, whoever is in the kingdom or
church of Christ, who professes himself to be a Christian, ought to be a
new creature: the Arabic version reads it, "he that is in the faith of
Christ is a new creature". All such who are secretly in Christ from
everlasting, though as yet some of them may not be new creatures, yet
they shall be sooner or later; and those who are openly in him, or are
converted persons, are actually so; they are a new "creation", as the
words may be rendered: , "a new creation", is a phrase often used by the
Jewish (h) doctors, and is applied by the apostle to converted persons;
and designs not an outward reformation of life and manners, but an
inward principle of grace, which is a creature, a creation work, and so
not man's, but God's; and in which man is purely passive, as he was in
his first creation; and this is a new creature, or a new man, in
opposition to, and distinction from the old man, the corruption of
nature; and because it is something anew implanted in the soul, which
never was there before; it is not a working upon, and an improvement of
the old principles of nature, but an implantation of new principles of
grace and holiness; here is a new heart, and a new spirit, and in them
new light and life, new affections and desires, new delights and joys;
here are new eyes to see with, new ears to hear with, new feet to walk,
and new hands to work and act with:

old things are passed away: the old course of living, the old way of
serving God, whether among Jews or Gentiles; the old legal
righteousness, old companions and acquaintance are dropped; and all
external things, as riches, honours, learning, knowledge, former
sentiments of religion, are relinquished:

behold, all things are become new; there is a new course of life, both
of faith and holiness; a new way of serving God through Christ by the
Spirit, and from principles of grace; a new, another, and better
righteousness is received and embraced; new companions are sought after,
and delighted in; new riches, honours, glory, a new Jerusalem, yea, new
heavens, and a new earth, are expected by new creatures: or the sense of
the whole may be this, if any man is entered into the kingdom of God,
into the Gospel dispensation, into a Gospel church state, which seems to
be the sense of the phrase "in Christ", in [Gal
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028) he is become a new creature, or
is got into a new creation, as it were into a new world, whether he be a
Jew or a Gentile; for with respect to the former state of either, "old
things are passed away"; if a Jew, the whole Mosaic economy is
abolished; the former covenant is waxen old, and vanished away; the old
ordinances of circumcision and the passover are no more; the daily
sacrifice is ceased, and all the other sacrifices are at an end, Christ,
the great sacrifice, being offered up; the priesthood of Aaron is
antiquated, there is a change of it, and of the whole law; the
observance of holy, days, new moons and sabbaths, is over; the whole
ceremonial law is at end; all the shadows of it are fled and gone, the
things they were shadows of being come by Christ, the sum and substance
of them; and there is no more a serving God in the oldness of the
letter, but in the newness of the Spirit: and if a Gentile, all the
former idols he worshipped he turns from, and his language is, "what
have I to do any more with idols? or what agreement hath the temple of
God with idols?" all former sacrifices, superstitious rites and
ceremonies, with which he worshipped them, are relinquished by him; with
all other Heathenish customs, rules, and methods of conduct he had been
used to: "behold, all things are become new"; to the one, and to the
other; the Gospel dispensation is a new state of things; a new form of
church state is erected, not national, as among the Jews, but
congregational, consisting of persons gathered out of the world, and
anew embodied together; new ordinances are appointed, which were never
in use before, as baptism and the Lord's supper; a new and living way is
opened by the blood of Christ into the holiest of all, not by the means
of slain beasts, as among the Jews, nor by petty deities as with the
Gentiles; a new commandment of love is enjoined all the followers of the
Lamb; and another name is given them, a new name, which the mouth of the
Lord their God has named, not of Jews nor Gentiles, but of Christians;
and new songs are put into their mouths, even praise to God: in short,
the Gospel church state seems to be, as it were, a new creation, and
perhaps is meant by the new heavens and new earth, [Isa
65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015) as well as those who are the
proper members of it, are new creatures in the sense before given.

\(h\) T. Hieros. Roshhashana, fol. 59. 3. Vajikra Rabba, fol. 170. 4.
Bemidbar Rabba, fol, 202. 3. Cosri, fol. 62. 2. & R. Levi ben Gersom in
Exod, fol. 108. 1. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 121. 2.

[2 Corinthians 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 5:18</span></span>

And all things are of God,.... A man's being brought into a Gospel
church state is of God; the causing all old things to pass away, whether
in the Jewish or Gentile world, is of God; the shaking of the heavens
and the earth, and the removing of those things that are shaken, the
abrogation of the ceremonial law, the putting an end to all the Mosaic
rites and sacrifices, the ejection of Satan out of the Heathen temples,
and the abolition of Gentilism, with every thing else that comes under
the names of old, and new, are of God: it is he that causes old things
to pass away, and makes all things new, see [Rev
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001). Moreover, as all things in the
old creation are from him, all creatures owe their beings to him, are
supported in them by him, and all are made for his pleasure, and his
glory so all things in the new creation are of him; the work of
renovation itself is his; all the grace that is implanted in
regeneration comes front him: nothing is of the creature, or to be
ascribed to it. All things in redemption are of him; he drew the plan of
it, called his Son to be the Redeemer, appointed and sent him as such;
and particularly that branch of it, reconciliation, is of him:

who hath reconciled us to himself by Jesus Christ. The work of
reconciliation, or making atonement for sin, is ascribed to the Father;
not that he is the author of it, for it is properly Christ's work; but
because he took the first step towards it: he formed the scheme of it;
he set forth his Son in his purposes and decrees to be the propitiary
sacrifice; he assigned him this work in council and covenant, in promise
and in prophecy, and sent him to effect it; therefore he is said to do
it "by" him; that is, by his blood and sacrifice, by his sufferings and
death, to which, and to which alone, the Scriptures ascribe our peace
and reconciliation: and this is made to "himself": as being the party
offended, whose law was broken, against whom sin was committed, and
whose justice required and demanded satisfaction:

and hath given to us the ministry of reconciliation; which is the Gospel
of peace, the word which preaches, publishes and declares, peace made by
the blood of Christ; which is a gift to ministers, and a blessing to the
people. The free grace of God greatly appears in this matter; God the
Father sets this work of reconciliation on foot, Christ has brought it
about, and the ministers of the Gospel publish it.

[2 Corinthians 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 5:19</span></span>

To wit, that God was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself,....
This expresses and explains the subject matter of the ministration of
the Gospel, especially that part of it which concerns our reconciliation
with God; and declares the scheme, the author, the subjects, the way,
and means, and consequence of it. The phrase, "in Christ", may be either
joined with the word "God", as in our version, "God was in Christ
reconciling"; that is, he was in Christ drawing the scheme, fixing the
method of reconciliation; his thoughts were employed about it, which
were thoughts of peace; he called a council of peace, and entered into a
covenant of peace with Christ, who was appointed and agreed to, to be
the peacemaker. Or with the word "reconciling", thus, God "was
reconciling in Christ"; that is, by Christ; and so it denotes, as
before, actual reconciliation by Christ. God, in pursuance of his
purposes, council, and covenant, sent his Son to make peace; and laid
our sins, and the chastisement of our peace upon him; this is the
punishment of sin, whereby satisfaction was made for it, and so peace
with God: or with the word "world", thus, "God was reconciling the world
in Christ"; by whom are meant, not all the individuals of mankind, for
these are not all in Christ, nor all reconciled to God, multitudes dying
in enmity to him, nor all interested in the blessing of non-imputation
of sin; whereas each of these is said of the world: but the elect of
God, who are chosen in Christ, whose peace Christ is, whose sins are not
imputed to them, and against whom no charge of any avail can be laid;
and particularly the people of God among the Gentiles are here designed,
who are frequently called "the world" in Scripture; being the world
which God loved, for whose sins Christ is the propitiation, and of the
reconciling of which mention is particularly made, [Joh
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016). And this sense well agrees with
the context, which signifies, that no man is regarded for his natural
descent; it is no matter whether he is a Jew or a Gentile, provided he
is but a new creature: for Gospel reconciliation, and the ministry of
it, concern one as well as another. Moreover, this reconciliation must
be considered, either as intentional, or actual, or as a publication of
it in the ministry of the word; and taken either way it cannot be
thought to extend to every individual person in the world: if it is to
be understood intentionally, that God intended the reconciliation of the
world to himself by Christ, and drew the scheme of it in him, his
intentions cannot be frustrated; his counsel shall stand, and he will do
all his pleasure; a scheme so wisely laid by him in his Son, cannot come
to nothing, or only in part be executed; and yet this must be the case,
if it was his design to reconcile every individual of mankind to
himself, since a large number of them are not reconciled to him: and if
the words are to be understood of an actual reconciliation of the world
unto God by Christ, which sense agrees with the preceding verse, then it
is out of all question, that the word "world" cannot be taken in so
large a sense as to take in every man and woman in the world; since it
is certain that there are many who are not reconciled to God, who die in
their sins, whose peace is not made with him, nor are they reconciled to
the way of salvation by Christ: and should it be admitted that the
ministry of reconciliation is here designed, which is not an offer of
reconciliation to the world, but a proclamation or declaration of peace
and reconciliation made by the death of Christ; this is not sent to all
men; multitudes were dead before the word of reconciliation was
committed to the apostles; and since, there have been great numbers who
have never so much as heard of it; and even in the times of the apostles
it did not reach to everyone then living: besides, the text does not
speak of what God did by the ministry of his apostles, but of what he
himself had been doing in his Son, and which was antecedent, and gave
rise unto and was the foundation of their ministry. There was a scheme
of reconciliation drawn in the counsels of God before the world began,
and an actual reconciliation by the death of Christ, which is published
in the Gospel, which these words contain the sum and substance of: and
this reconciliation, as before, is said to be "unto himself"; to his
offended justice, and for the glory of his perfections, and the
reconciling of them together in the affair of salvation:

not imputing their trespasses. This was what he resolved upon from all
eternity, that inasmuch as Christ was become the surety and substitute
of his people, he would not impute their sins to them, or look for
satisfaction for them from them; but would reckon and place them to the
account of their surety, and expect satisfaction from him; and
accordingly he did, and accordingly he had it. And this will, not to
impute sin to his people, or not to punish for it, which existed in God
from everlasting, is no other than a justification of them; for to whom
the Lord does not impute sin, he imputes righteousness, and such are
properly justified.

And hath committed unto us the word of reconciliation; or put it in us,
as a rich and valuable treasure; for such the doctrine of peace and
reconciliation, by the blood of Christ, is; a sacred deposition,
committed to the trust of faithful men, to be dispensed and disposed of
for the use and purpose for which it is given them.

[2 Corinthians 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co2 5:20</span></span>

Now then we are ambassadors for Christ,.... Since God has made
reconciliation by Christ, and the ministry of it is committed to us, we
are ambassadors for him; we come with full powers from him, not to
propose terms of peace, to treat with men about it, to offer it to them,
but to publish and proclaim it as made by him: we represent him, and God
who made it by him,

as though God did beseech you by us; to regard this embassy and message
of peace, which we bring from him; to consider from whence it takes its
rise, what methods have been used to effect it, and how it is
accomplished; which should oblige to say and sing with the angels,
"glory to God in the highest, on earth peace, and good will towards
men"; and to behave in peaceable manner to all men, and one another:

we pray you in Christ's stead; representing him as if he was present
before you:

be ye reconciled to God; you, who are new creatures, for whom Christ has
died, and peace is made; you, the members of the church at Corinth, who
upon a profession of faith have been taken into such a relation; be ye
reconciled to all the dispensations of divine Providence towards you;
let your wills bow, and be resigned to his, since he is the God of peace
to you; and as you are reconciled by Christ as a priest, be reconciled
to him as your King, and your God; to all his ordinances and
appointments; to all the orders and laws of his house; conform in all
things to his will and pleasure, which we, as his ambassadors, in his
name and stead, have made known unto you. You ought to be all obedience
to him, and never dispute anything he says or orders.

[2 Corinthians 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co2 5:21</span></span>

For he hath made him to be sin for us,.... Christ was made of a woman,
took flesh of a sinful woman; though the flesh he took of her was not
sinful, being sanctified by the Spirit of God, the former of Christ's
human nature: however, he appeared "in the likeness of sinful flesh";
being attended with infirmities, the effects of sin, though sinless; and
he was traduced by men as a sinner, and treated as such. Moreover, he
was made a sacrifice for sin, in order to make expiation and atonement
for it; so the Hebrew word signifies both sin and a sin offering; see
[Psa 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006) and so [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003). But besides all this, he was made
sin itself by imputation; the sins of all his people were transferred
unto him, laid upon him, and placed to his account; he sustained their
persons, and bore their sins; and having them upon him, and being
chargeable with, and answerable for them, he was treated by the justice
of God as if he had been not only a sinner, but a mass of sin; for to be
made sin, is a stronger expression than to be made a sinner: but now
that this may appear to be only by imputation, and that none may
conclude from hence that he was really and actually a sinner, or in
himself so, it is said he was "made sin"; he did not become sin, or a
sinner, through any sinful act of his own, but through his Father's act
of imputation, to which he agreed; for it was "he" that made him sin: it
is not said that men made him sin; not but that they traduced him as a
sinner, pretended they knew he was one, and arraigned him at Pilate's
bar as such; nor is he said to make himself so, though he readily
engaged to be the surety of his people, and voluntarily took upon him
their sins, and gave himself an offering for them; but he, his Father,
is said to make him sin; it was he that "laid", or "made to meet" on
him, the iniquity of us all; it was he that made his soul an offering
for sin, and delivered him up into the hands of justice, and to death,
and that "for us", in "our" room and stead, to bear the punishment of
sin, and make satisfaction and atonement for it; of which he was
capable, and for which he was greatly qualified: for he

knew no sin; which cannot be understood or pure absolute ignorance of
sin; for this cannot agree with him, neither as God, nor as Mediator; he
full well knew the nature of sin, as it is a transgression of God's law;
he knows the origin of sin, the corrupt heart of man, and the desperate
wickedness of that; he knows the demerit, and the sad consequences of
it; he knows, and he takes notice of too, the sins of his own people;
and he knows the sins of all wicked men, and will bring them all into
judgment, convince of them, and condemn for them: but he knew no sin so
as to approve of it, and like it; he hates, abhors, and detests it; he
never was conscious of any sin to himself; he never knew anything of
this kind by, and in himself; nor did he ever commit any, nor was any
ever found in him, by men or devils, though diligently sought for. This
is mentioned, partly that we may better understand in what sense he was
made sin, or a sinner, which could be only by the imputation of the sins
of others, since he had no sin of his own; and partly to show that he
was a very fit person to bear and take away the sins of men, to become a
sacrifice for them, seeing he was the Lamb of God, without spot and
blemish, typified in this, as in other respects, by the sacrifices of
the legal dispensation; also to make it appear that he died, and was cut
off in a judicial way, not for himself, his own sins, but for the
transgressions of his people; and to express the strictness of divine
justice in not sparing the Son of God himself, though holy and harmless,
when he had the sins of others upon him, and had made himself
responsible for them. The end of his being made sin, though he himself
had none, was,

that we might be made the righteousness of God in him; not the essential
righteousness of God, which can neither be imparted nor imputed; nor any
righteousness of God wrought in us; for it is a righteousness "in him",
in Christ, and not in ourselves, and therefore must mean the
righteousness of Christ; so called, because it is wrought by Christ, who
is God over all, the true God, and eternal life; and because it is
approved of by God the Father, accepted of by him, for, and on the
behalf of his elect, as a justifying one; it is what he bestows on them,
and imputes unto them for their justification; it is a righteousness,
and it is the only one which justifies in the sight of God. Now to be
made the righteousness of God, is to be made righteous in the sight of
God, by the imputation of the righteousness of Christ. Just as Christ is
made sin, or a sinner, by the imputation of the sins of others to him;
so they are made righteousness, or righteous persons, through the
imputation of his righteousness to them; and in no other way can the one
be made sin, or the other righteousness. And this is said to be "in
him", in Christ; which shows, that though Christ's righteousness is unto
all, and upon all them that believe, it is imputed to them, and put upon
them; it is not anything wrought in them; it is not inherent in them.
"Surely in the Lord have I righteousness and strength", says the church,
[Isa 45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024) and also, that the way in
which we come by this righteousness is by being in Christ; none have it
reckoned to them, but who are in him, we are first "of" God "in" Christ,
and then he is made unto us righteousness. Secret being in Christ, or
union to him from everlasting, is the ground and foundation of our
justification, by his righteousness, as open being in Christ at
conversion is the evidence of it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 6](co2006)

</div>
