<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2012)  [Next](gal000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 13:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CORINTHIANS 13

In this chapter the apostle continues his resolution to come to the
Corinthians, and to threaten with severity the incorrigible among them,
giving the reasons of it; prays to God that they might so behave, that
there might be no occasion for the exercise of it; and concludes the
epistle with very useful exhortations, and hearty wishes of good things
to them. He intimates to them again, that he intended this third time to
come unto them, when he would not spare them, as they might expect he
would not; partly because they had such repeated warnings, reproofs, and
admonitions from him, [Co2 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001.md) and
partly because many of them had sinned before, and were stubborn and
obstinate, and had not repented, [Co2
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#002.md) as also because they had tempted
him, and demanded a proof of his power and authority, and of Christ
speaking in him, [Co2 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003.md) and whereas
this sprung from the outward appearance of the apostle, whose bodily
presence was weak, he observes to them the instance of Christ himself in
human nature, who was crucified through weakness, and yet lives by the
power of God; and so he and his fellow ministers were weak like Christ,
and for his sake, and yet lived, and should live by the power of God; so
that their outward appearance was no proof of their want of the power of
Christ in them, [Co2 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004.md) besides, he
directs them to themselves for a proof of it; who upon examination would
find, that they were in the faith, and Christ was in them; which was
owing to the ministry of the apostle, as a means and instrument; and so
they had a proof in themselves of Christ's speaking in the apostle, and
being mighty in, and towards them, or else they must be reprobate,
injudicious, and disapproved persons, [Co2
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#005.md) but whether they were such
persons or not, he was confident that he would not be found such; but
would appear to be in the faith, to have Christ in him, and to have
power and authority from him, [Co2
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#006.md) however, the apostle's hearty
prayer for them was, that they might be kept from evil; and that they
might do that which is good, and so be approved of God and men; and
there be no occasion to use any severity with them, when he should come
among them, [Co2 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#007.md) otherwise he
could do nothing against the truth, could not connive at error and sin,
but must use the power and authority he had to crush everything of that
kind, and defend truth, [Co2 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#008.md) and
so far was he from glorying in his power, and priding himself with it,
that it was a pleasure to him to have no occasion to make use of it, by
which it might seem as if he was without it; and it rejoiced him, when
they stood fast in the faith, and walked as became the Gospel, and so
needed not the rod of reproof and correction; nay, he could even wish,
that they were wholly perfect, and free from all blame, and every kind
of charge, [Co2 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#009.md) and the end he
had in the writing in the manner he did, being absent from them, was,
lest when he should come among them, he should be obliged to make use of
his power he had from Christ for edification, and not destruction; to
prevent which, he wrote and admonished them, in order to bring them to
repentance, that so he might have no occasion to use severity and
sharpness, [Co2 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#010.md) and then he
takes his farewell of them, by giving them some exhortations to harmony,
unity, peace, and love among themselves, [Co2
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011.md) gives the salutations of all the
saints unto them, [Co2 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#013.md) and then
his own, with which he concludes the epistle, which is a wish of all the
blessings of grace from all the three persons, Father, Son, and Spirit,
[Co2 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014.md).

[2 Corinthians 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 13:1</span></span>

This is the third time I am coming to you,.... Or "am ready to come to
you", as the Alexandrian copy reads, as in [Co2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014.md). Though he had been as yet but
once at Corinth, and is to be reckoned and accounted for, either after
this manner; he had been "once" with them when he first preached the
Gospel to them, and was the means of their conversion, and laid, the
foundation of their church state, of which there is some account in [Act
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001.md) he came to them a "second" time,
by writing his first epistle, when he desired to be considered by them,
as though he was present with them, [Co1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#003.md) and now a "third" time by this
second epistle, in which he also speaks as if he was among them, see the
following verse; or else in this way, he had been actually in person
with them one time, and had been about to come in purpose and
preparation a "second" time, but was prevented, and now was just ready a
"third" time to set forward in his journey to them; see [Co2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#014.md) and so the Syriac version reads
it here, "this is the third time that I am ready to come to you", and
which our version also favours. The Alexandrian copy and some others,
the Complutension edition, the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions,
read, "behold, this third time", &c. in order to raise and fix their
attention to what he was saying, or about to say:

in the mouth of two or three witnesses shall every word be established;
referring to [Deu 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015.md) which he
applies much in the same manner Christ does in [Mat
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016.md) and which it is probable he had
in view; signifying hereby, that he proceeded in a judicial way,
according to due form of law, and in such a manner as Christ had
directed; and that they were to look upon his several comings in the
sense now explained, to be as so many witnesses, whereby the several
charges exhibited against them were fully attested and confirmed, so
that things were now ripe for judgment, and for a final sentence to pass
upon them.

[2 Corinthians 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 13:2</span></span>

I told you before, and foretell you as if I were present a second
time,.... He means, that he had in his former epistle faithfully told
them of their evils, and admonished them for them; and now he sends to
them a second time before his coming, and again admonishes them, as if
he was upon the spot with them; so that they had, as before, three
witnesses, also a first and second admonition; which, should they be
without success, he must proceed further:

and being absent now, I write to them which heretofore have sinned;
before he wrote his first epistle, of which he had information, and had
faithfully reproved and admonished them; see [Co2
12:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#021.md).

And to all other; that might since be drawn into a compliance with
sinful practices, through their example; or as the Arabic version
renders it, "to the rest of the congregation"; who would be witnesses
for him, and against them, that he had admonished them a first, and a
second time: and by his present writing declares,

that if I come again; for, not knowing what might fall out to prevent
him, though he was bent upon coming, and ready for it, nor what was the
will of God about it, he does not choose to be positive in the matter;
and therefore writes conditionally, and with a guard, and no doubt with
a submission to the divine will:

I will not spare; this was the reason why as yet he had not been at
Corinth, because he was willing to spare them; see [Co2
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#023.md) being loath to come to
severities, if gentler methods would take effect; but now having used
all proper means, he is at a point, aud determined not to spare, but to
use his apostolical rod, or that power which the Lord had given him in
an extraordinary way, as an extraordinary officer, to punish
incorrigible offenders, in such manner as the incestuous person, and
Hymenaeus and Philetus had been used by him.

[2 Corinthians 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 13:3</span></span>

Since ye seek a proof of Christ speaking in me,.... This is the reason
why he was determined, that should he come among them, he would not
spare them, because they called in question his apostleship, and
demanded a proof of it; which, of all men, they had the least reason to
do; for they themselves were the seals of his apostleship, and the signs
of an apostle had been done among them; they queried whether he was an
ambassador of Christ, and was sent by him, and in his name; whether the
message he came with was from him, and whether the Gospel he preached
was his voice; and particularly whether he had such a power to punish
delinquents, as he threatened them with the exercise of; a strange
infatuation of the false apostles this, since Christ, who sent him, was
with him, and spoke in him, and by him:

which to you-ward, says he,

is not weak, but is mighty in you; the Gospel of Christ, at the first
preaching of it to them by him, was the power of God unto salvation to
them; and was attended with divers signs and wonders, and gifts of the
Holy Ghost; and besides, they had instances of the power of Christ
towards them in an awful way, in punishing sinners; as in the delivery
of the incestuous person to Satan, which was done by his Spirit being
with them when assembled; and by smiting many of them with sickness,
diseases, and infirmities, and with death itself, who had sinned, [Co1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#004.md). Wherefore, seeing after all these
instances of the voice and power of Christ in him, they yet questioned
his apostolical authority, and sought proof of it; and especially since
this was not so much a tempting of him, as a tempting of Christ in him,
he was resolved not to spare them.

[2 Corinthians 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 13:4</span></span>

For though he was crucified through weakness,.... Of the human nature;
for the nature which Christ assumed was in all things like to ours,
excepting sin; it was subject to all sinless infirmities; it was mortal,
passible, liable to sufferings, and death, and so he came to be
crucified; though not against his will, or without his previous assent;
as God, he was able to have prevented his crucifixion if he would; he
gave an instance of his power over men, at the time of his apprehension,
by striking them down to the ground; and told Pilate his judge at his
trial, that he could have no power to crucify him, if it was not given
him from above; and he showed his superiority over devils when upon the
cross, by spoiling principalities and powers; so that his crucifixion
was not owing to want of power as God, but he became capable of it
through his weakness as man:

but yet he lives by the power of God; he was raised from the dead by a
divine power; by his own power as God, as well as by his Father's, and
so was declared to be the Son of God with power; and he lives at the
right hand of God as man and Mediator, vested with all power in heaven
and in earth; though, in the days of his flesh, he appeared so weak,
mean, and despicable: now the apostle mentions this case of our Lord's,
to deter the Corinthians from despising him, on account of his outward
weakness and meanness; and from hence buoying themselves up, and in
which they were encouraged by the false apostles, that he had not, and
could not exercise the power he talked of; they had observed what mean
figure he made when he was among them; and whatever weight there might
be in his letters, yet his bodily presence was weak, and his speech
contemptible; wherefore he sets before them the instance of Christ, who
though he appeared very weak in his state of humiliation, yet he now
lives in power, to assist and strengthen his ministers, in every branch
of their work; and suggests, that as it was with Christ, it was, and
would be in some measure with him, and his fellow ministers:

for we also are weak in him: like him, and for his sake, they were
subject to infirmities, reproaches, persecutions, and distresses;
carried about daily the dying of the Lord Jesus; bore a very great
resemblance to him in his state of humiliation; were very much as he was
in this world, and bore much for his name's sake; the Alexandrian copy
and the Syriac version read, "with him"; being crucified with him, and
dead with him:

but we shall live with him by the power of God towards you; which is not
to be understood of being raised by Christ to an immortal life, and of
living with him in glory; though this is a certain truth, that such who
suffer with Christ, shall live and reign, and be glorified together with
him; but of the life, power, and efficacy of the ministers of Christ,
and of Christ in and with them, displayed in the lively ministration of
the word and ordinances, in the vigorous discharge of all the branches
of their office; not only in preaching, but in rebuking, admonishing,
laying on of censures, and punishing criminals; and especially regards
the powerful exertion and use of the apostolic rod; for this life is not
only with Christ, or through Christ being in them, notwithstanding all
their outward weakness, and by the power of God, which supports them
under all, and enables them to perform their work, but is "towards you";
the Corinthians, to be exercised towards them, to be seen among them,
and felt by them.

[2 Corinthians 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 13:5</span></span>

Examine yourselves whether ye be in the faith,.... These words are to be
considered in connection with [Co2
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#003.md) for seeing they sought and
demanded a proof the voice and power of Christ in the apostle, he
directs them to self examination, to look within themselves, to try,
prove, and recognise their own souls; where if things were right, they
would find a proof of Christ's speaking in him, to them: he advises them
to examine the state of their own souls, and see whether they were in
the faith; either in the doctrine of faith, having a spiritual and
experimental knowledge of it, true love and affection for it, an hearty
belief of it, having felt the power of it upon their souls, and abode in
it; whether, as the Syriac version reads it, , "ye stand in the faith",
firm and stable; or in the grace of faith, either of miracles, or that
which is connected with salvation; and which if they were in it, and had
it, is attended with good works; operates by love to Christ and to his
people; by which souls go out of themselves to Christ, live upon him,
receive from him, and give him all the glory of salvation: and if this
was their case, he desires to know how they came by their faith; and
suggests, that their light in the doctrine of the Gospel, and their
faith in Christ Jesus, as well as the miraculous gifts many of them were
possessed of, were through his ministry as the means; and this was a
full proof of Christ's speaking in him:

prove your own selves. Know ye not your own selves, how that Jesus
Christ is in you; by which he means, that if they took a survey of
things in their own souls, it would appear that Christ was in them; not
as he is in all the world, filling heaven and earth with his presence;
or as he is in every rational creature, as the Creator and author of the
light of nature; but in a special and spiritual manner, by his Spirit
and grace; the Father reveals him in his people, as the foundation of
their hope of glory; he himself enters and takes possession of their
hearts in conversion, communicates his grace, and manifests himself, and
is formed there by his Spirit; his graces are implanted, his image is
stamped, his Spirit is put within them, and he himself dwells by faith:
and this upon inquiry would be found to be the case of the Corinthians,

except, says the apostle,

ye are reprobates; meaning not that they were so, as such may stand
opposed to the elect of God; for persons may as yet neither be in the
faith, nor Christ in them, and yet both be hereafter, and so not be left
of God, or consigned to destruction; but that if they were not in the
doctrine of, faith, then they were reprobate concerning it, or void of
judgment in it; and if they had not the grace of faith, and Christ was
not in them, then they were not genuine, but nominal professors, like
"reprobate silver", counterfeit coin; which when detected, would be
"disapproved", not only by God, but man, as this word also signifies,
and so stands opposed to them that are "approved", [Co2
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#007.md) or if they did not make such an
examination, probation, and recognition of themselves, they would be
without probation: or as the Arabic version, without experiment. The
apostle hereby brings them into this dilemma, either that if upon
examination they were found to be in the faith, and Christ in them,
which blessings they enjoyed through his ministry, then they did not
want a proof of Christ speaking in him; but if these things did not
appear in them, then they were persons of no judgment in spiritual
things, were not real Christians, but insignificant and useless persons.

[2 Corinthians 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 13:6</span></span>

But I trust that ye shall know,.... Whether they were reprobates or not,
the apostle would not pretend to say; that he left to themselves, and of
which they were capable of making judgment for themselves: however, he
hoped and believed, that he and his fellow apostles would give such
proof of themselves, as that they should know certainly

that we, says he,

are not reprobates; men void of judgment in the doctrines of the Gospel,
but have light, knowledge, and understanding in them; or useless and
unprofitable in the ministry, but were the savour of life unto life to
many; were ministers by whom others believed; were successful labourers
in the Lord's vineyard, and builders in his house; and were made very
useful for the conversion, comfort, and edification of many souls: or
that they were not men disapproved either by God, or his people; since
as they faithfully served Christ in the ministration of the Gospel, they
were acceptable to God, and approved of men: or were not men without a
proof of Christ speaking in them; they might assure themselves they
would have too soon, for some of them, an evidence of that power and
authority which Christ had lodged in them, to punish such as repented
not of their evils.

[2 Corinthians 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 13:7</span></span>

Now l pray to God,.... A strong mark of the apostle's affection for
them. For though they used him so ill, he took every way and method to
do them good; he not only wrote to them, sent the brethren to them, but
put up his supplications at the throne of grace for them: The
Alexandrian copy, the Vulgate Latin, and Ethiopic versions, read, "we
pray", &c. And one of his petitions for them was,

that ye do no evil; which, though impracticable and impossible,
considering the situation of the people of God in this world, yet is
desirable by every good man, both for himself and others; and was
desired by the apostle, partly that their consciences might not be
wounded, their souls grieved, their peace broke in upon, and their
comforts lost; and partly that the name of God, and his cause and
truths, might not be blasphemed; and chiefly that he might have no
opportunity of exercising his apostolical rod for their correction:

not that we should appear approved. This was a clear case that he sought
their good, and not his own credit, and the exercise of power; if they
committed evil, his faithfulness would be seen in reproving, rebuking,
and exhorting them; and if they continued impenitent, his apostolical
authority would be manifest in their punishment, so that he would appear
approved, or with a proof of the power of Christ in him; but this he did
not desire, but most earnestly wished there might be no occasion for any
such evidence:

but that they should do that which is honest; or "good", both in the
sight of God and men, that which is according to the will of God,
springs from love, is done in faith, and with a view to the glory of
God; and the apostle's praying, both that they might be kept from evil,
and do that which is good, shows the impotence of man's free will, the
necessity of the grace of God to abstain from sin, and perform good
works; and this the apostle earnestly desired,

though, says be,

we be as reprobates; weak and infirm persons, incapable of giving any
proof of the power of Christ, and appear as such, who have no marks of
apostolical authority. The apostle chose rather to be looked upon as a
poor, mean, and insignificant person, than that they should sin, and
require the exercise of his chastising rod, whereby he would be seen to
be what they called in question.

[2 Corinthians 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 13:8</span></span>

For we can do nothing against the truth,.... The apostles had no power,
nor could they, nor did they desire to exercise any against such who
received the truth of the Gospel in the love of it; who continued in it,
walked in it, and held it fast; who worshipped God in Spirit and in
truth, and who walked uprightly, and as became the truth; for as the law
is not made for such persons, but the reverse, so the authority the
apostles had received from Christ was not to be exercised upon such:

but for the truth: for the sake of defending the truth against those
that dropped, denied, and opposed it; and for the honour of it, by
chastising, correcting, reproving, censuring, and punishing such, who
either contradicted it, or caused it to be blasphemed and spoken evil
of.

[2 Corinthians 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 13:9</span></span>

For we are glad when we are weak,.... Appear to be so, look like persons
disarmed of all power and authority; the apostles rejoiced when they had
no occasion of exerting themselves, and of exercising that high office,
and extraordinary commission they had received of Christ Jesus:

and ye are strong; stand fast in the doctrine of faith, and are lively
and active in the exercise of the grace of faith; are strong in Christ,
and in his grace, and in the power of his might, to withstand every
temptation of Satan, every corruption of their own hearts, and to
perform every duty aright.

And this also we wish, even your perfection; or restoration, or jointing
in again; a metaphor taken from the setting of bones that are dislocated
and out of joint; for the church at Corinth was like a disjointed body,
and the apostle's wish was, that their animosities might cease, their
divisions be healed, their disorders rectified, and each member be in
its proper place, behaving as became the Gospel of Christ; see [Co1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010.md).

[2 Corinthians 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 13:10</span></span>

Therefore I write these things being absent,.... Assuring them of his
power and authority, expressing his concern for their welfare, earnestly
desiring that they might be kept from evil, and perform good works; and
that they might be in a more honourable, orderly, and comfortable
situation, whilst he was absent from them, and before he came among
them:

lest, being present, I should use sharpness; meaning severe reproofs and
censures, or rather the exercise of the apostolic rod:

according to the power the Lord haft given me, to edification, and not
to destruction; by striking persons dead, as Ananias and Sapphira were
by Peter; or by delivering them up to Satan to have corporeal punishment
inflicted on them, as were Hymenaeus and Philetus, and the incestuous
person by the Apostle Paul; which, though it was for the destruction of
the flesh, yet for the salvation of their souls, and for the good, use,
and edification of the rest of the society, that they might take warning
thereby, and shun the evils which were the occasion of such severity.

[2 Corinthians 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 13:11</span></span>

Finally, brethren, farewell,.... Or "rejoice", with spiritual joy in
Christ, their Saviour and Redeemer; in his person, in whom they were
accepted; in his righteousness, by which they were justified; in his
blood, by which they were washed and cleansed; and in his fulness, from
which they were supplied; and particularly, that they had such a
faithful monitor, such an hearty well wisher of their souls' welfare,
and who was so naturally and affectionately concerned for their good:

be perfect; seek after perfection in knowledge, grace, and holiness, and
in the performance of good works: or "be restored"; or jointed and knit
together, as before; see [Co2 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#009.md) let
every difference subside, all breaches be made up, every member take and
fill up his place, and all things be done decently and in order:

be of good comfort; or "exhort" one another to the diligent discharge of
duty, to love and good works; or comfort one another in all distresses,
inward and outward, both by words and deeds, according to the ability
God has given; or take comfort, be of good heart, do not refuse to be
comforted either by God or men.

Be of one mind; in religious sentiments, in the doctrines and principles
of grace, and ordinances of the Gospel; for as there is but "one Lord"
to be believed in, so there is, and ought to be, but "one" system of
"faith" to be received, and "one baptism" to be administered in one and
the same way, to one and the same sort of persons; which sameness of
judgment, in faith and worship, is very necessary to church communion,
and the comfort of it; for how can two, and much less more, walk
comfortably together, unless they are agreed in these things?

Live in peace both with them that are without, and them that are within,
with all men, and with the members of the church; which to do, is to the
credit of religion, the comfort of church members, and the joy of
Christ's ministers:

and the God of love and peace shall be with you; he who is love itself,
and has loved his people with an everlasting love, and who is the author
and donor of spiritual and eternal peace, and who has called his people
to peace, and expects and requires it among themselves, and all men,
will grant to such his gracious presence; than which nothing can be more
grateful and desirable.

[2 Corinthians 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 13:12</span></span>

Greet one another with an holy kiss. See Gill on [Rom
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016.md).

[2 Corinthians 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 13:13</span></span>

All the saints salute you. Being all interested in the same divine
favour, redeemed by the same blood, and sanctified by the same grace,
they have a common concern for each other's welfare; See Gill on [Rom
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#016.md).

[2 Corinthians 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 13:14</span></span>

The grace of the Lord Jesus Christ.... Meaning either the love of
Christ; see [Co2 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009.md) which is the same
with that of his Father's, is as early, and of the same nature, being a
love of complacency and delight; and which, as it is without beginning,
will be without end. This is the ground and foundation of all he has
done and underwent for his people; of his becoming their surety; of his
incarnation, obedience, sufferings, and death in their room and stead;
an interest in which, though they always have, yet they have not always
an abiding sense of it with them, which is what the apostle here prays
for: or else by the grace of Christ is meant the fulness of grace that
is in him as Mediator; which is desired to be with the saints as the
object of their trust and dependence; to be strong in, draw living water
with joy out of, receive and derive daily from; not forsake it, and hew
out broken cisterns, but continually apply to, and make use of it, as
the fountain of gardens, the well of living waters, and streams from
Lebanon; to be with them as a supply to their wants, to furnish them
with every thing they stand in need of, and to enable them to do his
will and work: or else the redeeming grace of Christ is particularly
designed, and the intent of the petition is, that they might see their
interest in it, and in all the branches of it; as that they were
redeemed by his blood from sin, law, and wrath, had all their sins
expiated and forgiven through his sacrifice, and were justified from all
things by his righteousness.

And the love of God; the Father, as the Arabic version adds very justly,
as to the sense, though it is not in the text; meaning the love of God
to his people, which is eternal, from everlasting to everlasting, free
and undeserved, special and peculiar, is dispensed in a sovereign way,
is unchangeable, abides for ever, is the source and spring of all the
blessings both of grace and glory. Now when this is entreated to be with
all the saints, it does not suppose that it is ever from them, or that
it can be taken away from them, but whereas they may be without a
comfortable sense of it, and a view of interest in it, the apostle
prays, that in this respect it might be with them; that they might be
directed into it, have it shed abroad in their hearts, and they be
rooted and grounded in it, and comprehend for themselves the height, and
depth, and length, and breadth of it.

And the communion of the Holy Ghost; either a larger communication of
the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God, called "the supply of the
Spirit", [Phi 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#019.md) necessary to carry
on the good work of grace, and perform it to the end; or else that
communion and fellowship which the Spirit of God leads the saints into
with the Father, by shedding abroad his love in their hearts, and with
the Son, by taking of the things of Christ, and showing them to them;
and also that nearness which the spirits of believers have with the
Spirit of God, when he witnesses to their spirits that they are the
children of God, becomes the earnest of the inheritance in their hearts,
and seals them up unto the day of redemption: all which is requested by
the apostle, to

be, says he,

with you all; or "with your company", or "congregations", as the Arabic
version reads it, with all the saints; for their interest in the love of
the Father, in the grace of the Son, and in the favour of the Spirit, is
the same, whatever different sense and apprehensions they may have
thereof. This passage contains no inconsiderable proof of a trinity of
persons in the Godhead, to whom distinct things are here ascribed, and
of them asked, equal objects of prayer and worship. "Amen" is by way of
assent and confirmation, and as expressive of faith in the petitions,
and of earnest desire to have them fulfilled. According to the
subscription at the end of this epistle, it was written by the apostle
when he was at Philippi, a city of Macedonia, and transcribed by Titus
and Lucas, and by them sent or carried to the Corinthians; which seems
to be agreeable to what is suggested in the epistle itself, though these
subscriptions are not to he depended upon. The Syriac version only
mentions Luke; and some copies read, by Titus, Barnabas, and Luke.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Galatians Introduction](gal000.md)

</div>
