<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2.md)  
  [Previous](co2007)  [Next](co2009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001.md)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CORINTHIANS 8

In this chapter the apostle stirs up the Corinthians, to make a
collection for the poor saints at Jerusalem, by a variety of arguments,
and gives a commendation of Titus and some other brethren, who were
appointed messengers to them on that account. He first sets before them
the example of the Macedonian churches, who had made a liberal
collection for the above persons; which the apostle calls the grace of
God, and says it was bestowed on them; and it was not the generosity of
one church only, but of many, and so worthy of imitation, [Co2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001.md) which generosity of theirs he
illustrates by the circumstances and condition they were in, they were
not only in great affliction, but in deep poverty; and yet contributed
with abundance of joy, and in great liberality, [Co2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002.md) yea, this they did not only to the
utmost of their power, and according to the best of their abilities; but
their will was beyond their power, they had hearts to do more than they
were able; and what they did, they did of themselves without being asked
and urged to it, [Co2 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#003.md) nay, they
even entreated the apostle and his fellow ministers to take the money
they had collected, and either send or carry it to the poor saints at
Jerusalem, and minister it to them themselves, [Co2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#004.md) and which was beyond the
expectation of the apostle, who knew their case; and yet it was but
acting like themselves, who at first gave themselves to the Lord and to
the apostles by the will of God, [Co2
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#005.md) and this forwardness and readiness
of the Macedonian churches, or the churches themselves put the apostle
upon desiring Titus to go to Corinth, and finish the collection he had
begun; and which carries in it more arguments than one to excite them to
this service; as that this was not only at the request of the apostle,
but of the Macedonian churches, that Titus should be desired to go on
this business; and besides the thing had been begun, and it would be
scandalous not to finish it, [Co2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006.md)
and next the apostle argues from their abounding in the exercise of
other graces, which he enumerates, that they would also in this, [Co2
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#007.md) for to excel in one grace, and not
in another, was not to their praise and honour; however, he did not urge
them to this in an imperious way, and to show and exercise his
authority; but was moved unto it through the generous example of others,
and that there might be a proof of their sincere love and affection to
the Lord, and to his people, [Co2 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#008.md)
but as what he wisely judged would have the greatest weight with them;
he proposes to them the example of Christ, and instances in his great
love to them; who though was rich became poor for them, that they might
be enriched through his poverty, [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009.md) and therefore should freely
contribute to his poor saints. Moreover, inasmuch as the apostle did not
take upon him to command, only give advice, he should be regarded; and
that the rather because what he advised to was expedient for them, would
be for their good, and be profitable to them; as well as prevent
reproach and scandal, which would follow should they not finish what
they had begun so long ago, [Co2 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#010.md)
wherefore he exhorts them cheerfully to perform what they had shown a
readiness to; and points out unto them the rule and measure of it, that
it should be out of their own, what they were possessed of, and
according to their ability; which be it more or less would be acceptable
to God, [Co2 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#011.md) for his meaning was
not that some should be eased and others burdened; but that all should
communicate according to what they had, [Co2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#013.md) to which he stimulates them from
the hope of the recompence of reward, whenever it should be otherwise
with them than it was, and things should change both with them who
communicated, and with them to whom they communicated; or this was the
end proposed by the apostle, that in the issue there might be an
equality between them, [Co2 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#014.md) which
he confirms and illustrates by the distribution of the manna to the
Israelites, who had an equal measure, [Co2
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#015.md) as appears from what is said,
[Exo 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018.md) next the apostle enters
upon a commendation of the messengers, that were appointed and ordered
to be sent to them upon this errand, and begins with Titus; and gives
thanks to God, that had put it into his heart to be so solicitous about
this matter, [Co2 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016.md) and praises him
for his forwardness in undertaking it of his own accord, and in
performing it without being urged to it, [Co2
8:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#017.md) and next he commends another
person, whose name is not mentioned, who was sent along with him; a
person of note and fame in all the churches, [Co2
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018.md) and who had the honour to be
chosen by the churches for this service, [Co2
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#019.md) and the reason why more persons
than one were sent, was to prevent any suspicion of converting the
collections to wrong purposes; and to preserve and secure a good
character, a character of honesty before God and men, [Co2
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#020.md). To these two a third was added,
whose name also is not mentioned, and who had been proved to be a
diligent man, and appeared more so in this matter upon the apostle's
confidence in the Corinthians, that they would readily attend to the
service these were sent to promote, [Co2
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#022.md) and thus having separately given
the characters of these men, they are all of them commended again;
Titus, as the apostle's partner and fellow helper; and the other
brethren as the messengers of the churches, and the glory of Christ,
[Co2 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023.md) and the chapter is concluded
with an exhortation to the members of the church at Corinth, to give
these messengers a proof of their love to the poor saints before all the
churches, and make it appear that he had not boasted of them in vain,
[Co2 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#024.md).

[2 Corinthians 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 8:1</span></span>

Moreover, brethren, we do you to wit of the grace of God,.... The
apostle having said everything that was proper to conciliate the minds
and affections of the Corinthians to him, and the matter in difference
being adjusted to the satisfaction of all parties concerned; he proposes
what he had wisely postponed till all was over, the making a collection
for the poor saints at Jerusalem; which he enforces by the example of
the Macedonian churches, the churches at Philippi, Thessalonica, &c. He
addresses them in a kind and tender manner, under the endearing
appellation of "brethren", being so in a spiritual relation; and takes
the liberty to inform them of the goodness of God to some of their
sister churches; "we do you to wit", or "we make known unto you". The
phrase "to wit" is an old English one, and almost obsolete, and
signifies to acquaint with, inform of, make known, or give knowledge of
anything. The thing informed of here, "is the grace of God bestowed on
the churches of Macedonia"; by which is meant, not any of the blessings
of grace common to all the saints, such as regeneration, justification,
adoption, forgiveness of sin, and the like; but beneficence, liberality,
or a liberal disposition to do good to others, called "the grace of
God"; because it sprung from thence, as all good works do when performed
aright; they were assisted in it by the grace of God; and it was the
love and favour of God in Christ, which was the engaging motive, the
leading view, which drew them on to it. This was

bestowed upon them, not merited, it was grace and free grace; God may
give persons ever so much of this world's goods, yet if he does not give
them a spirit of generosity, a liberal disposition, they will make no
use of it for the good of others: and this was bestowed

on the churches of Macedonia; not on a few leading men among them, but
upon all the members of these churches in general; and not upon one
church, but upon many; a spirit of liberality was in general diffused
among them, and this is proposed for imitation. Examples have great
influence, and the examples of many the greater; too many follow a
multitude to do evil; here the example of many, even of many churches,
is proposed in order to be followed to do good, to exercise acts of
beneficence and goodness, in a free generous way to saints in distress;
which as it is here called, "the grace of God", so in some following
verses, "the gift, the same grace, and this grace", [Co2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#004.md) agreeably to the Hebrew word which
signifies "grace" and "free bounty"; and is used for doing good, or for
beneficence, which the Jews call "a performance of kind and bountiful
actions": which are done freely, and for which a person expects no
return from the person to whom he does them: and this they distinguish
from "alms", after this manner (t);

"an alms (they say) is exercised towards the living, beneficence towards
the living and the dead; alms is used to the poor, beneficence both to
the rich and poor; alms is performed by a man's substance, beneficence
both by body and substance.''

\(t\) T. Hieros. Peah, fol. 15. 3.

[2 Corinthians 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 8:2</span></span>

How that in a great trial of affliction,.... The apostle proceeds to
show the condition these churches were in when, and the manner in which,
they contributed to the relief of others. They were in affliction: they
received the Gospel at first in much affliction, as did the church at
Thessalonica, which was one of them; and afterwards suffered much from
their countrymen for the profession of it, by reproaches, persecutions,
imprisonments, confiscation of goods, &c. They were under trying
afflictions, which tried their faith and patience, and in many of them.
Now for persons in prosperity, when all things go well with them, to be
liberal is no such great matter; but for persons in adversity, under
trying dispensations of Providence, amidst many afflictive ones to
communicate generously to the relief of others, is something very
remarkable, and worthy of notice and imitation, which was the case of
these churches: for notwithstanding this,

the abundance of their joy, and their deep poverty, abounded unto the
riches of their liberality; so that it appears likewise that they were
not only in great afflictions, but in deep poverty; had but an handful
of meal in the barrel, and a little oil in the cruse, their purses
almost empty, and their coffers almost exhausted; they had gotten to the
bottom of their substance, had but very little left; and yet freely
gave, with joy, even with an abundance of it. The allusion seems to be
to the words of David, in [Ch1 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#014.md)
now behold, which the Septuagint render by , "according to my poverty, I
have prepared for the house of the Lord an hundred thousand talents of
gold", &c. for by "the abundance of their joy", is not so much meant the
joy they felt in the midst of their afflictions, so that they could
glory in them, and rejoice in hope of the glory of God, as the
cheerfulness of their spirits in contributing to the necessities of
others; glad at heart they were that they had hearts to do good, and an
opportunity of doing it; which they gladly laid hold on, observing the
divine rule, "he that sheweth mercy", let him do it "with cheerfulness":
and this they did, considering the small pittance they were possessed
of, very largely; for though their poverty was deep, and their purses
low, their hearts were large and full, and their hands ready to
communicate; so that their poverty "abounded to the riches of their
liberality": though their poverty was great, their liberality was rich
and large; though it might be but little they gave in quantity, it was
much in quality, much in liberality; like the poor widow, who, of her
want and penury, cast in more than all the rich besides, not in
quantity, but in liberality; they only giving some, and a
disproportionate part, she her all.

[2 Corinthians 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 8:3</span></span>

For to their power, I bear record,.... They gave according to their
ability, to the utmost of it, which is the most that can be desired, or
be given; for no man can give more than he has, nor is he required to do
more than he is able:

yea, and beyond their power they were willing of themselves; not that
they did or could do beyond their power; but they were "willing" beyond
their power; their hearts were larger than their purses; they would
gladly have done more than they had ability to do; and to this the
apostle bears testimony to give it credit, which otherwise might have
been called in question: and it is to be observed, that these churches
communicated in this cheerful manner and large way, considering their
circumstances, to the utmost of their ability, "of themselves"; unasked,
not having been put upon, pressed, and urged to such a service; for
persons to give when they are asked, especially when they do it readily,
at once, without demurring upon it, and with cheerfulness, is much; but
to give unasked discovers a very generous and beneficent disposition:
this is reckoned by the Jews as one of the excellencies in giving of
alms (u),

"when a man gives into the hands of another , "before he asks"; and the
next degree to this is, when he gives to him after he asks; and the next
to this, who gives less than is proper, but with a cheerful
countenance.''

\(u\) Maimon. Hileh. Mattanot Anayim, c. 10. sect. 11, 12, 13.

[2 Corinthians 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 8:4</span></span>

Praying us with much entreaty,.... They not only gave freely, being
unasked by the apostles; but they sought to them, and earnestly
entreated them,

that they would receive the gift; the beneficence, what they had so
freely and generously collected: and

the fellowship of the ministering to the saints; what they had
communicated for the service of the poor saints at Jerusalem, in which
they testified their having and holding fellowship with the churches of
Christ; and that they would receive it at their hands, and take it upon
them, and carry it to Jerusalem, and distribute to the poor saints
there, as should seem to them most proper and convenient; which they
accordingly agreed to; see [Rom 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#025.md).

[2 Corinthians 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 8:5</span></span>

And this they did not as we hoped,.... All this was unexpected by the
apostles, who knew their great affliction and deep poverty, and
therefore could not have hoped for such a collection from them; or that
they would have desired the apostle to have ministered it for them:

but first gave their own selves to the Lord, and unto us by the will of
God; the sense of which is not barely, or only, that they committed
themselves to the care of Providence in all their afflictions and
poverty, trusting in God that he would provide for them for time to
come, and therefore even in their strait circumstances gave liberally;
and were so much under the direction of the apostles, God so disposing
their minds, that they were willing to do or give anything that they
should say was proper; yea, were very willing that some of their number
should leave their habitations and families to accompany them, in
forwarding this good work elsewhere: but the apostle seems to have
respect to what these persons did at first conversion, when they gave
themselves to Christ, to be saved by him, and him alone; and to serve
him to the uttermost, in everything, he should signify to be his will;
and when they joined themselves to the churches of Christ, and put
themselves under the care, government, and direction of the apostles,
who were over the churches in the Lord: and therefore though what the
members of these churches collected, was very wonderful and beyond
expectation; yet when it is considered that these persons had long ago
given their whole selves, their all to Christ, had committed all into
his hands, and devoted themselves entirely to his service; and had
declared their subjection to his ministers as servants under him, and to
his word and ordinances as ministered by them; it need not be so much
wondered at, that they should be so liberal in giving away their worldly
substance for the relief of Christ's poor members, when they had given
their precious souls, their immortal all, and had committed the
salvation of them entirely to him. Giving themselves to Christ, in this
sense, supposes that they had a true sight and apprehension of their
state and condition by nature, how sinful they were, and lost and undone
in themselves; that they were destitute of a righteousness, and unable
to obtain one by the works of the law; that they were in hopeless and
helpless circumstances, as considered in themselves; that they were
diseased from head to foot, and could not cure themselves; that they
were dead in law, and liable to the curse and condemnation of it; for
till men see themselves in such a case they will never give themselves
to Christ, or betake themselves to him to be saved by him. Moreover,
this supposes some knowledge of him as God's ordinance for salvation, as
the Saviour of the Father's appointing and sending; of him, as having
effected it by his obedience and death; of his being the only Saviour, a
suitable one, both able and willing to save to the uttermost, even the
chief of sinners that come to God by him. It is expressive of faith in
Christ; of seeing the Son and the fulness of grace and salvation in him,
and of going to him for it; of staying, resting, leaning, and relying
upon him, venturing on him, committing all into his hands, and trusting
him with all and for all. It denotes subjection to him, as their
husband, to whom they give themselves as his spouse and bride, and
consent to be the Lord's in a conjugal relation; and submission to him
in all his offices, as a prophet to be taught and instructed by him, as
a priest to be washed in his blood, and justified by his righteousness,
to which they heartily submit, and as their Lord and King to the sceptre
of his kingdom, the laws of his house, and ordinances of his Gospel; for
they are made a willing people, not only to be saved by him, but to
serve him in body and soul, and with all they have; as it is but right
they should, since he has given himself, his all, for them. Giving
themselves up to the apostles, signifies not a surrender of themselves
to them as lords over God's heritage, to be governed and ruled over in a
tyrannical and arbitrary way; but a submitting of themselves to them, as
Christ's servants set over them in the Lord, whilst they minister the
word and administer the ordinances, according to the will of Christ;
owning them as their fathers, or instructors, and guides, and as
watchmen and overseers placed in and over the churches, for their
spiritual welfare: all which is,

by the will of God: as that poor sensible sinners should give up
themselves to Christ, to be saved by him, and serve him; and that they
should join themselves to the churches, and be subject to the care,
teachings, and government of his servants in his house.

[2 Corinthians 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 8:6</span></span>

Insomuch that we desired Titus,.... Observing the very great readiness,
cheerfulness, and liberality of the poor Macedonians in this matter, the
apostles could do no other than desire Titus to forward, hasten, and
accomplish a like liberal contribution among the Corinthians; or the
sense is, that the Macedonians not only prayed with much entreaty, as in
[Co2 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#004.md) that the apostle would be
pleased to take their collection, and send or carry it to Jerusalem; but
also that they would entreat Titus,

that as he had begun, so he would also finish in you the same grace
also; that is, that as he had already moved this affair to the
Corinthians while he was with them, and had made some progress in it,
though what, through one thing or another, it had been retarded, and lay
in some measure neglected; that he might be desired to go again, on
purpose to complete so good a work, so acceptable to God, and so useful
to the poor saints; which carries in it a new and strong argument to
stir up the Corinthians to this service; since they had not only the
example of the Macedonian churches, but it was even at their request
that Titus was desired to go upon this errand; and to this sense read
the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions.

[2 Corinthians 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 8:7</span></span>

Therefore as ye abound in everything,.... In all gifts and every grace,
in the use and exercise of them, insomuch that they were enriched in
everything, and wanted nothing; see [Co1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#005.md), that is here expressed in
general, is explained by particulars following:

in faith: both in the doctrine of faith, which they had received and
professed, held fast to, and abode by; yea, they abounded in the
knowledge of it, zeal for it, and thankfulness to God on account of it;
and in the grace of faith, not an historical one, nor the faith of
miracles, but that which is peculiar to God's elect, is the gift of his
grace and the work of his Spirit, which has Christ for its object, and
works by love; in this they abounded, inasmuch as they had a large
measure of it, grew in it, were full of it, and were much in the
exercise thereof:

in utterance, or "speech": meaning either the gift of speaking with
tongues, which many in this church had; or the gift; of understanding
and explaining the word of God with much freedom; or a liberty of mind
and speech to declare their faith in Christ, and make an ingenuous
confession of it to others:

in knowledge; of God and of Christ, and of the truths of the Gospel:

and in all diligence: their ministers were diligent in preaching the
Gospel, the people in hearing the word, and attending on ordinances, and
both studiously careful to keep up the discipline of the church; and
very industrious to discharge the several duties of religion, and to
assist one another, both in things temporal and spiritual:

and in your love to us: the apostles and ministers of the word, whom
they loved, esteemed, and honoured for their works' sake: and since they
were so eminent for these graces, and the exercise of them, the apostle
exhorts them to liberality to the poor saints;

see that ye abound in this grace also; for as faith, utterance,
knowledge, diligence, and love to Christ's ministers are graces; so also
is kindness shown to Christ's poor members, it is a gift of God's grace,
cannot be rightly exercised without the assistance of his grace, has for
its objects men who have received the grace of God, and will be rewarded
with a reward of grace; persons eminent for the several graces of the
Spirit of God, and the exercise of them, it may be not only desired, but
expected from them, that they should abound in the exercise of
beneficence to the poor. This is another argument exciting to that good
work.

[2 Corinthians 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 8:8</span></span>

I speak not by commandment,.... Either of God, who has not fixed the
certain times when, or certain sums which persons are to give, and other
circumstances, which are left to discretion; but in general has
signified it as his will, that those in necessity are to be relieved by
such who are in ability to do it: or as an apostle, he did not speak in
an imperious manner, extorting from them a collection, or laying his
apostolical injunctions upon them to make one; he did not go about to
force or oblige them to it, for men in such cases must act willingly,
and what they do, must do of their own accord with cheerfulness, and not
through constraint or grudgingly:

but by occasion of the forwardness of others; or "through carefulness
for others"; what moved the apostle to propose this matter to the
Corinthians, and exhort them to it, were either the forwardness of the
Macedonians, cheerfully contributing in the midst of their poverty, and
their urgent solicitations that the same good work might go on
elsewhere, or else the very great care and concern that he himself had
for the poor saints at Jerusalem: it was not therefore to show his
apostolical authority, that he sent Titus to them to finish this
service; but he was stirred up hereunto, partly by the bounty and
solicitations of others, and partly by bowels of compassion within
himself, and concern in his own mind for the poor saints; and also, as
he adds,

to prove the sincerity of your love; to God, to Christ, to his
ministers, and to the saints, particularly the poor; that their love
might appear to be true, genuine, hearty, and real to others, to all men
as well as to them the apostles.

[2 Corinthians 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 8:9</span></span>

For ye know the grace of our Lord Jesus,.... This is a new argument, and
a very forcible one to engage to liberality, taken from the wonderful
grace and love of Christ, displayed in his state of humiliation towards
his people; which is well known to all them that have truly believed in
Christ; of this they are not and cannot be ignorant, his love, good
will, and favour are so manifest; there are such glaring proofs of it in
his incarnation, sufferings, and death, that leave no room for any to
doubt of it:

that though he was rich; in the perfections of his divine nature, having
the fulness of the Godhead in him, all that the Father has, and so equal
to him; such as eternity, immutability, infinity and immensity,
omnipresence, omniscience, omnipotence, &c. in the works of his hands,
which reach to everything that is made, the heavens, the earth, the sea,
and all that in them are, things visible and invisible; in his universal
empire and dominion over all creature; and in those large revenues of
glory, which are due to him from them all; which riches of his are
underived from another, incommunicable to another, and cannot be lost:

yet for your sakes he became poor; by assuming human nature, with all
its weaknesses and imperfections excepting sin; he appeared in it not as
a lord, but in the form of a servant; he endured in it a great deal of
reproach and shame, and at last death itself; not that by becoming man
he ceased to be God, or lost his divine perfections, thought these were
much hid and covered from the view of man; and in his human nature he
became the reverse of what he is in his divine nature, namely, finite
and circumscriptible, weak and infirm, ignorant of some things, and
mortal; in which nature also he was exposed to much meanness and outward
poverty; he was born of poor parents, had no liberal education, was
brought up to a trade, had not where to lay his head, was ministered to
by others of their substance, and had nothing to bequeath his mother at
his death, but commits her to the care of one of his disciples; all
which fulfilled the prophecies of him, that he should be and "poor" and
"low", [Psa 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md). The persons for whom
he became so, were not the angels, but elect men; who were sinners and
ungodly persons, and were thereby become bankrupts and beggars: the end
for which he became poor for them was,

that they through his poverty might be rich; not in temporals, but in
spirituals; and by his obedience, sufferings, and death in his low
estate, he has paid all their debts, wrought out a robe of
righteousness, rich and adorned with jewels, with which he clothes them,
and through his blood and sacrifice has made them kings and priests unto
God. They are enriched by him with the graces of his Spirit; with the
truths of the Gospel, comparable to gold, silver, and precious stones;
with himself and all that he has; with the riches of grace here, and of
glory hereafter. These are communicable from him, though unsearchable,
and are solid and substantial, satisfying, lasting, and for ever. Now if
this grace of Christ will not engage to liberality with cheerfulness,
nothing will.

[2 Corinthians 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 8:10</span></span>

And herein I give my advice,.... As Daniel did to Nebuchadnezzar, [Dan
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027.md). The apostle did not choose to
make use of his apostolical authority, or give orders, as he sometimes
did in such cases; he did not think fit to speak by way of commandment,
obliging them to what they ought to do willingly; looking upon this the
most prudential step, and wisest method he could take in order to
succeed, only to give his judgment in this matter, as what would be best
for them, and most conducive to their real good:

for this is expedient for you; most versions read it, "profitable";
doing acts of beneficence is profitable to persons, as to things
temporal, God usually blessing such with a greater affluence of the
things of life, and which indeed is often promised; and is also
profitable with respect to things spiritual, for if God does not make it
up to them in temporal enjoyments, yet with his presence, the
discoveries of his love, the joys of his salvation, and an increase of
every grace; so Gaius, that hospitable man to the apostle, and all
Christian strangers, was in much spiritual health, and a prosperous
condition in his soul, when but in an ill state with respect to his
body: yea, such a conduct is profitable in relation to things eternal;
for as it springs from the grace of God, and men are assisted therein by
it, and is exercised towards persons that have received it, it will be
rewarded with a reward of grace; though it may be, the apostle here does
not so much argue from the utility, as the decency of it in the
Corinthians;

who, says he,

have began before, a year ago, not only to do, but also to be forward,
or "willing": it is hard to say whether the apostle designs to commend
or reprove them; and indeed, it seems as if there was a mixture of
praise and dispraise in this passage; it was in their favour that they
had begun before, even a year ago, and were willing and forward of
themselves to this good work; yea, were the first that set it on foot,
and so were an example to the Macedonian churches, and others; but then
this was against them, that the other churches, which began later than
they, had finished before them; whether this their charity was
obstructed, as some have thought, through some affliction and
persecution that befell them, which if it appeared would much excuse
them; or rather it was neglected through lukewarmness and indolence;
wherefore the apostle gives his sentiments, that to save their own
credit, it was expedient for them to finish what they had begun; for
otherwise, as their boasting of them would be in vain, so they would
expose themselves to contempt and incur disgrace; and it was not only
proper that they should do this, but do it willingly, and with much
cheerfulness, for that is meant by being "forward" or "willing"; that
they not only do it, but do it with a good will, which they at first
discovered.

[2 Corinthians 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 8:11</span></span>

Now therefore perform the doing of it,.... This is a conclusion from the
former advice, to finish what was readily willed; for as it is not
enough to do a thing, unless it is done cheerfully and willingly, so it
is not sufficient to express a good will to such service as is here
called to, without doing it; both should go together:

that as there was a readiness to will, so there may be a performance
also; in some cases there is neither power nor will to do good; in
others there is will, when there is not a power; but in this case of
beneficence to the poor saints, as there was a willingness declared,
there was an ability in the Corinthians to perform; they had it in the
power of their hands, more or less, to act: and the apostle in the last
clause of this verse points out the rule and measure of their
liberality,

out of that which you have; according to your abilities, and as God has
prospered you; and with which he shuts up the mouths of all objectors,
rich and poor: should the rich say, would you have us give away all we
have? the answer is, no; but "out of that which you have", something of
it, according as you are able; should the poorer sort say, we are in
mean circumstances, we have families to provide for, and can spare
little, and what we can do is so trifling, that it is not worth giving
or accepting; the reply is, give "out of that which you have", be it
less or more; it follows,

[2 Corinthians 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 8:12</span></span>

For if there be first a willing mind,.... If what is done springs from a
truly noble, generous spirit, a spirit of bountifulness and liberality;
and is given cheerfully and freely, and according to a man's ability;
the quantity matters not, whether it be more or less:

it is accepted; both of God and man:

according to that a man hath, and not according to that he hath not. The
widow's mite was as acceptable, and more so, than all the rich men cast
into the treasury; a cup of cold water given to a prophet, in the name
of a prophet, is taken notice of by God, and shall have its reward. The
present sent by the Philippians to the Apostle Paul, and which perhaps
was not very large, was "an odour of a sweet smell, a sacrifice
acceptable, well pleasing to God", [Phi
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#018.md).

[2 Corinthians 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 8:13</span></span>

For I mean not that other men be eased and you burdened. Referring
either to the givers; and that either to the richer and meaner sort in
this church; the apostle's sense being, not to put the whole burden of
the collection upon some only, whilst others were excused doing little
or nothing; but that everyone should give according to his ability; or
to other churches in poorer circumstances; and the apostle's meaning
was, not that these churches by reason of their meanness should be
entirely free from this service, as it was plain they were not, by the
instance of the Macedonians; and that the whole be devolved upon the
Corinthian church, and others that were rich; but that all should
contribute according to their circumstances: or this may refer to the
persons given to, and for whom this beneficence was asked; for the words
may be rendered, "for not that there may be ease", or relaxation "to
others, and to you affliction" or straitness; that is, his meaning was,
not that there should be such a contribution raised for these poor
saints at Jerusalem, that they should live in ease and great abundance;
whilst their benefactors, through an over abundant generosity to them,
were straitened, and their families reduced to great difficulties; this
was what was far from his intentions.

[2 Corinthians 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 8:14</span></span>

But by an equality,.... All that he meant was, that there might be an
equality both in givers and receivers, proportioned to their several
circumstances and stations of life:

that now at this time; which was a very necessitous time at Jerusalem,
there being a famine there, and their common stock exhausted:

your abundance may be a supply for their want, that their abundance also
may be a supply for your want; which respects either the different
abilities of givers at different times; and that whereas now the church
at Corinth was rich, and wealthy, and had great abundance of the things
of this world, they in this general collection were able to make up the
deficiencies of other churches; and so should it ever be their case, as
it might be, that they should be reduced, and these other churches
increased, and enjoy a large abundance, they might hereafter in their
turn supply what would be wanting in them: or else the persons given to;
and the sense is, that should they ever change circumstances, as it was
not impossible that they that were now rich should become poor, and they
that were poor become rich; then as their abundance had been a supply to
the wants of others, the abundance of others in their turn would be a
supply to their wants; so that the argument is taken from the hope of
retribution, in case of such vicissitudes; see [Luk
6:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#038.md) his view was,

that there may be equality; either that in time to come an equal return
may be made, should it be necessary; or that at present some sort of
equality might be observed between the rich and poor; that the rich
should so distribute as not to leave themselves without a proper
support, according to their station of life; and yet so freely
communicate, that the poor may not be without food and raiment, suitable
to their lower sphere of life.

[2 Corinthians 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 8:15</span></span>

As it is written,.... In [Exo 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#018.md)

he that gathered much had nothing over, and he that gathered little had
no lack; respect is had to the history of the manna, a sort of food God
prepared for the Israelites in the wilderness; and which were gathered
by them every morning, by some more, by others less; and yet when it
came to be measured, every man had his "omer" and no more, one had
nothing over, and the other not at all deficient; each man had his
proper and equal quantity; and which, by the Jews (w), is looked upon as
a miracle that was wrought: many useful instructions may be learned from
this history, as that as there was a general provision made by God for
the Israelites, good and bad, and the mixed multitude that came from
Egypt with them; so there is an universal providence of God which
reaches to all creatures, even to the vegetable, to the birds of the
air, and beasts of the field, to all the individuals of human nature,
and to the bad among them as well as the good; though to the latter it
is more special, who of all men have the least reason to be distrustful
and uneasy: and as that provision was daily, so is that providential
supply which all creatures have from God; he is to be trusted to, and
depended on daily; application is to be made to him every day for daily
bread; nor should there be any anxious concern for the morrow. Moreover,
as the Israelites, though the manna was prepared for them, were to rise
in the morning and gather it before the sun waxed hot; so
notwithstanding the providence of God, and the daily care he takes of
men, yet diligence, industry, and the use of means are highly
commendable. And as some gathered more and others less, yet upon
measuring it with the "omer", there was an entire equality, one had not
more nor less than another; so upon the winding up of things in
Providence, such as have gathered much riches in the morning of life, in
the evening of death will have nothing over, nor anything to show more
than others; and they that have gathered little will appear to have had
no lack; both will have had food and raiment, and no more, only with
this difference, some will have enjoyed a richer diet and clothing, and
others a meaner, and both suitable to their circumstances in life; which
may instruct us to depend upon divine Providence, daily to be content
with such things as we have, and to make a proper use of what is
gathered, whether more or less, and not only for ourselves, but for the
good of others. This discovers the egregious folly of such, who are
anxiously concerned for the gathering and amassing much worldly riches
together; which when they have done, they lay it up for themselves, and
do not make use of it for common good, neither for the good of civil
society, nor the interest of religion. Let it be observed, that those
Israelites who from a selfish covetous disposition, and distrust of
divine Providence, left of their manna till the morning, "it bred worms
and stank": which was by the just judgment of God inflicted as a
punishment; for otherwise it was capable of being kept longer. So when
covetous mortals lay up for themselves for time to come, and do not
communicate to the necessities of others, such a practice breeds and
produces worms, moth, and rottenness in their estates, which gradually
decrease, or are suddenly taken from them, or they from them: such an
evil disposition is the root and cause of many immoralities in life; it
greatly prejudices professors of religion in things spiritual; and it
tends to their everlasting ruin, to breed that worm of an evil
conscience that will never die, and to render their persons stinking and
abominable, both in the sight of God and men.

\(w\) Jarchi & Aben Ezra in Exod. xvi. 18. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 76. 3.

[2 Corinthians 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 8:16</span></span>

But thanks be to God,.... The apostle proceeds to give an account of the
persons and their characters, who were employed in making this
collection at Corinth for the poor saints, and begins with Titus; and
the rather because he had been already concerned in setting afoot that
good work among them; and gives thanks to God,

which, says he,

put the same earnest care into the heart of Titus for you, by "earnest
care" is meant that very great carefulness, solicitude, and diligence,
Titus had shown in stirring them up to a liberal contribution; and which
was the same that he had expressed in the arguments just now used by
him, to engage them in the same service; and this care, as it was a very
earnest and hearty one, so he suggests that it was more for them, than
for the sake of the poor; the performance of acts of beneficence and
liberality tending more to the advantage and account of the giver than
of the receiver: and he further intimates, that these good motions in
the heart of Titus were not merely natural, or the effects of human
power and free will, but were of God, as every good thing is; they were
wrought in him by the Spirit of God, and sprung from the grace of God,
and therefore the apostle returns thanks to God for the same; and the
mention of this could not fail of carrying weight with it, and of having
some influence on the minds of the Corinthians.

[2 Corinthians 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 8:17</span></span>

For indeed, he accepted the exhortation,.... The Macedonians besought
the apostle with much entreaty to give unto him, [Co2
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#004.md) or which being moved by their
example, they gave unto him, namely, that he would go and finish what he
had already begun; and accordingly he did not refuse, but readily
accepted the exhortation: yea, not only so,

but being more forward; than was known or could have been expected;
which shows that this was put into his heart by God, before it was moved
unto him; so that if he had never been asked, or exhorted hereunto, he
would have gone of himself:

of his own accord he went unto you; so great is his care of you; so
great his love unto you so willing was he to come again and pay another
visit: and especially on this account, where he had before been treated
with so much respect and kindness. Titus having been at Corinth already,
and being well known there, the apostle forbears saying anything more in
his commendation.

[2 Corinthians 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 8:18</span></span>

And we have sent with him the brother,.... The Syriac and Ethiopic
versions read, "our brother"; and one of Stephens's copies, "your
brother": who this brother was, is not certain; some think it was Luke
the evangelist, the companion of the apostle in his travels:

whose praise is in the Gospel, throughout all the churches; being known
and highly commended by all the churches, for the Gospel he wrote; but
it is not certain that Luke as yet had wrote his Gospel; and much less
that it was so much known at present among the churches; and besides,
this brother's praise seems to be on account of his preaching the
Gospel, and not writing one: others think Barnabas is intended, who was
chosen and sent out by the churches along with the apostle; but these in
a short time separated from each other, nor do we read of their coming
together again: others are of opinion, that Apollos is designed, who was
a very eloquent preacher, and of whom the apostle had given the
Corinthians an intimation in his former epistle, that he would come to
them at a convenient time; but to him is objected, that he never was
chosen of the churches, to travel with the apostle on such an account as
here mentioned: others would have it that Silas or Silvanus is meant,
who was a very constant companion of the apostle, and of whom he makes
mention in most of his epistles; and others have made no doubt of it,
but John Mark is here meant, who not only wrote a Gospel, but was an
excellent preacher of it, and was chosen by the churches to go along
with Paul and Barnabas; and though there was some distaste taken to him
by Paul, he was afterwards reconciled to him, and for his profitableness
in the ministry was greatly desired by him; but after all, it is
difficult to determine who it was, nor is it of any great moment: a
"brother" he was; being not only a regenerate person, but a preacher of
the Gospel; a brother in the ministry, and "one whose praise was in the
Gospel"; greatly admired, and much commended, for his excellent talent
in preaching the Gospel; and for this he was famous "throughout all the
churches"; a very great commendation indeed; but this is not all, it
follows,

[2 Corinthians 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">co2 8:19</span></span>

And not that only, but who was also chosen of the churches,.... Not only
famous for preaching the Gospel, but he was also appointed by the joint
suffrages of the churches, which were made by the lifting up or
stretching out of the hand, as the word here used signifies; this
brother was not chosen to this service by a few private persons, or by a
single church only, but by several churches; which does not refer to the
churches at Jerusalem and Antioch, as if the apostles were appointed,
and others were appointed by these churches to travel with them, in
order to collect money for the poor saints at Jerusalem; of which no
mention is any where made, only of their being sent out by them to
preach the Gospel. James, Cephas, and John indeed, when they gave to
Paul and Barnabas the right hand of fellowship, that they might go to
the Heathen, desired them to "remember the poor"; [Gal
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#009.md) but these were not the churches.
The church at Antioch did collect for the brethren in Judea, at the time
of the famine among them, and sent their bounty by the hands of Barnabas
and Saul, which seems to be the case here. This brother was chosen by
the churches who collected, and not by the churches in Judea, for whom
the collections were made; for it was usual, and what was right and
proper, that the churches chose whom they thought fit to carry their
liberality to Jerusalem; see [Co1
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#003.md). Now this brother had the honour
to be chosen by these churches,

to travel, says the apostle,

with us, with this grace; bounty or beneficence of the churches, what
they had freely and liberally contributed for the supply of the poor,
from a principle of grace, and by the assistance of it;

which is administered by us; not given by the apostles, but collected by
them; or what was procured by their means, in the several churches to
whom they had moved it, and by proper arguments had excited them to it,
with which they cheerfully complied: and this was done on a two fold
account, both

to the glory of the same Lord: Jesus Christ, who is the one Lord over
all; the same Lord of the apostles, and the church at Corinth; the same
Lord of the Corinthians, and the Macedonian and other churches; and the
same Lord of the poor saints at Jerusalem, and the rich members of the
several churches that contributed to them: and also to

the declaration of your ready mind; or to stir up their ready mind to
increase it and promote it in them, as well to make it manifest, and
that it might appear to others, how readily and freely they came into
this service; so that the apostle's concern in this administration was
not from any sinister and selfish ends; no, nor so much for the relief
of the poor, though this was greatly designed, as for the glory of
Christ, and the honour of his churches.

[2 Corinthians 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">co2 8:20</span></span>

Avoiding this, that no man should blame us,.... There is an allusion in
these words to mariners, who, when sensible of danger, steer their
course another way, in order to shun a rock and secure themselves. So
the apostles being aware of the censorious spirits of some persons, and
to prevent all suspicion of their converting any part of what they had
collected to their own private use, sent Titus with it, a man of known
probity and integrity; and he not by himself only, but another brother
with him, one who had obtained a good report as a minister of the Gospel
in all the churches: and, besides, was appointed not by the apostles,
but by the churches themselves, to this service. This shows the good
conduct, and great prudence of the apostle, and his care and solicitude
that the ministry be not blamed; he knew he had many enemies, and how
subject such are to suspicion and jealousy, when persons are intrusted
with much, which was the case here; for it is added,

in this abundance which is administered by us: which designs the very
large contributions which were made by the churches, through the means
of the apostle's moving, exciting, and encouraging them thereunto; and
which were committed to their care and trust, and at their entreaty they
had accepted of.

[2 Corinthians 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">co2 8:21</span></span>

Providing for honest things,.... Or premeditating, forecasting, or
considering before hand in the mind, things that are good, that are of
good report among men, as well as accounted good by God; for it becomes
professors of religion, and especially ministers of the Gospel, to be
careful not only to exercise a good conscience towards God; but so to
behave, that they may obtain and preserve the good opinion of men; for
when they have once lost their credit and reputation among men, their
ministry becomes in a great, measure useless; wherefore the apostle
adds,

not only in the sight of the Lord: the same Lord as before, the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is a diligent searcher of the hearts, and discerner of
the thoughts, and observer of the ways and actions of all his people;

but also in the sight of men; not that the apostle affected a mere
outside show, popular applause, and the praise of men; but was concerned
lest any weak persons, by their conduct, should be stumbled and fall,
the edification of any should be hindered, and their ministry become
unprofitable.

[2 Corinthians 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">co2 8:22</span></span>

And we have sent with him our brother,.... This is a third person sent
about this business. The apostle, in this, conformed to the customs of
his nation; at least if he did not purposely do it, it agrees with the
Jewish canons, which require three persons for the distribution of alms.

"The alms dish, (they say (x)) is by three; nor do they appoint
"overseers" of it "less than three".''

Again, they say (y),

"the poor's chest is collected by two, "but distributed by three"; it is
collected by two, because they do not appoint governors over a
congregation less than two, and it is distributed by three, even as
pecuniary judgments; but the alms dish is collected by three, and
distributed by three; for the collection and distribution are alike:''

who this brother was, sent by the apostle with Titus and the other
person, is as uncertain as the former. Some think it was Luke, others
Apollos, others Timothy, others Sosthenes, others Epaenetus, others
Silas, others Zenas the lawyer; a brother he was, and a very
considerable character is given of him:

whom we have oftentimes proved diligent in many things; he was a very
diligent and industrious man, and so fit for this service; he had been
tried and proved, and was found to be so, not only once or twice, but
oftentimes; and that not in a few instances, but in many; and in nothing
did he ever show more diligence than in this matter:

but now much more diligent; than ever he had been in anything before:

upon the great confidence which I have in you; what doubled and
increased this brother's diligence, and made him so eager for, and
forward to this work, was, his observing the great confidence the
apostle expressed of the very great readiness and liberality of the
Corinthians; and which tacitly carries in it an argument exciting them
thereunto: or this last clause may be read, "which he hath in you"; and
so regards the confidence this brother had in them, which made him so
ready to engage with, and join the other messengers.

\(x\) T. Hieros. Peah, fol. 21. 1. (y) Misn. Peah, c. 8. sect. 7. &
Jarchi, Maimonides & Bartenora, in ib. T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 8. 2.
Maimon. Mattanot Anayim, c. 9. sect. 5.

[2 Corinthians 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">co2 8:23</span></span>

Whether any do inquire of Titus,.... The apostle here sums up the
characters of each of the above persons; as for Titus, he says,

he is my partner; he had been his companion in his travels, a partner
with him in preaching the Gospel, as well as in the troubles and
persecutions he had met with; and was one with whom he had had sweet
communion and fellowship:

and fellow helper; or worker,

concerning you; he had been a joint instrument with him, either in their
conversion, or consolation, and correction; or for their edification and
instruction, and setting things right, which had been out of order among
them:

or our brethren be inquired of; if their characters are asked after, as
well as Titus's; by whom are meant not his fellow apostles, but the two
brethren who were sent along with Titus; what may be truly said of them
is,

they are the messengers of the churches; they were chosen and sent forth
by the churches, not only to preach the Gospel, but particularly to take
care of the ministration to the poor saints. They were messengers
appointed by the churches for this service, and were also appointed to
the service of the churches; respect seems to be had to the public
minister in the synagogues, who was called "the messenger of the
congregation", or "church" (z); whose business was to take care about
the reading of the law and the prophets, to pray in public, and also to
preach if there was no other; so we read (a) also of , "the messengers
of the sanhedrim"; who were sent at the proper time to reap the sheaf of
the first fruits, and of others who swore the high priest before the day
of atonement (b); and of , "the messengers of the commandment" (c); who
went to hear the exposition (of the traditions) and visit the head of
the captivity:

and the glory of Christ: meaning either that the churches were the glory
of Christ, in whom he is glorified, where his glory is seen, and his
presence enjoyed; or rather the messengers of them, on whom the image of
Christ was stamped, who faithfully performed the work of Christ, in all
things sought his glory and not their own; and in and by whom his glory
was displayed, and held forth to others.

\(z\) T. Bab. Sota, fol. 37. 2. Tosephot Beracot, fol. 34. 1. Misn.
Beracot, c. 5. sect. 5. (a) Misn. Menachot, c. 10. 3. (b) Misn. Yoma, c.
1. 5. (c) T. Bab. Succa, fol. 26. 1.

[2 Corinthians 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">co2 8:24</span></span>

Wherefore show ye to them, and before the churches,.... This is the
conclusion of the apostle, upon summing up the characters of these
messengers; and his exhortation is, that since they were persons of so
much note and worth, as they ought to be received with great marks of
respect and affection, so they would take care evidently to make it
appear to them who were sent by the churches, and before the churches,
or before them who represented the churches; or so as that it might be
known by the churches from whence they came, when they returned with
their report; or be evident to the churches in Judea, when their
liberality should be brought to them:

the proof of your love; to Christ and his poor members, how hearty and
sincere it was:

and of our boasting on your behalf; how willing and forward they were to
this good work, and how liberal they would be.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 9](co2009.md)

</div>
