<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Corinthians Index](co2)  
  [Previous](co2002)  [Next](co2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Corinthians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)

[2 Corinthians](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">co2 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 CORINTHIANS 3

In this chapter the apostle clears himself from the charge of arrogance
and self-commendation, and ascribes both the virtue and efficacy of his
ministry, and his qualifications for it, to the Lord; and forms a
comparison between the ministration of the Gospel, and the ministration
of the law, showing the preferableness of the one to the other; and
consequently how much more happy and comfortable the state and condition
of the saints under the Gospel dispensation is, than under the legal
one: on account of what the apostle had said in the latter part of the
preceding chapter, concerning the excellency, usefulness, and success of
the Gospel ministry, he foresaw an objection would arise; that he and
his fellow ministers were proud and arrogant, and commended themselves,
which was unseemly, and not agreeably to the character they bore; which
objection he obviates, [Co2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001), by
putting some questions, signifying that they were not guilty of vain
boasting; nor did they need any commendations of their own, or others,
nor any letters to recommend them, either from Corinth to other places,
or thither: a practice which, he suggests, the false teachers made use
of; and in [Co2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#002) he gives the
reason why they did not stand in need of such letters, because the
members of the church at Corinth were their epistle or letter, declaring
to all men the efficacy and success of their ministry among men; but
lest he should be charged with arrogating to himself and others, he
declares, [Co2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003) that though the
Corinthians were their epistle, yet not so much theirs as Christ's;
Christ was the author and subject, they only were instruments; the
writing was not human, but the writing of the Spirit of God; and that
not upon outward tables, such as the law was written upon, but upon the
tables of men's hearts, which only God can reach; however, that they had
been useful, successful, and instrumental in the conversion of souls,
through the ministry of the word, that he was confident of, [Co2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#004) though the sufficiency and ability
to think, study, and preach, were not of themselves, and still less to
make the word effectual for conversion and comfort, but of God, [Co2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005) wherefore he ascribes all fitness,
worthiness, and ability to preach the Gospel, to the grace and power of
God, by which they were made ministers of it; and hence he takes
occasion to commend the excellency of the Gospel ministry above that of
the law, which he does by observing their different names and effects;
the Gospel is the New Testament or covenant, or an exhibition of the
covenant of grace in a new form; the law is the Old Testament, or
covenant, which is vanished away; which, though not expressed here, is
in [Co2 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014) the Gospel is spirit, the
law the letter; the one gives life, and the other kills, [Co2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006) wherefore the apostle argues from
the one to the other, that if there was a glory in the one which was
only a ministration of death, as the law was, [Co2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007) then the Gospel, which was a
ministration of spiritual things, and of the Spirit of God himself, must
be more glorious, [Co2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008) and if that
was glorious which was a ministration of condemnation, as the law was to
guilty sinners; much more glorious must be the Gospel, which is a
ministration of the righteousness of Christ, for the justification of
them, [Co2 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009) yea, such is the
surpassing glory of the Gospel to the law, that even the glory of the
law is quite lost in that of the Gospel, and appears to have none in
comparison of that, [Co2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010) to which
he adds another argument, taken from the abolition of the one, and the
continuance of the other; that if there was a glory in that which is
abolished, there must be a greater in that which continues, [Co2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011) and from hence the apostle
proceeds to take notice of another difference between the law and the
Gospel, the clearness of the one, and the obscurity of the other; the
former is signified by the plainness of speech used by the preachers of
it, [Co2 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012) and the latter by the
veil which was over Moses's face, when he delivered the law to the
children of Israel; the end of which they could not look to, and which
is a further proof of the obscurity of it, [Co2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013) as well as of the darkness of
their minds; which still continues with the Jews in reading the law, and
will do until it is taken away by Christ, [Co2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014) and that there is such a veil of
darkness upon the hearts of the Jews, when reading the law of Moses; and
that this continues to this day, is again asserted, [Co2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015) and an intimation given that
there will be a conversion of them to the Lord, and then it will be
removed from them, [Co2 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016) and who
that Lord is to whom they shall be turned, and by whom they shall have
freedom from darkness and bondage, is declared, [Co2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017) and the happy condition of the
saints under the Gospel dispensation, through the bright and clear light
of it, is observed, [Co2 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018) in which
the Gospel is compared to a glass; the saints are represented as without
a veil looking into it; through which an object is beheld, the glory of
the Lord; the effect of which is a transformation of them into the same
image by degrees; the author of which grace is the Spirit of the Lord.

[2 Corinthians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">co2 3:12</span></span>

Seeing then that we have such hope,.... Having this confidence, and
being fully persuaded that God has made us able and sufficient ministers
of the Gospel, has called and qualified us for such service; and since
we have such a ministry committed to us, which so much exceeds in glory
the ministry of Moses, a ministry not of death and condemnation, but of
the Spirit and of righteousness; not which is abolished and done away,
but which does and will remain, in spite of all the opposition of hell
and earth:

we use great plainness of speech; plain and intelligible words, not
ambiguous ones: or "boldness"; we are not afraid of men nor devils; we
are not terrified by menaces, stripes, imprisonment, and death itself:
or "freedom of speech"; we speak out all our mind, which is the mind of
Christ; we declare the whole counsel of God, hide and conceal nothing
that may be profitable to the churches; we are not to be awed by the
terror, or drawn by the flatteries of men to cover the truth; we speak
it out plainly, clearly, with all evidence and perspicuity. The apostle
from hence passes on to observe another difference between the law and
the Gospel, namely, the obscurity of the one, and the clearness of the
other.

[2 Corinthians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">co2 3:13</span></span>

And not as Moses, which put a veil over his face,.... This he did,
because there was such a glory upon his face when he came down from the
mount, that the Israelites could not bear to look upon him; and also to
take off that dread of him which was upon them, for they were afraid to
come nigh him; and that so they might be able to hearken and attend to
the words of the law, he delivered to them: the account of Moses's
putting on this veil is in [Exo 34:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#033)
where Onkelos renders it by , "the house of the face", or a "mask": and
Jarchi on the place says it was a "garment", which he put before his
face; and both the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem call it "a linen
cloth": now this veil upon his face had a mystery in it; it was an
emblem of the Gospel being veiled under the law, and of the darkness and
obscurity of the law in the business of life and salvation; and also of
the future blindness of the Jews, when the glory of the Gospel should
break forth in the times of Christ and his apostles; and which was such,

that the children of Israel, the Jews, as in the times of Moses, so in
the times of Christ and his apostles,

could not steadfastly look to; not upon the face of Moses, whose face
was veiled; not that they might not look, but because they could not
bear to look upon him; but they could not look

to the end of that which is abolished; that is, to Christ, who is the
end of the law, which is abrogated by him: to him they could not look,
nor could they see him to be the fulfilling end of the law for
righteousness; which being fulfilled, is done away by him; and this
because of the blindness of their hearts, of which blindness the veil on
Moses' face was typical: though the Alexandrian copy and the Vulgate
Latin version read, "to the face of him which is abolished".

[2 Corinthians 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">co2 3:14</span></span>

But their minds were blinded,.... This confirms the sense given of the
foregoing verse, and shows, that not the Israelites only in Moses's
time, but the Jews in the times of the Gospel, had their minds so
blinded, that they could not behold the glory of the Gospel, nor Christ
the end of the law; see [Rom 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#007).

For until this day, to this very time,

remaineth the same veil untaken away; not the selfsame veil that was on
Moses's face, but the veil of blindness, darkness, and ignorance, upon
the hearts of the Jews:

in the reading of the Old Testament; the books of the Old Testament,
which were used to be read in their synagogues every sabbath day; the
true spiritual meaning of which, as they respect Christ and the Gospel
dispensation, they understood not; of which darkness, the veil on the
face of Moses was a type and emblem:

which veil is done away in Christ; can only be removed by Christ, by his
Spirit and grace, and through the light of the Gospel of Christ, shining
into the heart; and so dispel that blindness and ignorance which is in
the understanding; whereby the books of the Old Testament are
understood, and appear to agree exactly with the Gospel of Christ, in
the books of the New Testament.

[2 Corinthians 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">co2 3:15</span></span>

But even unto this day, when Moses is read,.... These words are an
explanation of the former, and show that by the Old Testament is
designed, more especially, Moses, or the writings of Moses; which were
frequently read, and preached upon in the Jewish synagogues; see [Act
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015) and that by "the veil untaken
away", is meant,

the veil upon their heart; that is, the veil of blindness, ignorance of
Christ, and the Gospel; of the prophecies of the Old Testament, and even
of the law itself, its nature, use, and end; preferring the traditions
of their fathers, before the written law of Moses.

[2 Corinthians 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">co2 3:16</span></span>

Nevertheless, when it shall turn to the Lord,.... The heart, upon which
the veil now is; or the body of the Jewish nation, as in the latter day;
when they "shall turn", or "be turned", by the Spirit, power, and grace
of God, to the Lord Jesus Christ, and look upon him whom they have
pierced, and mourn, and embrace him as the true Messiah and only
Saviour:

the veil shall be taken away; the veil of blindness and ignorance,
respecting themselves, case, state, and condition, and the way of
salvation by Christ; the veil of unbelief, with regard to his person,
offices, and grace, and of error in points of the greatest moment and
importance; then all the darkness and obscurity that is upon the books
of Moses and the prophets, and which is now upon their hearts in reading
them, will be gone. The prophecies of the Old Testament will be seen in
their proper light, and to be evidently fulfilled in Christ; the true
nature, use, and end of the law, will be discovered; and both they and
that will be freed from all darkness that now attends them. The Jews
themselves acknowledge, that though the law is light, yet there is an
obscurity in it, by reason of the several ways of interpreting it; and
therefore,

"he that studies in it, has need to remove, , "veil after veil", which
is upon the face of it, in order to come at the light of it (g):''

and intimate, that the veil on Moses's face was an emblem of this
obscurity, which agrees with what the apostle hints in this context; and
also own, that there is now upon them a veil of ignorance; and, say they
(h), God has promised to remove, , perhaps it should be "the veil of
folly off of our understanding", referring, as is thought, to [Isa
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#007).

\(g\) R. Abraham Seba in Tzeror Hammor, fol. 90. 2. (h) Chobat
Halebabot, par. 1. c. 3. apud L. Capell. in loc.

[2 Corinthians 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">co2 3:17</span></span>

Now the Lord is that Spirit,.... "The Lord", to whom the heart is
turned, when the veil is removed, is Jesus Christ; and he is "that
Spirit", or "the Spirit": he, as God, is of a spiritual nature and
essence; he is a spirit, as God is said to be, [Joh
4:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#024) he is the giver of the Spirit of
God, and the very life and spirit of the law, without whom as the end of
it, it is a mere dead letter: or rather as by Moses in [Co2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#015) is meant, the law of Moses, so by
the "Lord" here may be meant the Gospel of Christ: and this is that
Spirit, of which the apostles were made ministers, and is said to give
life, [Co2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006).

And where the Spirit of the Lord is, there is liberty; which may be
understood of the third person in the Godhead; where he is as a spirit
of illumination, there is freedom from former blindness and darkness;
where he is as a spirit of regeneration and sanctification, there is
freedom from the bondage of sin, and captivity of Satan; where he is as
a comforter, there is freedom from the fear of hell, wrath, and
damnation: where he is as a spirit of adoption, there is the freedom of
children with a father; where he is as a spirit of prayer and
supplication, there is liberty of access to God with boldness, Though
rather the Gospel as attended with the Spirit of God, in opposition to
the law, is here designed; and which points out another difference
between the law and the Gospel; where the law is, there is bondage, it
genders to it; it has a natural tendency to it: quite contrary is this
to what the Jews (i) say, who call the law, "liberty": and say,

"that he that studies in the law, hath , "freedom from everything":''

whereas it gives freedom in nothing, but leads into, and brings on
persons a spirit of bondage; it exacts rigorous obedience, where there
is no strength to perform; it holds men guilty, curses and condemns for
non-obedience; so that such as are under it, and of the works of it, are
always under a spirit of bondage; they obey not from love, but fear, as
servants or slaves for wages, and derive all their peace and comfort
from their obedience: but where the Gospel takes place under the
influence of the Spirit of God, there is liberty; not to sin, which is
contrary to the Gospel, to the Spirit of God in believers, and to the
principle of grace wrought in their souls; but a liberty from the
bondage and servitude of it: a liberty from the law's rigorous exaction,
curse, and condemnation, and from the veil of former blindness and
ignorance.

\(i\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 90. 1. & in Exod. fol. 72. 1. & in Numb. fol.
73. 3.

[2 Corinthians 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">co2 3:18</span></span>

But we all with open face,.... We are not like Moses, who had a veil on
his face; nor like the Jews, who have one on their hearts: "but we all";
not ministers and preachers of the Gospel only, but all believers,
whether Jews or Gentiles, greater or lesser believers, who are
enlightened by the Spirit of God, and are converted to Christ: "with
open face"; which may regard the object beheld, the glory of Christ
unveiled, that has no veil on it, as Moses had on his face, when he
delivered the law; or the persons beholding, who are rid of Jewish
darkness; the veil of the ceremonial law, and of natural darkness and
blindness of mind; and so clearly and fully, comparatively speaking,

beholding as in a glass; not of the law, but of the Gospel, and the
ordinances of it; not with the eyes of their bodies, but with the eyes
of their understandings, with the eye of faith; which sight is
spiritual, delightful, and very endearing; throws a veil over all other
objects, and makes souls long to be with Christ: the object beheld is

the glory of the Lord; Jesus Christ: not the glory of his human nature,
which lies in its union to the Son of God, and in its names which it has
by virtue of it; and in its being the curious workmanship of the Spirit
of God, and so is pure and holy, and free from all sin; and was
outwardly beautiful and glorious, and is so at the right hand of God,
where we see him by faith, crowned with glory and honour; and shall
behold him with the eyes of our bodies, and which will be fashioned like
to his glorious body; but this sight and change are not yet: rather the
glory of his divine nature is meant, which is essential and underived,
the same with his Father's; is ineffable, and incomprehensible; it
appears in the perfections he is possessed of, and in the worship given
to him; it was manifested in the doctrines taught, and in the miracles
wrought by him; there were some breakings forth of this glory in his
state of humiliation, and were beheld by the apostles, and other
believers, who saw his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the
Father. Though the glory of Christ as Mediator, being full of grace and
truth, seems to be chiefly designed; this he has from God, and had it
from everlasting; this he gives to his people, and is what makes him so
glorious, lovely, and desirable in their eye: and whilst this delightful
object is beheld by them, they are

changed into the same image; there was a divine image in man, in his
first creation; this image was defaced by sin, and a different one took
place; now in regeneration another distinct from them both is stamped,
and this is the image of Christ; he himself is formed in the soul, his
grace is wrought there; so that it is no wonder there is a likeness
between them; which lies in righteousness and holiness, and shows itself
in acts of grace, and a discharge of duty. The gradual motion of the
change into this image is expressed by this phrase,

from glory to glory: not from the glory of the law to the glory of the
Gospel; or from the glory of Moses to the glory of Christ; rather from
the glory that is in Christ, to a glory derived in believers from him;
or which seems most agreeable, from one degree of grace to another,
grace here being signified by glory; or from glory begun here to glory
perfect hereafter; when this image will be completed, both in soul and
body; and the saints will be as perfectly like to Christ, as they are
capable of, and see him as he is: now the efficient cause of all this,
"is the Spirit of the Lord". It is he that takes off the veil from the
heart, that we may, with open face unveiled, behold all this glory; it
is he that regenerates, stamps the image of Christ, and conforms the
soul to his likeness; it is he that gradually carries on the work of
grace upon the soul, increases faith, enlarges the views of the glory of
Christ, and the spiritual light, knowledge, and experience of the
saints, and will perfect all that which concerns them; will quicken
their mortal bodies, and make them like to Christ; and will for ever
rest as a spirit of glory on them, both in soul and body: some read
these words,

by the Lord of the Spirit, and understand them of Christ, others read
them, "by the Lord the Spirit", as they very well may be rendered; and
so are a proof of the true and proper deity of the Holy Spirit, who is
the one Jehovah with the Father and the Son. The ancient Jews owned
this;

"the Spirit of the living God, (say (k) they,) , this is the Creator
himself, from him all spirits are produced; blessed be he, and blessed
be his name, because his name is he himself, for his name is Jehovah.''

\(k\) R. Moses Botril in Sepher Jetzirah, p. 40. Ed. Rittangel.

[2 Corinthians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">co2 3:1</span></span>

Do we begin again to commend ourselves?.... The apostle having asserted
that he and his fellow ministers always triumphed in Christ, and made
manifest the savour of his knowledge in every place; were a sweet savour
of Christ to God, did not corrupt the word of God, as some did, but
sincerely and faithfully preached Christ; some might insinuate from
hence, that he was guilty of arrogance and vain glory; wherefore to
remove such a charge, or prevent its being brought, he asks, "do we
begin again to commend ourselves?" we do not; what we say, we say
honestly, sincerely, in the simplicity of our hearts, without any view
to our own glory and applause among men, or for any worldly profit and
advantage, or to ingratiate ourselves into your affections; we have no
such views: some read these words without an interrogation, "we do begin
again to commend ourselves"; as we have done already, in this and the
former epistles; and as it is but just and right that we should
vindicate our characters, support our good name and reputation, and
secure and maintain our credit, which some would maliciously deprive us
of:

though we have no need, as some others, of epistles of commendation to
you, or letters of commendation from you; our persons, characters, and
usefulness are too well known, to require commendatory letters front
others to you, or from you to others. The false apostles are here struck
at, whose practice it was to get letters of commendation from place to
place; which they carried about and made use of for their temporal
advantage, having nothing truly good and excellent in them to recommend
them to others. The apostle does not hereby condemn letters of
recommendation, which in proper cases may be very lawfully given, and a
good use be made of them; only that he and other Gospel ministers were
so well known, as to stand in no need of them.

[2 Corinthians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">co2 3:2</span></span>

Ye are our epistle,.... Here a reason is given why they stood in no need
of letters of commendation, to or from the church at Corinth, because
that church was their living epistle, and which was much preferable to
any written one. The apostle calls them their epistle in the same sense,
as they are said to be his "work in the Lord, and the seal of his
apostleship", [Co1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#001) they were so as
persons regenerated by the Spirit and grace of God, in whose conversion
he was an instrument; now it was the work of conversion in them, which
was the epistle said to be

written in our hearts; some think it should be read, "in your hearts";
and so the Ethiopic version reads it; and it looks as if it should be so
read, from the following verse, and from the nature of the thing itself;
for the conversion of the Corinthians was not written in the heart of
the apostle, but in their own; and this was so very notorious and
remarkable, that it was

known and read of all men; everyone could read, and was obliged to
acknowledge the handwriting; it was so clear a case, what hand the
apostle, as an instrument, had in the turning of these persons from
idols to serve the living God; and which was so full a proof of the
divinity, efficacy, truth, and sincerity of his doctrine, that he needed
no letters from any to recommend him.

[2 Corinthians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">co2 3:3</span></span>

Forasmuch as ye are manifestly declared,.... But lest it should be
thought that the apostle attributed too much to himself, by saying that
the Corinthians were our epistle; here he says, they were "manifestly
declared"

to be the epistle of Christ ministered by us; so that the apostles and
ministers of the word were only amanuenses, Christ was the author and
dictator; yea, he himself is the very matter, sum, substance, and
subject of the epistle; he is formed in the hearts of his people in
conversion, his image is stamped, his grace is implanted, his word, his
Gospel dwells richly, his laws and ordinances are written here; he also
is the exemplar, believers are but copies of him, in grace and duty, in
sufferings, in the likeness of his death and resurrection: and they are
"manifestly declared" to be so, by the impresses of Christ's grace upon
them; by the fairness of the copy; by the style and language of the
epistle; by their likeness to Christ; by their having not the form only,
but the power of godliness; and by their lives and conversations: now in
writing these epistles, the ministers of the Gospel are only
instruments, "ministered by us". They are made use of to show the sinner
the black characters which are written upon him, and that what is
written in him, and to be read by him, by the light of nature is not
sufficient for salvation; they are employed as instruments in drawing
the rough draught of grace in conversion, and in writing the copy over
again, fairer and fairer; being the happy means blessed by God, for the
building up of souls in faith and holiness, in spiritual knowledge and
comfort. These epistles are

not written with ink; of nature's power, or of rhetorical eloquence and
moral persuasion;

but with the Spirit of the living God: every grace that is implanted in
the soul is wrought there by the Spirit of God; or he it is that draws
every line, and writes every word and letter; he begins, he carries on
and finishes the work of grace on the soul; and that as "the Spirit of
the living God": hence saints become the living epistles of Christ; and
every letter and stroke of his making, is a living disposition of the
soul in likeness to him; and such are written among the living in
Jerusalem, and shall live and abide for ever as the epistles of Christ:
again, the subjects of these epistles, or that on which they are
written, are

not tables of stone; such as the law was written upon, on Mount Sinai:
of these tables there were the first and second; the first were the work
of God himself, the latter were hewed by Moses, at the command of God,
[Exo 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#016) the former being broken
when he came down from the mount, which by the Jewish writers are said
to be miraculously made, and not by the means and artifice of men (l);
yea, that they were made before the creation of the world (m), and
which, they commonly say, were made of sapphire; See Gill on [Co2
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007) these, as the latter, were two
stones, which, Jarchi says (n), were of an equal size; and were, as
Abarbinel says (o), in the form of small tables, such as children are
taught to write upon, and therefore are so called: some pretend to give
the dimensions of them, and say (p), that they were six hands long, and
as many broad, and three thick; nay, even the weight of them, which is
said (q) to be the weight of forty "seahs", and look upon it as a
miracle that Moses should be able to carry them; on these stones were
written the ten commands; and the common opinion of the Jewish writers
is, that five were written on one table, and five on the other; this is
the opinion of Josephus (r), Philo (s), and the Talmudic writers (t);
and the tables are said to be written on both sides, [Exo
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#015). Some think that the engraving
of the letters perforated and went through the tables, so that, in a
miraculous manner, the letters were legible on both sides; others think,
only the right and left hand of the tables are meant, on which the laws
were written, five on a side, and which folded up like the tables or
pages of a book; though others are of opinion, that they were written
upon, both behind and before, and that the law was written twice, both
upon the fore part and back part of the tables, yea, others say four
times; and some think the phrase only intends the literal and mystical,
the external and internal sense of the law: however, certain it is, as
the apostle here suggests, that the law was written on tables of stone,
which may denote the firmness and stability of the law; not as in the
hands of Moses, from whence the tables fell and were broken, but as in
the hands of Christ, by whom they are fulfilled; or else the hardness of
man's heart, his stupidity, ignorance of, and not subject to the law of
God:

but fleshly tables of the heart: alluding to [Eze
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026) and designs not carnal hearts,
but such as are made soft and tender by the Spirit of God. The table of
the heart is a phrase to be met with in the books of the Old Testament;
see [Pro 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003) and very frequently in
the writings of the Jews (u).

\(l\) R. Levi ben Gersom in Pentateuch, fol. 113. 2. (m) Zohar in Exod.
fol. 35. 1. (n) Perush in Exod. xxxi. 18. (o) In Pentateuch, fol. 209.
2. & 211. 3. (p) T. Hieres Shekalim, fol. 49. 4. Shemot Rabba, c. 47.
fol. 143. 2. Bartenora in Misn. Pirke Abot, c. 5. sect. 6. (q) Targum
Jon. in Exod. xxxi. 18. & in Deut. xxxiv. 12. (r) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 5.
sect. 8. (s) De Decalogo, p. 761, 768. (t) T. Hieros. Shekalim, fol. 49.
4. Shemot Rabba, sect. 47. fol. 143. 2. Zohar in Exod. fol. 35. 1. (u)
Vid. Targum Jon. in Dent. vi. 5, & in Cant. iv. 9.

[2 Corinthians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">co2 3:4</span></span>

And such trust have we,.... This refers to what he had said in the
latter end of the foregoing chapter, and the beginning of this; as that
they made manifest the savoury knowledge of God and Christ everywhere,
and were the sweet savour of Christ to many souls; were sufficient in
some measure, through the grace of Christ, to preach the Gospel
sincerely and faithfully, and were attended with success, had many seals
of their ministry, and particularly the Corinthians were so many living
epistles of commendations of the power and efficacy of their ministry;
such confidence and firm persuasion of the truth of grace on your souls,
and of our being the happy instruments of it, we have

through Christ, the grace of Christ,

to God-ward: who is the object of our confidence and hope, and the
ground thereof.

[2 Corinthians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">co2 3:5</span></span>

Not that we are sufficient of ourselves,.... Though we are sufficient
for this work to which God has called us, and have such trust and
confidence that he has blessed and owned us, and done such great things
by us; yet we do not ascribe anything to ourselves, to any power of
ours, to any self-sufficiency in us: for "we are not sufficient of
ourselves" neither for the work of the ministry, nor for the conversion
of sinners, nor for faith and hope in God, nor for any spiritual work
whatever; not even to think anything as of ourselves; any good thing,
either for our own use and benefit, or for the advantage of others; we
are not able of ourselves to meditate with judgment and affection upon
the word of God, to study the Scriptures, to collect from them things
fit for the ministry; and much less with freedom and boldness to speak
of them to edification; and still less able to impress them upon the
heart: for though you who are the epistle of Christ are ministered by
us, yet not by any power and self-sufficiency of ours;

but our sufficiency is of God; to think, to speak, and to act for his
glory.

[2 Corinthians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">co2 3:6</span></span>

Who also hath made us able ministers,.... This is an answer to the
question in [Co2 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#016) who is
sufficient for these things? no man is of himself; we are indeed
sufficient for them, but not of ourselves; our sufficiency is of God, he
hath made us able, or sufficient ministers: such ministers as are not of
men's, but God's making, are sufficient ones; and none are sufficient
but whom God makes so; and those he makes able and sufficient, by giving
them spiritual gifts, fitting them for the ministry: and these are
ministers

of the New Testament, or "covenant"; the covenant of grace, of which
Christ is the Mediator and surety; called "new", not because newly made,
for it was made with Christ from everlasting; nor newly revealed, for it
was made known to Adam after his fall, and to all the Old Testament
patriarchs, and was exhibited under the legal dispensation, though but
darkly, in types, shadows, sacrifices, &c. which therefore waxing old is
vanished away; and the covenant of grace is now more clearly revealed
under the Gospel dispensation, free from all the obscurity it before
laboured under; and therefore is called "new", as well as because it
will always continue so, and never give way to another covenant: now the
Gospel, and the ministry of it, is nothing else but an exhibition of the
covenant of grace, its blessings and promises; and the work and business
of those who are ministers of it is not to insist upon the covenant of
works, the terms, conditions, obligations, promises, and threatenings of
that covenant; but to open and explain the nature, promises, and
blessings of the covenant of grace: for such who are fit and proper
ministers, are ministers

not of the letter, but of the spirit; which is to be understood, not of
any difference between the books of the Old and the New Testament, for a
faithful minister of the word may and will bring forth things new and
old, out of the one as well as the other; nor of the literal and
allegorical, or mystical sense of the Scriptures, as if the latter and
not the former was only to be attended to; nor of the difference of
communicating the Gospel by letters, and preaching it by word of mouth;
since both methods may be used for the spread of it, as were by the
apostles themselves; but of the difference there is between the law and
the Gospel. The law is "the letter", not merely because written in
letters, for so likewise is the Gospel; but because it is a mere letter,
hereby showing what is to be done or avoided, without any efficacy in
it, or communicating any to enable persons to obey its commands, to give
life to its observers, or either to sanctify or justify any who are
under it, or of the works of it; it is a mere letter, as observed by an
unregenerate man, who only regards the externals of it, being
unacquainted with its spirituality. The Gospel is "the spirit"; see [Joh
6:63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063) it contains spiritual things, and
not things merely natural, moral, and civil, as does the law, but
spiritual blessings and promises; it penetrates into the spirit and soul
of man, and comes from, and is attended with the Spirit of God. The law
is

the letter that

killeth, by irritating and provoking to sin, the cause of death, which
though not the design and natural tendency of the law, and therefore not
to be blamed, yet so it is, through the corruption of human nature; and
by convincing of sin when the sinner is killed, and it dead in his own
apprehension; and by not only threatening with death, but by cursing,
condemning, and punishing with it:

but the Gospel is

the spirit, which

giveth life; it is a means in the hand of the Spirit of God, of
quickening dead sinners, of healing the deadly wounds of sin, of showing
the way of life by Christ, and of working faith in the soul, to look to
him, and live upon him; it affords food for the support of the spiritual
life, and revives souls under the most drooping circumstances. The
apostle may allude to a distinction among the Jews, between the body and
soul of the law; the words, they say, are , "the body of the law"; and
the book of the law is the clothing; and besides these, there is , "the
soul of the law"; which wise men look into (w).

\(w\) Zohar in Numb. fol. 63. 2.

[2 Corinthians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">co2 3:7</span></span>

But if the ministration of death,.... The apostle having observed the
difference between the law and the Gospel, the one being a killing
letter, the other a quickening spirit, enlarges upon it, and more, fully
explains it; and proceeds to take notice of other things in which they
differ; and to show the superior glory and excellency of the one to the
other; for that by "the ministration of death", he means the law, as
delivered to Moses on Mount Sinai, is clear from its being said to be

written and engraven in stones; as that was by the finger of God
himself: rightly does the apostle say, that it was both "written" and
"engraven"; for the two tables of the law are expressly said to be
written with the finger of God, [Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018) meaning either the Spirit of
God, who is sometimes so called, [Luk
11:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#020) compared with [Mat
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#028) or the power of God, which at
once caused this writing to exist; and it is in so many words affirmed,
that "the writing" was "the writing of God"; and not of man, nor of any
creature, no not of an angel, [Exo
32:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#016) yea, even the two tables which
were hewn out by Moses, after the first were broken, were written upon
by the Lord himself, and not Moses, [Exo
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001). So that as the work of the
tables was the work of God, and wonderfully made, the form of the
letters, as Abarbinel (x) observes, were miraculously made by him; for
this law was, , "in letters", as the apostle here says; and as it was
written in the Hebrew language, very likely it was in the same form of
letters now in use with the Jews; though some have thought that the
Samaritan letters are the original ones: moreover, the law was not only
written, but "engraved"; for so it is said, that the writing was graven
upon the tables, [Exo 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#016) and though
the word so rendered is no where else used but there, it is rightly
rendered graven, as appears by the apostle in this place; and which may
lie confirmed by the Targumist on that, who renders it by "engraven";
and by the Septuagint which signifies the same; and so in the book of
Zohar (y), the letters are said to be "engraven" on the tables: and that
the tables were tables of stone, it is certain; they are often so
called, [Exo 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#012) wherefore the
apostle very properly says, that the law was engraven "in stones"; but
what stones these tables were made of cannot be said; the Jews, who
affect to know everything, will have them to be precious stones, but
what they were they are not agreed in; for though they generally say (z)
they were made of the sapphire stone, and sometimes say (a) they were
hewed out of the sapphire of the glorious throne of God; yet at other
times they call them marble tables (b); and Aben Ezra (c) was of
opinion, that the tables which Moses hewed were not of any precious
stone, for he asks where should a precious stone of such size be found?
though others pretend to say (d), that Moses in a miraculous manner was
shown a sapphire quarry in the midst of his tent, out of which he cut
and hewed the stones; but very likely they were common ones; however,
certain it is, that the tables of stone, as written and engraven by the
Lord himself, were made, as the apostle here says, "in glory", ; and so
Jarchi on [Exo 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#016) "and the tables
were the work of God", says, this is to be understood literally "and in"
or "for his glory"; or by his glorious power he made them: now this law,
though thus written and engraven, and glorious, it was "the ministration
of death"; and is so called, because it threatened and punished the
transgressors of it with a corporeal death; they that sinned against it
died without mercy upon proper evidence and witnesses; every precept of
it had this penalty annexed to it, in ease of disobedience; as the
having any other goals but one, making of graven images, taking the name
of God in vain, the violation of the sabbath, dishonouring of parents,
murder, adultery, theft, and covetousness; instances there are of each
of these being punishable by this law with a bodily death: and besides,
it is the ministration of eternal death, the wages of sin the
transgression of the law; which is that wrath of God, a sense of which
it is said to work; the curse it threatens with and the second death or
lake of fire it casts into: and may be said to be the "ministration" of
it; as it shows persons they are deserving of it, pronounces the
sentence of it on them, and will execute it upon them, if grace prevent
not; now though it was the ministration of death, yet it

was glorious. There were many things which made it so; but what the
apostle here particularly takes notice of is the glory that was upon the
face of Moses, when he received it and brought it from the Lord, which
was very great;

so that the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold the face of
Moses, for the glory of his countenance, which glory was to be done
away. The history of this may be read in [Exo
34:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#029) it was a real visible glory that
was upon the skin of his face, so that it shone again; it is said, "the
skin of his face shone"; and this shining of his face the apostle very
properly calls "the glory of his countenance": agreeably to the
Septuagint version, which renders it, "the appearance of the skin, or
colour of his face, was glorified"; and still nearer to the paraphrase
of Onkelos, which is, "the splendour of the glory of his countenance was
great"; and to the Targum of Jonathan, which also assigns the reason of
it, and which seems to be the true one, "the splendour of the form of
his countenance was glorious, because of the splendour of the glory of
the majesty of God, at the time he talked with him". The Vulgate Latin
version has led many wrong, to paint Moses with two horns, rendering it,
"his face was horned", the Hebrew word having the signification of an
horn in its derivative; because glory darted from him like horns, as
rays of light do from the sun; see [Hab
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#004) and this brightness and glory were
so very great, and so dazzling, that Aaron and the people of Israel were
afraid to come nigh; which Jarchi, a Jewish writer, imputed to their
sin, and shame, and fear, having worshipped the calf; but our apostle
ascribes it to the lustre of his countenance, which was such that they
could not steadfastly look upon it; they saw it indeed, as it is said in
[Exo 34:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#035) yet they could not look
wistly at it, nor bear the splendour of it; though this was only a
glory, which was to continue but a while; according to the opinion of
Ambrose (e), this glory continued on Moses's countenance as long as he
lived; but be it so, it at last was done away: now this glory was put
there to bear a testimony to the divine authority of the law, that it
came from God, and was to be received at the hands of Moses, with awful
reverence as from God, and to make them afraid of violating a law which
came with such majesty and glory; and also to command awe and respect
from the Israelites to Moses, whom they were inclined at every turn to
treat with contempt, and to let them see that he had communion with God,
which this was the effect of: now this was a circumstance which rendered
the law glorious, and was expressive of a real glory in it; which,
though as this on Moses's face, "was to be done away"; wherefore the
apostle argues;

\(x\) In loc. (y) In Exod. fol. 35. 1. (z) Zohar ib. Targum Jon. in
Dent. xxxiv. 12. (a) Targum in Cant. 1. 11. Targum Jon. in Exod. xxxi.
18. (b) Targum Jon. in Deut. ix. 9, 10. (c) In Exod. xxxii. 15. (d)
Jarchi in Exod. xxxiv. 1. Pirke Eliezer, c. 46. (e) Comment. in Psal.
cxix. 135.

[2 Corinthians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">co2 3:8</span></span>

How shall not the ministration of the Spirit,.... By "the ministration
of the Spirit", is meant the Gospel; so called not only because it
ministers spiritual things, as peace, pardon, righteousness and
salvation, spiritual joy and comfort, and even spiritual life; but
because it ministers the Spirit of God himself, by whom it is not only
dictated, and by him at first confirmed, and who qualities persons for
the preaching of it; but by it he conveys himself into the hearts of
men, and makes it powerful for illumination, consolation, edification,
and an increase of every grace; and therefore must be rather glorious,
or much more glorious than the law, the ministration of death.

[2 Corinthians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">co2 3:9</span></span>

For if the ministration of condemnation be glory,.... So the Jews call
the law, for they say, , "there is no glory but the law" (f); this is
another head of opposition or difference between the law and the Gospel,
from whence the superior glory of the one to the other is argued. The
law is "the ministration of condemnation"; as sin is a transgression of
the law, it accuses for it, convinces of it, pronounces guilty, and
adjudges to death on account of it; which is the condemnation it
ministers; and this it does to all Adam's posterity, and for his sin
too; and to all the actual transgressors of it, to all unbelievers, to
all that are under it; even to God's elect themselves, as considered in
Adam, and in themselves as transgressors; and this it ministers to their
consciences when convicted, though it is never executed on them, because
of the suretyship engagement and performances of Christ. The Gospel is

the ministration of righteousness; not of a legal one, or a man's own,
but of the righteousness of Christ, by which the law is honoured,
justice is satisfied, and God's elect justified from all sin and
condemnation; this being perfect, pure, and spotless, and for ever: the
Gospel is "the ministration" of it, as it is a means of stripping a man
of his own righteousness, of revealing Christ's to him, and of working
faith in him, and encouraging him to lay hold upon it for himself; and
thus it is not to righteous persons, but sinners, to all believers, to
all the second Adam's posterity; now as

much more as righteousness exceeds condemnation, and a justified state a
condemned one, so "much more" does the Gospel

exceed the law

in glory.

\(f\) Raya Mehimna in Zohar in Lev. fol. 33. 4.

[2 Corinthians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">co2 3:10</span></span>

For even that which was made glorious,.... The apostle grants that there
was a glory in the law: it "was made glorious"; it was glorious in the
author of it, who is God; it was of his appointing and ordaining,
agreeable to his nature, and a declaration of his will; his authority
was stamped upon it, and it was written by himself, which cannot be said
of any other law whatever; it was glorious in its promulgation, God
himself appeared in great glory at the giving of it; Christ was then
present; it was ordained by angels, and by them delivered into the hands
of Moses, on whose face such a glory was left as could not be
steadfastly looked upon; and it was attended with thunderings,
lightnings, the sound of a trumpet, &c. it was glorious in the matter of
it, it contained great and excellent things; the substance of it is love
to God, and to our neighbour; and it was glorious in its properties,
being, in its nature and substance, holy, just, good, spiritual,
perfect, immutable, and eternal; but yet

had no glory in this respect, by reason of the glory that excelleth.
There is such an excelling glory in the Gospel, that the other is
swallowed up and lost in it; it excels it in those things in which it
was so glorious: in the author of it, which, though the same, yet with
this difference; the law was given by God as a judge, the Gospel by him
as a Father, as the Father of Christ, and of his people in him; the law
is the birth of his holiness and righteousness, the Gospel of his
wisdom, grace, and love; the law declares his will with respect to duty,
the Gospel with respect to salvation; the authority of God is stamped on
the law, but the Gospel is the image of Christ; the law was written by
the finger of God, but the Gospel was hid in his heart, and came from
thence: in the promulgation of it, through the long train of patriarchs
and prophets, that went before it to usher it in; it was published by
Christ, the Son of God himself, confirmed by the gifts and miracles of
the Holy Ghost, and in it is a greater display of the glory of God; it
was attended with angels too, and a voice from heaven delightful and not
terrible; and there was a glory on Christ's countenance, far exceeding
that of Moses's: in the matter of it; which is the love, grace, and
mercy of God; the Lord Jesus Christ, in all the glories and fulness of
his person and offices; salvation by him, spiritual blessings, exceeding
great and precious promises; neither of which are to be observed in the
law: the ordinances of it vastly exceed the legal ones; and it has
greatly the advantage of it in its effects on the souls of men, when
accompanied by the Spirit of God.

[2 Corinthians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">co2 3:11</span></span>

For if that which is done away,.... Here another difference is pointed
out, which subsists between the law and the Gospel, and proves that the
one is more excellent and glorious than the other. The law is "that
which is done away"; not merely the ceremonial law, or the judicial law,
but the whole ministry of Moses, and particularly the law of the
Decalogue: for the better understanding of this, distinguish between the
matter and ministry of it; the ministry of it by Moses is done away, the
matter of it so far as of a moral nature abides: distinguish between the
law, as in the hands of Moses and of Christ; as in the hands of Moses it
is broken to pieces and abolished, as in the hands of Christ, as King in
his church, it remains: distinguish between precepts and precepts; some
are mixed, being partly moral, and partly ceremonial, as the fourth and
fifth commands, and others are not; what is ceremonial, or purely
related to the Jews whilst in their civil policy, and in the land of
Canaan, is done away; but what is purely moral, is, as to the matter of
it, still obliging: distinguish between the law as a covenant of works,
and as a rule of walk and conversation; as a covenant of works it is
done away, as a rule of walk and conversation it still continues:
distinguish between persons and persons; to them that are redeemed from
it, it is done away; to them that are under it, it remains; and lastly,
distinguish between a right and a wrong use of it; as to any use of it
to justify us before God, by our obedience to it, it is done away; but
as it may be of use to convince sinners of sin, and to direct saints in
a course of righteousness, so it abides. The Gospel is "that which
remaineth"; which denotes the continued efficacy, the incorruptibleness,
the inexpugnableness, and duration of it; notwithstanding all the
opposition of men and devils to it, still its blessings, promises,
doctrines, ordinances, and effects continue; it remains in the
Scriptures, in the church, in the hearts of believers, and in the world
too, until all the elect of God are gathered in: now as things that
remain are much more glorious than those which are done away, so the
Gospel must be much more glorious than the law.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Corinthians Chapter 4](co2004)

</div>
