<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Colossians Index](col)  
  [Previous](phi004)  [Next](col001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Colossians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

[Colossians](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">col 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO COLOSSIANS

The Colossians, to whom this epistle is written, were not the Rhodians,
by some called Colossians, from Colossus, the large statue of the sun,
which stood in the island of Rhodes, and was one of the seven wonders of
the world; but the inhabitants of Colosse, a city of the greater
Phrygia, in the lesser Asia, near to which stood the cities of Laodicea
and Hierapolis, mentioned in this epistle. Pliny (a) speaks of it as one
of the chief towns in Phrygia, and (b) Herodotus calls it the great city
of Phrygia; it is said to have perished a very little time after the
writing of this epistle, with the above cities, by an earthquake, in the
year of Christ 66, and in the tenth of Nero (c); though it was
afterwards rebuilt; for Theophylact says, that in his time it was called
Chonae. When the Gospel was brought hither, and by whom, is not known,
nor who was the founder of the church in this place; for the Apostle
Paul was not, since his face had never been seen by them, [Col
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#001), though it is said that Epaphras,
the same name with Epaphroditus, was fixed by him pastor of this church;
and others say Philemon was set over it by him. The occasion of this
epistle was this, Epaphras, who had preached the Gospel to the
Colossians, and very likely was the first that did, came to Rome, where
the Apostle Paul was a prisoner, and gave him an account of them, how
they had heard and received the Gospel, and of their faith Christ, and
love to the saints; and also declared to him in what danger they were
through some false teachers that had got among them, who were for
introducing the philosophy of the Gentiles, the ceremonies of the law of
Moses, and some pernicious tenets of the followers of Simon Magus, and
the Gnostics; upon which the apostle writes this epistle to them, to
confirm them in the faith of the Gospel Epaphras had preached unto them,
and which was the same he himself preached; and to warn them against
those bad men, and their principles; and to exhort them to a discharge
of their duty to God, and men, and one another. It was written by the
apostle, when in bonds at Rome, as many passages in it show, and about
the same time with those to the Philippians and Ephesians; and the
epistle to the latter greatly agrees with this, both as to subject and
style. Dr. Lightfoot places it in the year of Christ 60, in the second
of the apostle's imprisonment, and in the sixth of Nero's reign.

\(a\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 32. (b) Polymnia, l. 7. c. 30. (c) Eusebius in
Chron.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Colossians Chapter 1](col001)

</div>
