<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan006)  [Next](dan008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DANIEL 7

This chapter contains Daniel's vision of the four beasts, The time,
place, manner, writing, and declaration of the vision, [Dan
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001), the rise of the beasts, and the
description of them, [Dan 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002), the
judgment of God upon them, especially the last, and the delivery of
universal monarchy to his Son, [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009), the interpretation of the vision
at the request of Daniel, being greatly affected with it, [Dan
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015), a particular inquiry of his
about the fourth beast, concerning which a full account is given, [Dan
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019), all which caused in him many
thoughts of heart, and reflections of mind, [Dan
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028).

[Daniel 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 7:1</span></span>

In the first year of Belshazzar king of Babylon,.... Daniel having
finished the historical part of his book, and committed to writing what
was necessary concerning himself and his three companions, and
concerning Nebuchadnezzar, Belshazzar, and Darius the Mede, proceeds to
the prophetic part, and goes back to the first year of Belshazzar's
reign, seventeen years before his death, and the fall of the Babylonish
monarchy last mentioned; for so long Belshazzar reigned, according to
Josephus (u); and with which agrees the canon of Ptolemy, who ascribes
so many years to the reign of Nabonadius, the same, with Belshazzar: he
began to reign, according to Bishop Usher (w), Dean Prideaux (x), and
Mr, Whiston (y), in the year of the world 3449 A.M., and 555 B.C.; and
in the first year of his reign Daniel had the dream of the four
monarchies, as follows:

Daniel had a dream: as Nebuchadnezzar before had, concerning the same
things, the four monarchies of the world, and the kingdom of Christ,
only represented in a different manner: or, "saw a dream" (z); in his
dream he had a vision, and objects were presented to his fancy as if he
really saw them, as follows:

and visions of his head came upon his bed; as he lay upon his bed, and
deep sleep was fallen on him, things in a visionary way were exhibited
to him very wonderful and surprising, and which made strong impressions
upon him:

then he wrote the dream: awaking out of his sleep, and perfectly
remembering the dream he had dreamed, and recollecting the several
things he had seen in it; that they might not be lost, but transmitted
to posterity for their use and benefit, he immediately committed them to
writing:

and told the sum of the matters; the whole of what he had dreamt and
seen; or however the sum and substance of it, the more principal parts
of it, the most interesting things in it, and of the greatest
importance: when it was daylight, and he rose from his bed, and went out
of his chamber, he called his friends together, and told them by word of
mouth what he had seen in his dream the night past; or read what he had
written of it, which was as follows:

\(u\) Antiqu. Jud. l. 10. c. 11. sect. 4. (w) Annales Vet. Test. A. M.
3449. (x) Connexion, &c. part. 1. p. 114. (y) Chronological Tables,
cent. 10. (z) "somnium vidit". V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, &c.

[Daniel 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 7:2</span></span>

Daniel spake and said, I saw in my vision by night,.... He declared he
had had a vision by night, and this was the substance of it:

and, behold, the four winds of the heaven strove upon the great sea: the
east, west, north, and south winds, broke out from each of their
quarters, and rushed in upon the great sea; either the Mediterranean, so
called in comparison of the sea of Sodom, and the sea of Tiberias in
Judea; or upon the waters of the main ocean, and raised up its waves,
and seemed as it were to be striving and fighting with them, and put
them into a strange agitation; by which may be meant the whole world,
and the kingdoms and nations of it, because of its largeness,
inconstancy, instability, and disquietude; see [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015), and by the "four winds" some
understand the angels, either good or bad, concerned in the affairs of
Providence on earth, either by divine order or permission; or rather the
kings of the earth raising commotions in it, striving and fighting with
one another, either to defend or enlarge their dominions; and which have
been the means in Providence of the rising up of some great state or
monarchy, as after appears.

[Daniel 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 7:3</span></span>

And four great beasts came up from the sea,.... Which are afterwards
interpreted of four kings or kingdoms, [Dan
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017), which rose up in the world, not
at once, but successively, and out of the sea or world, through the
commotions and agitations of it; and these are the four monarchies,
Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman; compared to "beasts", because
of the rapine and violence, cruelty, oppression, and tyranny, by which
they were obtained, set up, supported, and maintained; and to "great
ones", being not like single separate kingdoms, as the kingdom of
Israel, and the like, but consisting of many kingdoms and nations, and
so like beasts of an enormous size:

diverse one from another; in their situation, language, manner,
strength, and power; hence expressed by divers sorts of beasts, as the
lion, bear, leopard, &c.; as in Nebuchadnezzar's dream by different
metals, gold, silver, brass, and iron.

[Daniel 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 7:4</span></span>

The first was like a lion,.... That which rose up first, the kingdom of
the Babylonians, as the Syriac version expresses it; or the Assyrian
monarchy, founded by Nimrod, increased by the Assyrians, and brought to
its height under Nebuchadnezzar by the Babylonians and Chaldeans; this
is said to be like a "lion" for its strength and power, for its
greatness, dignity, and majesty; the same with the head of gold in
Nebuchadnezzar's dream; see [Jer 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007),

and had eagles' wings; denoting the celerity and swiftness with which
Nebuchadnezzar ran, or rather flew, over several kingdoms and countries,
and added them to his empire; see [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013),

and I beheld till the wings thereof were plucked; it was retarded and
stopped in its conquests; it could fly no further, nor make any new
acquisitions; yea, it was deplumed and stripped of some of its
dominions, the Medes and Persians falling off, and making war with it:

and it was lifted up from the earth; or, "with which it was lifted up
from, the earth" (a); with which wings it raised itself up, and lifted
itself above other kingdoms and nations; but now were plucked, and could
not soar aloft as formerly; its glory and majesty, power and strength,
were lessened, whole provinces revolting, as in the times of
Evilmerodach, Neriglissar, and Belshazzar:

and made stand upon the feet as a man; it did not fly like an eagle as
before, and overrun countries, and waste them; or go upon all four, as a
beast; but stood on its feet, its two hinder legs, like a man;
signifying that it abated, in the reigns of the above princes, of its
strength and fierceness, and became more mild and tractable, and was
reduced within bounds like other kingdoms:

and a man's heart was given to it; instead of a lion like heart, that
was bold and intrepid, and feared nothing, it became weak and fearful,
and timorous like the heart of man, especially in Belshazzar's time; not
only when he saw the handwriting on the wall, to which Jacchiades refers
this; but when he was so fearful of Cyrus that he shut himself up in
Babylon, and durst not stir out to give him battle, as Xenophon (b)
relates; and when the city was taken, the Babylonians were obliged to
deliver up their arms, employ themselves in tilling their fields, and to
pay tribute to the Persians, and always salute them as their lords and
masters, as the same historian (c) says; see [Jer
51:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#030).

\(a\) "quibus efferebatur e terra", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "per
quas efferebatur supra terram", Grotius. (b) Cyropaedia, l. 5. c. 10.
(c) Cyropaedia, l. 7. c. 24.

[Daniel 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 7:5</span></span>

And, behold, another beast, a second, like to a bear,.... Another
monarchy, and which succeeded the former, and rose up upon the ruins of
it, the Medo-Persian monarchy; and so the Syriac version prefixes to
this verse, by way of explanation,

"the kingdom of the Medes''

like to a bear, less generous and strong than the lion; more rough and
uncivil, but equally cruel and voracious; which describes the Medes and
Persians as a fierce and cruel people, and less polished, and more
uncivilized, than the Chaldeans; and answers to the silver breasts and
arms in Nebuchadnezzar's dream; see [Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017),

and it raised up itself on one side; either of the lion, the first beast
it destroyed; or rather on one side of itself, on the side of Persia;
from whence Cyrus came, who was the principal instrument of raising this
empire to the pitch it was brought unto. Some render it, "and it raised
up one government" (d); one empire out of many nations and kingdoms it
subdued:

and it had three ribs in the mouth of it, between the teeth of it; that
is, three ribs covered with flesh, which, it was devouring; the bear
being very voracious, and a great flesh eater: these, according to some,
signify three kings that followed Darius the Mede; Cyrus, Ahasuerus, and
Darius; so Jarchi and Jacchiades; and, according to Jerom, three
kingdoms, the Babylonian, Median, and Persian: but neither of these
kings nor kingdoms can be said to be in its mouth, and between its
teeth, as ground and devoured by it, unless the Babylonian; wherefore it
is better interpreted by others, as Theodoret, the three parts of the
world it conquered, westward, northward, and southward, [Dan
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#004), though it is best of all, with
Sir Isaac Newton and Bishop Chandler, to understand by them Babylon,
Lydia, and Egypt; which countries were ground and oppressed by the Medes
and Persians, as the ribs of any creature are ground in the mouth of a
bear:

and they said thus unto it, arise, devour much flesh; which Jerom refers
to Haman's orders to destroy the Jews in the times of Ahasuerus; but it
is much better applied by others to Cyaxares or Darius sending for Cyrus
to take upon him the command of his army; and to the Hyrcanians,
Gobryas, and others, inviting him to avenge them on the Babylonians,
promising to join and assist him, as Xenophon (e) relates: or rather
this is to be interpreted of the divine will, and of the conduct of
Providence by means of angels stirring up the spirit of Cyrus, and of
the Medes and Persians, to attack and subdue many nations, and
particularly the Babylonians, and fill themselves with their wealth and
substance; hence they are styled the Lord's sanctified, whom he ordered
and called to such service; see [Isa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003).

\(d\) "quae dominatum unum erexit", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus; "et
dominatum quendana erexit", Piscator. (e) Cyropaedia l. 1. c. 22. l. 4.
c. 4, 24.

[Daniel 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 7:6</span></span>

After this I beheld, and, lo another, like a leopard,.... Another beast,
another monarchy, a third monarchy succeeding the Persian monarchy, and
which rose up on the ruins of that; Darius king of the Persians being
beaten by Alexander king of Macedon, who was the instrument of setting
up the Grecian monarchy here intended; compared to a leopard, a smaller
creature than a lion; signifying that this monarchy arose from a small
beginning; and a crafty one, Alexander having many wise counsellors of
his father's about him, though he himself was rash and hasty; and a
spotted one, denoting the various virtues and vices of Alexander, and
his inconstancy in them; sometimes exercising the one, and sometimes the
other; or rather the different nations, and the manners of them, he
conquered, of which this empire consisted; not to say anything of the
cruelty and swiftness of this creature, which are both to be observed in
this conqueror:

which had upon the back of it four wings of a fowl; denoting the
swiftness of Alexander in his conquests; who in a few years made himself
master of the whole world, at least as he thought, whose empire was
greater than that of Nebuchadnezzar and the Chaldeans, to whom only two
wings of an eagle are given, [Dan 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004).
Says Jerom,

"nothing was more swift than the conquest of Alexander, from Illyricum
and the Adriatic sea, unto the Indian ocean, and the river Ganges; he
rather ran through the world by victories than by battles, and in six
years subdued part of Europe, all Asia even unto India,''

to which may be added all Egypt, Syria, and Palestine. Arimazes being
master of a rock in Sogdiana, which was thought inaccessible and
impregnable, Alexander sent a messenger to him to demand the delivery of
it to him; but, among other things he proudly said, he asked the
messenger, with a sneer, if Alexander could fly; which, when the
messenger reported, nettled him much, that he should be insulted because
he had not wings; and vowed that the next night he would make him
believe that the Macedonians did fly; and accordingly they found ways
and means to get to the top of it, which, when the governor saw, he
declared that Alexander's soldiers had wings (f):

the beast also had four heads; which signify the four kingdoms into
which the Grecian empire was divided after Alexander's death, under four
of his generals, who were heads or governors of them: Macedonia under
Antipater, or, as others, Cassander; Egypt under Ptolemy; Syria under
Seleucus; and Asia under Antigonus, or, as others, Lysimachus:

and dominion was given to it; the dominion of the whole world, or,
however, a very large dominion; and this was given of God, and according
to his will, and the ordering of his providence; for to nothing else can
it be ascribed, that with thirty thousand men Alexander should beat an
army of six hundred thousand; and with such a handful of men subdue so
many kingdoms and nations, and that in the space of a few years.

\(f\) Curt. Hist. l. 7. c. 11.

[Daniel 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 7:7</span></span>

After this I saw in the night visions, and behold a fourth beast,....
Not in another night, as Jarchi; but in the same night, and in the same
visions of it; only after he had seen the other three successively, then
last of all he saw this fourth beast; and more being said of this than
of the rest, shows that this was the principal thing in the vision to be
observed, as being to endure until, and having a close connection with,
the kingdom of the Messiah; which, arising, shall destroy it, and take
place of it: this is not the Turkish empire, as Aben Ezra, and others:
nor the kingdom of the Seleucidae, as Grotius, and others; to which
neither the characters, nor the duration of it, agree; but the Roman
empire, which succeeded the Grecian, so Gorionides (g):

dreadful and terrible, and strong exceedingly; exceeding powerful, as
the Roman empire was, and terrible to all the kingdoms of the earth; its
armies, wherever they came, struck terror among the nations, and threw
them into a panic, killing, wasting, robbing all they met with (h); and
especially it was terrible to Christians, by their persecutions of them,
as both Rome Pagan and Rome Papal have been. Rome has its name from
strength with the Greeks, and from height with the Hebrews, as Jerom (i)
observes:

it had great iron teeth; which may design its generals and emperors,
such as Scipio, Pompey, Julius Caesar, and others; which crushed and
devoured all that came in their way: this monarchy answers to the legs
and feet of iron in Nebuchadnezzar's dream:

it devoured and brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with the feet
of it; it devoured nations, broke kingdoms in pieces, and brought them
in subjection to them; reducing them to the greatest servitude, and
obliging them to pay heavy taxes and tribute:

it was diverse from all the beasts that were before it: in its original,
language, laws, customs, and forms of government; it was such a monster,
that no name could be given it; there was no one beast in nature to
which it could be compared; it had all the ill properties of the other
beasts, for craft, cruelty oppression, and tyranny; and therefore John
describes this same beast as being like a leopard, having the feet of a
bear and the mouth of a lion. [Rev
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002),

and it had ten horns; which are explained of ten kings or kingdoms, [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024), the same with the ten toes in
Nebuchadnezzar's dream and with the ten kings that received power as
kings with the beast or ten kingdoms, into which the Roman empire was
divided about the time of the rise of antichrist,see Gill on Rev\_17:12.

\(g\) (Curt. Hist.) l. 3. c. 15. p. 221. (h) Raptores Orbis, &c. Taciti
Vita Agricolae, c. 30. (i) Adv. Jovinian. l. 2. fol. 32. L.

[Daniel 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 7:8</span></span>

I considered the horns,.... The ten horns of the fourth beast; these the
prophet particularly looked at, took special notice of them, carefully
observed them, their number, form, and situation, and pondered in his
mind what should be the meaning of them:

and, behold; while he was attentive to these, and thinking within
himself what they should be, something still more wonderful presented:

there came up among them another little horn; not Titus Vespasian, as
Jarchi; nor the Turkish empire, as Saadiah; nor Antiochus Epiphanes, as
many Christian interpreters; for not a single person or king is meant by
a horn, but a kingdom or state, and a succession of governors; as by the
other ten horns are meant ten kings or kingdoms; besides, this little
horn is a part of the fourth, and not the third beast, to which
Antiochus belonged; and was to rise up, not in the third or Grecian
monarchy, as he did, but in the fourth and Roman monarchy; and was to
continue until the spiritual coming of Christ; or, until his kingdom in
a spiritual sense takers place; which is not true of him: and since no
other has appeared in the Roman empire, to whom the characters of this
horn agree, but antichrist or the pope of Rome, he may be well thought
to be intended. Irenaeus (k), an ancient Christian writer, who lived in
the second century, interprets it of antichrist; of whom having said
many things, has these words:

"Daniel having respect to the end of the last kingdom; that is the last
ten kings among whom their kingdom should be divided, upon whom the son
of perdition shall come; he says that ten horns shall be upon the beast,
and another little horn should rise up in the midst of them; and three
horns of the first be rooted out before him; and, "behold", saith he,
"in this horn were eyes as the eyes of man", &c.; of whom again the
Apostle Paul, in [Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008) declaring
together the cause of his coming, thus says, "and then shall that wicked
one be revealed &c."''

and in a following chapter (l) the same writer observes,

"John the disciple of the Lord in the Revelation hath yet more
manifestly signified of the last time, and of those ten kings in it,
among whom the empire that now reigns (the Roman empire) shall be
divided; declaring what shall be the ten horns, which were seen by
Daniel; saying, "the ten horns which thou sawest are ten kings, which
have received no kingdom as yet, &c."; therefore it is manifest, that of
these he that is to come shall slay three, and the rest shall be subject
to him, and he shall be the eighth among them;''

and Jerom on the place says, that this is the sense of

"all ecclesiastical writers, that when the Roman empire is destroyed,
there shall be ten kings who shall divide it among them; and an eleventh
shall arise, a little king, who shall conquer three of the ten kings;
and having slain them, the other seven shall submit their necks to the
conqueror:''

who he further observes is not a devil or demon, but a man, the man of
sin, and son of perdition; so as that he dare to sit in the temple of
God, making himself as if he was God: now to the Roman antichrist
everything here said answers: he is a "horn", possessed of power,
strength, authority, and dominion, of which the horn is an emblem; a
"little" one, which rose from small beginnings, and came to his
ecclesiastic power, from a common pastor or bishop, to be a metropolitan
of Italy, and then universal bishop; and to his secular power, which at
first was very small, and since increased; and yet in comparison of
other horns or kingdoms, but little; though, being allowed to exercise a
power within others, is, or at least has been, very formidable: this
"came up among" the other horns; when the northern barbarous nations
broke into the empire and set up ten kingdoms in it, this little horn
sprung up among them; and while they were forming kingdoms for
themselves, he was contriving one for himself; they rose at the same
time and reigned together; see [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012),

before whom, there were three of the first horns plucked up by the
roots; before whom three kings or kingdoms fell, and were subdued as in
[Dan 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020) which, according to Mr. Mede
(m), were the kingdoms of the Greeks, of the Longobards, and of the
Franks; but, according to Sir Isaac Newton (n), they were the exarchate
of Ravenna, the kingdom of the Lombards, and the senate and dukedom of
Rome; or, according to the present bishop of Clogher (o), the Campagnia
of Rome, the exarchate of Ravenna, and the region of Pentapolis, which
were plucked up by Pipin and Charlemagne, kings of France, and given to
the pope; and were confirmed to him by their successor Lewis the pious,
and is what is called the patrimony of St. Peter; in memory of which a
piece of Mosaic work was made and put up in the pope's palace,
representing St. Peter with three keys in his lap; signifying the three
keys of the three parts of his patrimony; and to show his sovereignty
over them, the pope to this day wears a triple crown:

and, behold, in this horn were eyes like the eyes of man; in some
monstrous births there have been eyes in the knees, and in the belly
above the navel (p); but never was there known such a monster as this,
to have a horn, and eyes in the horn; horns some monsters have but not
eyes in them: these may design the pretended sanctity and religion of
the pope of Rome or antichrist, who, though a beast, would be thought to
be a man, a religious creature; or his pretended modesty, humanity, and
courtesy, when he is all the reverse; or rather his insight into the
Scriptures he makes pretension to, setting himself up as an infallible
judge of them, and of all controversies: though they seem better to
design what he really has than what he pretends to; and may denote his
penetration and sagacity, his craft and cunning, and sharp looking out
to get power and dominion, temporal and spiritual; and his watchfulness
to keep it, that it is not encroached upon, and took away from him; and
also all means and instruments by which he inspects his own and others'
affairs; particularly the order of the Jesuits, which are his eyes
everywhere, spies in all kingdoms and courts, and get intelligence of
what is done in the councils and cabinets of princes: how many eyes this
horn had is not said; nor is it easy to say how many the pope of Rome
has; he has as many as Argus, and more too, and these sharp and
piercing:

and a mouth speaking great things as that he is Christ's vicar on earth,
Peter's successor, head of the church, and universal bishop; that he is
infallible, and cannot err; that he has all power in heaven, earth, and
hell; that he can forgive sin, grant indulgences, make new laws, and
bind the consciences of men; dispense with the laws of God and men;
dispose of kingdoms, and remove and set up kings at pleasure, with many
others of the like kind; see [Rev
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005).

\(k\) Advers. Haeress, l. 5. c. 25. (l) Ibid. c. 26. (m) Works, B. 4. p.
779. (n) Observations on Daniel, p. 75-78, 80, 88. (o) Inquiry into the
Time of the Messiah's coming, p. 28. (p) Vid. Schott. Phyica Curiosa, l.
5. c. 25. p. 711, 712.

[Daniel 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 7:9</span></span>

I beheld till the thrones were cast down,.... On which the governors of
the above monarchies sat; and those of the ten kings, signified by the
ten horns; and also that of the little horn. The prophet kept looking on
the objects before him, till he in his dream, and the visions of the
night, saw all those empires and kingdoms demolished, and all rule,
power, and authority, put down, and way made for the glorious kingdom of
the Messiah, and his saints with him; to this sense Aben Ezra, Saadiah,
and Jacchiades, interpret the word used; but the Septuagint, Vulgate
Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions, render it, "until the thrones were
set up" (q); for the judges to sit upon to try, judge, and condemn the
four beasts or monarchies; in order to make way for the kingdom of the
Son of man to take place in the spirituality and glory of it: here are
more thrones than one; see [Rev 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004),
one for the Ancient of days, and another for him who was like to the Son
of man, brought near before him; and so the Jews (r) say, here were two
thrones pitched and prepared, one for the Ancient of days, and another
for David, that is, the Messiah, or Son of David; and so Jarchi
paraphrases the words,

"the thrones were pitched and prepared to sit upon in judgment:''

and this sense is confirmed by the use of the word in [Ezr
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#024) and in the Targum on [Kg2
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#014) and to this agrees best the
following clause:

and the Ancient of days did sit; on one of the thrones pitched, as chief
Judge: this is to be understood of God the Father, as distinct from the
Messiah, the Son of God, said to be like the Son of man brought unto
him, [Dan 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013) and is so called, not
only because he is from everlasting, and without beginning of days; but
chiefly because he is permanent, and endures for ever; his years fail
not, and of his days there will be no end; and he will be when these
empires, signified by the four beasts, will be no more; and very fit to
be Judge of them, because of his consummate wisdom and prudence,
signified also by this phrase; and the divine Father of Christ is still
more proper, because it is in Christ's cause the judgment will proceed;
and this in order to introduce him openly into his dominions in the
world:

whose garment was white as snow; denoting the purity of his nature, the
brightness of his majesty, and his uncorruptness in judgment:

and the hair of his head like the pure wool; signifying his
venerableness, gravity, wisdom, and ripeness of judgment; being
wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working:

his throne was like the fiery flame; expressive of him, as awful and
formidable, as a consuming fire; and of his piercing judgment, and the
severity of it:

and his wheels as burning fire; the wheels of his throne; alluding to
such seats and thrones as were made to turn about, and to be moved from
place to place; denoting the power and providence of God everywhere; the
clear view he has of all things, in all places; and his swiftness in the
execution of his judgments.

\(q\) "subsellia posita sunt", Tigurine version; "solia posita sunt",
Piscator, Cocceius; "throni elati sunt", Pagninus, Montanus. (r) T. Bab.
Chagiga, fol. 14. 1. & Gloss in ib.

[Daniel 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 7:10</span></span>

A fiery stream issued and came forth from before him,.... Or, "a river
of fire" (s); which denotes the copious judgments of God, the abundance
of them; the full flow of his wrath, and the fierceness of it; and also
its rapidity, which cannot be resisted and stopped:

thousand thousands ministered unto him; attended upon him, waiting his
orders, and ready to execute them; an innumerable company of angels,
[Psa 103:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#020),

and ten thousand times ten thousand stood before him; to be judged by
him; the numerous inhabitants of the several monarchies, with their
kings; particularly all the antichristian states, and the worshippers of
the beast, whom the whole world went after, [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003),

the judgment was set; that is, the court was set; the Judge was upon the
bench, and all his assessors and apparitors about him, and that
ministered to him:

and the books were opened; both to take the trial in writing, and to
produce evidence against the criminals; the book of God's purposes and
decrees concerning these beasts; the book of prophecies relating to
them; the book of God's remembrance, and of their own consciences, with
respect to the evils committed by them; and the book of records,
statutes, and laws made in such cases; even the book of the Scriptures,
which contains the revelation of the will of God. In some things there
is a likeness between this and the last and future judgment, and in
other things a disagreement; the Judge in both is a divine Person, the
eternal God, omniscient, omnipotent, holy, just, and true, which is
absolutely necessary for carrying on such a process; none but God over
all is equal to such a work: in the last judgment, as in this, there
will be thrones; the throne of God and of the Lamb, particularly a great
white throne, a symbol of purity, justice, and equity, on which the
Judge himself will sit, and execute judgment, from whose presence the
earth and heaven will flee away; and besides, there will be other
thrones for the martyrs of Jesus, and true professors of his name, to
sit upon as spectators, witnesses, and approvers of the solemn
procedure, and shall reign with Christ a thousand years: likewise the
number of the persons judged, as here, will be very great, even
innumerable; all, both small and great, as to age or dignity, will stand
before the Judge, to be judged by him, and receive their sentence from
him; and there will be books for that purpose, as here, even the same,
and particularly the book of life, in which, if a man's name is not
written, he will be cast into the lake of fire; see [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004), but in other things they differ;
here the Judge is God the Father, the first Person in the Trinity,
called the Ancient of days, distinguished from Christ, said to be like
the Son of man; whereas the last and future judgment will be committed
to the Son of God, the second Person, who is ordained Judge of quick and
dead; and who will come a second time to judge the world in
righteousness; and, though the description of the Ancient of days will
agree well enough with him, he having the same glorious perfections his
Father has, which qualify him for a Judge; see [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014), yet it is certain not he, but
his divine Father, is intended: nor in the account of the future
judgment is there any mention of "a fiery stream" issuing forth before
him, as here, for the burning of the body of the beast; unless the lake
of fire may be thought to answer to it, into which will be cast all such
who have no part in the Lamb, nor a name in his book of life: however,
the accounts of both are very awful and striking; and this may be
considered as a type, example, presage, and pledge, of the future
judgment; this will be at the beginning of the spiritual reign of
Christ, when antichrist will be destroyed with the breath of his mouth,
and the brightness of his coming; the judgment of the saints will be at
the beginning of his personal reign, even of the quick and dead, those
that will be found alive, and those that will be raised from the dead,
at his appearing and kingdom; and the judgment of the wicked will be at
the close of it, or at the end of the Millennium; see [Rev
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#005).

\(s\) "fluvius ignis", Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Daniel 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 7:11</span></span>

I beheld then because of the voice of the great words which the horn
spake,.... Or, "from the voice" (t); from the time it was heard, the
prophet continued looking to see what would be the issue of all this;
especially from the time he heard the little horn speak such blasphemous
things against God, and Christ, and his people, which were so
intolerable, that he concluded some notice would be taken of them in a
way of correction and punishment; and the rather, when he saw the Judge
appear with so much majesty and grandeur, and all things prepared for a
judicial process:

I beheld even till the beast was slain; the fourth beast, the Roman
monarchy, to which a period will be put, and be utterly abolished in
every form and shape, and with it the little horn or Papacy; when the
beast on which the whore of Rome sits and rules, and by whom she is
supported, will go into perdition; and she herself shall be made
desolate and naked, her flesh eaten, and she burned with fire by the ten
horns, or kings, that shall rise up against her, being filled with
hatred to her, [Rev 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003),

and his body destroyed, and given to the burning flame; when Rome with
all its power and wealth shall cease, and be no more, the whole body of
the antichristian states shall perish; the city of Rome shall be burnt
with fire; the beast and false prophet shall be taken and cast into a
lake of fire, burning with brimstone, [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008).

\(t\) "a voce", Montanus, Cocceius; "ex quo coepit vox", Vatablus,
Junius & Tremellius; "ex quo audita fuit vox", Piscator.

[Daniel 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 7:12</span></span>

As concerning the rest of the beasts..... The other three which
represent the Babylonian, Persian and Grecian monarchies:

they had their dominion taken away; not at this time when the fourth
beast, or Roman empire, is destroyed, but long ago; and not together,
but successively; the dominion was taken away from the Babylonians, and
given to the Persians; and then their dominion was taken away, and given
to the Grecians; and after that the dominion of the Grecians was taken
away from them, and given to the Romans: the prophet having observed
what became of the fourth beast, he was most intent upon, just in a few
words takes notice of the fate of the other three, before this:

yet their lives were prolonged for a season and time: these monarchies
did not at once become extinct, as the fourth beast or monarchy will,
but by degrees; and the kingdoms of which they consisted are still in
being, though in another form of government, and in different hands;
whereas, when the fourth monarchy is destroyed, all rule and authority
will be put down, and the kingdom be given to Christ and his saints, as
follow:

[Daniel 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 7:13</span></span>

I saw in the night visions,.... Very probably the same night in which he
had the dream and vision of the four beasts; but this that follows,
being a new object presented, is introduced and prefaced after this
manner; as well as, being something wonderful and worthy of attention,
has a "behold" prefixed to it:

and, behold one like the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven; not
Judas Maccabaeus, as Porphyry; nor the Roman people, as Grotius; nor the
people of Israel, as Aben Ezra; nor the people of the saints of the most
High, as Cocceius; but the Messiah, as most Christian interpreters, and
even the Jews themselves, both ancient and modern, allow. In the ancient
book of Zohar (u) it is said,

"in the times of the Messiah, Israel shall be one people, to the Lord,
and he shall make them one nation in the earth, and they shall rule
above and below; as it is written, "behold, one like the Son of man came
with the clouds of heaven"; this is the King Messiah of whom it is
written, "and in the days of these kings shall the God of heaven, set up
a kingdom which shall never be destroyed", &c. [Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044)''

So in the Talmud (w) this prophecy is thus reconciled with another,
concerning the Messiah, in [Zac 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009),
to what R. Alexander said, R. Joshua ben Levi objects what is written,

and, behold, one like to the Son of man came with the clouds of heaven;
and it is written, "poor, and riding upon an ass": which is thus
adjusted,

"if they (the Israelites) are worthy, he (the Messiah) comes with the
clouds of heaven; but if they are not worthy, he comes poor, and riding
on an ass;''

and so it is interpreted in their ancient Midrashes (x), or expositions,
as well us in more modern ones: Jarchi on the text says,

"he is the Messiah;''

and so R. Saadiah Gaon and Jacchiades, this is Messiah our
righteousness; and Aben Ezra observes, that this is the sense R. Jeshua
gives, "that one like to the Son of man" is the Messiah; and he adds, it
is right, only along with him must be joined the holy people, who are
the Israelites: and, with the Jews, Anani, which signifies "clouds", is
the name of the Messiah, founded upon this text, in the Targum of [Ch1
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#024), where mention is made of the
name of a person, Anani, it is added,

"who is the Messiah that is to be revealed;''

so in an ancient book called Tanchuma (y), speaking of Zerubbabel, it is
asked, from whence did he spring? it is answered from David, as it is
said, [Ch1 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#010) "and Solomon's son was
Rehoboam", &c.; and so all in the line are mentioned unto Anani, [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024) and then it is asked, who is this
Anani? this is the Messiah, as it is said, [Dan
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#013),

and I saw in the visions of the night, and, behold, one like to the Son
of man came with the clouds of heaven. He is said to be "as", or "like
the Son of man", in agreement with the style of these visions, [Dan
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004), or because as yet he was not
really incarnate, only appeared in a human form; or this as is not a
note of similitude, but of truth and reality, as in [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014) or because he was more than a
man: and his coming with the clouds of heaven denotes the majesty,
visibility, and swiftness, with which he came to take open possession of
his kingdom and glory. Saadiah interprets them of the angels of heaven,
with which he will be attended:

and came to the Ancient of days; his divine Father, from whom, as man
and Mediator, he receives his mediatorial kingdom, is invested with it,
and insisted it, to it; see [Rev 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#007)
this is not to be understood of his first coming in the flesh, which was
from his Father, and not to him; nor of his ascension to heaven,
exaltation and session at the right hand of God, when he indeed received
the kingdom from the Father, and was made and declared Lord and Christ;
but this seems to respect what shall be upon the destruction of the
fourth beast, when Christ shall receive and take to himself his great
power, and reign, and more visibly appear by his Father's designation
and appointment, and his open glory, to be King and Lord over all:

and they brought him near before him; not Elijah the prophet, as
Jacchindes; rather the angels, as others; or the saints by their
prayers, who hasten to, and hasten thereby, the coming and kingdom of
Christ in a more spiritual and glorious manner; or it may be rendered
impersonally,

"he was brought near before him,''

as by the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions.

\(u\) In Gen. fol. 85. 4. Ed. Sultzbac. (w) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 98.
1. (x) Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 13. fol. 209. 4. Midrash Tillium apud
Galatin. de Arcan. Cathol. ver. l. 10. c. 1. (y) Apud Yalkut Simeoni,
par. 2. fol. 85. 2.

[Daniel 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">dan 7:14</span></span>

And there was given him dominion, and glory, and a kingdom,.... That is,
a large, powerful, and glorious kingdom; not but that he had a kingdom
before, but now it will be more extensive, and appear in greater glory:
this will be fulfilled when the kingdoms of this world shall become his,
and all nations shall serve and worship him, [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015), as follows:

that all people, nations, and languages, should serve him; embrace his
Gospel, submit to his ordinances serve and worship him in every
religious duty; every people, of all nations, and of every language
under heaven; which will be the case when the everlasting Gospel will be
preached to them all with success, [Rev
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006),

his dominion is an everlasting dominion; it shall never have an end, as
the rest of the monarchies, signified by the four beasts, have had, or
will have; see [Psa 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006),

which shall not pass away; or be removed from one to another, like the
above monarchies:

and his kingdom that which shall not be destroyed; or "corrupted" (z)
abolished and brought to nothing, as the said monarchies were one by
another; and, at last, all of them by the stone cut out of the mountain;
see [Dan 2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044).

\(z\) "corrumpetur", Pagninus, Montanus; "corrumpitur", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Coccceus.

[Daniel 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">dan 7:15</span></span>

I Daniel was grieved in my spirit in the midst of my body,.... Or
"sheath" (a); the soul being in the body as a sword in its scabbard;
where it was "cut" (b) and pierced, as the word signifies; and was
wounded, distressed, and grieved at the vision seen; not at the sight of
the Son of man, and the glorious and everlasting kingdom given to him;
but of the four beasts, and especially the last, and more particularly
the little horn, and the look, and words, and actions of that, as well
as the awful scene of judgment presented to his view:

and the visions of my head troubled me; the things he saw, which
appeared to his fancy as real things, gave him a great deal of
uneasiness, and chiefly because he did not understand the meaning of
them; it was not so much the things themselves, as ignorance of them,
that cut him to the heart, and grieved and troubled him; for what is
more so to an inquisitive mind, that has got a hint of something great
and useful to be known, but cannot as yet come to the knowledge of it?

\(a\) "in medio vaginae", Montanus; "intra vaginam", Munster, Vatablus.
(b) "transfixus est", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus; "succisus, vel
excisus est", Munster.

[Daniel 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">dan 7:16</span></span>

I came near unto one of them that stood by,.... To one of the angels
that attended, either the throne of judgment, or, the Son of man in his
approach to his divine Father:

and asked him the truth of all this; the substance of these visions;
what these images, presented to his view, were shadows and
representations of; so type and truth, shadow and substance, are opposed
to each other. The real meaning of all this was what he asked; nor need
any be ashamed to ask of whomsoever they can hope to get knowledge of
truth, and especially of superiors, of the angels of the churches, or
pastors of them:

so he told me, and made me know the interpretation of the things; he
interpreted everything in the vision to him, and gave him the true
meaning and real design of the whole, as follows: this was asked and
told, not when Daniel was awake, and was considering of what he had
dreamed; but in his dream, in his vision by night; this was all
transacted in a visionary way, both the things and the interpretation of
them.

[Daniel 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">dan 7:17</span></span>

These great beasts, which are four, are four kings,.... Or kingdoms, as
the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions; and so Jarchi, Aben
Ezra, and Saadiah; so the fourth beast is called the fourth kingdom,
[Dan 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023) or a succession of kings in
four kingdoms or monarchies, comparable to beasts for their strength,
cruelty, and tyranny: these are the words of him that stood by, of one
of the angels Daniel applied to, to know the meaning of his dream; and
might be better rendered, "as to these (c) great beasts, which are
four"; for their quality beasts, for their quantity great, and for
number four. The meaning is,

four kings shall arise out of the earth; or kingdoms; which have an
earthly original and foundation; are supported by earthly and worldly
means, and with earthly and worldly views; and are different from the
kingdom of Christ and his saints, which is not of the world, though it
may be in it: this explains what is meant by the great sea, from whence
these beasts are said to come up, [Dan
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#003), nor is it any material objection
that the first of these kingdoms, the Babylonian, was risen already, and
almost at an end; since the denomination is taken from the larger
number; three of them were to arise, and the first was of the same
original with them; thus it is said, [Dan
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#002), that three kings of Persia
should stand up, and yet Cyrus, who was one of them, reigned already.

\(c\) "Quod attinet", Michaelis.

[Daniel 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">dan 7:18</span></span>

But the saints of the most High,.... Or, "of the most high Ones" (d),
Father, Son, and Spirit, separated by God the Father in election, and in
that sense his servants, or sanctified ones, [Jde
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001), and redeemed by the Son, and
sanctified with his blood, or their sins atoned by it, and to whom he is
made sanctification, and so his saints, [Heb
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#012) and sanctified by the Spirit,
who in conversion implants principles of grace and holiness in them,
[Co1 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#011), or, "the saints of high"
(e), places or things; who are born from above, and are called with a
high and heavenly calling, towards which they are pressing, reckoning
themselves strangers here below:

these shall take the kingdom; or "receive" (f) it, as a free gift from
God; and not by force, and rapine, and violence, as the beasts did:

and possess the kingdom for ever, even for ever and ever; after the four
monarchies are destroyed, a fifth kingdom shall be set up; and this will
be given to, and put into the possession of, the saints; they shall have
the rule and government in the world, even in the whole world, as well
as reign with Christ spiritually; which manner of rule shall last long;
and then after the first resurrection they shall reign with him a
thousand years on earth, and afterwards in heaven to all eternity. There
is another rendering and sense of the words given, "and they (the
beasts) shall receive the kingdom of the saints of the most High" (g),
&c.; and so Saadiah interprets them,

"and these kingdoms shall receive the kingdom of Israel, who are the
saints of the most High, until the world to come, until the Messiah
reigns;''

and this way go many others, who understand the words of those several
monarchies possessing the land of Judea, and ruling over it; and of the
continuance of it in the hands of Papists or Turks for a long, time,
even until the glorious kingdom of Christ takes place; but this does not
agree with the accentuation of the words, their form of construction,
their connection, and strong manner of expression, "for ever and ever";
and especially if compared with [Dan
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022).

\(d\) "sanctorum altissimorum", Pagninus, Montanus; "sanctorum
excelsorum", Junius & Tremellius. (e) "Sancti exceisoram, sel locorum",
Piscator. (f) "accipient", Munster, Piscator, Tigurine version. (g)
"Suscipient regnum sanctorum", Pagninus, Montanus; "sortientur, vel
obtienebunt regnum", Calvin; so Polanus, Sanctius.

[Daniel 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">dan 7:19</span></span>

Then I would know the truth of the fourth beast;.... What it
represented, what kingdom or monarchy was meant by it; for, by the above
answer of the angel, he understood the four beasts signified four kings
or kingdoms; the three first he pretty well understood; at least he was
not so solicitous about them as about the fourth; and this he was
desirous of having a very particular and exact account of; it
threatening, by its appearance, a great deal of trouble to the world,
and especially to the church of God:

which was diverse from all the others; or, "from all them", or "those"
(h), the other three beasts:

exceeding dreadful; to other kingdoms and nations:

whose teeth were of iron; of these parts of its description, see on [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007),

and his nails of brass; this is a new circumstance, not before
mentioned, and here added with great propriety: "nails" belonging to a
beast of prey, and these said to be of "brass", to denote its strength,
cruelty, and voraciousness in tearing its prey, to pieces; and,
moreover, to show that this kingdom has somewhat of the nature of the
third or Grecian monarchy, said to be of brass in Nebuchadnezzar's
dream; some out of that kingdom being taken into the Roman militia, as,
Theodoret observes; and soldiers are to a king what nails are to a
beast:

which devoured, brake in pieces, and stamped the residue with his feet;
some kingdoms and provinces were destroyed by it, and the rest were made
subject to it; see [Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007).

\(h\) "a cunctis ipse", Pagninus, Montanus; "ab omnibus illis", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[Daniel 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">dan 7:20</span></span>

And of the ten horns,.... That is, Daniel desired to know the truth of
the ten horns, or the meaning of them what they signified, and who they
pointed at, of which in [Dan 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007), here
it is added,

that were in his head; observing the situation of them; thought the
horns of a beast could hardly be thought to be elsewhere:

and of the other which came up, and before whom three fell; particularly
he was very desirous to know the meaning of a single horn, which rose up
among the rest, and before which three of the other horns fell, being
plucked up by the roots:

even of that horn that had eyes, and a mouth that spake very great
things: See Gill on [Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008),

whose look was more stout than his fellows; than the other beasts, or
rather than the other horns; either than his fellow bishops, claiming an
authority over them, as being universal bishop; or than the kings and
princes of the earth, setting up himself above all that is called god,
emperors and kings; taking to himself all power in heaven and in earth;
a power to depose kings, and absolve their subjects from allegiance to
them, and even over the consciences of men; so that his look is more
bold and impudent than others, as well as more fierce and terrible,
threatening kings and kingdoms with his bulls, anathemas, and
interdicts: or, "whose appearance is greater than his fellows" (i); in
pomp and splendour, making a greater show and figure than the kings of
the earth, and claiming a superiority over them.

\(i\) "cujus aspectus", Munster; "et aspectus ejus major sociis suis",
Pagninus.

[Daniel 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">dan 7:21</span></span>

I beheld, and the same horn made war with the saints,.... The same
little horn before described; not Antiochus Epiphanes, who made war with
the Jews, as many think; or the Roman Caesars, that persecuted the
church of Christ, as others; nor Titus Vespasian, who fought against
Israel, as Saadiah; but antichrist, or the pope of Rome; and this refers
to the wars of the popes with the Waldenses, which began in the year
1160, and continued long, and with the two witnesses at the close of
their testimony, [Rev 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007), this
Daniel had a view of in vision; not while he was inquiring of the angel,
but before, though not mentioned till now; and was a reason he was so
very inquisitive about this little horn, because of its war with the
saints, and its success, as follows:

and prevailed against them: as the popes and their abettors did against
the Waldenses and Albigenses, whom they slew in great numbers, and got
the victory over; as the beast also, the same with this little horn,
will overcome the witnesses, and slay them, [Rev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007).

[Daniel 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">dan 7:22</span></span>

Until the Ancient of days came,.... Not locally, by change of place, he
being the omnipresent God; but in a providential way, to check and put a
stop to the power and prevalency of the little horn over the saints; for
this is the terminus or end of that; which puts a period to it; for when
the Ancient of days comes in the exertion of his power and providence,
he will come and sit as a Judge upon this little horn or antichrist, and
judge, and condemn, and punish it; see [Dan
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#009),

and judgment was given to the saints of the most High; their characters
vindicated from all calumny and false aspersions; their adversaries
condemned and punished; and power, dominion, and authority, given to
them with Christ; see [Dan 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027),

and the time came that the saints possessed the kingdom; See Gill on
[Dan 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#018); till which time the little
horn or antichrist will reign and rage, and prevail over the saints, but
no longer.

[Daniel 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">dan 7:23</span></span>

Thus he said,.... The person that stood by, the angel, of whom Daniel
made his inquiries, and who answered him, as follows:

the fourth beast shall be the fourth kingdom on earth; which shows that
the angel, by four kings, [Dan 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#017),
meant four kingdoms, that should successively arise in the earth, and
out of it, one after another; and this kingdom is not the kingdom of the
Seleucidae, nor the Turkish, but the Roman empire; for this is to
continue until the kingdom of Christ takes place; see [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007),

which shall be diverse from all kingdoms; from the kingdoms and
monarchies that were before it; particularly as a kingdom, in its form
of government, both when Pagan and when Papal; see [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007),

and shall devour the whole earth, and shall tread it down, and break it
in pieces: not the whole land of Judea only, as some read and interpret
it; but the whole world, which the Romans became masters of; and the
phrases used denote the destruction and desolation they made, wherever
they carried their arms, and the cruelty and tyranny they exercised, and
the vast profusion of blood made by them, both among the Heathens they
subdued, and the Christians they persecuted.

[Daniel 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">dan 7:24</span></span>

And the ten horns out of this kingdom are ten kings that shall
arise,..... Or ten kingdoms which sprung out of the Roman empire, or
into which it was broken and divided upon the dissolution of it, about
A.D. 476; which, according to Mr. Mede (k), were thus divided, A.D. 456,

1\. Britons; 2. Saxons; 3. Franks; 4. Burgundians; 5 Visigoths; 6.
Suevians and Alanes; 7. Vandals; 8. Almanes; 9. Ostrogoths; 10. Greeks.

The list Bishop Lloyd (l) has given of them is,

1\. Hunns, who erected their kingdom in that part of Pannonia and Dacia,
which was from them called Hungary, about A.D. 356. 2. Ostrogoths, who
settled themselves in the countries that reach from Rhetia to Maesia,
even to Thrace, about 377; and afterwards came into Italy under
Alaricus, in 410. 3. Visigoths, who settled in the south parts of
France, and in Catalonia, about 378. 4. Franks, who seized upon part of
Germany and Gaul, A.D. 410. 5. Vandals, who settled in Spain; afterwards
set up their kingdom in Africa, A.D. 407; their king Gensericus sacked
Rome, 455. 6. Suevians and Alans, who seized the western parts of Spain,
A.D. 407; and invaded Italy, 457. 7. Burgundians, who came out of
Germany, into that part of Gaul called from them Burgundy, 407. 8.
Herules, Rugians, and Thoringians, who settled in Italy under Odoacer,
about A.D. 476. 9. Saxons, who made themselves masters of Great Britain
about the same time, 476. 10. Longobards, called likewise Gopidae, who
settled in Germany, about Magdeburg, A.D. 383; and afterwards succeeded
the Heruli and Thuringi in Hungary, about the year 826.

Sir Isaac Newton (m) reckons the ten kingdoms in the following order:

1\. the kingdom of the Vandals and Alans in Spain and Africa; 2. of the
Suevians in Spain; 3. of the Visigoths; 4. of the Alans in Gallia; 5. of
the Burgundians; 6. of the Franks; 7. of the Britons; 8. of the Hunns;
9. of the Lombards; 10. of Ravenna;

who gives an account of the various kings of these kingdoms; and these,
as the same learned writer says (n), whatever was their number
afterwards, they are still called the ten kings from their first number;
and though they have not always been in the same form and order, yet
they have been generally about, if not exactly, the same number; as they
are now near the same; and may be thus reckoned, as the kingdoms of
France, Spain, Portugal, Germany, Great Britain, Sardinia, Denmark, the
two Sicilies, Swedeland, Prussia, and Poland; of which see more See Gill
on [Rev 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012).

And another shall rise after thee: not Titus Vespeasian, as Jarchi and
Saadiah; nor the nation of Gog and Magog, as Jacchiades: but the pope of
Rome, or antichrist; who came to his power as universal bishop, and as a
horn or temporal prince, after the above kingdoms arose; not after they
were at an end, but after they were constituted and established, as it
was proper they should first be; since they were to give their strength,
power, and kingdom, to the antichristian beast, by which it became a
horn or temporal prince, [Rev 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#013).
The Septuagint render it, "behind them"; which Mr. Mede (o) interprets
of his springing up unawares, imperceptibly, unnoticed, and unobserved
by them, till he overtopped them.

And he shall be diverse from the first; from the first ten horns, kings
or kingdoms; having, besides a secular power and temporal authority, an
ecclesiastical and spiritual one; a power not only over the bodies and
estates of men, but over their souls and consciences; and even over the
other horns and kingdoms, which they had not over one another; and so
was different from them all:

and he shall subdue three kings; designed by the three horns plucked up
by the roots, and which fell before him; of which See Gill on [Dan
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008).

\(k\) Works, B. 3. c. 14. p. 661. (l) Apud Lowth in loc. (m)
Observations on Daniel, c. 6. p. 47. (n) Ibid. p. 73. (o) Works, B. 4.
ep. 24. p. 778.

[Daniel 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">dan 7:25</span></span>

And he shall speak great words against the most High,.... Or, "at the
side of the most High" (p); setting himself up as a rival, and upon an
equality with him; taking the names and characters of holiness,
infallibility, yea, of deity itself, unto him; claiming a power to
forgive sin, which is peculiar to God; and preferring his own laws,
doctrines, and traditions, to the word of God:

and shall wear out the saints of the most High; by his wars with them,
and murders and massacres of them; by taking away their lives and their
substance; so lessening their numbers, and weakening their strength and
power, wear them out, as a garment is wore out, as the word (q)
signifies; utterly consume and destroy them, at least in his own
apprehensions; which will be the case when the witnesses will be slain,
[Rev 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008), and especially will wear
out their patience, or however thoroughly exercise it. The word (r), in
the Arabic language, signifies "to afflict and handle roughly"; and such
usage the saints have met with, more or less, in all ages, from the man
of sin.

And think to change times and laws: to alter the forms and constitutions
of kingdoms, and the customs and usages of them; yea, to set up and pull
down kings at pleasure; see [Dan 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021),
or to change the use of times and seasons, by setting apart days as holy
for canonized saints; and appointing such days in a week, and such a
season in the year, for abstinence from meats; and even to change the
laws of God and man, by dispensing with both, and making new ones of his
own:

and they shall be given into his hand; either the saints he makes war
with, and wears out, who shall be overcome by him; or the times and
laws, which he shall not only have it in his mind and purpose to change,
but shall have it in his power to do it, and shall do it:

until a time, and times, and the dividing of time; by "a time" is meant
a year, the longest part of time; by "times", two years; and "the
dividing of time", half a year; in all three years and a half, which is
the same with 1260 days, or forty two months, the time of the witnesses
prophesying in sackcloth, and of the reign of antichrist; so long shall
he continue, exercising his power and authority, his wrath and rage, and
blasphemy, and no longer; see [Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002).

\(p\) "ad regionem, sive latus Altissimi", Calvin; "juxta Altissimum".
Cocceius; "ex parte Altissimi", Munster. (q) Sept.; "deteret", Junius &
Trmellius, Piscator; "abolebit", Montanus; "absumet" Munster;
"consumet", Vatablus. (r) "ingrato et duriore modo tractavit, affixit",
Giggeius apud Golium, col. 325. Erpenius apud Castel. col. 363. So
Michaelis on the place observes.

[Daniel 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">dan 7:26</span></span>

But the judgment shall sit,.... As in [Dan
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010), the court shall sit, the Judge
shall take the bench, and all things be prepared for the arraignment,
trial, condemnation, and punishment, of the little horn or antichrist,
when the above time is up; God the Father, the Ancient of days, and
Christ, said to be like the Son of man, brought near to him, shall sit
as Judges, attended by the holy angels:

and they shall take away his dominion, to consume and to destroy it unto
the end; either the angels, or rather the saints of the most High;
particularly the Christian princes, into whose hearts God will put it to
hate the whore, eat her flesh, and burn her with fire; so that there
shall be an utter end of antichrist; he shall be stripped of all his
power and authority; his destruction will be inevitable and
irrecoverable; he shall never come out of it; it shall continue to the
end of the world, to the end of time.

[Daniel 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">dan 7:27</span></span>

And the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the saints of the most
High,.... Not only the dominion that shall be taken away from the little
horn or antichrist, and from all the antichristian states, but the
dominion of all others throughout all the earth, and under the whole
heaven, shall be given to the people of God, and the true professors of
faith in Christ. The kingdoms of this world will become Christ's, and
Christian princes will be kings of them everywhere; and not only the
royal power and authority will be vested with them, but all the grandeur
and state belonging to them will be theirs; as well as all the saints in
general shall reign in a spiritual manner with Christ, enjoying all
ordinances, and all religious liberties, as well as civil, and be free
from all persecutions.

Whose kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and all dominions shall serve
and obey him; the people of the saints of the most High, all shall be
subject to them, all dominions, and the governors of them; or Christ the
head of them, under and with whom they reign. So Saadiah (s) paraphrases
it,

"the kingdom of the King Messiah is an everlasting kingdom, and his
government is to generation and generation, and all dominions shall
serve and obey him.''

This spiritual reign of Christ, which will take place in a more glorious
manner at the destruction of antichrist, will continue until the
Millennium, or the personal reign of Christ, begins; and after that will
be the ultimate glory, in which Christ and his people will reign to all
eternity.

\(s\) And R. Isaac in Chizzuk Emunah, par. 1. p. 44. applies it to the
Messiah.

[Daniel 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">dan 7:28</span></span>

Hitherto is the end of the matter,.... Of the angel's words, and of the
interpretation of those things Daniel was desirous of being informed
about, and of the whole dream and vision Daniel had; and indeed this is
the end and issue of all events in Providence, the kingdom and glory of
Christ with his people:

as for me Daniel: with respect to his frame of mind, and the state of
his body, when he awaked from this dream, and reflected upon it, and
especially upon that part of it which affected the people of God:

my cogitations much troubled me; when he thought of these powerful
monarchies, their strength and cruelty, and what the people of God would
suffer under them, and especially under the fourth beast or monarchy,
and ignore particularly under the little horn or antichrist:

and my countenance changed in me: turned pale: he looked sorrowful and
dejected, because of the afflictions of God's people; though the issue
of them, one would have thought, would have inspired him with joy and
pleasure:

but I kept the matter in my heart; laid it up in his memory; pondered it
in his mind; meditated upon it; and well weighed the several things
observed to him; that he might be thoroughly master of them, and make
them known to others, and leave them in writing for the benefit of the
church of God in future ages.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Daniel Chapter 8](dan008)

</div>
