<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Daniel Index](dan)  
  [Previous](dan011)  [Next](hos000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Daniel Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)

[Daniel](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">dan 12:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DANIEL 12

This chapter begins with an account of a time of exceeding great trouble
to the people of God, who are comforted with the consideration of
Michael the great Prince being on their side, and with a promise of
deliverance, with the resurrection of the dead, and the glorious state
of wise and good men upon that, [Dan
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001), and Daniel is ordered to shut up
and seal the book of the prophecy, until a time when it should be better
understood, [Dan 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004), next follows a
question put by an angel to Christ, and his answer to it, with respect
to the time of the fulfilment of those wonderful events, [Dan
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005). Daniel, not understanding what
he heard, asks what would be the end of those things, [Dan
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#008) in answer to which he is bid to
be content with what he knew; no alteration would be among men; things
would be neither better nor worse with them, [Dan
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#009), a time is fixed for the
accomplishment of all, [Dan 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011), and
it is promised him that he should have rest after death, and rise again,
and have his lot and share with the blessed, [Dan
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#013).

[Daniel 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">dan 12:1</span></span>

And at that time shall Michael stand up,.... The Archangel, who has all
the angels of heaven under him, and at his command, the Son of God, our
Lord Jesus Christ; who is as God, as the name signifies, truly and
really God, and equal in nature, power, and glory, to his divine Father:
"he shall stand up"; which is not to be understood of his incarnation,
or manifestation in the flesh, for this refers to times long after that;
yet neither of his personal appearance in the clouds of heaven, and
standing upon the earth in the latter day; but of his spiritual presence
among his people, and protection of them, and continuance with them:
this respects the spiritual reigns of Christ, the Lamb's standing upon
Mount Zion, and the 144,000 with him, [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001), and this will be at that time,
when the eastern antichrist, the Turk, will be destroyed; for the words
are closely connected with the last verse of the preceding chapter; and
when also the western antichrist, the pope of Rome, will come to his
end; for, as they rose, so they will fall, much about the same time; and
then Christ will rise and stand up, as the glorious Head of the church,
and as a triumphant Conqueror over all his enemies, and take to himself
his great power, and reign, and that kingdom which of right belongs to
him.

The great Prince which standeth for the children of thy people; the King
of kings, and Lord of lords, the Prince of the kings of the earth; great
in his person, and in his office; great in dignity, power, and
authority; who always did, and ever will, stand on the side of the true
Israel of God: he espoused their cause very early; he wrought out
salvation for them in time; he intercedes for them now in heaven, and
will appear to be their patron and defender against all their enemies in
the latter day: here it seems to have special regard to the people of
the Jews, Daniel's people; whom Christ shall appear unto, and for, in an
eminent manner, to convert and save them, help and assist them, protect
and defend them.

And there shall be a time of trouble, such as never was since there was
a nation even to that same time; that is, ever since the world was, from
the beginning of it, from the creation of the world; not only from the
time that the Jews became a people, which was at their coming out of
Egypt, as some understand it, but from the beginning of time; and so our
Lord interprets it, who seems to have this passage in view in [Mat
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021), there have been many great and
sore troubles in the world, great confusions in it, and convulsions of
it, strange and amazing changes in it; very afflictive and distressing
times have been to each of the kingdoms, nations, and cities, which have
been entirely overthrown; but never was any like to this; which respects
not the distresses of the Jews in the times of Antiochus, or at the
destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans; nor does it seem to respect them
at all, at least they will have no further share and concern in it, than
as they will be in connection with other people, among whom they will be
at this time; and it will be to them rather a time of deliverance and
salvation than of distress; but it is that time of trial, and hour of
temptation, that shall come upon all the world, [Rev
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010) as it may concern the church and
people of God, it is the last struggle of the beast, of antichrist, at
the time of his downfall and ruin, when he will make his last effort;
this will be the last persecution of the saints, which will be short and
sharp; the slaying of the witnesses, which will affect the whole
interest of Christ everywhere; and as this concerns others, it designs
the pouring out of the vials of God's wrath upon all the antichristian
states, and all those judgments and calamities which will come upon the
nations of the world, signified by the harvest and vintage; see [Rev
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#014), &c.: and this time of trouble,
for the nature, quality, and extent of it, will exceed any and all that
ever were in the world.

And at that time thy people shall be delivered; the Jews, the people of
Daniel; these shall be delivered not only from the then present outward
troubles, not only from their present captivity and afflictions, but
from their spiritual evils; from the bondage of sin, and the captivity
of Satan; their disbelief of the Messiah; their confidence in their own
righteousness, and attachment to the traditions of their fathers; they
shall be turned from their transgressions, and return to the Lord their
God, and David their King, and shall be truly converted, and spiritually
and eternally saved, [Rom 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025).

Every one that shall be found written in the book; in the book of life,
as Jacchiades; in the book of God's eternal purposes and decrees,
concerning the salvation of his people by Christ; for it is according to
these that God saves and calls men, whether Jews or Gentiles, [Ti2
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#009).

[Daniel 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">dan 12:2</span></span>

And many of them that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake,....
Which is not to be understood in a figurative and metaphorical, sense,
as by R. Jeshuah the Jew, Porphyry the Heathen, and by some Christian
writers; neither of the deliverance of the Jews from the troubles of
Antiochus, or their present captivity; nor of the spiritual resurrection
of them, or others, from their state of infidelity to a profession of
the Gospel, which in some is real, in others only hypocritical; but, in
a literal sense, of the resurrection of the dead at the last day, which,
with respect to the righteous, will take place upon the personal
appearance of Christ at first, [Th1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#016), for, as death is oftentimes
compared to "sleep", in which the senses are bound up, and the body is
in a state of inactivity; see [Joh
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#011), so the resurrection from the
dead is expressed by awaking out of sleep, when the body shall rise
fresh and vigorous, in full health and strength, as a man out of a
comfortable sleep; see [Psa 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015). The
word "many" is used, either because, as all will not sleep, so all will
not be awaked; there will be some that will be alive and awake at
Christ's coming, [Co1 15:51](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#051), or, as it
signifies, a multitude, [Psa 97:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001) and
so here the innumerable multitude of the dead, who are afterwards
distributively considered; and indeed the word is sometimes used for
"all"; see [Rom 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#015),

some to everlasting life; to the enjoyment of everlasting life and
happiness with Christ in the world to come; a phrase often used in the
New Testament, though never before in the Old; expressive of that
felicity and bliss which the saints enjoy in heaven after this life is
over, first in the separate state of the soul, and then, at the
resurrection, in soul and body, and of the everlasting continuance of
it; they that shall enjoy this are those that are written in the Lamb's
book of life, or are ordained unto eternal life; who are redeemed by the
blood of Christ, regenerated by his Spirit and grace, justified by his
righteousness, adopted into the family of God, are heirs of God, and
joint heirs with Christ; these are the dead in Christ, which rise first:

and some to shame and everlasting contempt; wicked men, who lived in a
course of sin in this world, without any remorse or shame; but, when
they shall rise from the dead, they will rise with all their sins upon
them, and with a full conviction of them in their consciences; and will
be ashamed of them, and to appear before God the Judge of all; and will
be had in contempt by the Lord, by elect angels, and all good men; and
this reproach shall never be wiped off; see [Isa
66:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#024). Our Lord seems manifestly to
have respect to this passage, when he speaks of men coming out of their
graves at the last day, "some unto the resurrection of life, and others
unto the resurrection of damnation", [Joh
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#028) and upon these words it may well
be thought the Apostle Paul grounded his faith of the resurrection of
the dead, both just and unjust, [Act
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/act024.htm#015), and though the resurrection of
both is spoken of here and elsewhere together, yet it will be at
distinct periods of time; the resurrection of the just at the beginning
of the thousand years, and that of the wicked at the end of them, [Rev
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#005), between which will be the
intermediate state of the saints dwelling with Christ on earth; where
they will be favoured with his presence, and the rewards of his grace,
to which the following verse has respect.

[Daniel 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">dan 12:3</span></span>

And they that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the
firmament,.... That are wise, not in things natural and civil, but in
things spiritual; who are wise unto salvation; that are wise to know
themselves, their state and condition by nature; their impurity and
impotence; the insufficiency of their own righteousness; the exceeding
sinfulness of sin, and the dangerous circumstances they are in; that are
wise to know Christ, and him crucified; to believe in him, and trust in
him for everlasting life and salvation: these at the resurrection shall
shine, both in body and soul; their bodies shall be fashioned like to
the glorious body of Christ; their souls shall be filled with perfect
light and knowledge, and be completely holy, without any sin upon them;
and this light and glory that will be upon both soul and body will be
like the brightness of the heavens when the sun is risen; yea, it will
be like the brightness and glory of the sun itself, as our Lord affirms;
having, as it seems, respect to this passage, [Mat
13:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#043). Some render it, "they that
instruct" (i); or make others wise, and so restrain it to ministers of
the word; but the more general sense is best; and, besides, they are
more particularly described in the next clause:

and they that turn many to righteousness as the stars forever and ever;
or, "that justify many" (k); that teach the doctrine of a sinner's free
justification by the righteousness of Christ; that lead and direct souls
sensible of sin, and of the weakness of their own righteousness, to the
righteousness of Christ, as being that only which justifies before God;
otherwise it is God alone that justifies men, by imputing the
righteousness of his Son unto them: but these show men the way of
justification, or that which God takes to justify sinners; and this
being the principal doctrine of the GospeL, they are denominated from
it; and no man deserves the name of a Gospel minister that does not
preach it, though this is not all that they preach; they preach all
other doctrines of the Gospel in connection with it, and also instruct
men thus justified to live soberly, righteously, and godly: now, as
these are stars in the church of Christ below, who receive their light
from Christ the sun of righteousness, and communicate it to his people;
so they will continue stars in the Millennium state, and appear
exceeding glorious, having the glory of God and Christ upon them, and
not only then, but to all eternity. These words are applied to the days
of the Messiah by the Jews (l).

\(i\) "erudiunt", Munster; "erudientes", Junius & Tremellius; "qui alios
instituerint", Grotius. (k) "justificantes", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius
& Tremellius; "qui justificaverint", Calvin, Piscator. (l) Shemot Rabba
sect. 15. fol. 102. 4.

[Daniel 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">dan 12:4</span></span>

But thou, O Daniel, shut up the words,.... Of the book, in which he had
wrote the visions and prophecies delivered to him: this he is bid to
"shut up", to keep it from the common and profane people, who would only
burlesque it; and to keep it to himself, as a peculiar treasure
committed to his care; and though it was not kept from the saints and
people of God, from their reading it, yet he was not to interpret and
explain it to them; it was to remain a secret until the time of its
accomplishment was come, or, however, near at hand; so that this denotes
the obscurity of the prophecy, and the great difficulty of understanding
it; it being like a book that is shut and sealed, as follows, see [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001),

and seal the book, even to the time of the end; till the time comes
appointed for the fulfilment of it, which shows that it reached to times
at a great distance; that till these times were come, or near, it would
be as a sealed book, and yet the accomplishment of it would be sure and
certain, as what is sealed is:

many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be increased; that is,
towards the end of the time appointed, many persons will be stirred up
to inquire into these things delivered in this book, and will spare no
pains or cost to get knowledge of them; will read and study the
Scriptures, and meditate on them; compare one passage with another;
spiritual things with spiritual, in order to obtain the mind of Christ;
will peruse carefully the writings of such who have gone before them,
who have attempted anything of this kind; and will go far and near to
converse with persons that have any understanding of such things: and by
such means, with the blessing of God upon them, the knowledge of this
book of prophecy will be increased; and things will appear plainer the
nearer the accomplishment of them is; and especially when accomplished,
when prophecy and facts can be compared together: and not only this kind
of knowledge, but knowledge of all spiritual things, of all evangelic
truths and doctrines, will be abundantly enlarged at this time; and the
earth will be filled and covered with it, as the sea with its waters;
see [Isa 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009).

[Daniel 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">dan 12:5</span></span>

Then I Daniel looked, and, behold, there stood other two,.... Other two
angels, besides the man clothed with linen, [Dan
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006) or rather besides the angel who
had given Daniel the long account of things that were to come to pass,
in the preceding chapter, and the beginning of this; whom Daniel, being
attentive to that account, had not observed before; but now, that being
finished, he looks about him, and takes notice of those other two who
were standing, being ministering spirits to Christ, and ready to execute
his orders:

the one on this side of the bank of the river, and the other on that
side of the bank of the river; Hiddekel or Tigris, as appears from [Dan
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#004). The reason of this position was
chiefly on account of Christ, the man clothed with linen, who stood upon
or above the water of the river, in the midst of it; and to show that
they were waiting upon him, and ready to go every way he should send
them to do his will; and also on account of Daniel, that he might hear
what was said, whether to Christ, or to one another; since, being at
such a distance, their voice must be loud; and indeed the design of all
that follows to the end of the chapter is to inform him, and by him the
church and people of God in all future ages, of the time and end of all
these things before delivered in the prophecy.

[Daniel 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">dan 12:6</span></span>

And one said to the man clothed with linen,.... One of the angels on one
side of the bank of the river spoke to Christ, who appeared in a human
form, as a presage of his future incarnation; and as clothed in linen,
expressive of his priestly office, and of his purity and holiness, which
qualified him for it; See Gill on [Dan
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan010.htm#006). Which of the angels it was that
spake is not said, or on which side of the river he stood; very probably
each of them spake in their turn, and joined: in the same request to
Christ:

which was upon the waters of the river: or above (m) them; denoting his
power and dominion over men, kingdoms, and nations, sometimes signified
by waters, and even over those the most tumultuous and raging:

how long shall it be to the end of these wonders, these wonderful things
before predicted, concerning the state and condition of the people of
God, their troubles and afflictions, the fall and ruin of antichrist,
and the glorious things that shall follow upon that: angels, as they are
inquisitive creatures, and pry into the mysteries of grace, so into
those of Providence; especially such as concern the church of God, for
whom they have a great regard; of the secrets of which they have no
knowledge until revealed unto them; though this question seems to be put
not so much for their own sakes as for the sake of Daniel, who was
present, but had not that courage and presence of mind as they had; nor
could use that freedom with Christ as they did, at least at first, till
encouraged by their example.

\(m\) "super aquas", Pagninus; "desuper aquas", Montanus; "supra aquas",
Calvin, Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Daniel 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">dan 12:7</span></span>

And I heard the man clothed in linen, which was upon the waters of the
river,.... Christ, as he appeared in a human form, and as the High
Priest our profession, and as the Mediator that has power over all
flesh; so he pronounced articulate sounds with a human voice, and so
loud, clear, and distinct, that Daniel could hear every word he said,
and for whose sake it was said:

when he held up his right hand and his left hand unto heaven; the
lifting up of the right hand is a gesture used in swearing, and the
lifting up of both hands is either for the greater solemnity of the
action, or with respect to the two angels that stood one on one side of
him, and the other on the other, that both might be eyewitnesses of this
solemn affair; though lifting up both hands is often a prayer gesture,
and there may be a mixture of both in this action, of both praying and
swearing; Christ, as the High Priest, intercedes for his church and
people, that their faith fail not till the end of their troubles comes:

and sware by him that liveth for ever; by the living God, the immortal
One, who only hath immortality. Maimonides (n) interprets it, "by the
Life of the world"; that is, by God, who is the Life of the world, that
gives life and being to all creatures; all live, and move, and have
their being in him, and so is greater than all, and by whom an oath is
only to be taken. Christ, as man, swears by his divine Father, who, as
such, was greater than he; though, if we understand it of God, Father,
Son, and Spirit, the one, only, true, and living God, there is no
impropriety in Christ's swearing by himself the living God, which is a
character he sometimes bears; see [Heb
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#012), what he here swears to is,

that it shall be for a time, times, and an half; that it would be so
long to the end of these wonderful things; or that the troubles of the
church would last so long, and, at the end of that date here fixed, a
glorious scene would open, and amazing things appear, to the great joy
and comfort of the saints. "Time" signifies a prophetic year, or 360
years; and "times" two prophetic years, or 720 years; and half a time
half a prophetic year, or 180 years, in all 1260 years; which is the
exact date and duration of the reign of antichrist, of the church's
being in the wilderness, and of the witnesses prophesying in sackcloth,
and of the treading under foot the holy city, expressed both by 1260
days, and by forty two months, which are the same; see [Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002),

and when he shall have accomplished to scatter the power of the holy
people: that is, either, "when he (God) shall have finished the
scattering the power of the holy people", the Jews; when the dispersion
of them, who were formerly a holy people to the Lord, and shall be so
again, will be over; and they shall be gathered out of all nations where
they have been dispersed, and, being converted, shall return to their
own land: or, "when he" (antichrist) "shall have done scattering", the
church and people of God in general; when his wars with the saints, and
victories over them, will be ended; and particularly when the slaying of
the witnesses will be over, at which time there will be a great
scattering of the saints; they will be as sheep without a shepherd,
their pastors being smitten, slain, or removed into corners; all which
things will be fulfilled about the end of the date before mentioned:

and then all these things shall be finished; or, as the same glorious
Person explains it, "time will be no longer, and the mystery of God will
be finished", [Rev 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#006), the time of
antichrist's reign, and of the troubles of the church, and the
witnesses' prophesying in sackcloth, will be protracted no longer than
the time, and times, and half a time, or the 1260 days, or forty months,
that is, 1260 years; then all the afflictions of the church will be at
an end, and glorious times will succeed, as before spoken of; the
spiritual reign of Christ, the first resurrection, and the Millennium,
in their order.

\(n\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 1. c. 72. p. 146. So R. Joseph Albo, Sepher
Ikkarim, l. 1. c. 69. "per vitam aeternitatis", so some in Gejerus.

[Daniel 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">dan 12:8</span></span>

And I heard, but understood not,.... Daniel heard what Christ said, in
answer to the angel, but he did not understand the meaning of it, which
he ingenuously confesses; he did not understand what was meant by
"time", and "times", and "half a time"; what kind of time this was, and
when and how it would end, and which he was very desirous of knowing:

then said I, O my Lord, what shall be the end of these things? he
applied not to the angel that put the above question, but to the man
clothed with linen; to Christ, whom he perceived to be a divine Person,
a Person of dominion, power, and authority, superior to angels, and his
Lord and God; and who only could resolve the question he puts, which is
somewhat different from that of the angel's, [Dan
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#006), that respects the length of
time, to the accomplishment of these things; this the quality at the end
of them, what kind of end they should have; or what the signs, symptoms,
and evidences of the end of them, by which the true end of them might be
known. Mr. Mede renders it, "what are these latter times?" perhaps it
might be rendered better, "what is the last of these things?" (o) what
is the last thing that will be done, that so it may be known when all is
over?

\(o\) "quid erit novissimum horum?" Munster; "postremum horum?" Calvin.

[Daniel 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">dan 12:9</span></span>

And he said, go thy way, Daniel,.... About thy business; attend to civil
affairs, the affairs in which he was concerned in the king's court, and
ask no more questions concerning this matter; but be content with the
prophecies that have been delivered to thee, and with what knowledge
thou hast of them: or he is bid to go and write in a book the several
visions he had seen, and the predictions related to him; that he might
read them, and meditate on them at his leisure, and transmit them to
future posterity, for their use: or go the way of all flesh, prepare for
death and eternity; for in the present state he was not to expect a full
revelation of these things; but should rest satisfied with what he knew,
and assure himself with the full performance of them, and that he should
have his share of the blessed times in the Millennium, and of the
ultimate glory, as in [Dan 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#013).

For the words are closed up, and sealed till the time of the end; that
is, till the time comes, or draws near, that they shall be accomplished;
till then they would not be clearly understood, but remain in a great
measure dark and obscure, though sure and certain: it is suggested they
would not always remain so; time is the best interpreter of prophecy,
and, the nearer the time of the accomplishment of it is, the clearer it
appears, things leading the way to it being gradually fulfilled; but
clearest of all when it is accomplished; then it is no more shut and
sealed, but open and manifest; See Gill on [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004).

[Daniel 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">dan 12:10</span></span>

Many shall be purged, and made white, and tried,.... Though Christ does
not give, in plain, clear, and explicit terms, an answer to the above
question, when, and how, and what would be the end of the church's
troubles and afflictions; yet he here points out the use of them, which
for the present should be chiefly attended to; and, when duly
considered, would be a means of causing the saints to endure them with
more patience and cheerfulness: many should be hereby made more pure and
holy, and more free from their spots, their chaff, and their dross;
their corruptions, and the power of them, weakened; their graces tried,
and become more bright and shining; and they themselves a greater
ornament to the religion they profess: hereby they should be "purified",
or cleansed from the chaff of their sins; or be separated, as the chaff
is by the fan, from hypocrites and ungodly men, who would not be able to
endure persecution for the sake of the Gospel: and "be made white"; as
cloth is by the fuller; freed both from their own spots in their
garments, being led to the blood of Christ to wash their garments, and
make them white therein; which afflictions may be the means of guiding
them to, under the direction of the blessed Spirit; and from such
persons who were spots in their feasts of love: and "be tried", as gold
and silver in the furnace, and so be rid of their own dross, and of the
wicked of the earth, who are like unto it; see the note on [Dan
11:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#035).

But the wicked shall do wickedly; go on in a course of sin, and be never
the better for the afflictive dispensations of Providence; these either
mean formal professors, that turn apostates from the faith, and become
openly wicked livers; or the profane world in common; and particularly
furious persecutors of the saints: such as each of these there will be
till the end of things come; see [Rev
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011),

and none of the wicked shall understand; neither the doctrines of the
Gospel spiritually and experimentally; nor the providences of God, and
what he is doing in the world; and particularly not the prophecy of this
book, and especially what has been just delivered:

but the wise shall understand; more or less of each of these things,
such as are wise unto salvation; that search the Scriptures, seek to God
by prayer, and are much in meditation, and make use of every help for
the understanding of divine things, and even of these prophecies; and
especially towards the close of time, as the accomplishment of them
draws near.

[Daniel 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">dan 12:11</span></span>

And from the time that the daily sacrifice shall be taken away,.... This
is in part an answer to the above questions, as they relate to the end
of things: some dates are given, by which it might in general be known
when and how these things would end: and these dates begin with the
removal of the daily sacrifice; that is, the doctrine of atonement and
satisfaction for sin by the sacrifice of Christ, the antitype of the
daily sacrifice under the law; this was taken away by antichrist, when
he got to his height; when he established the doctrine of works, and
opposed the merits of men to the merits of Christ, and his own pardons,
indulgences, penances, &c. to the satisfaction of Christ:

and the abomination that maketh desolate; image worship; the abomination
of the Mass, and other acts of idolatry and superstition:

there shall be a thousand two hundred and ninety days; from the
beginning of the reign of antichrist to the end of it are one thousand
two hundred and sixty days or years, or forty two months, which is the
same, according to [Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005), here
thirty days or years are added, which begin where the other end, and is
the time allotted for the conversion of the Jews, and other things,
making way for the kingdom of Christ; and which the reign of antichrist
was an hinderance of, but should now immediately take place.

[Daniel 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">dan 12:12</span></span>

Blessed is he that waiteth, and cometh to the one thousand three hundred
five and thirty days. Which is an addition of forty five days or years
more, beginning at the end of one thousand two hundred and ninety, and
make up this sum; during which time the vials will be poured out upon
all the antichristian states, and the Turkish empire be destroyed, and
all the enemies of Christ and his church removed, and clear way made for
the setting up of his kingdom in the world in a more visible and
glorious manner; and therefore happy is the man that will be found
waiting for these times, and live to enjoy them. There are various ways
taken in the computation and application of these one thousand three
hundred and thirty five days by Jews and Christians. Lipman (p) the Jew
makes them to be the same with "time", and "times", and "half a time",
[Dan 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007), "time" he supposes, designs
the space of four hundred and eighty years, from the Israelites going
out of Egypt to the building of the first temple; times the space of
four hundred and ten years which is as long as that temple stood; and
"half a time" half of these two spaces, that is, four hundred and forty
five years; all which make up one thousand three hundred and thirty
five; but strange it is that time should signify a larger space than
"times". Much more ingenious is the computation of Jacchiades on the
text, who makes the account to describe the space of time from the days
of Daniel to the end of the world. He supposes there were three thousand
three hundred and ninety one years, from the beginning of the world to
Daniel; he then takes and joins the one thousand two hundred and ninety
days in the preceding verse, which he understands of years with the one
thousand three hundred and thirty five days or years in this, which make
together two thousand six hundred and twenty five; and, added to the
above, the whole is six thousand and sixteen years; which agrees with
the opinion of Elias, in the Talmud (q), that the world shall stand six
thousand years. Many Christian interpreters (r) apply it to the times of
Antiochus; and reckon them thus, understanding them of days; and not
years; from the time of his taking away the daily sacrifice, to the
restoration of it by Judas Maccabaeus, were three years and a half and
some days, in all one thousand two hundred and ninety, as in the
preceding verse; during which time the temple was profaned by idolatrous
worship, the altar demolished, and the daily sacrifice ceased, and was a
time of great distress with the Jews; and which, though greatly
alleviated by the success of Judas, yet their calamities were not over
until the death of Antiochus, which happened forty five days after; and
these, added to the above number, make one thousand three hundred and
thirty five days; at the close of which it was happy times with them,
being delivered from so cruel and powerful an enemy; and therefore
blessed were they that waited and came to this time. This passage Mr.
Brightman applies to the Turkish empire; and thinks that time, and
times, and half a time; [Dan 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#007),
measure the space of the power of that empire; "time" signifying one
hundred years; "times" two hundred years; "half a time", fifty years; in
all three hundred and fifty years; which added to one thousand three
hundred, when that empire began, the date ends in one thousand six
hundred and fifty, when he supposes, it would begin to decline; to
which, if you add forty five days or years, as here, it will bring it
down to one thousand six hundred and ninety five, when he thought it
would be utterly extinct; but time has shown this to be a mistake. Mr.
Mede (s) thinks these numbers are to be reckoned from the profanation of
the temple by Antiochus; and that the first number, one thousand two
hundred and ninety, ended in the year of Christ one thousand one hundred
and twenty three, when antichrist was come to his height, and was
discerned by many to be the person that was prophesied of as such; and
the latter number, one thousand three hundred and thirty five ended in
the year of Christ one thousand one hundred and sixty eight, when the
Waldenses, Albigenses, and others separated from the church of Rome as
antichristian, upon which violent persecutions were raised upon them:
but then not happy, but miserable times, followed on these; unless this
blessedness spoken of is to be applied to the martyrs that died for the
sake of Christ, as in [Rev 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013).
Another learned man (t) was of opinion that these numbers are to be
counted from the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus Vespasian, A.D. 71,
from whence the first number fell on the year 1361, at which time the
school at Prague was founded by Charles king of Bohemia, and the errors
and tyranny of antichrist began to be openly opposed by the same; and
the second number ended in the year 1406, when the light of the Gospel
broke out more clearly; so that the angel here pronounces those blessed
who overlived these first seeds of the Gospel being brought to light;
but something of great importance and cause of more joy, is here
intended. Wherefore, upon the whole, it seems best to interpret these
numbers as at first, of the date of the reign of antichrist, and as
showing the full and certain end of it; when there will be blessed
times, halcyon days indeed!

\(p\) Nizzachon, No. 332. (q) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 97. 1. (r)
Broughton in loc. L'Empereur, Not. in Jacchiad. in loc. Huls. Theolog.
Jud. par. 1. p. 77, 78. (s) Works, B. 3. p. 720. (t) Henr. Wolphius lib.
de tempore apud Brightman in loc.

[Daniel 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">dan 12:13</span></span>

But go thou thy way till the end be,.... Prepare for death and expect to
be under the power of it, to lie in the grave, till the end of the
world, until the resurrection morn:

for thou shalt rest; from all toil and labour, from all sin and sorrow;
his body in the grave, his soul in the bosom of Christ: and stand in thy
lot at the end of the days; signifying that he should rise again from
the dead, have his part in the first resurrection, his share of the
glory of the Millennium state, and his portion in the heavenly
inheritance of the saints; the antitype of Canaan, which was divided by
lot to the children of Israel: and, in the faith and hope of this, it
became him to be contented and satisfied; believing the accomplishment
of all that had been shown him, and looking for the blessedness which
was promised him. Agreeable to which is the paraphrase of Jacchiades;

"but thou, O Daniel, go to the end of thy life in this world; and, after
thou art dead, rest in the rest of paradise; and at the end of days thou
shall stand and live in the resurrection of the dead, and shall enjoy
thy good lot in the world to come''.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Introduction](hos000)

</div>
