<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu009)  [Next](deu011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 10

In this chapter an account is given of an order to Moses to hew two
tables of stone, on which the Lord would write the words that were on
the first, and to make an ark and put them into it, all which was
accordingly done, [Deu 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001.md) and of
some of the journeys of the children of Israel, [Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006.md) and of the separation of the
tribe of Levi to the service of the sanctuary, [Deu
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008.md) and of Moses's stay in the mount
forty days and nights, and his success there, and the direction he had
to lead on the people of Israel towards Canaan's land, [Deu
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#010.md) and who by various arguments are
exhorted to fear the Lord, and serve him, and keep his commands, [Deu
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012.md).

[Deuteronomy 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 10:1</span></span>

At that time the Lord said unto me,.... On the fortieth day, mentioned
in the preceding chapter, as Aben Ezra, or at the end of forty days, as
Jarchi; not of the first forty, for then were given him the first two
tables of stone, with the law written on them, which he broke when he
came down; but at the end of the second forty days, as some think, when
he had fallen before the Lord, and entreated him for the people, and, as
a token of his reconciliation to them, gave the following order:

hew thee two tables of stone like unto the first, &c. Of the same sort
of stone, of the same size and form with those God gave him in the mount
the first time he was there, and which he broke in his descent from
thence; they were the work of God, but these were to be hewed by Moses:
the order seems to be given between the request Moses made to see the
glory of the Lord, and the proclamation made of it, see [Exo
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#001.md), and come up unto me into the
mount; Mount Sinai; this was certainly the third time of his going up
there, and where he continued forty days and nights; but whether he
continued there so long the second time may be a matter of question,
though he certainly did the third time; see [Exo
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030.md).

and make thee an ark of wood; Jarchi thinks this was not the ark
Bezaleel made, but made after, and is that which went out to battle; and
some take it to be a temporary ark, made for the present purpose till
that was finished; but Aben Ezra is of opinion it is the same that
Bezaleel made: and it may be said to be made by Moses, because he was
not only ordered to make it, but it was by his orders and the direction
he gave to Bezaleel that it was made; and this seems the more probable,
because there the tables remained, [Deu
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#005.md).

[Deuteronomy 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 10:2</span></span>

And I will write on the tables the words that were in the first tables,
which thou brakest,.... (a) Though they were hewn by Moses, the writing
on them was the Lord's; and the very same laws, in the same words,
without any alteration or variation, were written by him on these as on
the former; partly to show the authenticity of them, that they were of
God and not Moses, of a divine original and not human; and partly to
show the invariableness of them, that no change had been made in them,
though they had been broken by the people; of which Moses's breaking the
tables was a representation:

and thou shall put them in the ark; which being a type of Christ may
signify the fulfilment of the law by him, who is the end, the fulfilling
end of the law for righteousness to every believer; and that as this was
in his heart to fulfil it, so it is in his hand as a rule of faith and
conversation to his people.

\(a\) See a Sermon of mine on this text, called, "The Law in the Hand of
Christ."

[Deuteronomy 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 10:3</span></span>

And I made an ark of shittim wood,.... That is, ordered it to be made,
and it was made by Bezaleel, and that of shittim wood: so the ark that
was put into the holy of holies was made of this wood; see See Gill on
[Exo 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010.md); see Gill on [Exo
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#001.md),

and hewed two tables of stone like unto the first; two marble ones, as
the Targum of Jonathan; that is, he ordered them to be hewed, and took
care that they should be exactly made as the former were, of which he
had perfect knowledge, having received them of the Lord, and brought
them with him down the mount:

and went up into the mount, having the two tables in my hand; in order
to have the words of the law, the ten commands, written on them, these
being only hewn stones, without anything on them: they were very
probably marble, of which great quantities were near at hand.

[Deuteronomy 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 10:4</span></span>

And he wrote on the tables according to the first writing,.... The same
laws, in the same letters:

the ten commandments which the Lord spake unto you in the mount; in
Mount Sinai, on which he descended, and from whence he delivered the
decalogue by word of mouth in an audible manner, that all the people
could hear it:

out of the midst of the fire; in which he descended, and where he
continued, and from whence he spake, so that it was indeed a fiery law:

in the day of the assembly; when all the people of Israel were assembled
together at the bottom of the mount to hear it:

and the Lord gave them unto me; the two tables, when he had wrote upon
them the ten commands.

[Deuteronomy 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 10:5</span></span>

And I turned myself,.... From the Lord, out of whose hands he had
received the tables:

and came down from the mount; with the two tables in his hand as before,
one in one hand, and the other in the other hand:

and put the tables in the ark which I had made; or ordered to be made:

and there they be, as the Lord commanded me; there they were when Moses
rehearsed what is contained in this book, on the plains of Moab, about
thirty eight years after the putting them, into it; and there they
continued to be when the ark was brought into Solomon's temple, [Kg1
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#009.md) and there they were as long as the
ark was in being; which may denote the continuance of the law in the
hands of Christ under the Gospel dispensation as a rule of walk and
conversation to his people.

[Deuteronomy 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 10:6</span></span>

And the children of Israel took their journey from Beeroth of the
children of Jaakan,.... Not when or soon after they removed from Sinai;
for if this place is the same with Benejaakan, as is generally supposed,
they had a great many journeys, mansions, and stations before they came
to it; see [Num 33:31](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#031.md) and besides,
since Aaron, according to this account, died at their next station from
hence, that was thirty eight years after their departure from Mount
Sinai; and it is hard to say what should be the reason of making mention
of these two or three journeys here; and whereas they are here said to
journey front the place here mentioned

to Mosera; on the contrary in [Num
33:31](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#031.md) they are said to depart from
Mosera, and pitch in Benejaakan; which is accounted for by their going
backwards and forwards, and so both may be true. Aben Ezra is of
opinion, that Beeroth Benejaakan, or the wells of the children of
Jaakan, is not the same with Bene Jaakan, nor Mosera the same with
Moseroth; but Beeroth is Kadesh, and Mosera is the name of the desert of
Mount Hor; and it is certain that Moseroth was the twenty seventh
station, and Mosera, or the desert of Mount Hor, where Aaron died, was
the thirty fourth, and therefore must be distant; see [Num
33:30](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#030.md), which seems to agree with what
follows:

there Aaron died, and there he was buried; it is certain that Aaron died
on Mount Hor, [Num 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#023.md), or there
died and was buried when in the desert of Mosera:

and Eleazar his son ministered in the priest's office in his stead; so
that though the high priest died, the office continued, and the law of
it remained in force, and the tribe of Levi was separated for the
service of the sanctuary, as afterwards expressed.

[Deuteronomy 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 10:7</span></span>

From thence they journeyed unto Gudgodah,.... Which Jarchi takes to be
the same with Horhagidgad, and so do most; see [Num
33:32](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#032.md), but Aben Ezra says it is not,
but is a general name, including Zalmonah, Punon, and Oboth, places the
Israelites came to after they removed from Mount Hor, where Aaron died;
see [Num 33:41](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#041.md).

and from Gudgodah to Jotbath, a land of rivers of waters; which the
above writer takes to be the same with Beer, the well, [Num
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#016.md) and by this description of it,
it was a place where there was much water.

[Deuteronomy 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 10:8</span></span>

At that time the Lord separated the tribe of Levi,.... Not at the time
that Moses came down from the mount with the tables of the law, but some
considerable time after, even after the tabernacle was erected; nor at
the time that Aaron died, and Eleazar succeeded him, but many years
before that; unless there was a fresh separation of them, or a renewal
of it when Eleazar became high priest in his father's stead; and so that
being mentioned is the reason of its being repeated here:

to bear the ark of the covenant of the Lord; even that into which the
law, sometimes called the covenant, was put, and therefore here called
the ark of the covenant: when this was carried from place to place, as
it was especially in the wilderness, it was the business of the Levites
to bear it, particularly the Kohathites; [Num
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#031.md),

to stand before the Lord to minister unto him; that is, to his priests,
in the tabernacle, and to keep and guard that:

and to bless in his name unto this day; not to bless the people, which
was the work of the priest, but to sing praise in the name of the Lord,
to give thanks unto him, and bless and praise him.

[Deuteronomy 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 10:9</span></span>

Wherefore Levi hath no part nor inheritance with his brethren,.... In
the division of the land of Canaan, because being separated to the
service of the sanctuary, he had no leisure to plough and sow, as Jarchi
observes:

the Lord is his inheritance, as the Lord thy God promised him; not in a
spiritual sense, for so the Lord was an inheritance and portion of other
Israelites; though these being taken off of worldly employments, and
devoted to sanctuary service, might have more communion with God than
others; but in a temporal sense, provision being made particularly by
tithes, which were the Lord's, for their maintenance; and so the Targums
of Onkelos and Jonathan paraphrase the words;"gifts which the Lord gave
him are his inheritance;''see [Num
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#020.md).

[Deuteronomy 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 10:10</span></span>

And I stayed in the mount, according to the first time, forty days and
forty nights,.... Which is to be connected with [Deu
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006.md) and relates what passed before he
came down from the mount with the two tables; as that he stayed there as
long as he did when he received the first tables, and fasted also as
long as he did then; see [Exo 34:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#028.md).

and the Lord hearkened unto me at that time also; to his prayer on the
behalf of the people:

and the Lord would not destroy thee; though he had threatened it, and
their sin had deserved it.

[Deuteronomy 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 10:11</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me, arise, take thy journey before the
people,.... Here Moses goes on with his relation of things at Mount
Sinai, how that upon his supplication for the people, on account of the
destruction they were threatened with for their idolatry, the Lord was
graciously pleased not only to hear him and forgive the people, but
ordered him to go before them, and lead them on towards the land of
Canaan he had promised them, [Exo
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034.md),

that they may go in and possess the land, which I sware unto their
fathers to give unto them; and which had it not been for their later
murmurings and rebellions, they had been in the possession of it in a
little time, especially after their departure from Sinai.

[Deuteronomy 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 10:12</span></span>

And now, Israel, what doth the Lord thy God require of thee,.... For all
these favours bestowed upon them, the forgiveness of their sins, and a
fresh intimation of their possession of the land of Canaan, and the
renewal of the promise of it made to their fathers:

but to fear the Lord thy God; to fear him with a filial fear, to fear
him and his goodness, and him for his goodness sake, and particularly
for his pardoning grace and mercy vouchsafed to them; see [Psa
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004.md),

to walk in all his ways; prescribed and directed to by him, every path
of duty, whether moral, ceremonial, or judicial:

and to love him, and to serve the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and
with all thy soul; for that is the best service which springs from love,
and love constrains unto, and which is hearty and sincere, as that is,
and is performed in the best manner such are capable of.

[Deuteronomy 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 10:13</span></span>

To keep the commandments of the Lord, and his statutes,.... Both the ten
commands and all others:

which I command thee this day for thy good; promises of temporal good
things, introduction into the land of Canaan, possession of it, and
continuance in it, being made to obedience to them.

[Deuteronomy 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 10:14</span></span>

Behold, the heaven, and the heaven of heavens, are the Lord's thy
God,.... Made and possessed by him; the airy and starry heaven, the
third heaven, which is the heaven of heavens, the seat of the divine
Majesty, the habitation of angels and glorified saints:

the earth also, with all that therein is; that is his property, and at
his disposal, being made by him, and all that is upon it, or contained
in it, even whatsoever is on or in the whole terraqueous globe; see [Psa
115:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#015.md).

[Deuteronomy 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 10:15</span></span>

Only the Lord had a delight in thy fathers to love them,.... Though the
heavens and the earth, and all the inhabitants of them are the Lord's by
creation, yet he had a special regard unto, and a peculiar complacency
in, the fathers of the Israelites, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; from
whence arose some particular expressions of love to them, signified by
various acts of kindness done them, and promises made unto them:

and he chose their seed after them, even you above all the people, as it
is this day; to be a special people to him, to enjoy civil and religious
privileges greater than any other; and particularly to have his law
given to them, his tabernacle and worship set up among them, which were
at this time, and which gave them the preference to all other nations;
see [Deu 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007.md).

[Deuteronomy 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 10:16</span></span>

Circumcise therefore the foreskin of your heart,.... Content not
yourselves with, nor put your confidence in outward circumcision of the
flesh, but be concerned for the circumcision of the heart; for removing
from that whatever is disagreeable to the Lord, even all carnality,
sensuality, hypocrisy, and superfluity of naughtiness, and for having
that put there which is well pleasing in his sight; and which though it
is the work of God, and he only can do it and has promised it, yet such
an exhortation is made to bring men to a sense of their need of it, and
of the importance of it, and to show how agreeable it is to the Lord,
and so to stir them up to seek unto him for it; see [Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006.md).

and be no more stiffnecked; froward, obstinate, and disobedient, as they
had been hitherto; [Deu 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#006.md).

[Deuteronomy 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 10:17</span></span>

For the Lord your God is God of gods,.... Of angels and civil
magistrates, who are sometimes so called: these are his creatures, act
for him and under him, and are accountable to him:

the Lord of lords; of the kings and princes of the earth, who have their
crowns, sceptres, and kingdoms from him, and hold them of him, by and
under whom they reign and decree judgment, and who are subject to his
authority and control:

a great God; as the perfections of his nature, the works of his hands,
the blessings of his providence and grace, and the extensiveness of his
dominion in heaven, earth, and hell, show him to be:

a mighty and a terrible; mighty and powerful to help, protect, and
defend his people; terrible to his and their enemies, even to the kings
of the earth:

which regardeth not persons; but bestows his favours, whether in a way
of providence or grace, according to his sovereign will and pleasure,
without regard to the works and merits of men, their characters or
circumstances:

nor taketh reward; or bribes, to avert threatened and deserved
judgments; see [Job 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#018.md).

[Deuteronomy 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 10:18</span></span>

He doth execute the judgment of the fatherless and widow,.... Who have
none to help them, and whose patron and defender he is, and will do them
justice himself, and take care that it is done them by others, or avenge
their injuries, for he is a Father of the fatherless, and a judge of the
widow, in his holy habitation; [Psa
68:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#005.md).

and loveth the stranger, in giving him food and raiment; one that is in
a foreign country, at a distance from his native land, and destitute of
friends; such God in his providence takes care of, and expresses his
love and kindness to, by giving them the necessaries of life, food, and
raiment.

[Deuteronomy 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 10:19</span></span>

Love ye therefore the stranger,.... Because the Lord loves him; and
another reason follows, particularly binding on the Israelites:

for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt; and therefore should
sympathize with such, and show them compassion, relieve them in
distress, and afford them whatever they want, and is in the power of
their hands to communicate to them; remembering their own condition in
Egypt, and how welcome such a treatment would have been to them then, as
well as the kind and careful providence of God towards them at that
time.

[Deuteronomy 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 10:20</span></span>

Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God,.... Which includes the whole worship
of him, external and internal:

him shalt thou serve; heartily and sincerely, according to his revealed
will, and him only:

and to him shall thou cleave; and not turn aside to follow other gods,
and worship them:

and swear by his name; and his only, whenever it is necessary to take an
oath, which should not be done rashly or on trivial accounts; and never
by any creature, but by the living God; see [Deu
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013.md).

[Deuteronomy 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 10:21</span></span>

He is thy praise,.... The object and matter of it, who deserves the
praises of all his creatures, because of his perfections, works, and
blessings of goodness; for all mercies temporal and spiritual come from
him, and therefore he is greatly to be praised for them: praise is his
due, and it is comely in his people to give it to him; see [Jer
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014.md).

and he is thy God which hath done for thee these great and terrible
things which thine eyes have seen; which were done upon the Egyptians
for their sakes, both in the land of Egypt and at the Red sea; and also
what he had done for them in the wilderness, to Sihon and Og, kings of
the Amorites, [Psa 106:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#022.md).

[Deuteronomy 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 10:22</span></span>

Thy fathers went down into Egypt with seventy persons,.... That is, in
all; for there were not seventy besides Jacob and the patriarchs his
sons, but with them; see [Gen 46:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#026.md)
and now the Lord thy God hath made thee as the stars of heaven for
multitude; as he promised they should be, [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 11](deu011.md)

</div>
