<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu003)  [Next](deu005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 4

This chapter contains an exhortation to Israel to keep the commands,
statutes, and judgments of God, urged from the superior excellency of
them to those of all other nations, [Deu
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001.md), from the manner in which they
were delivered, out of the midst of fire, by a voice of words, but no
similitude seen, [Deu 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009.md), and
particularly the Israelites are cautioned against idolatry, from the
consideration of the goodness of God to them, in bringing them out of
Egypt, [Deu 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#016.md), and the rather Moses
is urgent upon them to be diligent in their obedience to the laws of
God, because he should quickly be removed from them, [Deu
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#021.md), and should they be disobedient
to them, it would provoke the Lord to destroy them, or to carry them
captive into other lands, [Deu 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#025.md)
though even then, if they repented and sought the Lord, and became
obedient, he would be merciful to them, and not forsake them, [Deu
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029.md) and they are put in mind again of
the amazing things God had done for them, in speaking to them out of
fire, and they alive; in bringing them out of another nation, and
driving out other nations to make room for them; all which he improves,
as so many arguments to move them to obedience to the divine commands,
[Deu 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032.md) and then notice is taken of
the three cities of refuge, separated on this side Jordan, [Deu
4:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#041.md), and the chapter is concluded
with observing, that this is the law, and these the testimonies, Moses
declared and repeated to the children of Israel in the country of Sihon
and Og, who were delivered into their hands, and their lands possessed
by them, which laid them under fresh obligations to yield obedience to
God, [Deu 4:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#044.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 4:1</span></span>

Now therefore hearken, O Israel, unto the statutes and unto the
judgments,.... The laws of God, moral, ceremonial, and judicial, which
they are exhorted to attend to and obey, in consideration of the great
and good things the Lord had done for them, ever since they came from
Horeb, where they were given them; such as providing for them, and
feeding them in the wilderness, preserving them from every hurtful
thing, and delivering their enemies into their hands, the two kings of
the Amorites, which they are put in mind of in the preceding chapters;
hence this begins with "therefore hearken"; for nothing is a greater
incentive to obedience than the kindness and goodness of God:

which I teach you for to do that ye may live; the law was taught by
Moses, but the Gospel of grace and truth by Jesus Christ; and it was
taught by him, as well as it was to be hearkened to by them, in order to
yield obedience to it; for not bare hearing, but doing the law, is the
principal thing of any avail; and which was to be done, that they might
live; not a spiritual and eternal life, which are not by the works of
the law, but are had only from Christ, through his grace and
righteousness; but a corporeal life, and a comfortable enjoyment of the
blessings of it, and particularly that that might be continued to them:

and go in and possess the land which the Lord God of your fathers giveth
you; the land of Canaan, which the Lord God of Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, had promised to give to their posterity, and which they were to
hold by their obedience to his laws.

[Deuteronomy 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 4:2</span></span>

Ye shall not add to the word which I command you, nether shall you
diminish ought from it,.... Neither make new laws of their own, and join
them to the law of God, and set them upon a level with it, or prefer
them before it; as the Scribes and Pharisees did in Christ's time, who
by their traditions made the word of God of none effect, as do the
Papists also by their unwritten traditions; nor abrogate nor detract
from the law of God, nor make void any part of it: or else the sense is,
neither do that which is forbidden, nor neglect that which is commanded;
neither be guilty of sins of omission nor commission, nor in any way
break the law of God, and teach men so to do by word or by example; not
a jot or tittle is either to be put to it, or taken from it, [Pro
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005.md).

that ye may keep the commandments of the Lord your God, which I command
you; in his name; or which he delivered unto them as his commandments,
and which were to be kept just as they were delivered, without adding to
them, or taking from them.

[Deuteronomy 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 4:3</span></span>

Your eyes have seen what the Lord did because of Baalpeor,.... Because
of the idolatry the people of Israel fell into by worshipping that idol,
being drawn into it by the daughters of Moab and Midian, through the
counsel of Balaam, with whom they committed fornication; which led them
to the other sin, and both highly provoking to God. The Targums of
Onkelos and Jonathan are,"what the Word of the Lord has done to the
worshippers of the idol Peor;"

for all the men that followed Baalpeor, the Lord thy God hath destroyed
them from among you; 24,000 persons died on that account; which being a
recent thing, fresh in memory, and what they were eyewitnesses of, was a
caution to them to avoid the same sins, as it is to us on whom the ends
of the world are come, [Num 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#009.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 4:4</span></span>

But ye that did cleave unto the Lord your God,.... To the worship of the
Lord your God, as the Targum of Jonathan; attended the service of the
sanctuary, were observant of the laws of God, and walked in his statutes
and judgments; did not apostatize from him by idolatry or otherwise, but
kept close unto him, and followed him fully:

are alive everyone of you this day; which is very remarkable, that in
such a vast number of people not one should die in such a space of time,
it being several months since that affair happened; and besides, in that
time there was a war with the Midianites, and yet not one person died in
that war, nor as it seems by this account by any disease or disaster
whatever; see [Num 31:49](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#049.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 4:5</span></span>

Behold, I have taught you statutes and judgments, even as the Lord my
God commanded me,.... He had faithfully delivered them, without adding
them, or diminishing from them, and had diligently instructed the
Israelites in them, had taken pains to lead them into a thorough
knowledge and understanding them:

that ye should do so in the land whither ye go possess it; do in like
manner as the commandments the Lord direct to; or that which is right
(e); proper and fitting to be done, by doing which they continue in the
land they were about to possess, therefore when in it were to be careful
to them; some of them could not be done till they came into it, and all
were to be done in it.

\(e\) "rectum".

[Deuteronomy 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 4:6</span></span>

Keep therefore and do them,..... Observe them, take notice of what is
expressed by them, and perform them, both as to matter and manner, as
they require:

for this is your wisdom and your understanding in the sight of the
nations; that is, their wisdom and understanding would appear to other
nations by their observance of the commands of God:

which hear all these statutes; which they had a report, got knowledge of
by some of the philosophers who travelled into those parts, and by the
translation of the Bible into the Greek language:

and say, surely this great nation is a wise and understanding people;
that had such a body of laws, in which they were instructed, and
according to which they were governed, and in which they walked; that
were so agreeable to reason, truth, justice, and equity; insomuch that
so far as they became known they were admired and copied after, both by
Greeks and Romans; and hence it was that the oracle (f) declared, that
only the Chaldeans and Hebrews were a wise people; the Hebrews came from
Chaldea, as Abraham the father of them.

\(f\) Apud Porphyr. in Euseb Evangel. Praepar. l. 9. c. 10. p. 413.

[Deuteronomy 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 4:7</span></span>

Not so much for their number, for they were the fewest of all people;
nor for the largeness of their territories, for the land they were going
to possess was but a small country; nor for their wealth and riches, and
warlike exploits, though they were not contemptible in either; but for
their happy constitution in church and state, being directed and
governed in both by laws which came immediately from God himself; for
their knowledge of divine things, and for spiritual blessings and
privileges they were favoured with, of which a special instance is
given:

who hath God so nigh unto them as the Lord our God is, in all things
that we call upon him for? God was nigh unto them in respect of
relation, being their covenant God and Father, and they his sons and
daughters, to whom the adoption belonged; and with respect to place and
presence, his tabernacle being in the midst of them, the seat of his
Shechinah, or divine Majesty, being in the most holy place, between the
cherubim over the mercy seat; and he going before them in the pillar of
cloud by day, and in the pillar of fire by night, and who might be
applied unto at all times for whatsoever they stood in need of; and who
was always near unto them, to give them advice and counsel, help and
assistance; to hear their prayers, and communicate unto them things
temporal and spiritual they stood in need of: and so the Lord is nigh to
all that call upon him in faith, with fervency, and in sincerity and
truth; and herein the glory and greatness of a people, as of Israel,
lies, in being nearly related to God, a people near unto him, both as to
union and communion; and in having a communication of good things from
him. God is both a God at hand and afar off, [Jer
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#023.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 4:8</span></span>

And what nation is there so great, that hath statutes and judgments so
righteous,.... Founded in justice and equity, and so agreeable to right
reason, and so well calculated and adapted to lead persons in the ways
of righteousness and truth, and keep them from doing any injury to each
other's persons and properties, and to maintain good order, peace, and
concord among them:

as all this law which I set before you this day? which he then repeated,
afresh declared, explained and instructed them in; for otherwise it had
been delivered to them near forty years ago. Now there was not any
nation then in being, nor any since, to be compared with the nation of
the Jews, for the wise and wholesome laws given unto them; no, not the
more cultivated and civilized nations, as the Grecians and Romans, who
had the advantage of such wise lawgivers as they were accounted, as
Solon, Lycurgus, Numa, and others; and indeed the best laws that they
had seem to be borrowed from the Jews.

[Deuteronomy 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 4:9</span></span>

Only take heed to thyself,.... To walk according to this law, and not
swerve from it:

and keep thy soul diligently; from the transgressions and breaches of
it:

lest thou forget the things which thine eyes have seen; either the
statutes and judgments set before them, and the circumstances of the
delivery of them; or the punishment inflicted on the breakers of them;
or the favours bestowed on those that observed them:

and lest they depart from thy heart all the days of thy life; out of thy
mind and memory, and have no place in thy affections, through a neglect
and disuse of them:

but teach them thy sons, and thy sons' sons; their children and
grandchildren, that they may be trained up in them in their youth, and
so not depart from them when grown up, and in years; see [Deu
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 4:10</span></span>

Specially the day that thou stoodest before the Lord in Horeb,.... Above
all things Moses would have them take care not to forget the day the law
was given from Mount Sinai, which was so awful and solemn, when they saw
the fire, the smoke, the lightning, and heard the thunder and the sound
of the trumpet; all which were very shocking and terrifying: and though
the men of this generation were but young then, being under twenty years
of age, yet many of them were old enough to observe these things, and
which one would think should never wear out of their minds:

when the Lord said unto me, gather me the people together; not the
elders of the people only, but the whole body of the people, as he did,
and brought them to the foot of Mount Sinai, [Exo
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017.md),

and I will make them hear my words; the ten commands which were spoken
by the Lord himself aloud, with an articulate voice, in the hearing of
all the people; and was such a terrible voice of words, that they that
heard it entreated it might be spoken to them no more, [Heb
12:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#019.md).

that they may learn to fear me all the days that they shall live upon
the earth; to reverence him the lawgiver, who is able to save and to
destroy; to fear to offend him by breaking his laws, so holy, just, and
good, and delivered in such an awful and solemn manner:

and that they may teach their children; the words they had heard, teach
them obedience to them, and to be careful not to act contrary to them;
since that would bring down judgments upon them, and deprive them of the
favour they enjoyed, of which they had seen instances.

[Deuteronomy 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 4:11</span></span>

And ye came near and stood under the mountain,.... At the foot of it, in
the lower part of the mountain, as the Targum of Jonathan, and agrees
with [Exo 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017.md).

and the mountain burnt with fire unto the midst of heaven; the flame and
smoke went up into the middle of the air: with darkness, clouds, and
thick darkness; which thick darkness was occasioned partly by the smoke,
which went up like the smoke of a furnace, and partly by the thick
clouds, which were on the mount, and covered the face of the heavens,
which were black and tempestuous with them; the Septuagint renders it a
"tempest", [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018.md), which denotes
the obscurity of the law, and the terrors it works in the minds of men.

[Deuteronomy 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 4:12</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto you out of the midst of the fire,.... For the
Lord descended on Mount Sinai in a cloud, in fire, and was in the thick
darkness, from whence he delivered out the ten commands:

ye heard the voice of the words; distinctly and plainly, not only the
sound of them, but the words themselves, and so as to understand what
was meant by them:

but saw no similitude; not any likeness of the person speaking, by which
they could form any idea of him in their minds, which was purposely done
to prevent idolatry:

only ye heard a voice; that was all.

[Deuteronomy 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 4:13</span></span>

And he declared unto you his covenant,.... So the law was called,
because it contained, on the part of God, things which he would have
done or avoided, to which were annexed promises of long life and
happiness in the land he gave them; and they, on their part, agreed to
hearken to it, and obey it, [Exo 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#003.md),

which he commanded you to perform, even ten commandments; which see at
large in [Exo 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001.md), and in this book
afterwards repeated, [Deu 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#006.md),

and he wrote them upon two tables of stone; to denote the durableness of
them; the Targum of Jonathan says on tables of sapphire; but it is most
likely that they were written on tables of marble, since there were
great quantities of it in Mount Sinai; See Gill on [Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 4:14</span></span>

And the Lord commanded me at that time,.... When the ten commandments
were delivered on Mount Sinai, and Moses was ordered to come up to God
in the mount:

to teach you statutes and judgments; laws ceremonial and judicial,
besides the ten commands given them:

that ye may do them in the land whither ye go over to possess it; the
land of Canaan, which was on the other side of Jordan, and over which
they must go in order to possess it; and when they came there, they were
to hold the possession of it by attending to those laws which forbad the
sins for which the old inhabitants of it were expelled out of it; and
besides these, there were also several laws, both ceremonial and
judicial, which were to be peculiarly observed in the land, as well as
others they were obliged to do while without it.

[Deuteronomy 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 4:15</span></span>

Take ye therefore good heed unto yourselves,.... As to keep all the laws
given them, so particularly to avoid idolatry:

for ye saw no manner of similitude on the day the Lord spake unto you in
Horeb out of the midst of the fire; and therefore, as they had nothing
that directed and led them, so they had nothing that could be a
temptation to them, to make any form or likeness, and worship it.

[Deuteronomy 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 4:16</span></span>

Lest ye corrupt yourselves,.... And not themselves only, but the word
and worship of God, by idolatry, than which nothing is more corrupting
and defiling, nor more abominable to God:

and make you a graven image, the similitude of any figure; a graven
image, in the likeness of any figure, an idea of which they had formed
in their minds:

the likeness of male or female; of a man or a woman; so some of the
Heathen deities were in the likeness of men, as Jupiter, Mars, Hercules,
Apollo, &c. and others in the likeness of women, as Juno, Diana, Venus,
&c. Some think Osiris and Isis, Egyptian deities, the one male, the
other female, are respected; but it is not certain that these were
worshipped by them so early.

[Deuteronomy 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 4:17</span></span>

The likeness of any beast that is on the earth,.... As there are scarce
any but the likeness of them has been made and worshipped, or the
creatures themselves, as the ox by the Egyptians, the sheep by the
Thebans, the goat by the Mendesians, and others by different people:

the likeness of any winged fowl that flieth in the air; as the hawk, and
the bird called Ibis, and another by the name of Cneph by the Egyptians,
and the eagle by others.

[Deuteronomy 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 4:18</span></span>

The likeness of anything that creepeth on the ground,.... As serpents by
many; and indeed that creature is introduced into almost all the
idolatries of the Heathens, which seems to take its rise from the
serpent Satan made use of to deceive our first parents:

the likeness of any fish that is in the waters beneath the earth; as the
crocodile and hippopotamus, or river horse, by the Egyptians; and Dagon
and Derceto, supposed to be figures in the form of a fish, among the
Phoenicians.

[Deuteronomy 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 4:19</span></span>

And lest thou lift up thine eyes unto heaven,.... The starry heaven,
which to do in itself is not sinful; and may be lawfully and commendably
done, to raise admiration at the wonderful works of God in them, and
lead to adore the author of them: but if not guarded against may be
ensnaring:

and when thou seest the sun and the moon, and the stars, even all the
host of heaven; those bright luminaries, so glorious to behold, and so
useful and beneficial to the earth, and the inhabitants of it:

shouldest be driven to worship them, and serve them; should have an
impulse on their minds and their hearts, be inclined and drawn to the
worship of them, partly by considering their splendour, glory, and
usefulness, and partly by the example of others; for the worshipping of
these seems to be and is the first kind of idolatry men gave into, at
least it was very ancient; see [Job
31:26](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#026.md),

which the Lord thy God hath divided unto all nations under the whole
heaven; the sun and the moon by their constant revolutions visit all the
parts of the world, and stars are fixed in both hemispheres, so that all
nations of the earth receive the benefit and advantage of all these
heavenly bodies; but were never designed to be the objects of their
worship, as might be learnt from their being divided to them, sometimes
one part of the earth enjoying them, and then another, and not present
with them all at one and the same time, which, if deities, would have
been necessary; see [Psa 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#006.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 4:20</span></span>

But the Lord hath taken you, and brought you forth out of the iron
furnace,.... The allusion is to the trying and melting of metals, and
fleeing them from dross, by putting them into furnaces strongly heated,
some of which are of earth, others of iron; the word, as the Jewish
writers (g) observe, signifies such an one in which gold and silver and
other things are melted; see [Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006.md)
even "out of Egypt"; which is here compared to an iron furnace, because
of the cruelty with which the Israelites were used in it, the hardships
they were put under, and the misery and bondage they were kept in; but
out of all the Lord brought them, as he does all his people sooner or
later out of their afflictions, sometimes called the furnace of
affliction, [Isa 48:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#010.md) where their
graces are tried, and they are purged, purified, and refined from their
dross and tin. This the Lord did to Israel, he brought them out of their
distressed state and condition:

to be unto him a people of inheritance, as ye are this day: to be the
Lord's inheritance, as they now were, [Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009.md) as well as they were quickly to
inherit the land of Canaan, for which they were brought out of the land
of Egypt; and indeed they were already, even that day, entered on their
inheritance, the kingdom of the Amorites being delivered into their
hands.

\(g\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Celim. c. 8. sect. 9. & Jarchi in
loc.

[Deuteronomy 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 4:21</span></span>

Furthermore the Lord was angry with me for your sakes,.... See [Deu
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#026.md),

and sware that I should not go over Jordan; this circumstance of
swearing is nowhere else expressed:

and that I should not go in unto that good land; the land of Canaan; he
might see it, as he did from Pisgah, but not enter into it:

which the Lord thy God giveth thee for an inheritance; to them and to
their children after them.

[Deuteronomy 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 4:22</span></span>

But I must die in this land,.... The land of Moab, in a mountain in it
he died, and in a valley there he was buried, [Deu
32:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#050.md),

I must not go over Jordan; this he repeats, as lying near his heart; he
had earnestly solicited to go over, but was denied it:

but ye shall go over, and possess that good land; this he firmly
believed and assures them of, relying on the promise and faithfulness of
God.

[Deuteronomy 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 4:23</span></span>

Take heed unto yourselves,.... Since he should not be long with them, to
advise, instruct, and caution them:

lest ye forget the covenant of the Lord your God, which he made with
you; what that required of them, and what was promised unto them on the
performance of it, and what they must expect should they break it, and
particularly be so forgetful of it, and the first articles in it, as
follows:

and make you a graven image, or the likeness of anything which the Lord
thy God hath forbidden thee; a graven image in the likeness of men or
women, of any beast on the earth, or fowl in heaven, or fish in the sea.

[Deuteronomy 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 4:24</span></span>

For the Lord thy God is a consuming fire,.... To his enemies; his wrath
is like fire to burn up and destroy all that oppose him and break his
commands, and especially idolaters; whose sin of all others is the most
provoking to him, since it strikes at his being, his honour and glory;
wherefore it follows:

even a jealous God; who is jealous of his honour in matters of worship,
and will not suffer his glory to be given to another, nor his praise to
graven images, without resenting it or punishing for it.

[Deuteronomy 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 4:25</span></span>

When thou shall beget children, and children's children,.... Children
and grandchildren, and several ages and generations have passed:

and shalt have remained long in the land; many years and even ages, or
have grown old (h) in it: now they were in their infancy, and as such
they were about to enter into it; during the times of the judges, they
were in their childhood, or youth; in the times of David and Solomon,
they were in their manhood; after that, in their decline; and in the
times of Jeconiah and his brethren in their old age, when for their sins
they were carried captive:

and shall corrupt yourselves, and make a graven image, or the likeness
of anything; See Gill on [Deu 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#016.md).

and shall do evil in the sight of the Lord thy God, to provoke him to
anger; that sin of idolatry, that God provoking sin, is chiefly
intended.

\(h\) "inveteraveritis", Montanus: "veteres facti fueritis", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; "senueritis", Vatablus.

[Deuteronomy 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 4:26</span></span>

I call heaven and earth to witness against you this day,.... Should they
be guilty of such a sin, since they were so strongly and publicly
cautioned against it; and even the heaven and the earth were called upon
as witnesses of the law being set before them, which so expressly
forbids it, [Deu 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019.md).

that ye shall soon utterly perish from off the land whereunto you go
over Jordan to possess it; though they were now about to go over Jordan
and inherit the land of Canaan, yet they would not enjoy it long, but be
taken and carried captive out of it; as the ten tribes were by
Shalmaneser king of Assyria, and the two tribes by Nebuchadnezzar king
of Babylon, and both for their idolatry and other crimes.

[Deuteronomy 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 4:27</span></span>

And the Lord shall scatter you among the nations,.... As they were by
both captivities; the ten tribes were dispersed among the cities of the
Medes, and the two tribes throughout the empire of Babylon:

and ye shall be left few in number among the Heathen, whither the Lord
shall lead you; or be "men of number" (i), so few that they might be
easily numbered; which intimates that it should be other wise with them
than when in Egypt; there they were multiplied and increased the more
they were afflicted, but in these captivities they should be greatly
diminished.

\(i\) "viri numeri", Montanus, Drusius.

[Deuteronomy 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 4:28</span></span>

And there ye shall serve gods, the work of men's hands, wood and
stone,.... Idols made by men, cut out of wood and stone; these they
should be enticed into the service of, or compelled to serve; which was
still more brutish and stupid than to worship the sun, moon, and stars,
which were not the works of men's hand, but the glorious works of the
eternal God. But since in their captivities they were not subject to
idolatry, but were cured of it thereby, another sense of the words is
given by some, as by Onkelos and Jonathan, who paraphrase the words of
serving the people, that serve idols; but what follows confirms the
first sense:

which neither see, nor hear, nor taste, nor smell; senseless things,
which have none of the senses of seeing, hearing, and smelling, nor the
faculty of eating, which they need not to support life, of which they
are destitute; and therefore it must be monstrous stupidity to worship
such lifeless, senseless, objects; see [Psa
115:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#004.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 4:29</span></span>

But if from thence thou shalt seek the Lord thy God,.... By prayer and
supplication, acknowledging and confessing sin, and desiring that God
would be gracious and forgive it, and bring them out of their miserable
condition; even if out of those depths of affliction and distress, and
though scattered about in the world, and in the uttermost parts of it:

thou shalt find him; to be a God hearing and answering prayer, gracious
and merciful, ready to help and deliver:

if they seek him with all their heart and with all their soul; sincerely
and affectionately.

[Deuteronomy 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 4:30</span></span>

When thou art in tribulation,.... In a strange land, in the power of a
foreign enemy, and used ill:

and all these things are come upon thee; captivity, thraldom, hard
labour, and want of the necessaries of life:

even in the latter days: in their present captivity for the rejection of
the Messiah:

if thou turn to the Lord thy God; as the Jews will when they are
converted and brought to a sense of their sin, and of their need of
Christ, and seek to him as their Saviour, as they will do in the latter
day, [Hos 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005.md).

and shall be obedient unto his voice; not of the law only, but of the
Gospel also, proclaiming peace, pardon, righteousness, and salvation by
him whom they have pierced.

[Deuteronomy 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">deu 4:31</span></span>

For the Lord thy God is a merciful God,.... In Christ, in whom he has
proclaimed his name as such, of which Moses had a comfortable view, [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md) and therefore could attest it
from his own knowledge and experience:

he will not forsake thee; though in a strange country, but bring them
from thence into their own land again, and favour them with his gracious
presence in his house and ordinances:

neither destroy thee; from being a people; and in a very wonderful
manner are they preserved among the nations of the earth to this day:

nor forget the covenant of thy fathers, which he sware unto them; that a
Saviour should come and turn away ungodliness from them, and take away
their sins; see [Rom 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">deu 4:32</span></span>

For ask now of the days that are past, which were before thee,....
Inquire into and consult the annals of former times, of ages past:

since the day that God created man upon the earth; trace them quite up
to the creation of the world, and men in it:

and ask from the one side of heaven to the other; traverse the whole
globe, and examine the records of every nation in it in both
hemispheres:

whether there hath been any such thing as this great thing is, or hath
been heard like it? whether they can give any account of anything seen,
heard, or done like what follows; suggesting that they cannot furnish
out an instance to be mentioned with it.

[Deuteronomy 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">deu 4:33</span></span>

Did ever people hear the voice of God speaking out of the midst of
fire,.... None ever heard the voice of God as they did, much less
speaking such words as they heard, and still less out of the midst of
fire, which was their case, [Deu 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#012.md).

as thou hast heard, and live? which was stranger still, when they might
have expected they should, and doubtless feared they would be, as it was
wonderful they were not, consumed by it.

[Deuteronomy 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">deu 4:34</span></span>

Or hath God assayed to go and take him a nation from the midst of
another nation,.... As he now had done, namely, the nation of Israel out
of the nation of the Egyptians; this he not only had assayed to do, but
had actually done it; whereas no such instance like it could be
produced, and especially as done in the manner this was:

by temptations, by signs, and by wonders, and by war; the word
"temptations" may be considered as a general word, as Aben Ezra thinks,
and may signify the temptations by signs, &c. or the various essays and
trials, ways, means, and methods taken by the Lord to bring about the
event; by "signs" may be meant those which were required of Moses, and
done by him before the people of Israel, and before Pharaoh, as proofs
of his mission from the Lord, [Exo 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo004.htm#001.md)
and by "wonders", the ten plagues of Egypt, which were done by a
supernatural and miraculous operation, and were amazing things; see [Psa
78:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#011.md); and by "war", either the
slaying of the firstborn, with the destruction of the judges and gods of
Egypt, as Aben Ezra; or the Lord's fighting for Israel at the Red sea,
as Jarchi; he saved them and destroyed the Egyptians, and showed himself
to be a man of war, [Exo 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014.md).

and by a mighty hand and stretched out arm; phrases frequently used when
this affair is spoken of, and are expressive of the mighty power of God
in the above instances, and in the issue of them, bringing Israel out of
Egypt; though Aben Ezra interprets it of the pillar of fire and cloud in
which the Lord went before them:

and by great terrors; which the same writer interprets of the drowning
of Pharaoh and his host in the sea, and dividing it for Israel; but may
be understood not only of the terrors which possessed him and his people
then, but at other times, especially at the time of the thunder and
lightning, and when they sat in thick darkness, and particularly when
all their firstborn were slain; see [Deu
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#008.md),

according to all that the Lord your God did for you in Egypt before your
eyes; among the men of Egypt, as the above writer, Pharaoh and his
courtiers: the above things were done as before them for their terror,
so before Israel for their encouragement.

[Deuteronomy 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">deu 4:35</span></span>

Unto thee it was showed,.... What the Lord did in Egypt:

that thou mightest know that the Lord he is God, there is none else
besides him; that he is the one only living and true God, and there is
no other: this phrase is often used by the Prophet Isaiah, to express
the same great article of faith.

[Deuteronomy 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">deu 4:36</span></span>

Out of heaven he made thee to hear his voice, that he might instruct
thee,.... Thunder is the voice of God, and by which he instructs men in
the greatness of his power, [Job
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#014.md), &c. unless his voice in giving
the law, which was for the instruction of Israel, is meant; for that was
heard on earth, on Mount Sinai, to which the following refers:

and upon earth he showed thee his great fire; on Mount Sinai, which
burned with it:

and thou heardest his words out of the midst of the fire; the ten
commands, and therefore may well be called, a fiery law; see [Deu
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#012.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">deu 4:37</span></span>

And because he loved thy fathers,.... Not their immediate fathers, whose
carcasses fell in the wilderness, and entered not into the good land
because of their unbelief, but their more remote fathers or ancestors,
Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, who had some singular testimonies of the love
of God to them, Abraham is called their friend of God, and Isaac was the
son of promise in whom the seed was called; and Jacob is particularly
said to be loved by God, when Esau was hated:

therefore he chose their seed after them; not to eternal life and
salvation, but to the enjoyment of external blessings and privileges, to
be called by his name, and to set up his name and worship among them,
and to be a special people to him above all people on the earth, as to
outward favours, both civil and ecclesiastical:

and brought thee out in his sight with his mighty power out of Egypt;
which was done not only in the sight of the Egyptians openly, they not
daring to hinder them, as the wonders wrought to oblige them to let them
go out, done in the sight of the Israelites as before observed, but in
the sight of God, he going before them in the pillar of cloud and fire,
smiling upon them the Israelites, and looking with a frown upon the host
of the Egyptians, and conducting the people by the angel of his
presence.

[Deuteronomy 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">deu 4:38</span></span>

To drive out nations from before thee, greater and mightier than thou
art,.... The seven nations of the land of Canaan, which were more in
number and mightier in power and strength than they, and particularly
the Amorites, who were already driven out and dispossessed of their
country, even the kingdoms and nations of Sihon and Og:

to bring thee in to give thee their land for an inheritance, as it is
this day; referring, as Aben Ezra observes, to the inheritance of the
land of the two kings of the Amorites, which the tribes of Reuben and
Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh, were put into the possession of
already.

[Deuteronomy 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">deu 4:39</span></span>

Know therefore this day, and consider it in thine heart,.... Own and
acknowledge it now with thy mouth, and lay it up and consider it in
thine heart hereafter, as a truth of the greatest importance to be
professed and held fast, and to be thought of and meditated upon
continually, and never to be forgotten:

that the Lord he is God in heaven above, and upon the earth beneath;
that he has made both, and is the possessor and Lord of them, and does
what he pleases with them; that the one is his throne, his dwelling
place, and the other his footstool; and that the inhabitants of both are
his creatures, and under his authority and command, and he can dispose
of them as he pleases:

there is none else; no God in heaven or in earth beside him.

[Deuteronomy 4:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">deu 4:40</span></span>

Thou shall keep therefore his statutes, and his commandments,.... All
his laws, moral, ceremonial, and judicial, partly being under obligation
to him for all the great and good things done by him for them before
enumerated, and partly and chiefly because he is the Lord God in heaven
and in earth, and has a right to command and ought to be obeyed:

which I command thee this day; in the name of the Lord, and which he
repeated, opened, and explained, and charged them afresh to observe;
otherwise they were such that had been given long ago:

that it may go well with thee, and with thy children after thee; that
they and theirs might enjoy temporal mercies, and continue in the land
of Canaan, and partake of all the blessings in it, as follows, and of
the sanctuary of the Lord, and the privileges of it:

and that thou mayest prolong thy days upon the earth, which the Lord thy
God giveth thee for ever; that is, that they and theirs might live long
in the land of Canaan, which the Lord gave for an inheritance for ever,
provided they kept his law, and were obedient to his commands; see [Deu
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#025.md), and though they have had several
interruptions by their captivities, and especially by their present very
long one, yet when they shall return and seek the Lord their God, and
David their king, they shall have their land restored to them again, and
shall never more be dispossessed of it.

[Deuteronomy 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">deu 4:41</span></span>

Then Moses severed three cities,.... To be cities of refuge, according
to the command of God, [Num 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#014.md) this
he did when he had conquered the two kingdoms of the Amorites, that God
had given them for an inheritance to the tribes of Reuben and Gad, and
the half tribe of Manasseh, [Deu 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#038.md)
though Jarchi says, and so other Jewish writers, that persons were not
received into them until the three cities appointed in the land of
Canaan were separated for the like use; See Gill on [Num
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#014.md) and these were:

on this side Jordan, toward the rising sun; on that side of the river on
which the plains of Moab lay, and the kingdoms of the Amorites, and to
the east of Jordan: so Jarchi remarks,"on that side which is on the east
of Jordan;''see [Jos 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">deu 4:42</span></span>

That the slayer might flee thither,.... For refuge; the slayer of a man,
but not any slayer, but

which should kill his neighbour unawares; by accident to him, without
any design and intention to kill him; ignorantly, as the Septuagint
version; and so Onkelos:

and hated him not in times past; it having never appeared that there had
been a quarrel between them, and that the slayer had shown any enmity to
the man slain any time before the fact, or bore a grudge against him, or
spite unto him:

and that, fleeing unto one of these cities, he might live; in peace and
safety unto his own death, or unto the death of the high priest, when he
was released from his confinement to the city of his refuge, and might
return to his tribe, house, family, and possessions.

[Deuteronomy 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">deu 4:43</span></span>

Namely, Bezer in the wilderness,.... In [Jos
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008.md), it is added "upon the plain";
this perhaps was the wilderness of Moab, in the plains of it, the same
with Bozrah, see [Jer 48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024.md) and in the
Apocrypha:"Hereupon Judas and his host turned suddenly by the way of the
wilderness unto Bosora; and when he had won the city, he slew all the
males with the edge of the sword, and took all their spoils, and burned
the city with fire,'' (1 Maccabees 5:28)it was in the

plain country of the Reubenites, or lay in that part of the country
which was allotted to them, and which they gave to the Levites, [Ch1
6:78](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#078.md),

and Ramoth in Gilead of the Gadites; it lay in that part of Mount
Gilead, and among the cities of it, which fell to the share of the tribe
of Gad, and was by them given to the Levites, [Ch1
6:80](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#080.md), this city is frequently in
Scripture called Ramothgilead; see [Kg1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#013.md).

and Golan in Bashan, of the Manassites, or "Gaulon", as the Septuagint,
and from hence the country round about was called Gaulanitis; all
Bashan, the kingdom of Og, was given to the half tribe of Manasseh, and
out of it this city was given by them to the Levites, [Ch1
6:71](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#071.md), and appointed a city of refuge:
now as these cities were typical of Christ, there may be something
observed in the names of them as agreeing with him. "Bezer" signifies "a
fortified place"; Christ is the fortress, mountain, and place of defence
for his people, and strong hold to which the prisoners of hope turn, the
strong tower whither the righteous run and are safe. "Ramoth" signifies
"exaltations"; which may point both at the exaltation of Christ in human
nature at the right hand of God, and the exaltation of his people by
him, who are raised by him from a low estate to sit among princes, and
to inherit the throne of glory, and by whom he is exalted in his person,
office, and grace. "Golan" signifies "revealed" or" manifested": so
Christ has been manifest in the flesh, and is revealed to sinners, when
they are called by his grace; to whom they flee for refuge, and lay hold
on him, the hope set before them.

[Deuteronomy 4:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">deu 4:44</span></span>

And this is the law which Moses set before the children of Israel. Not
the law concerning the cities of refuge, but the law of the ten commands
repeated in the following chapter; so Jarchi remarks,"this which he
should set in order after this section;''as he does in the next chapter,
where he repeats in order the ten precepts, and makes observations on
the manner of the delivery of them, and urges obedience to them.

[Deuteronomy 4:45](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">deu 4:45</span></span>

These are the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments,.... The
laws, moral, ceremonial, and judicial, delivered in the following
chapters; which are renewed, repeated, and explained: which Moses spake
unto the children of Israel, after they came forth out of Egypt; in the
third month after they came from thence these laws were delivered to him
at Mount Sinai, and he declared them to them; and now afresh, near forty
years after, repeated them to them in the plains of Moab.

[Deuteronomy 4:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">deu 4:46</span></span>

On this side Jordan, in the valley, over against Bethpeor,.... Where the
Israelites abode some time; see [Deu
3:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#029.md),

in the land of Sihon king of the Amorites, who dwelt at Heshbon; which
was now conquered, and in the hands of the Israelites:

whom Moses and the children of Israel smote, after they came out of
Egypt; not as soon as, or quickly after they came from thence; for it
was but a few months ago since this conquest was made, whereas it was
near forty years since they came out of Egypt.

[Deuteronomy 4:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">deu 4:47</span></span>

And they possessed his land, and the land of Og king of Bashan,....
Seized upon them, and took them as their own, and divided them for an
inheritance among two of their tribes and half another:

two kings of the Amorites; which is more than once observed, that it
might be taken notice of that these were of the nations of the
Canaanites Israel were to root out, and possess their land:

which were on this side Jordan, toward the sun rising; which lands and
kingdoms lay to the east of Jordan, on that side of it on which were the
plains of Moab, where Moses and Israel now were.

[Deuteronomy 4:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">deu 4:48</span></span>

From Aroer, which is by the bank of the river Arnon,.... A city of Moab,
which was situated on the bank of the river Arnon, that was on the
border of Moab, [Deu 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#036.md),

even unto Mount Sion, which is Hermon; the meaning is, that the lands of
these two kings conquered by Israel reached from the city Aroer on the
river Arnon to Mount Hermon, the one being the southern, the other the
northern boundary of them. Here Hermon has another name Sion, and is to
be carefully distinguished from Mount Zion near Jerusalem; it lying in a
different country, and being written with a different letter in the
Hebrew language. In the Septuagint version it is called Seon, and by the
Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem the mount of snow; See Gill on [Deu
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009.md).

[Deuteronomy 4:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">deu 4:49</span></span>

And all the plain on this side Jordan eastward,.... The plains of Moab,
on that side of Jordan to the east:

even unto the sea of the plain; the sea of Sodom, the salt sea:

under the springs of Pisgah; that rose from Mount Pisgah, the same with
Ashdothpisgah, [Deu 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#017.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 5](deu005.md)

</div>
