<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu001)  [Next](deu003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 2

In this chapter Moses goes on with his account of the affairs of the
people of Israel, and what befell them, how they turned into the
wilderness again; but passes over in silence their travels there, till
they came to Mount Self, where having been some time they were bid to
depart, [Deu 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001), and were directed
not to meddle with the Edomites, or take anything from them, but pay
them for what they should have of them, since they lacked not, [Deu
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#004), nor to distress the Moabites, of
whose country, as formerly inhabited, and also of Edom, some account is
given, [Deu 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#009), when they were bid to
go over the brook Zered, to which from their coming from Kadeshbarnea
was the space of thirty eight years, in which time the former generation
was consumed, [Deu 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#013) and now
passing along the borders of Moab, they were ordered not to meddle with
nor distress the children of Ammon, of whose land also, and the former
inhabitants of it, an account is given, [Deu
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#017), then passing over the river
Arnon, they are bid to fight with Sihon king of the Amorites, and
possess his land, [Deu 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#024) to whom
they sent messengers, desiring leave to pass through his land, and to
furnish them with provisions for their money, as the Edomites and
Moabites had done, [Deu 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#026) but he
refusing, this gave them an opportunity to attack him, in which they
succeeded, slew him and his people, and took possession of his country,
[Deu 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#030).

[Deuteronomy 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 2:1</span></span>

Then we turned,.... From Kadesh, where they had been many days, and so
also their backs on the land of Canaan, on the borders of which they had
been:

and took our journey into the wilderness, by the way of the Red sea, as
the Lord spake unto me; [Deu 1:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#040).

and we compassed Mount Seir many days; many think by Mount Seir is meant
the whole mountainous country of Edom, about which they travelled to and
fro in the wilderness that lay near it for the space of thirty eight
years, which they suppose are meant by many days; but I rather think
they came to this mount towards the close of the thirty eight years,
before they came to Kadesh, from whence they sent messengers to Edom,
which they went round about for several days,

[Deuteronomy 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 2:2</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto me,.... While about Mount Seir:

saying; as follows.

[Deuteronomy 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 2:3</span></span>

Ye have compassed this mountain long enough,.... It was time to be gone
from thence, as from Horeb, [Deu 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#006),

turn you northward; from the southern border of Edom towards the land of
Canaan, which lay north. It was from Eziongeber in the land of Edom,
from whence the Israelites came to Kadesh, where they sent messengers to
the king of Edom, to desire a passage through his land; see [Num
33:36](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#036).

[Deuteronomy 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 2:4</span></span>

And command thou the people,.... Give them a strict charge:

saying, ye are to pass through the coast of your brethren the children
or Esau: not through the midst of their country, for that the king of
Edom would not admit of, but by or on the border of it:

and they shall be afraid of you; lest such a numerous body of people as
Israel were should seize upon their country, and dispossess them of it,
they having been so long, wanderers in a wilderness near them:

take ye good heed unto yourselves therefore; that they did not take any
advantage of their fears, and fall upon them, and do them mischief, or
that they did not provoke them to battle and overcome them.

[Deuteronomy 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 2:5</span></span>

Contend not with them in battle, nor provoke them to it:

for I will not give you of their land, no not so much as a foot breadth;
or as the sole of a man's foot can tread on, signifying that they should
not have the least part of it, not any at all. Jarchi makes mention of
an exposition of theirs, that he would give them nothing of it until
should come the day of the treading of the sole of the foot in the mount
of Olives, [Zac 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004), meaning not till
the days of the Messiah, when Edom should be a possession of Israel; see
[Num 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#018), [Oba
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#019).

because I have given Mount Seir unto Esau for a possession; and
therefore not to be taken away from them; they have a right of
inheritance of it; see [Gen 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008).

[Deuteronomy 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 2:6</span></span>

That is, if they would, as Aben Ezra observes; for though they had manna
daily, yet if they would they might buy other food when they had an
opportunity, as they would now have of Edom; but then they were not to
take it by force or stealth, but pay for it, which they were able to do.
The same writer observes, that some read the words with an
interrogation, "shall ye buy meat?" no, there is no need of it; for the
Lord had blessed them with a sufficiency of it:

and ye shall also buy water of them for money; that ye may drink; which
was usual in those hot countries; See Gill on [Num
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#019) or dig water (y) that is, pay
for digging of wells for water, or buy water out of wells dug in the
land of Edom. Jarchi says in maritime places they express buying by this
word, and so it is used in the Arabic language; See Gill on [Hos
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#002).

\(y\) "fodietis", Montanus.

[Deuteronomy 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 2:7</span></span>

For the Lord thy God hath blessed thee in all the works of thine
hands,.... Had increased their cattle and substance, even though in a
wilderness:

he knoweth thy walking through this great wilderness; every step they
took, and he owned them and prospered them in all things in which they
were concerned:

these forty years the Lord thy God hath been with thee: not only to
protect and defend them, but to provide all things necessary for them.
This number of years was not fully completed, but the round number is
given instead of the broken one:

thou hast lacked nothing: and since they had wherewith to pay for their
food and drink, they are directed to do it, and not take anything from
the Edomites in an unjust way; nor make themselves look poor when they
were rich, as Jarchi says.

[Deuteronomy 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 2:8</span></span>

And when we passed by from our brethren the children of Esau, which
dwelt in Self,.... Along their coasts, by the borders of their country:

through the way of the plain; the wilderness of Zin, where Kadesh was:

from Elath and Eziongeber; the two ports on the shore of the Red sea in
the land of Edom; it was from the latter they came to Kadesh; see [Num
33:35](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#035). Elath was ten miles from Petra,
the metropolis of Edom, to the east of it, as Jerom says (z); it is by
Josephus (a) called Aelana, and by the Septuagint here Ailon; from
whence the Elanitic bay has its name; he speaks of it as not far from
Eziongeber, which he says was then called Berenice:

we turned and passed by the way of the wilderness of Moab; the
wilderness which is before Moab, towards the sun rising or the east,
[Num 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#011).

\(z\) De loc. Heb. fol. 91. E. (a) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 6. sect. 4.

[Deuteronomy 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 2:9</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me,.... When upon the borders of Moab:

distress not the Moabites, neither contend with than in battle; besiege
not any of their cities, nor draw them into a battle, or provoke them to
fight:

for I will not give thee of their land for a possession; at least not as
yet, the measure of their sins not being fully up, and the time of their
punishment not come; otherwise in David's time they were subdued, and
became tributaries to him, and the Edomites also, [Sa2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#002),

because I have given Ar unto the children of Lot for a possession; so
the Moabites were, they sprung from Moab, a son of Lot by his firstborn
daughter, [Gen 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#037). Ar was the
metropolis of Moab, called Ar of Moab, [Isa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001) and is here put for the whole
country of Moab; so Aben Ezra interprets it of Moab. Jarchi says it is
the name of the province; in the Septuagint version it called Aroer.

[Deuteronomy 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 2:10</span></span>

The Emims dwelt there in time past,.... We read of them as early as the
times of Chedorlaomer, [Gen 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005) when
their dwelling was in Kirjathaim, a city which Sihon king of the
Amorites took from the Moabites, and which being taken from him, was
with others given to the tribe of Reuben, [Num
32:37](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#037). These are by some thought to be
the same with the Yemim which Anah found and met with in the wilderness,
and defeated, which we render "mules", [Gen
36:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#024). They had their name from the
fear and terror they put men into because of their gigantic stature and
great strength, as follows: it is probable they were the descendants of
Ham:

a people great and many, and tall as the Anakims; who were very
numerous, of a very bulky size of body, and of high stature, like the
giants the spies had seen at Hebron, the sons of Anak, a noted giant
there, [Num 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022).

[Deuteronomy 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 2:11</span></span>

Which also were accounted giants, as the Anakims,.... Because of their
bulky size and tall stature; or,"the Rephaim were they accounted, even
they as the Anakims;''they were reckoned Rephaim, a name for giants in
early times, even as the Anakims were; see [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005).

but the Moabites called them Emims; to distinguish them from the
Rephaim; so that it seems this name of Emims was not originally their
name, but they are called so by a prolepsis, or anticipation, in [Gen
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005) since they had it from the
Moabites, a people of a later date.

[Deuteronomy 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 2:12</span></span>

The Horims also dwelt in Seir before time,.... Which is the name of a
mount, and so of the country, from it; so called from Seir the Horite,
who dwelt in it before it was possessed by Esau and his sons; but who
the Horim or Horites were, from whence they had their name, is difficult
to say; they were as early as the times of Chedorlaomer, [Gen
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#006). They seem to be so called from
their dwelling in holes and caves in rocks, which the southern part of
Edom or Idumea was full of, and to be the same the Greeks call
Troglodytae:

but the children of Esau succeeded them; Esau and his sons marrying
among them, made way for getting the country into their possession, as
appears from [Gen 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002) and in which
they afterwards settled themselves by the dint of sword, since it
follows:

when they had destroyed them from before them, and dwelt in their stead;
even in Seir where they had dwelt, afterwards called Edom, from one of
the names of Esau, [Gen 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008).

as Israel did in the land of his possession, which the Lord gave unto
them; because this is said before the Canaanites were drove out of their
land, and it was possessed by the Israelites, some think this was
written by Ezra, or some other hand; but there is no need to suppose
that; Moses, by a spirit of prophecy, and in faith of the promises and
prophecies of God relating to this affair, which were just now about to
be fulfilled, might write this; besides, it may refer to what was
already done to the kingdoms of Sihon and Og, kings of the Amorites;
which had been taken from them, and given to the tribes of Reuben and
Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh; and the above instances as well as
this may be observed, to encourage the people of Israel that they should
succeed in dispossessing the Canaanites, and settling in their land, in
like manner as dispossessions of this kind had already been made.

[Deuteronomy 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 2:13</span></span>

Now rise up, said I, and get you over the brook Zered,.... It is called
the valley of Zered, [Num 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#012), the
word used signifying both a valley and a brook; and it is very probable
there were both a valley and a brook of the same name; it must be near
Dibongad, since in one place it is said the Israelites came from Ijim
and pitched in Zered; and in another place that they came from thence,
and pitched in Dibongad, [Num 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#011)
and

Nu 33:45.

and we went over the brook Zered; which was fordable, or perhaps at this
time dried up.

[Deuteronomy 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 2:14</span></span>

And the space in which we came from Kadeshbarnea,.... The space of time;
or, "the days" (b); the number of them:

until we were come over the brook Zered, was thirty and eight years;
that is, from the time that the spies were sent and searched the land,
and brought a report of it; for they were sent from Kadeshbarnea, [Num
32:8](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#008) unto the passage of the
Israelites over Zered, were thirty eight years; so long they had been
travelling in the wilderness, after they were come to the borders of the
land:

until all the generation of the men of war were wasted out from among
the host; all that were twenty years old and upwards, and fit to go out
to war upon occasion, when the people were first numbered after they
came out of Egypt; all that generation was now consumed within the above
space of time, excepting two, Caleb and Joshua:

as the Lord sware unto them; [Num
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#021).

\(b\) "et dies", Montanus; "dies autem", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Deuteronomy 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 2:15</span></span>

For indeed the hand of the Lord was against them,.... His power was
exerted in a way of wrath and vengeance on them, for their murmurings at
the report of the spies; and therefore, it is no wonder they were
consumed, for strong is his hand, and high is his right hand; and when
lifted up it falls heavy, and there is no standing up under it, or
against it: it smote them with one disease or another, or brought one
judgment or another upon them: as the sword of Amalek, by which many
were cut off, and the plague at Shittim in the plains of Moab, in which
died 24,000; besides the destruction of Korah and his company, which was
quickly after the affair of the spies, and the plague at that time, of
which died 14,700; and thus, by one stroke after another, he went on to

destroy them from among the host until they were consumed, even all of
them but two, as follows.

[Deuteronomy 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 2:16</span></span>

So it came to pass, when all the men of war were consumed,.... By
wasting diseases and judgments of one kind or another:

and dead from among the people; the rising and surviving generation.

[Deuteronomy 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 2:17</span></span>

That the Lord spoke unto me,.... At the brook Zered, having passed that,
or at Dibongad, which was their next station:

saying; as follows.

[Deuteronomy 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 2:18</span></span>

Thou art to pass over through Ar,.... That is, over the river Arnon, by
the city Ar of Moab, which was situated by it; see [Deu
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#009) and so Moses and the people of
Israel were to pass along by that:

and by the coast of Moab; for they were not admitted to enter the land
and pass through it; only to travel on the borders of it, and that they
were to begin to do this day; the day the Lord spake to Moses.

[Deuteronomy 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 2:19</span></span>

And when thou comest nigh over against the children of Ammon,.... Who
dwelt near the Moabites, and were brethren, both descending from Lot,
[Gen 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#037).

distress them not, nor meddle with them: lay no siege to any of their
cities, nor provoke them to war, nor engage in battle with them:

for I will not give thee of the land of the children of Ammon any
possession; that is, any part of it which was now in their hands;
otherwise half their land was given to the tribe of Gad; but then that
was what Sihon king of the Amorites had taken from them, and which
Israel retook from him, and so possessed it not as the land of the
Ammonites, but of the Amorites, one of the seven nations, whose land
they were to inherit; see [Jos 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#025),

because I have given it unto the children of Lot for a possession; the
Ammonites were the children of Lot by his second daughter, [Gen
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#038).

[Deuteronomy 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 2:20</span></span>

That also was accounted a land of giants,.... Ammon was so reckoned as
well as Moab, [Deu 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#010).

giants dwelt therein in old time; the Rephaim dwelt there, as they did
also in Ashteroth Karnaim, [Gen 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005).

and the Ammonites call them Zamzummims; they are thought to be the same
with the Zuzims in [Gen 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#005) who had
their name, as Hillerus (c) thinks, from Mezuzah, a door post, from
their tall stature, being as high as one; and for a like reason Saph the
giant might have his name, [Sa2 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#018).
The word Zamzummims, according to him (d), signifies contrivers of evil
and terrible things; they were inventors of wickedness, crafty and
subtle in forming wicked and mischievous designs, which struck terror
into people, and made them formidable to them.

\(c\) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 158, 288, 289. (d) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 161,
310, 428.

[Deuteronomy 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 2:21</span></span>

A people great and many, and tall as the Anakims,.... As the Emims were,
[Deu 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#010) but the Lord destroyed them
before them; destroyed the Zamzummims before the children of Amman; or
otherwise they would have been an too much for them, being so numerous,
and of such a gigantic stature:

and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead; and in this way, and
by these means, he gave them their land for a possession, [Deu
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 2:22</span></span>

As he did to the children of Esau which dwelt in Seir,.... He did the
like things for them as he did for the Ammonites:

when he destroyed the Horims from before them: which is repeated from
[Deu 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#012), other instances of the like
kind being here recited:

and they succeeded them, and dwelt in their stead, even unto this day;
See Gill on [Deu 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#012).

[Deuteronomy 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 2:23</span></span>

And the Avim, which dwelt in Hazerim, even unto Azzah,.... The same with
the Avites, who appear to have inhabited some part of the land of the
Philistines, in which Azzah or Gaza was, which was one of the five
lordships of the Philistines, [Jos
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#003). The word Hazerim signifies
courts, and a learned man (e) interprets it of tents or huts placed in a
square or circular form, so as to have an area in the middle; and in
such the Avim may be supposed to dwell, while in Palestine, as far as
Gaza:

the Caphtorim, which came from out of Caphtor, destroyed them; according
to the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, and the Septuagint and Vulgate
Latin versions, these were Cappadocians, that came out of Cappadocia;
but it seems manifest that they were originally of Egypt, see [Gen
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#014) and Bochart (f) thinks they went
from thence into that part of Cappadocia that was near Colchis; but
things not answering their expectations, they returned, and drove out
the Avim from their country:

and dwelt in their stead; See Gill on [Jer
47:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer047.htm#004), [Amo
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007). Though it seems as if they were
not utterly destroyed, but some escaped into Assyria, and settled there,
where was a place called Ava from them; and from whence they were sent
by the king of Assyria to repeople the cities of Samaria, after the
captivity of the ten tribes; see [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024). Now these several instances are
observed to encourage the children of Israel to hope and believe that
they should be able to dispossess the Canaanites, and inherit their
land; such dispossessions having been very frequent, when it was the
will of God they should take place.

\(e\) Clayton's Chronology of the Hebrew Bible, p. 65. (f) Phaleg. l. 4.
c. 32. col. 291, 292.

[Deuteronomy 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 2:24</span></span>

Rise ye up, take your journey, and pass over the river Arnon,.... Which
was on the border of Moab, and divided between Moab and the Amorites,
[Num 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#013).

behold, I have given into thy hand Sihon, the Amorite, king of Heshbon,
and his land; that is, he had determined to give it to the Israelites,
for as yet it was not actually given; of this king, and the place he was
king of; see Gill on [Num 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021), [Num
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#026) begin to possess it, and contend
with him in battle; provoke him to war, fight with him, take his land
from him, and enter upon the possession of it, hereby assuring of
victory.

[Deuteronomy 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 2:25</span></span>

This day will I begin to put the dread of thee,.... And so fulfil the
prophecies delivered by Moses in [Exo
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#014).

and the fear of thee upon the nations that are under the whole heaven;
not only the neighbouring nations, the Edomites, Moabites, Ammonites,
Philistines, and Canaanites, but nations more remote even throughout the
whole world:

who shall report of thee; of what was done for Israel in Egypt, and at
the Red sea, and in the wilderness; and particularly of the delivery of
Sihon and Og, kings of the Amorites, and of their kingdoms into their
hands:

and shall tremble, and be in anguish because of thee; lest they should
proceed on, and make conquests of their lands also; see [Jos
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#009).

[Deuteronomy 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 2:26</span></span>

And I sent messengers out of the wilderness of Kedemoth,.... A city in
the tribe of Reuben, and given by them to the Levites in later times,
having been taken from the Amorites with others; near this lay a
wilderness, which took its name from it, and seems to be the same with
Jeshimon, [Num 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#020). Aben Ezra takes
it to be the wilderness of Matthanah, which according to Jerom (g) was
situated on Arnon, twelve miles to the east of Medeba; see [Num
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#018) from hence messengers were sent
by Moses:

unto Sihon king of Heshbon, with words of peace; in a peaceable and
respectful manner, desiring to be at peace and in friendship with him,
and a continuance of it, which was done to leave him inexcusable; as
afterwards a like method was ordered to be taken, when they came to any
city, to proclaim peace, and if an answer of peace was given, no
hostilities were to be committed, [Deu
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#010),

saying; as follows.

\(g\) De loc. Heb. fol. 93. C.

[Deuteronomy 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 2:27</span></span>

Let me pass through thy land,.... See Gill on [Num
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#022),

I will go along by the highway; the king's highway, as in the place
referred to, the public road:

I will neither turn to the right hand nor to the left; to go into his
fields and vineyards, and gather the fruit, or tread down the corn and
vines, or do any manner of mischief to them; see the above place.

[Deuteronomy 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 2:28</span></span>

Thou shalt sell me meat for money, that I may eat,.... If they thought
fit to have provision of them, they desired no other but to pay for it:

and give me water for money, that I may drink; see [Deu
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#006),

only I will pass through on my feet; for they were all footmen, [Num
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#021), of the phrase; see Gill on [Num
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 2:29</span></span>

As the children of Esau which dwell in Seir, and the Moabites which
dwell in Ar, did unto me,.... Which respects, as Jarchi observes, not
the affair of passing through their land requested, for neither of them
granted that, but buying food and drink; for though the Edomites at
first seem not to have granted that, yet afterwards they did. The
mountain of Seir, and the city Ar, are put for the whole countries of
Edom and Moab:

until I shall pass over Jordan into the land which the Lord our God
giveth us; this is observed to remove any suspicion or jealousy of their
seizing his country, and taking possession of it, and dwelling in it;
since they only proposed to pass through it on their journey to the land
of Canaan, which lay on the other side Jordan, over which they must pass
in order to possess it, which they had a right unto by the gift of God.

[Deuteronomy 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 2:30</span></span>

But Sihon king of Heshbon would not let us pass by him,.... Or through
his country, as was desired:

for the Lord had hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate; as
he did Pharaoh's, for whom he will he hardens; so that he would not
listen to the proposals made to him, nor grant the requests asked of
him, but with pride and haughtiness of spirit despised and disdained
Israel:

that he might deliver him into thine hand; that so an opportunity might
offer of fighting with him, and taking his country from him; whereas,
had he been peaceable and flexible, he had continued in the enjoyment of
his land, and Israel would not have had that advantage against him; but
God, who has the hearts of kings and of all men in his hands, so wrought
upon him that he should take the steps he did, which made way for the
delivery of him and his country into the hands of the Israelites:

as appeareth this day: for when Moses made this speech, the kingdom of
Sihon was possessed by the Israelites, [Num
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#024).

[Deuteronomy 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">deu 2:31</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me,.... After or about the time when the
messengers were sent to Sihon, perhaps when they had returned and had
brought his answer:

behold, I have begun to give Sihon and his land before thee; by
hardening his heart, which was a sure token of his ruin, and a leading
step to the delivery of him into the hands of Israel:

begin to possess, that thou mayest inherit his land; move towards it and
enter into it, not fearing any opposition made by him.

[Deuteronomy 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">deu 2:32</span></span>

Then Sihon came out against us,.... Perceiving they were upon their
march towards his land or into it, he gathered all his people and went
out of Heshbon their capital city, where he resided:

he and all his people, to fight at Jahaz; a city which he had taken from
the king of Moab, and which in later times, after the captivity of the
ten tribes, came into their hands again, [Isa
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004); see Gill on [Num
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#021).

[Deuteronomy 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">deu 2:33</span></span>

And the Lord our God delivered him before us,.... With their lands:

and we smote him and his sons, and all his people; with the edge of the
sword; slew them all: the Cetib or textual reading is "his son", though
the Keri or margin is "his sons", which we follow. So Jarchi observes,
it is written "his son", because he had a son mighty as himself, he
says.

[Deuteronomy 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">deu 2:34</span></span>

And we took all his cities at that time,.... As Heshbon, and others
mentioned in [Num 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#025),

and utterly destroyed the men, and the women, and the little ones of
every city, we left none to remain; for the Amorites were one of the
seven nations who were devoted to destruction, the measure of whose
iniquity was now full, and therefore vengeance was taken.

[Deuteronomy 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">deu 2:35</span></span>

Only the cattle we took for a prey unto ourselves,.... These they did
not destroy, but preserved alive for their own use and profit, and took
them as their own property:

and the spoil of the cities which we took; as household goods, gold,
silver, and whatever valuable was found by them; this they took as
plunder, and shared it among themselves.

[Deuteronomy 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">deu 2:36</span></span>

From Aroer, which is by the brink of the river Arnon.... Upon the border
of Moab, and the principal city of it; see [Jer
48:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#019).

and from the city that is by the river; or even the city that is in the
midst of the river, the city Aroer, which seems to be meant; see [Jos
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#002). This river is afterwards called
the river of Gad, [Sa2 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#005) in the
midst of it Aroer was, perhaps because it was possessed by the tribe of
Gad:

even unto Gilead; Mount Gilead and the country adjacent to it, which
belonged to Og king of Bashan:

there was not one city too strong for us; that could hold out against
them, when attacked and besieged by them, but presently surrendered:

the Lord our God delivered all unto us; Moses ascribes all the victories
and success they had unto the Lord, not to their own might and power,
but to the power of God with them, and his blessing on them.

[Deuteronomy 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">deu 2:37</span></span>

Only unto the land of the children of Ammon thou camest not,.... Which
was then in their possession; otherwise what Sihon had took away from
them, that the children of Israel came into and enjoyed, as before
observed, [Deu 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#019).

nor unto any place of the river Jabbok; any town or city situated on
this river, which was the border of the children of Ammon, [Deu
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#016); see Gill on [Gen
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#022),

nor unto the cities in the mountains; much less did they penetrate into
the innermost parts of their country, the mountainous part thereof, and
the cities there:

nor unto whatsoever the Lord our God forbad us: whether in Edom, Moab,
or Ammon, particularly the latter, of which he is more especially and
peculiarly speaking.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 3](deu003)

</div>
