<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu029)  [Next](deu031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 30:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 30

This chapter contains some gracious promises of the conversion of the
Jews in the latter day, of their calling things to mind that have
befallen them, of their repentance, and the circumcision of their hearts
to love the Lord, of the return of them to their own land, and of the
great increase of them, and of their enjoyment of plenty of good things,
[Deu 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001); in it is an account of the
Gospel, or word of faith, which at this time should be brought near to
the Jews, and be received by them, [Deu
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011); and for the present Moses
desires them to consider what he now set before them, and what would be
the consequences of receiving or rejecting it, and so what it would be
most proper for them to make choice of, [Deu
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015).

[Deuteronomy 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 30:1</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, when all these things are come upon thee,....
Declared, pronounced, foretold, and prophesied of in the three preceding
chapters, especially in [Deu 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001),

the blessing and the curse which I have set before thee; the blessings
promised to those that pay a regard to the will of God and obey his
voice, and curses threatened to the see [Deu
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001),

and thou shall call them to mind among all the nations whither the Lord
thy God hath driven thee; recollect the promises and the threatenings,
and observe the exact accomplishment of them in their captivities, and
especially in this their last and present captivity.

[Deuteronomy 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 30:2</span></span>

And shalt return unto the Lord thy God,.... By repentance, acknowledging
their manifold sins and transgressions, particularly their disbelief and
rejection of the Messiah, now seeking him and salvation by him; see [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005),

and shalt obey his voice; in the Gospel, yielding the obedience of faith
to that; embracing the Gospel, and submitting to the ordinances of it:

according to all that I command thee this day, thou, and thy children;
which was to love the Lord, and walk in his ways, directed to in the
Gospel, and which were to be regarded from a principle of love to God
and the blessed Redeemer; see [Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006),

with all thine heart and with all thy soul; that is, both their return
unto the Lord, and their obedience to his voice or word, should be
hearty and sincere; which being the case, the following things would be
done for them.

[Deuteronomy 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 30:3</span></span>

That then the Lord thy God will turn thy captivity, and have compassion
on thee,.... Return them from their captivity, or bring them out of it,
both in a temporal and spiritual sense; free them from their present
exile, and deliver them from the bondage of sin, Satan, and the law; and
all this as the effect of his grace and mercy towards them, and
compassion on them; see [Jer 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018);
The Targum of Jonathan is,"his Word shall receive with good will your
repentance;''it being cordial and unfeigned, and fruits meet for it
brought forth:

and will return and gather thee from all the nations whither the Lord
thy God scattered thee; or, "will again gather thee" (k); as he had
gathered them out of all places where they had been scattered, on their
return from the Babylonish captivity; so will he again gather them from
all the nations of the earth, east, west, north, and south, where they
are now dispersed; when they shall turn to the Lord, and seek David
their King, the true Messiah. Maimonides (l) understands this passage of
their present captivity, and deliverance from it by the Messiah.

\(k\) , Sept. "et rursum congregabit te", V. L. "et iterum colliget te",
Piscator. (l) Hilchot Melachim, c. 11. sect. 1.

[Deuteronomy 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 30:4</span></span>

If any of thine be driven out unto the outmost parts of heaven,.... As
many of them are in this remote island of ours, Great Britain, reckoned
formerly the uttermost part of the earth, as Thule, supposed to be
Schetland, an isle belonging to Scotland, is said to be (m); See Gill on
[Deu 28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049); and as some of them are
thought to be in America, which Manasseh Ben Israel (n) had a firm
belief of:

from thence will the Lord thy God gather thee, and from thence will he
fetch thee; whose eye is omniscient, and reaches every part of the
world; and whose arm is omnipotent, and none can stay it, or turn it
back. The Targum of Jonathan is,"from thence will he bring you near by
the hands of the King Messiah.''

\(m\) "Ultima Thule", Virgil. Georgic. l. 1. v. 30. Seneca Medea, Act 2.
in fine. (n) Spes Israelis, sect. 38.

[Deuteronomy 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 30:5</span></span>

And the Lord thy God will bring thee into the land which thy fathers
possessed, and thou shalt possess it,.... That the Jews upon their
conversion in the latter day will return to the land of Judea again, and
possess it, is the sense of many passages of Scripture; among others,
see [Jer 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#018); the above Targum
is;"the Word of the Lord will bring thee, &c."

and he will do thee good; both in things temporal and spiritual; see
[Eze 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#024),

and multiply thee above thy fathers; increase their number more than
ever they were in any age; for they shall be as the sand of the sea,
which cannot be numbered, [Hos 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010).

[Deuteronomy 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 30:6</span></span>

And the Lord thy God will circumcise thine heart, and the heart of thy
seed,.... No mention is made of circumcision of the flesh, which will
now be out of use with the Jews; they being fully convinced of the
abrogation of the ceremonial law by the Messiah, whom they will now
receive. It is spiritual circumcision only that is here spoken of, with
which the Jews will be circumcised, when they shall be pricked and cut
to the heart, and be thoroughly convinced of sin; when the iniquity of
their hearts will be laid open to them, and they put to pain, and filled
with shame and loathing for it; when the hardness of their hearts will
be removed, and the foolishness of them will be exposed and taken away,
and they will be made willing to part with their sins, and with their
own righteousness; when the graces of the Spirit will be implanted in
them, and the blood of Christ applied to them for pardon and cleansing.
This is the circumcision made without hands, which is not of men, but of
God; what he calls for, and exhorts unto, as being necessary, [Deu
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016); he here promises to do; and
deed none but himself can do it; for he only can come at the hearts of
men, to take anything out of them, or put anything into them; it is he
that opens the heart, softens, quickens, enlightens, and purifies it:
Baal Hatturim says this respects the times of the Messiah:

to love the Lord thy God with all thine heart, and with all thy soul;
which, though the duty of every man, is performed by none but those that
have the grace of God; there is no love to God in the heart before this
inward and spiritual circumcision of it: it is a fruit of the Spirit in
conversion when the affections are taken off of other things, and set on
Christ; when a man sees his sin and his Saviour, and the one is odious,
and the other precious; when the blessings of grace are applied, and the
love of God is shed abroad in the heart, which cause love to God and
Christ again:

that thou mayest live; spiritually and eternally; for there is no
spiritual life in the soul till the heart is circumcised, or, in other
words, regenerated and renewed; then it is quickened; then a man lives a
life of faith on Christ, of holiness from him, communion with him, and
has both an open right unto, and meetness for, eternal life.

[Deuteronomy 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 30:7</span></span>

And the Lord thy God will put all these curses upon thine enemies,....
Recorded in [Deu 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016); that is, the
Word of the Lord, as the Targum of Jonathan; for he being now sought
unto, and embraced, will be their King and their Saviour, and revenge
their enemies:

and on them that hate thee, which persecuted thee: the Turks and
Papists, the former having taken possession of their land, and the
latter being violent persecutors of them in all their countries. This
will be fulfilled when the vials of God's wrath will be poured on the
antichristian states, [Rev 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001).

[Deuteronomy 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 30:8</span></span>

And thou shall return, and obey the voice of the Lord,.... In the
Gospel; obey the form of doctrine delivered to them, embrace the truth
of the Gospel cordially, and yield a cheerful subjection to the
ordinances of it; or receive the Word of the Lord, as the Targum of
Jonathan, Christ, the essential Word, by faith, as the Saviour and
Redeemer, Mediator, Prophet, Priest, and King:

and do all his commandments which I command thee this day; the
commandment nigh unto them, in their mouths and hearts, even the word of
faith, the ministers of Christ preach, [Deu
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011); besides, all the moral precepts
and commands of the law, which will then be in force, being eternal and
invariable; which faith in Christ, and love to him, will influence and
constrain them to observe.

[Deuteronomy 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 30:9</span></span>

And the Lord thy God will make thee plenteous in every work of thine
hand,.... In every manufacture, trade, or business of life in which they
should be employed; the meaning is, that the Lord will greatly bless
them in all that they shall set their hands to in a lawful way; so that
they shall abound in good things, and have enough and to spare, a
redundancy of the good things of life, great plenty of them:

in the fruit of thy body; abundance of children:

and in the fruit of thy cattle; a large increase of oxen and sheep:

and in the fruit of thy land for good; it being by the blessing of God
on their labours restored to its former fertility, though now barren
through want of inhabitants, and the slothfulness of those that are
possessed of it; for travellers observe (o), the soil is still good, was
it properly manured and cultivated:

for the Lord will again rejoice over thee for good, as he rejoiced over
thy fathers; particularly in the days of Solomon and David, when the
people of Israel enjoyed plenty of all good things, and so they will
hereafter; see [Hos 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015); The Targum
of Jonathan is,"the Word of the Lord will return to rejoice, &c.''See
[Jer 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#041).

\(o\) See Shaw's Travels, p. 336. Ed. 2.

[Deuteronomy 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 30:10</span></span>

If thou shalt hearken unto the voice of the Lord thy God,.... Or rather,
"for thou shalt hearken" (p); seeing it is before promised that the Lord
would circumcise their hearts to love him, and they should obey his
voice, [Deu 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006). The Targum
is,"receive the Word of the Lord:"

to keep his commandments and his statutes, which are written in this
book of the law; particularly in this chapter, and all that are of a
moral nature:

and if thou return unto the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with
all thy soul; or, "for thou shall return", &c. as it is promised they
should, [Deu 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#008).

\(p\) "quia obedies", Cocceius.

[Deuteronomy 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 30:11</span></span>

For this commandment which I command thee this day,.... Which the Jews
understand of the law, but the Apostle Paul has taught us to interpret
it of the word of faith, the Gospel preached by him and other ministers,
[Rom 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006); which better suits with the
context, and the prophecies before delivered concerning the conversion
of the Jews, their reception of the Messiah, and his Gospel:

it is not hidden from thee; being clearly revealed, plainly and fully
preached: if hidden from any, it is from them that are lost; from the
wise and prudent, while it is revealed to babes, and given to them to
know the mysteries of it: or too "wonderful" (q); hard, difficult, and
impossible; its doctrines, are not beyond the understanding of an
enlightened person; they are all plain to them that understand and find
the knowledge of them; and the ordinances of it are not too hard and
difficult to be kept; the commandments of Christ are not grievous:

neither is it far off; for though it is good, news from a far country,
from heaven, it is come down from thence; it is brought nigh in the
ministry of the word to the ears and hearts of men.

\(q\) "mirabile", Montanus, Cocceius.

[Deuteronomy 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 30:12</span></span>

It is not in heaven,.... The scheme of it was formed in heaven, it was
hid in the heart of God there, before revealed; it was ordained before
the world was for our glory; it was brought down from thence by Christ,
and committed to his apostles and ministers of the word to preach it to
men; and has been ever since continued on earth, and will be at the time
of the conversion of the Jews:

that thou shouldest say; that there should be any occasion of saying; it
forbids any such kind of speech as, follows:

who shall go up for us to heaven, and bring it to us, that we may hear
it, and do it? there is no need of that, for it is brought from thence
already, and may be heard, and should be obeyed; for to put such a
question would be the same as to ask "to bring Christ down from above",
who is come down already by the assumption of human nature, to preach
the Gospel, give the sense of the law, and fulfil it, to do the will of
his Father, bring in an everlasting righteousness, and save his people;
so that there is no need of his coming again on the same errand, since
he has obtained eternal redemption, and is the author of everlasting
salvation, which is the sum and substance of the Gospel.

[Deuteronomy 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 30:13</span></span>

Neither is it beyond the sea,.... There is no need to travel into
foreign parts, into transmarine countries for it, as the Heathen
philosophers did to get knowledge; for the Gospel is ordered to be
preached to all the world, and sent into all nations; and at the time of
the conversion of the Jews the earth will be filled with the knowledge
of it, as the waters cover the sea; so that there will be no need to go
into distant countries for it; nor any occasion

that thou shouldest say, who shall go over the sea for us, and bring it
unto us, that we may hear it, and do it? which would be all one as to
desire "to bring up Christ again from the dead"; when he is already
risen, and is gone to heaven, where he ever lives to make intercession
for us; is thereby declared to be the Son of God with power, and is
discharged as the surety of his people, having done completely what he
engaged to do; and is risen for their justification, and become the
firstfruits of the resurrection of the dead; wherefore whoever confesses
with his mouth, and believes with his heart, that God has raised him
from the dead, that is enough, he shall be saved: what a sublime sense
of the words is this the apostle gives and how puerile is that of the
Chaldee paraphrast in comparison of it! See Gill on [Rom
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006).

[Deuteronomy 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 30:14</span></span>

But the word is very nigh unto thee,.... In the ministration of it by
those who clearly, plainly, and faithfully preach it, and in the
application of it by the Spirit of God to the heart; and in the gracious
experience converted persons have of the power and efficacy of it in
them, and of the comfort they receive from it:

in thy mouth, and in thy heart, that thou mayest do it; in the mouth by
confession, being not ashamed to own it, and profess it before men; and
in the heart, where it is come with power, has a place, and works
effectually, and is cordially believed, and comfortably experienced; and
when this is the case, its ordinances will be faithfully kept as
delivered, and cheerfully submitted to.

[Deuteronomy 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 30:15</span></span>

See, I have set before thee this day,.... Moses here returns to press
the Israelites to the present observance of the laws, statutes, and
judgments of one sort and another, he had been delivering to them; as
being of great moment and importance to them, no other than

life and good, and death and evil; which are the effects and
consequences of obedience and disobedience to them; a happy temporal
life, and a continuance of it in the good land of Canaan, and an
enjoyment of the blessings and good things thereof to them that are
obedient; for not spiritual and eternal life, or spiritual blessings and
everlasting happiness, are to be had by man's obedience to the law of
works, only through Christ, through his obedience, righteousness,
sufferings, and death; see [Gal 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#021);
so temporal death, or a cutting short of natural life in the promised
land, and evil things, calamities, and distresses, or a deprivation of
all the good things of it to the disobedient; see [Isa
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 30:16</span></span>

In that I command thee this day to love the Lord thy God,.... Which is
the sum and substance of the first table of the law, and includes the
whole worship of God, the contrary to which are idolatry, superstition,
and will worship, from which Moses had been dissuading and deterring
them:

to walk in his ways; which he has prescribed, as his will to walk in,
and his law directs to:

and to keep his commandments, and his statutes, and his judgments; his
laws, moral, ceremonial, and judicial, Moses had been repeating and
reciting:

that thou mayest live and multiply; live in the land of Canaan, and have
a numerous offspring and posterity to succeed and continue in it, which
is confirmed by what follows:

and the Lord thy God shall bless thee in the land whither thou goest to
possess it; with health and happiness, with an affluence of all good
things, in the land of Canaan they were just entering into to take
possession of.

[Deuteronomy 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 30:17</span></span>

But if thine heart turn away,.... From the true God, and the right
worship of him, and from his commands, statutes, and judgments:

so that thou wilt not hear; the voice of the Lord and obey it, or
hearken to his laws, and do them:

but shalt be drawn away; by an evil heart, and by the ill examples of
others:

and worship other gods and serve them; the gods of the Gentiles, the
idols of the people, besides the one living and true God, the God of
Israel.

[Deuteronomy 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 30:18</span></span>

I denounce unto, you this day that ye shall surely perish,.... By one
judgment or another; this he most solemnly averred, and it might be
depended upon that it would certainly be their case; see [Deu
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026),

and that ye shall not prolong your days upon the land, whither thou
passest over Jordan to go to possess it; but be cut short by death, of
one kind or another, by sword, or famine, or pestilence, or be carried
into captivity; one or other of which were frequently their case.

[Deuteronomy 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 30:19</span></span>

I call heaven and earth to record this day against you,.... Either,
literally understood, the heavens above him, and the earth on which he
stood, those inanimate bodies, which are frequently called upon as
witnesses to matters of moment and importance; see [Deu
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026); or figuratively, the inhabitants
of both, angels and men:

that I have set before you life and death, blessing and cursing; had
plainly told them in express words what would be the consequence of
obedience and disobedience to the law of God; long life, and the
blessings of it in the land of Canaan, to those that obey it; death, by
various means, and dreadful curses, to those that disobey it; of which
see at large [Deu 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016),

therefore choose life, that thou and thy seed may live; that is, prefer
obedience to the law, and choose to perform that, the consequence of
which is life; that they and their posterity might live comfortably and
happily, quietly and safely, and constantly, even to the latest ages, in
the land of Canaan.

[Deuteronomy 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 30:20</span></span>

That thou mayest love the Lord thy God,.... And show it by keeping his
commands:

and that thou mayest obey his voice; in his word, and by his prophets:

and that thou mayest cleave unto him; and to his worship, and not follow
after and serve other gods:

for he is thy life, and the length of thy days; the God of their lives,
and the Father of their mercies; the giver of long life, and all the
blessings of it; and which he had promised to those that were obedient,
to him, and which they might expect:

that thou mayest dwell in the land which the Lord sware unto thy
fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to give them; the land of
Canaan, often thus described; this was the grand promise made to
obedience to the law, and was typical of eternal life and happiness;
which is had, not through man's obedience to the law, but through the
obedience and righteousness of Christ.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 31](deu031)

</div>
