<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu005)  [Next](deu007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 6

In this chapter Moses proceeds on in his exhortations to the people of
Israel, to attend to the commandments of God, that it might be well with
them, [Deu 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001), and begins with a
principal and fundamental article of religion, which deserved their
first and chief regard, the unity of God, and the love of him, [Deu
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004), which they were carefully to
instinct their children in, and ever to be mindful of themselves, [Deu
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006), and when they were come into the
land of Canaan, and into a plentiful enjoyment of all good things in it,
they are exhorted to be careful not to forget the Lord, their kind
benefactor; but to fear him, serve him, and not go after other gods,
since he is jealous of his honour and worship, [Deu
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#010) and not to tempt him, as they had
done, but diligently keep, his commandments, that it might be well with
them in that land, [Deu 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016), and when
their children inquired the reason and meaning of such testimonies,
statutes, and judgments, that were enjoined them, they were to give them
the history of their case in Egypt, their deliverance from thence, the
wonders that were wrought for them, and the introduction of them into
the good land of Canaan; and to let them know that these commands were
some of them in commemoration of these blessings; and by these they were
laid under obligation to regard them all, and the rather, since they
were not only for the glory of God, but for their own good, [Deu
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020).

[Deuteronomy 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 6:1</span></span>

Now these are the commandments, the statutes, and the judgments,.... Not
the ten commandments repeated in the preceding chapter, but all others,
whether moral, ceremonial, or judicial, afterwards declared; for what
Moses now did was only to give a repetition and fresh declaration of
such laws as he had before received, and delivered to the people; and so
the Targum of Jonathan thus paraphrases this clause,"this is a
declaration of the commandments, statutes, and judgments:"

which the Lord your God commanded to teach you; that is, which he
commanded him, Moses, to teach them, though not fully expressed, as may
be learned from [Deu 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#001).

that ye might do them in the land whither ye go to possess it; this is
often observed, to imprint upon their minds a sense of their duty, even
of obedience to the laws of God, which they were carefully and
diligently to perform in the land of Canaan they were going into, and by
which they were to hold their possession of it.

[Deuteronomy 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 6:2</span></span>

That thou mightest fear the Lord thy God,.... Being taught to know the
greatness of his being, and the nature of his mind and will, and the
manner of his worship; and not with a slavish fear, but with a filial
one, a reverential affection for God; being instructed in their duty, as
of children, to their God and Father; see [Deu
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#029).

to keep all his statutes, and his commandments, which I command thee;
not in his own name, but in the name, and by the authority of God, whose
minister and messenger he was; and all, having the stamp of divine
authority on them, were to be observed and kept, and not one to be
neglected or departed from:

thou, and thy son, and thy son's son, all the days of thy life; a man
and his children, and grandchildren; he was to take care that they kept
all the commandments of the Lord as long as he lived, and had any
concern with them:

and that thy days may be prolonged; long life being reckoned a very
great outward mercy; a long enjoyment of, and continuance in the land of
Canaan, is chiefly designed, which is usually expressed when this is
observed; see [Deu 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#026).

[Deuteronomy 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 6:3</span></span>

Hear therefore, O Israel, and observe to do it,.... Or them, the
commandments given them:

that it may be well with thee; in body and estate:

and that ye may increase mightily; not only in wealth and riches, but
chiefly in numbers:

as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee; a promise of increase
of numbers was frequently made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; as that
their seed should be as the stars of heaven, and as the dust of the
earth, and the sand on the sea shore, innumerable; see [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005) and this especially

in the land that floweth with milk and honey; a very common periphrasis
of the land of Canaan, because of the plenty of good things in it; see
[Exo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008).

[Deuteronomy 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 6:4</span></span>

Hear, O Israel,.... These are the words of Moses, stirring up the people
to an attention to what he was about to say of this great and momentous
article, the unity of God, to prevent their going into polytheism and
idolatry. From one of the words here used, the Jews call this section
Kiriathshema, which they oblige themselves to read twice a day, morning
and evening (n); the last letter of the first word in this verse,
"Shema", meaning "hear", and the last letter of the last word in it,
"Echad", meaning "one", are greater than ordinary; which seems designed
to excite the attention to what is contained in this passage:

the Lord our God is one Lord; the doctrine of which is, that the Lord,
who was the covenant God and Father of his people Israel, is but one
Jehovah; he is Jehovah, the Being of beings, a self-existent Being,
eternal and immutable; and he is but one in nature and essence; this
appears from the perfection of his nature, his eternity, omnipotence,
omnipresence, infinity, goodness, self-sufficiency, and perfection; for
there can be but one eternal, one omnipotent, one omnipresent, one
infinite, one that is originally and of himself good; one self, and all
sufficient, and perfect Being; and which also may be concluded from his
being the first cause of all things, which can be but one; and from his
relations to his creatures, as their King, ruler, governor, and
lawgiver. And for this purpose these words are cited in [Mar
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#029) but then they no ways contradict
the doctrine of a trinity of persons in the unity of the divine essence,
the Father, Word, and Holy Spirit, which three are one; the one God, the
one Jehovah, as here expressed; see [Jo1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007) and so the ancient Jews understood
this passage. In an ancient book of theirs it is said (o) Jehovah,
Elohenu, Jehovah (i.e. Jehovah, our God, Jehovah); these are the three
degrees with respect to this sublime mystery; "in the beginning God
(Elohim) created the heavens and the earth"; and again (p), Jehovah,
Elohenu, Jehovah, they are one; the three forms (modes or things) which
are one; and elsewhere (q) it is observed, there are two, and one is
joined to them, and they are three; and when the three are one, he says
to (or of) them, these are the two names which Israel heard, Jehovah,
Jehovah, and Elohenu (our God) is joined unto them; and it is the seal
of the ring of truth, and when they are joined they are one in one
unity; which is illustrated by the three names the soul of man is called
by, the soul, spirit, and breath; and elsewhere they say (r) the holy
blessed God, and his Shechinah, are called one; see [Joh
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#030).

\(n\) Mist. Beracot, c. 1. sect. 1, 2. (o) Zohar in Gen. fol. 1, 3. (p)
Ib. in Exod. fol. 18. 3, 4. (q) Ib. in Numb. fol. 67. 3. (r) Tikkune
Zohar, Correct. 47. fol. 86. 2.

[Deuteronomy 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 6:5</span></span>

And thou shalt love the Lord thy God,.... Which is the first and chief
commandment in the law, the sum and substance of the first table of it;
and includes in it, or at least has connected with it, knowledge of God,
esteem of him, delight in him, faith and trust in him, fear and worship
of him, and obedience to him, which when right springs from it. God is
to be loved because of the perfections of his nature, and the works of
his hand, of nature, providence, and grace; and because of the relations
he stands in to men, and especially to his own people; and because of
his peculiar love to them; and, indeed, he is to be loved by all men for
his care of them, and blessings of goodness bestowed on them; the manner
in which this is to be done follows:

with all thine heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy might;
with a superlative love, above all creatures whatever; with the whole of
the affections of the heart, with great fervency and ardour of spirit,
in the sincerity of the soul, and with all the strength of grace a man
has, with such love that is as strong as death. Jarchi interprets loving
God with all the heart, that is, with thy heart not divided about God, a
heart not divided between God and the creature; "all thy might" he
interprets of mammon or substance; and, indeed, that is one way in which
men may show their love to God, by laying out their substance in his
service, and for the support of his cause and interest in the world.
Aben Ezra by "the heart" understands knowledge, and by the "soul" the
spirit of man that is in his body, and by might perfect love in the
heart.

[Deuteronomy 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 6:6</span></span>

And these words, which I command thee this day,.... To hearken to,
observe, and take notice of, that God is one, and is to be loved in the
strongest manner that possibly can be:

shall be in thine heart; on the table of the heart, as the Targum of
Jonathan; see [Co2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003), be cordially
received, have a place in the affections of the heart, and be retained
in mind and memory.

[Deuteronomy 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 6:7</span></span>

And thou shall teach them diligently unto thy children,.... Care and
diligence are to be used, and pains taken, to instruct children, as soon
as they are capable, in the knowledge of God, and of his commandments;
that they are to love him, fear him, serve, and worship him; this is to
bring them up in the nurture and admonition of the Lord, [Eph
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#004), it may be rendered "thou shalt
whet or sharpen them" (s), the words or commandments; it is expressive
of diligence and industry in teaching, by frequent repetition of things,
by inculcating them continually into their minds, endeavouring to
imprint them there, that they may be sharp, ready, and expert in them:

and shalt talk of them when thou sittest in thine house; at the time of
meals, or at leisure hours, or even when employed in any business in the
house which will admit of it; every opportunity should be taken to
instil the knowledge of divine things into their tender minds:

and when thou walkest by the way; in a journey, and any of his children
with him; or for diversion, in the garden, field, or vineyard; occasion
may be taken on sight of any of the works of creation to lead into a
discourse concerning God, his nature, perfections, and works, and the
obligations his creatures lie under to love, fear, and serve him: and
when thou liest down, and when thou risest up; at the time of going to
bed, and rising from it; which, as they are seasons of prayer to God,
may be improved in instruction of children.

\(s\) "et acues ea", Vatablus, Piscator.

[Deuteronomy 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 6:8</span></span>

And thou shalt bind them for a sign upon thine hand,.... As a man ties
anything to his hand for a token, that he may remember somewhat he is
desirous of; though the Jews understand this literally, of binding a
scroll of parchment, with this section and others written in it, upon
their left hand, as the Targum of Jonathan here interprets the hand:

and they shall be as frontlets between thine eyes; and which the same
Targum interprets of the Tephilim, or phylacteries, which the Jews wear
upon their foreheads, and on their arms, and so Jarchi; of which See
Gill on [Mat 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#005).

[Deuteronomy 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 6:9</span></span>

And thou shalt write them upon the posts of thine house, and on thy
gates. To put them in mind of them when they went out and came in, that
they might be careful to observe them; this the Jews take literally
also, and write in a scroll of parchment this section with some
passages; and, as the Targum of Jonathan here, fix them in three places,
over against the bed chamber, upon the posts of the house, and on the
gate at the right hand of it; and this is what they call the Mezuzah;
and the account given of it is this. In a parchment prepared for the
purpose, they write the words in [Deu
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004) and then roll up the parchment,
and write on it "Shaddai"; and put it either into a cane (or reed), or
else into a like hollow piece of wood, and so fasten it to the wall on
the posts of the door at the right hand of entrance; and thus, as often
as they go in and out, they make it a part of their devotion to touch
this parchment, and kiss it (t).

\(t\) Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. c. 31. p. 582, &c. Leo Modena's History of
the Rites and Customs of the Jews, par. 1. c. 2. p. 5, 6.

[Deuteronomy 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 6:10</span></span>

And it shall be, when the Lord thy God shall have brought thee into the
land,.... The land of Canaan, on the borders of which they now were, and
were just going into:

which he sware unto thy fathers, to Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob, to
give thee; of his own free favour and good will, without any merit and
desert of theirs, and in which would be found

great and goodly cities, which thou buildedst not; large and capacious,
delightfully situated, well built, and strongly fortified, without any
pains or expense of theirs; all ready for them to take possession of,
and dwell in; and so should no longer reside in tents or booths, as they
had for forty years past, but in spacious and noble cities.

[Deuteronomy 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 6:11</span></span>

And houses full of all good things which thou filledst not,.... Not only
full of good, convenient, and rich household furniture, but of the
fruits of the earth, of corn, and wine, and oil, and also, perhaps, of
gold and silver:

and wells digged which thou diggedst not; which in those hot and dry
countries were in much esteem, and of great worth; see [Gen
26:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#018),

vineyards and olive trees which thou plantedst not; which Canaan
abounded with much more than Egypt, where there were but few vines and
olive trees, though of both these there were more where the Israelites
lived than elsewhere; See Gill on [Gen
47:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#011) and these therefore might be
such as they had seen in Egypt, in that part of it in which they dwelt,
Goshen, which was in the Heracleotic nome, and that Strabo (u) says only
produced perfect olives, and fruit bearing trees, but the rest of Egypt
wanted oil; and this home is the same which the Arabs now call the
province of Fium, of which Leo Africanus (w) says, it produces a large
quantity of olives; so that this might be observed for the encouragement
of the Israelites:

when thou shalt have eaten and be full; having such plenty of good
things the land would furnish them with.

\(u\) Geograph. l. 17. p. 556. (w) Descriptio Africae, l. 8. p. 722.

[Deuteronomy 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 6:12</span></span>

Then beware lest thou forget the Lord,.... To love, fear, and worship
him, and keep his commands; creature enjoyments being apt to get
possession of the heart, and the affections of it; [Pro
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#009).

which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage; into a land abounding with all the above good things, and
therefore under the highest obligations to remember the Lord and his
kindnesses, and to serve and glorify him: [Exo
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#002).

[Deuteronomy 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 6:13</span></span>

Thou shalt fear the Lord thy God, and serve him,.... Serve him through
fear; not through slavish fear, a fear of hell and damnation; but
through filial fear, a reverential affection for that God that had
brought them out of a state of bondage into great and glorious liberty,
out of Egypt into Canaan's land, out of a place of misery into a land of
plenty; and therefore should fear the Lord and his goodness, and from
such a fear of him serve him, in every part of worship, public and
private, enjoined; this passage Christ refers to [Mat
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#010).

and shalt swear by his name; when they made a covenant with any, or were
called to bear a testimony for the decision of any controversy which
could not be otherwise finished; or whenever they took an oath on any
account, which should never be taken rashly or on any trivial account,
and much less falsely; it should be taken not in the name of any idol,
or of any other but the true and living God; the Targum of Jonathan
is,"in the name of the Word of the Lord, in truth ye shall swear.''

[Deuteronomy 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 6:14</span></span>

Ye shall not go after other gods,.... To serve and worship them, and
swear by them; and which indeed are no gods, only nominal and fictitious
ones; idols which are nothing in the world, and ought to have no
veneration and adoration given them; to go after them is to worship
them, and this is to depart from the true God, and go a whoring after
false deities:

of the gods of the people which are round about you; the gods of the
Edomites, Ammonites, Moabites, Philistines, and Egyptians; all of which
had their peculiar deities.

[Deuteronomy 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 6:15</span></span>

For the Lord thy God is a jealous God among you,.... He was near to
them, in the midst of them, his tabernacle being placed between their
camps; and was a God jealous of his honour and glory in matters of
worship, and would resent any affront given him in that way:

lest the anger of the Lord thy God be kindled against thee; there being
nothing more apt to stir up his wrath than idolatry:

and destroy thee from off the face of the earth; suffer them to be
carried captive out of their own land, and to be scattered among the
nations of the world, and be utterly destroyed.

[Deuteronomy 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 6:16</span></span>

Ye shall not tempt the Lord your God,.... By striving with him or
against him, by murmuring at or complaining of his providential dealings
with them, or by requiring a sign of him, or miracles to be done by him;
this is another passage used by Christ to repel the temptations of
Satan, [Mat 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007),

as tempted him in Massah; a place so called from the Israelites tempting
the Lord there, [Exo 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#007), the Targum
of Jonathan adds, with ten temptations; see [Num
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#021).

[Deuteronomy 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 6:17</span></span>

You shall diligently keep the commandments of the Lord your God,.... Not
only the ten commands, but all others:

and his testimonies, and his statutes, which he hath commanded thee;
those of a judicial and ceremonial kind.

[Deuteronomy 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 6:18</span></span>

And thou shalt do that which is right and good in the sight of the
Lord,.... And what is such appears from the declaration of his mind and
will in the commandments he has given, and obeying which is therefore
doing what is right and good; for his commandment is holy, just, and
good, being agreeable both to his nature and will, [Rom
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#012) that it may be well with thee; as
it is with those that fear God, and keep his commandments:

and that thou mayest go in and possess the good land which the Lord
sware unto thy fathers; to give to them and to their posterity, even the
land of Canaan; but if they did not what was right and good in the sight
of God, they might expect to be kept out of it, as their immediate
parents were, whose carcasses fell in the wilderness.

[Deuteronomy 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 6:19</span></span>

To cast out all thine enemies from before thee,.... This the Lord
promised, and as it seems with an oath, that he would do for them; drive
out their enemies, and make way for the settlement of them in their
country:

as the Lord hath spoken; see [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018).

[Deuteronomy 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 6:20</span></span>

And when thy son asketh thee in time to come,.... Or "tomorrow" (x);
that is, in later times, as Jarchi interprets it; any time after this,
and particularly after they were come into the land of Canaan, when the
several laws, statutes, and ordinances appointed, would take place and
be obeyed:

what mean the testimonies, and the statutes, and the judgments, which
the Lord our God hath commanded you? what is the reason of the various
rites, customs, and usages, the observance of which is directed to, such
as the feasts of passover, pentecost, tabernacles, sacrifices, and other
duties of religion?

\(x\) "cras", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus.

[Deuteronomy 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 6:21</span></span>

In order to lead him into the spring and original of them, and to
acquaint him with the goodness of God, which laid them under obligation
to observe them:

we were Pharaoh's bondmen in Egypt; were brought into bondage and
slavery to Pharaoh king of Egypt, into whose country their ancestors
came, and where they resided many years, and at length were reduced to
the utmost servitude and misery:

and the Lord brought us out of Egypt with a mighty hand; by the exertion
of his mighty power, which the Egyptians and their king could not
withstand, as a token of his care and kindness to us; by the ties of
which we are bound in gratitude to observe his commands. The Targum of
Jonathan is,"the Word of the Lord brought us, &c.''and it was Christ the
Son of God that was from first to last concerned in that affair, even
from the appearance to Moses in the bush to Israel's coming out of
Egypt.

[Deuteronomy 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 6:22</span></span>

And the Lord showed signs and wonders, great and sore,.... Meaning the
ten plagues, which were signs of the power of God, marvellous works,
great, above the power of nature, and very sore or "evil" (y); very
distressing to the Egyptians; for they came and lay heavy

upon Egypt, upon Pharaoh, and upon all his household, before our eyes;
upon the king, his courtiers, and the whole land, and which were done
publicly in the sight of the people of Israel, as well as the Egyptians;
and there were some then living, though at that time when wrought under
twenty years, who saw with their own eyes what were done to them, and
could never forget them. Here also the Targum of Jonathan has it,"and
the Word of the Lord sent signs, &c''

\(y\) "et pessima", V. L. Junius & Tremellius; "et noxia", Tigurine
version; "et mala", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator.

[Deuteronomy 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 6:23</span></span>

And he brought us out from thence,.... By means of those miraculous
plagues, even out of a state of bondage and misery: and in order

that he might bring us in, to give us the land which he sware unto our
fathers; to bring them into the land of Canaan, give it to them, and put
them in the possession of it; and so fulfil his promise and his oath
made to Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.

[Deuteronomy 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 6:24</span></span>

And the Lord commanded us to do all these statutes,.... Some of which
were designed on purpose to commemorate the wonderful deliverance out of
Egypt, as particularly the passover; and all of them they were obliged
in gratitude to obey, in consideration of such great favours bestowed
upon them:

to fear the Lord our God, for our good always: as it is always for the
good of men, temporal, spiritual, and eternal, to fear the Lord; for
there is no want to them that fear him, nor will the Lord withhold good
things from them; see [Psa 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009),

that he might preserve us alive, as it is at this day; in bodily health
and strength, and in the enjoyment of the good land, and all the
blessings and benefits of it.

[Deuteronomy 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 6:25</span></span>

And it shall be our righteousness,.... Or a mercy, benefit, and blessing
to us; or this shall be reckoned our righteousness, and that by which we
shall be justified:

if we observe to do all these commandments before the Lord our God, as
he hath commanded us; in order to have such a justifying righteousness,
a man must keep all the commandments of God, not one excepted; and that
perfectly, without the least breach of them in thought, word, or deed;
and that before the Lord, in his sight, not as it may appear to a man
himself, or to others, but as it appears to God, who sees the heart, and
weighs all actions; and a man must keep them in the manner the Lord has
commanded, even with all his heart, soul, and strength, as in [Deu
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#005) and this is not possible for a
sinful man to do; and therefore righteousness cannot be by the law. Only
Christ could thus keep all the commandments of God, and his obedience is
our righteousness; and he only is the end of the law for righteousness
to everyone that believes, and to him we must seek for it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 7](deu007)

</div>
