<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu007)  [Next](deu009) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 8

In this chapter Moses repeats the exhortation to observe the commands of
God, and urges the Israelites to it, from the consideration of the great
and good things God had done for them in the wilderness, and even in
those instances which were chastisements, and were of an humbling
nature, [Deu 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#001), and on the
consideration of the blessings of the good land they were going to
possess, [Deu 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007) for which blessings
they are exhorted to be thankful, and are cautioned against pride of
heart through them, and forgetfulness of God, and of his goodness to
them while in the wilderness, and when brought into the land of Canaan,
which they were to ascribe to his power and goodness, and not their own,
[Deu 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#010), and the chapter is
concluded with a warning against idolatry, lest they perish through it
as the nations before them, [Deu 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 8:1</span></span>

All the commandments which I command thee this day shall ye observe to
do,.... It is repeated over and over again, to impress it on their
minds, and to show the importance and necessity of it, how greatly it
was expected from them, and how much it was incumbent on them:

that ye may live and multiply, and go in and possess the land which the
Lord sware unto your fathers; for their temporal life, and the mercies
and comforts of it, the multiplication of their offspring, and of their
substance, their entrance into the land of Canaan, possession of it, and
continuance in it, all depended on their obedience to the commands of
God; see [Deu 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#020).

[Deuteronomy 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 8:2</span></span>

And thou shalt remember all the way which the Lord thy God led thee
these forty years in the wilderness,.... For this was now the fortieth
year of their coming out of Egypt into the wilderness, into which they
quickly came after their departure from thence, and had been in one
wilderness or another ever since, in which God went before them in a
pillar of cloud and fire, and directed their way; and now they are
called upon to remember all the occurrences in the way, what favours and
mercies had been bestowed upon them, what provisions had been made for
them, what enemies they had been delivered from or overcome, as well as
what afflictions and chastisements had attended them: and so the people
of God should call to mind how they were brought to see their wilderness
state and condition by nature; how they were brought out of it, and
stopped in their career of sin, and turned from their evil ways, and led
to Christ; what gracious promises have been made to them; what light has
been afforded them; what communion they have had with God; what pleasure
in his ordinances; what food they have been fed with; what temptations
have befallen them, and how delivered out of them; and what afflictions
have been laid upon them, and how supported under them, and freed from
them:

to humble thee; under the mighty hand of God, to bring down the pride of
their hearts and hide it from them; to lay them low in their own eyes,
and clothe them with humility, that the Lord alone might be exalted: and

to prove thee; whether they would be obedient to his laws, or how they
would behave towards him both in prosperity and adversity, and to try
their graces, their faith and patience, fear and love:

to know what was in thine heart; that is, to make it known to themselves
and others; for God knew all that was in it, the wickedness of it, the
unbelief, rebellion, and frowardness of it, and needed not any ways and
means to get into the knowledge of it; see [Ch2
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031),

whether thou wouldest keep his commandments or no; which they had in
such a solemn manner promised to do; [Deu
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#027).

[Deuteronomy 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 8:3</span></span>

And he humbled thee,.... Or afflicted thee with want of bread:

and suffered thee to hunger; that there might be an opportunity of
showing his mercy, and exerting his power:

and fed thee with manna, which thou knewest not, neither did thy fathers
know; a sort of food they had never seen before, and when they saw it,
knew not what it was, but asked, what is it? [Exo
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#015). Thus the Lord humbles his
people by his Spirit and grace, and brings them to see themselves to be
in want, and creates in them desires after spiritual food, and feeds
them with Christ the hidden manna, whose person, office, and grace, they
were before ignorant of:

that he might make thee know that man doth not live by bread only; which
is the stay and staff of life, and which strengthens man's heart, and is
the main support of it, being the ordinary and usual food man lives
upon, and is put for all the rest:

but by every word that proceedeth out of the mouth of the Lord doth man
live: not so much by the food he eats as by the blessing of God upon it,
and who can make one sort of food as effectual for such a purpose as
another; for every creature of God is good being received with
thankfulness, and sanctified by the word and prayer; and particularly he
could and did make such light food as manna was to answer all the
purposes of solid bread for the space of forty years in the wilderness;
the Targum of Jonathan is,"but by all which is created by the Word of
the Lord is the life of man;''which seems to agree with [Ti1
4:3,4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003) for the meaning is not that the
Israelites in the wilderness, and when come into the land of Canaan,
should not live by corporeal food only, but by obedience to the commands
of God, by means of which they should continue under his protection,
which was indeed their case; nor that man does not live in his body only
by bread, but in his soul also by the word of God, and the doctrines of
it, which is certainly true; spiritual men live a spiritual life on
Christ, the Word of God, and bread of life, and on the Gospel and the
truths of it, the wholesome words of our Lord Jesus, and are nourished
up with the words of faith and sound doctrine, by means of which their
spiritual life is supported and maintained; but this is not what is here
intended.

[Deuteronomy 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 8:4</span></span>

Thy raiment waxed not old upon thee, &c. They wanted not clothes all the
forty years they were in the wilderness; which some account for by the
rising generation being supplied with the clothes of those that died in
the wilderness, and with the spoils they took from Amalek, [Exo
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001) and others, as Aben Ezra
observes, remark that they brought much clothes with them out of Egypt,
which no doubt they did; see [Exo
12:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#035) and he adds, as worthy of
notice, that the manna they lived upon did not produce sweat, which is
prejudicial to clothes; but be it so, that they were sufficiently
provided with clothes, it must be miraculous that these clothes they
wore should not wax old. This, in a spiritual sense, may denote the
righteousness of Christ, which is often compared to raiment, the
property of which is, that it never waxes old, wears out, or decays; it
is an everlasting righteousness, and will never be abolished, but will
answer for the saints in a time to come; see [Isa
51:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#006) neither did thy foot swell these
forty years; or puff up like paste, as Jarchi explains it, which is
often the case in long journeys; the Septuagint version is, "did not
become callous"; a callousness or hardness is frequently produced by
travelling; in [Deu 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#005) it is
explained of the shoes on their feet not waxing old; so Ben Melech, and
the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, and the Syriac and Arabic versions
here, "thy feet were not naked", were not without shoes; these were no
more wore out by travel than their clothes upon their backs, and this
was equally as miraculous: the Gibeonites, pretending to come from a far
country, and to have travelled much and long, put on old garments and
old shoes, to make it probable and plausible, [Jos
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#005). This may be an emblem of the
perseverance of the saints in faith and holiness: shoes upon the feet
denote a Gospel conversation, which is very beautiful, [Sol
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#001) the feet of saints being shod with
the preparation of the Gospel of peace; which, as shoes to the feet,
guides and directs the Christian walk, strengthens and makes fit for
walking, keeps tight and preserves from slipping and falling, and
protects from what is harmful, accompanied by the power and grace of
God.

[Deuteronomy 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 8:5</span></span>

Thou shalt also consider in thine heart,.... Frequently think of, and
meditate upon, revolve in their thoughts, well weigh in their minds, and
take into thorough and deliberate consideration in their hearts; it
being a matter of great moment and importance to them for their peace
and comfort and the glory of God, namely, what follows:

that as a man chasteneth his son, so the Lord thy God chasteneth thee;
that they stood in the same relation to God as a son to a father, and
therefore happy and honourable; that all their afflictions came from
God, were appointed, sent, directed, and overruled by him for his own
glory and their good; that these were the chastenings and corrections of
a father, and were not done in wrath, but in love, and therefore should
be patiently endured; and it became them to consider well from what hand
they came, and in what manner, and for what ends and purposes, how they
ought to behave under them, and what they should do, as follows.

[Deuteronomy 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 8:6</span></span>

Therefore thou shalt keep the commandments of the Lord thy God,.... Not
only because they are the commands of God, and of a covenant God and
Father, which are reasons sufficient for the observance of them; but
because the Lord had dealt so bountifully with them, in providing food
and raiment for them in the wilderness, which always continued with
them; and because, when he afflicted them, it was a fatherly
chastisement, with great tenderness and compassion, and for their good;
all which laid them under obligations to keep the commands of God,
whatsoever he had enjoined them, whether of the moral, ceremonial, or
judicial kind:

to walk in his ways, and to fear him; to walk in the ways he directed,
to be under an awe of his majesty, a fear of offending him, and a
reverential affection for him, such as children have to a father.

[Deuteronomy 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 8:7</span></span>

For the Lord thy God bringeth thee into a good land,.... The land of
Canaan, abounding with good things after enumerated, a land flowing with
milk and honey, having in it plenty of everything both for convenience
and delight; which is another reason why they were under obligations to
serve the Lord, to walk in his ways and keep his commandments:

a land of brooks of water; rivers and torrents, such as Jordan, Jabbok,
Kishon, Kidron, Cherith, and others:

of fountains; as Siloam, Gihon, Etam, the baths of Tiberias, and others:

and depths that spring out of valleys and hills; deep waters, caverns,
wells, and lakes, which had their rise from such places, of which there
were many. With this agrees the account of it by our countrymen, Mr.
Sandys (g), as it was in the beginning of the last century; that it was
adorned with beautiful mountains and luxurious valleys, the rocks
producing excellent waters, and no part empty of delight or profit.

\(g\) Travels, l. 3. p. 110.

[Deuteronomy 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 8:8</span></span>

A land of wheat and barley,.... There were two harvests in it, one a
barley harvest, which began at the passover, and the other a wheat
harvest, which began at Pentecost: instances of the great plenty of
these might be observed in the vast quantities consumed in the times of
Solomon, in his household, and in the yearly distribution he made to
Hiram, [Kg1 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#022), yea, there was such
plenty of wheat in this land, that it not only supplied the inhabitants
of it, but even furnished other countries with it; with this the
merchants of Israel and Judah traded at the market of Tyre, [Eze
27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017). According to the Jewish
writers, the best fine wheat flour was at Mechumas and Mezonichah, and
the next to them was Chephraim, or Ephraim, in the valley (h):

and vines; with which this land abounded everywhere; the places most
noted were Lebanon, Eshcol, Engedi, Ashkelon, Gaza, and Sarepta;
according to the above writers (i), Cerotim and Hatolim were the first
for wine, and the second to them were Beth Rimah and Beth Laban in the
mountain, and Caphat Sigmah in the valley; the wine of Sharon is also
highly commended by them (k).

and fig trees and pomegranates: according to Josephus (l), the country
of Gennesaret furnished with the best grapes and figs for ten months
without intermission, and the rest of fruits throughout the whole year.
Figs and pomegranates, the spies brought with them when they returned
from searching the land, as well as grapes, are a specimen of the fruits
of it, [Num 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#023).

a land of oil olive; the mount of Olives was famous for olive trees, and
had its name from thence; the whole land abounded with them, and though
oil was so much in common use with the Jews, they supplied their
neighbours with it: see [Kg1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011). It
was usual also, as we are told, for the ten tribes to send oil into
Egypt (m); according to the Jewish doctors, Tekoah was the first place
for oil, and the second, Ragab, beyond Jordan (n); very probably the
same with Argob, [Deu 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004).

and honey; besides the great quantities of honey produced by bees in
this country, there was much of another sort that dropped from trees,
called wild honey, the food of John the Baptist in the wilderness, [Mat
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#004). Pliny (o) speaks of a sort of
honey which he calls "eloeomeli", or oil honey, which is said to flow
from the olive trees in Syria; but this honey here is generally thought
by the Jewish writers to be an honey which was made of the fruit of palm
trees, frequent in this country, and especially about Jericho; of which
Josephus (p) says, that the palm trees about Jericho, the fatter of them
(i.e. of the fruit of them) being pressed, emit a large quantity of
honey, scarce exceeded by any; and Maimonides (q) says, that the honey
spoken of in the law, particularly in this place, is honey of palm
trees, so Ben Melech; and it was not unusual for people of other nations
to make honey of the fruit of them. Herodotus (r) reports, that the
Babylonians made honey out of palm trees; so the Arabs call honey of
palm trees "dibs, dibis, dipso" (s), the same with the word here used;
agreeably to which both the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem paraphrase
the words,"out of whose palm trees honey is made.''

\(h\) Misn. Menachot, c. 8. sect. 1. (i) lbid. sect. 6. (k) T. Bab.
Sabbat, fol. 77. 1. (l) De Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 9. sect. 8. (m) Echa
Rabbati, fol. 59. 3. (n) Misn. Menachot, c. 8. sect. 3. (o) Nat. Hist.
l. 23. c. 4. Tikkune Zohar, correct. 16. fol. 27. 1. (p) De Bello Jud.
l. 4. c. 8. sect. 3. (q) In Misn. Menachot, c. 5. sect. 1. so Bartenora
in Misn. Biccurim, c. 1. sect. 3. (r) Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 193. (s) See
Shaw's Travels, p. 143.

[Deuteronomy 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 8:9</span></span>

A land wherein thou shall eat bread without scarceness,.... That is,
should have plenty of all sorts of provisions, which bread is often put
for:

thou shall not lack anything in it; for necessity and convenience, and
for delight and pleasure:

a land whose stones are iron; in which were iron mines:

and out of whose hills thou mayest dig brass; both which are taken out
of the earth and the stones of it, [Job
28:2](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#002) and were to be found in the land
of Canaan, and particularly in the tribe of Asher, as seems from [Deu
33:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#025) and more particularly at Sidon
and Sarepta, which were in that tribe; the latter of which seems to have
its name from the melting of metals there, and the former is said in
Homer (t) to abound with brass.

\(t\) . Homer. Odyss. 15. l. 424.

[Deuteronomy 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 8:10</span></span>

When thou hast eaten and art full, then thou shalt bless the Lord thy
God,.... For as the Lord would furnish them with plenty of food, they
might eat of it liberally, provided they did not indulge to
intemperance, as everyone may whom God has blessed with a fulness of
good things; and this shows that we are to return thanks to God for a
plentiful meal, as well as to ask a blessing on it:

for the good land which he hath given thee; which supplied them with
such plenty, that they enjoyed full meals every day.

[Deuteronomy 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 8:11</span></span>

Beware that thou forget not the Lord thy God,.... The Father of mercies
and fountain of goodness, the author and donor of every good and perfect
gift. Plenty is apt to induce a forgetfulness of God, when on the
contrary one would think it should keep him in continual remembrance,
and engage to daily thankfulness to him:

in not keeping his commandments, and his judgments, and his statutes,
which I command thee this day; gave a repetition of, and in the name of
God afresh enjoined them, even laws moral, ceremonial, and judicial,
which, when not observed, God is forgotten.

[Deuteronomy 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 8:12</span></span>

Lest when thou hast eaten and art full,.... Not only once and again, but
continually, day after day, being indulged with great plenty:

and hast built goodly houses, and dwelt therein; who for forty years had
only dwelt in tents, moving from place to place in the wilderness.

[Deuteronomy 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 8:13</span></span>

And when thy herds and thy flocks multiply,.... Having good pasture for
them in so fruitful a land:

and thy silver and thy gold is multiplied; by trading with other
nations:

and all that thou hast is multiplied; children, servants, and substance.

[Deuteronomy 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 8:14</span></span>

Then thine heart be lifted up,.... As the heart is apt to be when riches
increase; hence the advice in [Ti1
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#017).

and thou forget the Lord thy God; from whom all good things come, and
who can take them away when he pleases, and therefore should be ever
kept in mind, for ever looked to and trusted in for the continuance of
them; yet such is the evil heart of man, and such the stupefying nature
of riches, that they bring on forgetfulness of the author of them, lead
off from dependence on him and obedience to him; in order to prevent
which, an enumeration is given of wonderful instances of divine goodness
to Israel, as follows:

which brought thee forth out of the land of Egypt, from the house of
bondage; into a land abounding with all the above good things, and
therefore it must be the highest ingratitude to forget such a God, and
disobey his commands.

[Deuteronomy 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 8:15</span></span>

Who led thee through that great and terrible wilderness,.... The
wilderness of Paran, which was great and large, reaching from Sinai to
Kadesh, eleven days' journey, and terrible to the sight, nothing being
to be seen but dry rocks and barren mountains; see [Deu
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#019), and especially for what follows:
wherein were fiery serpents and scorpions; fiery serpents, such as bit
the Israelites, of which see [Num 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#006)
and scorpions, a kind of serpents, venomous and mischievous, which have
stings in their tails they are continually thrusting out and striking
with, as Pliny says (u); and have their name from their great sting; for
Aristotle (w) says, this alone of insects has a large sting:

and drought where there was no water; a dry and barren place where no
water was to be had; see [Psa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001) or
it may be rather another kind of serpents may be meant, which is called
"dipsas"; and so the Vulgate Latin, Septuagint, and Samaritan versions
render it; the biting of which produces such a thirst as proves mortal,
and which must be intolerable in a wilderness where no water is; and
from whence it has its name, which signifies thirsty, as does the Hebrew
word here used:

who brought thee forth water out of the rock of flint; which was done
both at Horeb and Kadesh, [Exo 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006)
and was very extraordinary; by striking flint, fire is ordinarily
produced, and not water. Dr. Shaw observes (x), that it may be more
properly named, with other sorts of graphite marble here to be met with,
"the rock of amethyst", from their reddish or purple colour and
complexion.

\(u\) Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 25. (w) Hist. Animal. l. 4. c. 7. (x)
Travels, p. 317, 442.

[Deuteronomy 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 8:16</span></span>

Who fed thee in the wilderness with manna,.... Even all the forty years
they were in it, [Exo 16:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#035) which thy
fathers knew not; when they first saw it, [Exo
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#015).

that he might humble thee, and that he might prove thee; they were kept
humble, being dependent on God for their daily bread, having nothing in
the wilderness to support themselves with; and this tried them, whether
they would trust in God for their daily supply, and be thankful for it,
or not:

to do thee good at thy latter end; that by living on such light bread,
and this only and continually, his goodness might appear the greater,
and be the sweeter to them, when they came into a land abounding with
all good things; which is not to be understood of the latter end and
last days of their commonwealth, as our version, with the Septuagint,
Samaritan, Arabic versions, and others, and the Targum of Onkelos; but
of time following nearer, and the phrase should be rendered "hereafter"
(y); which better agrees with the promise of a divine blessing; though,
come when it would, it was the more acceptable for the trial; as heaven
will be the sweeter to the saints, through the afflictions, hardships,
straits, and difficulties, which attend them here.

\(y\) "tandem", Tigurine version, Vatablus, Piscator; "posthac",
Noldius, p. 180. No. 807.

[Deuteronomy 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 8:17</span></span>

And thou say in thine heart,.... These words are in connection with the
former part of the [Deu 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#014),

and thou forget the Lord thy God; the author and giver of all the good
things enjoyed, and think within themselves, though they might not
express it in words at length:

my power and the might of mine hand hath gotten me this wealth; so
ascribing that to themselves, their labour, and diligence, which ought
to be ascribed to the bounty and blessing of God; see [Hos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008).

[Deuteronomy 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 8:18</span></span>

But thou shalt remember the Lord thy God,.... That he was the author of
their beings, the God of their lives and mercies; what great and good
things he had done for them in Egypt, and in the wilderness; and
particularly in putting them into the possession of such a fruitful
country, abounding with all that heart could wish for:

for it is he that giveth thee power to get wealth; for though men may
have seeming opportunities for getting wealth, may have capacities for
the management of business for the acquisition of it, and may not be
wanting in diligence and industry, yet may not attain it; it is the
blessing of God that makes rich, and to that it should be imputed
whenever it is enjoyed; see [Psa
127:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#002).

that he may establish his covenant which he sware unto thy fathers,

as it is this day; that he would give the land of Canaan to their seed,
and make them a rich and flourishing people, as they would be and were
when possessed of the land, which is supposed throughout this discourse.

[Deuteronomy 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 8:19</span></span>

And it shall be, if thou do at all forget the Lord thy God,.... Either
the mercies they received from him, not acknowledging they came from
him, but ascribing them to themselves; or their duty to him, to whom
they were so greatly obliged: and walk after other gods, and serve them,
and worship them; which would be to forget him indeed, forsaking his
worship, and giving homage and adoration to idols, which is what is
intended by these expressions:

I testify against you this day that ye shall surely perish; by one
judgment and calamity or another, as the sword, famine, pestilence, and
captivity; there being nothing more provoking to God than idolatry,
which so much detracts from his honour and glory: and which besides, in
such a people, so highly favoured of God, it argued the basest
ingratitude.

[Deuteronomy 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 8:20</span></span>

As the nations which the Lord destroyeth before your face, so shall ye
perish,.... Be cut off by the sword, or cast out as they were, the same
sins, particularly idolatry, being committed by them. This is to be
understood of the seven nations of the land of Canaan, which the Lord
would be gradually destroying when Israel came into the possession of
their land; and they might righteously expect the same treatment, should
they be guilty of the same sins:

because ye would not be obedient to the voice of the Lord your God;
expressed in his law, especially in the two first precepts of it, which
require the worship of one God, and forbid the worshipping of idols; or
to the Word of the Lord, as the Targum of Jonathan, Christ, the
essential Word, in whom the name of the Lord was, and whose voice Israel
was to obey, [Exo 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 9](deu009)

</div>
