<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu015)  [Next](deu017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 16:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 16

This chapter treats of the three grand yearly festivals, of the feast of
passover, when, where, and what was to be sacrificed, how to be dressed,
and in what manner to be eaten, [Deu
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001.md), of the feast of pentecost, when
to begin it, where and how it was to be observed, [Deu
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#009.md), and of the feast of tabernacles,
when, where, and how long it was to be kept, [Deu
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#013.md), which three times in the year
all the males were to appear before the Lord, and not empty, [Deu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016.md), an order is given for the
appointment of judges in the land, to execute judgment, [Deu
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018.md), and the chapter is closed with
a caution against planting groves, and setting up images, [Deu
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021.md).

[Deuteronomy 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 16:1</span></span>

Observe the month of Abib,.... Sometimes called Nisan; it answered to
part, of our March, and part of April; it was an observable month, to be
taken notice of; it was called Abib, from the corn then appearing in
ear, and beginning to ripen, and all things being in their verdure; the
Septuagint calls it the month of new fruit; it was appointed the first
of the months for ecclesiastic things, and was the month in which the
Israelites went out of Egypt, and the first passover was kept in it, and
therefore deserving of regard; see [Exo
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002.md).

for in the month of Abib the Lord thy God brought thee forth out of
Egypt by night; for though they did not set out until morning, when it
was day light, and are said to come out in the day, yet it was in the
night the Lord did wonders for them, as Onkelos paraphrases this clause;
that he smote all the firstborn in Egypt, and passed over the houses of
the Israelites, the door posts being sprinkled with the blood of the
passover lamb slain that night, and therefore was a night much to be
observed; and it was in the night Pharaoh arose and gave them leave to
go; and from that time they were no more under his power, and from
thence may be reckoned their coming out of bondage; see [Exo
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012.md).

[Deuteronomy 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 16:2</span></span>

Thou shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the Lord thy God,....
In the month Abib, and in the night of that month they came out of
Egypt, even on the fourteenth day of it at night, between the two
evenings, as the Targum of Jonathan; which was a lamb, and typical of
Christ, the passover sacrificed for us, [Co1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#007.md).

of the flock and the herd; that is, you shall sacrifice also the
offerings which were offered throughout the seven days of unleavened
bread, and these were both sheep and oxen, [Num
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#019.md) and are expressly called
passover offerings and peace offerings, [Ch2
30:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#021.md), for what was strictly and
properly the passover was only of the flock, a lamb, and not of the
herd, or a bullock; though Aben Ezra says there were some that thought
that in Egypt it was only a lamb or a kid, but now it might be a
bullock; which he observes is not right. It may be indeed that the word
"passover" here is a general term, comprehending the whole passover
solemnity, and all the sacrifices of the seven days: the Jews commonly
understand this clause of the Chagigah, or feast of the fifteenth day,
the first day of unleavened bread, and so the Targum of Jonathan,"and
the sheep and the oxen on the morrow;''some distinguish them thus, the
flock for the duty of the passover, the herd for the peace offerings, so
Aben Ezra; or as Jarchi interprets it, the flock of the lambs and kids,
and the herd for the Chagigah or festival; in the Talmud (m); the flock,
this is the passover; the herd, this is the Chagigah, so Abendana: there
was a Chagigah of the fourteenth day, which was brought with the lamb
and eaten first, when the company was too large for the lamb, that their
might eat with satiety (n); but this was not reckoned obligatory upon
them (o), but they were bound to bring their Chagigah on the fifteenth
day:

in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place his name
there; that is, at Jerusalem, as the event has shown; hence we read of
the parents of our Lord going up to Jerusalem every year at the feast of
the passover, [Luk 2:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041.md).

\(m\) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 70. 2. (n) Jarchi in loc. Maimon. Hilchot
Corban Pesach, c. 8. l. 3. (o) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 71. 1, 2. Maimon.
ut supra, (n)) c. 10. sect. 13. Aruch in voc. fol. 58. 1.

[Deuteronomy 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 16:3</span></span>

Thou shalt eat no leavened bread with it,.... With the passover, as the
Targum of Jonathan expresses it; that is, with the passover lamb, nor
indeed with any of the passover, or peace offerings, as follows; see
[Exo 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008.md).

seven days shall ye eat unleavened bread therewith; with the passover;
this plainly shows, that by the passover in the preceding verse is not
meant strictly the passover lamb, for that was eaten at once on the
night of the fourteenth of the month, and not seven days running, and
therefore must be put for the whole solemnity of the feast, and all the
sacrifices of it, both the lamb of the fourteenth, and the Chagigah of
the fifteenth, and every of the peace offerings of the rest of the days
were to be eaten with unleavened bread:

even the bread of affliction; so called either from the nature of its
being heavy and lumpish, not grateful to the taste nor easy of
digestion, and was mortifying and afflicting to be obliged to eat of it
seven days together; or rather from the use of it, which was, as Jarchi
observes, to bring to remembrance the affliction they were afflicted
with in Egypt:

for thou camest forth out of the land of Egypt in haste; and had not
time to leaven their dough; so that at first they were obliged through
necessity to eat unleavened bread, and afterwards by the command of God
in remembrance of it; see [Exo 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#033.md),

that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out of the land
of Egypt all the days of thy life; how it was with them then, how they
were hurried out with their unleavened dough; and that this might be
imprinted on their minds, the master of the family used (p), at the time
of the passover, to break a cake of unleavened bread, and say, this is
the bread of affliction, &c. or bread of poverty; as it is the way of
poor men to have broken bread, so here is broken bread.

\(p\) Haggadah Shel Pesach, in Seder Tephillot, fol. 242. Maimon.
Chametz Umetzah, c. 8. sect. 6.

[Deuteronomy 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 16:4</span></span>

And there shall be no leavened bread seen with thee in all thy coasts
seven days,.... For before the passover they were to search diligently
every room in the house, and every hole and crevice, that none might
remain any where; see [Exo 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015.md),

neither shall there be anything of the flesh, which thou sacrificedst
the first day at even, remain all night until the morning; which may be
understood both of the flesh of the passover lamb, as Aben Ezra,
according to [Exo 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010.md) and of the
flesh of flocks and herds, or of the Chagigah; according to Jarchi this
Scripture speaks of the Chagigah of the fourteenth, which was not to
remain on the first day of the feast (the fifteenth) until the morning
of the second day (the sixteenth).

[Deuteronomy 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 16:5</span></span>

Thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy gates,.... Or
cities, as the Targum of Jonathan, so called because they usually had
gates to them, in which public affairs were transacted; but in none of
these, only in the city of Jerusalem, the place the Lord chose, might
they kill the passover and eat it, and other passover offerings:

which the Lord thy God giveth thee; in the land of Canaan, and which
land was given them of God.

[Deuteronomy 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 16:6</span></span>

But at the place which the Lord thy God shall choose to place his name
in,.... To place the ark and the mercy seat with the cherubim over them,
where he caused his Shechinah, or divine Majesty, to dwell; and this was
at Jerusalem, where the temple was built by Solomon:

there thou shalt sacrifice the passover; kill and eat the paschal lamb:

at even, at the going down of the sun; between the two evenings it was
killed, before the sun was set, and afterwards at night it was eaten;
the Targum of Jonathan is,"and at evening, at the setting of the sun, ye
shall eat it until the middle of the night:"

at the season that thou camest forth out of Egypt; or as the same
Targum,"the time of the beginning of your redemption out of
Egypt;''which was when Pharaoh rose at midnight, and gave them leave to
go; from thence their redemption commenced, though they did not actually
set out until the morning.

[Deuteronomy 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 16:7</span></span>

And thou shalt roast and eat it in the place which the Lord thy God
shall choose,.... The word for "roast" signifies to "boil", and is
justly so used, and so Onkelos here renders it, and the Septuagint
version both roast and boil; but it is certain that the passover lamb
was not to be boiled, it is expressly forbidden, [Exo
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008.md) wherefore some think the Chagigah
is here meant, and the other offerings that were offered at this feast;
and so in the times of Josiah they roasted the passover with fire,
according to the ordinance of God; but the other holy offerings sod or
boiled they in pots, cauldrons and pans, and divided them speedily among
the people, [Ch2 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#013.md), but the
passover lamb seems plainly to be meant here by the connection of this
verse with the preceding verses; wherefore Jarchi observes, that this is
to be understood of roasting with fire, though expressed by this word:

and thou shalt turn in the morning, and go unto thy tents; not in the
morning of the fifteenth, after the passover had been killed and eaten
on the fourteenth, but in the morning, after the feast of unleavened
bread, which lasted seven days, was over; though some think that they
might if they would depart home after the passover had been observed,
and were not obliged to stay and keep the feast of unleavened bread at
Jerusalem, but march to their own cities; and so Aben Ezra observes,
that some say a man may go on a feast day to his house and country, but,
says he, we do not agree to it; and it appears from the observation of
other feasts, which lasted as long as these, that the people did not
depart to their tents till the whole was over; see [Kg1
8:66](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#066.md) and with this agrees the Targum
of Jonathan,"and thou shall turn in the morning of the going out of the
feast, and go to thy cities.''Jarchi indeed interprets it afterwards of
the second day.

[Deuteronomy 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 16:8</span></span>

Six days shalt thou eat unleavened bread,.... In other places it is
ordered to be eaten seven days, [Exo
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#015.md) and here it is not said six
only; it was to be eaten on the seventh as on the other, though that is
here distinguished from the six, because of special and peculiar service
assigned to it, but not because of an exemption from eating unleavened
bread on it. The Jews seem to understand this of different corn of which
the bread was made, and not of different sort of bread; the Targum of
Jonathan is, on the first day ye shall offer the sheaf (the firstfruits
of the barley harvest), and on the six days which remain ye shall begin
to eat the unleavened bread of the new fruits, and so Jarchi:

and on the seventh day shall be a solemn assembly to the Lord thy God; a
holy convocation, devoted to religious exercises, and the people were
restrained, according to the sense of the word, from all servile work,
as follows:

thou shalt do no work therein; that is, the business of their callings,
their trades and manufactories; they were obliged to abstain from all
kind of work excepting what was necessary for the dressing of food, and
in this it differed from a sabbath; see [Exo
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016.md).

[Deuteronomy 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 16:9</span></span>

Seven weeks then shalt thou number unto thee,.... And then another feast
was to take place, called from hence the feast of weeks, and sometimes
Pentecost, from its being the fiftieth day:

begin to number the seven weeks from such time as thou beginnest to put
the sickle to the corn; for the sheaf of the wave offering, as the first
fruits of barley harvest, which was done on the morrow after the sabbath
in the passover week, and from thence seven weeks or fifty days were
reckoned, and the fiftieth day was the feast here ordered to be kept; so
the Targum of Jonathan,"after the reaping of the sheaf ye shall begin to
number seven weeks;''see [Lev 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#015.md).

[Deuteronomy 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 16:10</span></span>

And thou shall keep the feast of weeks unto the Lord thy God,.... The
feast of Pentecost, at which time the Spirit was poured down upon the
apostles, [Act 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#001.md).

with a tribute of a freewill offering of thine hand; there were two wave
loaves which were ordered to be brought and seven lambs, one young
bullock and two rams for a burnt offering, together with the meat and
drink offerings belonging thereunto, and a kid of the goats for a sin
offering, and two lambs for a peace offering, [Lev
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#017.md), and besides all this, there was
to be a voluntary contribution brought in their hands; for this was one
of those feasts at which all the males were to appear before the Lord,
and none of them empty:

which thou shalt give unto the Lord thy God,

according as the Lord thy God hath blessed thee; no certain rate was
fixed, it was to be a free gift, and in proportion to a man's abilities,
or what the Lord had blessed him with.

[Deuteronomy 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 16:11</span></span>

And thou shalt rejoice before the Lord thy God,.... Make a liberal
feast, and keep it cheerfully, in the presence of God, in the place
where he resides, thankfully acknowledging all his mercies and favours:

thou, and thy son, and thy manservant, and thy maidservant, and the
Levite that is within thy gates; that dwelt in the same city, who were
all to come with him to Jerusalem at this feast, and to partake of it
with him:

and the stranger, and the fatherless, and the widow, that are among you,
in the place which the Lord thy God hath chosen to place his name there;
who should be at Jerusalem at this time.

[Deuteronomy 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 16:12</span></span>

And thou shalt remember that thou wast a bondman in Egypt,.... And now
delivered from that bondage; the consideration of which should make them
liberal in their freewill offering, and generous in the feast they
provided, and compassionate to the stranger, widow, and fatherless:

and thou shalt observe and do these statutes; concerning the passover,
the feast of unleavened bread, and of Pentecost, and the peace offerings
and the freewill offerings belonging to them: and nothing could more
strongly oblige them to observe them than their redemption from their
bondage in Egypt; as nothing more engages to the performance of good
works than the consideration of our spiritual and eternal redemption by
Christ, [Co1 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#019.md).

[Deuteronomy 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 16:13</span></span>

Thou shalt observe the feast of tabernacles seven days,.... Which began
on the fifteenth day of Tisri, or September; see [Lev
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034.md), &c.

after that thou hast gathered in thy corn and thy wine; and therefore
sometimes called the feast of ingathering, [Exo
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#016.md), barley harvest began at the
passover, and wheat harvest at Pentecost; and before the feast of
tabernacles began, the vintage and the gathering of the olives were
over, as well as all other summer fruits were got in.

[Deuteronomy 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 16:14</span></span>

And thou shalt rejoice in thy feast,.... At this feast of tabernacles
and ingathering of the fruits of the earth, in token of gratitude and
thankfulness for the goodness of God bestowed on them; the Targum of
Jonathan adds, with the flute and the pipe, making use of instrumental
music to increase the joy on this occasion:

thou and thy son, &c. See Gill on [Deu
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#011.md)

[Deuteronomy 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 16:15</span></span>

Seven days shalt thou keep a solemn feast unto the Lord thy God,.... The
feast of tabernacles still spoken of:

in the place which the Lord thy God shall choose: the city of Jerusalem:

because the Lord thy God shall bless thee in all thy increase, and in
all the works of thine hands; both in the increase of their fields,
vineyards, and oliveyards, and also in their several handicraft trades
and occupations they were employed in; so Aben Ezra interprets all the
works of their hands of merchandise and manufactories:

therefore thou shalt surely rejoice; extremely, heartily, and sincerely,
and not fail to express joy on this occasion, and manifest it by a
generous freewill offering to the Lord, and a bountiful entertainment
for himself, his family, friends, and others.

[Deuteronomy 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 16:16</span></span>

Three times a year shall all thy males appear before the Lord thy
God,.... This has been observed before, [Exo
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#017.md), and is repeated here for the
sake of mentioning the place where they were to appear, which before now
was not observed, and indeed it is chiefly for that the other festivals
are here recited:

in the place which he shall choose; which though not expressed is now
easily understood; and the three times at which they were to appear
there were, in the feast of unleavened bread, and in the feast of weeks,
and in the feast of tabernacles; or passover, Pentecost, and
tabernacles; and of numbers of people going up from the country to each
of these feasts, we have instances in the New Testament; to the
passover, [Luk 2:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#042.md), to Pentecost,
[Act 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#005.md), to tabernacles, [Joh
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002.md),

and they shall not appear before the Lord empty; Aben Ezra observes, the
meaning is, not empty of the tribute of the freewill offering of their
hand, and which Jarchi more fully explains of the burnt offerings of
appearance, and of the peace offerings of the Chagigah, or money
answerable to them; which, according to the Misnah (q) was a meah of
silver for a burnt offering, and two pieces of silver for the Chagigah,
which weighed thirty two barley corns (r).

\(q\) Chagigah, c. 1. sect. 2. (r) Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Deuteronomy 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 16:17</span></span>

Every man shall give as he is able,.... The quantity to be given is not
fixed in the law, but the wise men appointed it, as observed on [Deu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016.md) but it is left by the Lord to
the generosity of the people, only giving this general rule, that they
should do according to their ability, and as the Lord had prospered
them; see [Co1 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1016.htm#002.md) so Jarchi,"every
man that hath many eatables and much goods shall bring many burnt
offerings and many peace offerings.''

[Deuteronomy 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 16:18</span></span>

Judges and officers shall thou make thee,.... Judges were fixed in the
sanhedrim, or court of judicature, and those that have lawsuits come
before them; officers are masters of the staff and whip, and they stand
before the judges, and go into markets, streets, and shops, to order the
weights and measures, and to smite all that do wrong; and all they do is
by order of the judges; so Maimonides (s): the qualifications of judges
to be chosen and constituted by the people are thus described by him. In
the sanhedrim, greater or lesser, they place only men wise and
understanding, expert in the wisdom of the law, and masters of great
knowledge, and that know some of the other sciences, as medicine,
arithmetic, astronomy, and astrology, the ways of soothsayers, diviners,
and wizards, and the vanities of idolatry, that they may know how to
judge them; and they set in the sanhedrim only priests, Levites, and
Israelites, who are genealogized; nor do they set an old man there, nor
an eunuch, nor a king, but an high priest, if he is qualified with
wisdom; and they must be free from blemishes, and of a good stature and
appearance, and understand many languages, and not hear by an
interpreter; and though all this was not precisely required of the
sanhedrim of three judges, yet these same things ought to be in everyone
of them, wisdom, and meekness, and fear, and hatred of money, and love
of truth, and love of men, and to be of a good report (t) and these were
to be placed in

all thy gates which the Lord thy God giveth thee throughout thy tribes;
that is, in every city, as Onkelos, and so Jarchi; and usually the
courts of judicature were held in the gates of cities, and it was only
in the land of Israel, not without it, that they were obliged to set up
courts of judicature, as Maimonides (u) observes; who also asks, how
many courts were fixed in Israel, and what the number they consisted of?
to which he answers, they fixed at first the great court in the
sanctuary, and it was called the great sanhedrim, and its number were
seventy one; and again, they set up two courts of twenty three, one at
the door of the court, and the other at the door of the mountain of the
house (and so in the Misnah) (w); and they set up in every city in
Israel, in which were one hundred and twenty (men or families) or more,
a lesser sanhedrim, which sat in the gate, and their number were twenty
three judges; in a city in which there were not one hundred and twenty,
they placed three judges, for there is no court less than three (x):

and they shall judge the people with just judgment; give a right and
just sentence in all cases that come before them, according to the laws
of God, and the rules of justice and equity.

\(s\) Hilchot Sanhedrin, c. 1. sect. 1. (t) Ib. c. 2. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4,
5, 6, 7. (u) Ib. c. 1. sect. 2. (w) Sanhedrin, c. 10. sect. 2. (x) Ib.
sect. 3, 4.

[Deuteronomy 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 16:19</span></span>

Thou shall not wrest judgment,.... Or pervert it, pass a wrong sentence,
or act contrary to justice; this is said to the judges as a direction to
them, and so what follows:

thou shalt not respect persons; so as to give the cause on account of
outward circumstances and relations; as in favour of a rich man against
a poor man merely for that reason, or of a near relation or intimate
friend and acquaintance against a stranger, but justice should be
administered without favour or affection to any; as Jarchi puts it, he
was to make no difference in his address and behaviour to contending
parties before him; he was not to be tender and soft to one and hard to
the other, or let one stand and another sit:

neither take a gift: as a bribe to give the cause wrong: at Thebes, in
Egypt, as Diodorus Siculus (y) relates, in a court on a wall, were
images of judges to the number of thirty; in the midst of them was the
chief judge; having Truth hanging down from his neck (which seems to be
in imitation of the Urim of the high priest of the Jews), his eyes shut,
and many books by him; by which image was shown, that judges should
receive nothing, and that the chief judge should look to truth only:

for a gift doth blind the eyes of the wise, and pervert the words of the
righteous; see [Exo 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#008.md) the Jews have
a saying, that a judge that takes a bribe, and perverts judgment, does
not die of old age, or till his eyes become dim (z).

\(y\) Bibliothec. l. 1. c. 45. (z) Misn. Peah, c. 8. sect. 9.

[Deuteronomy 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 16:20</span></span>

That which is altogether just shalt thou follow,.... Or "justice",
"justice" (a), strict justice, and nothing else:

that thou mayest live and inherit the land which the Lord thy God giveth
thee; that is, continue in the possession of it.

\(a\)

[Deuteronomy 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 16:21</span></span>

Thou shall not plant thee a grove of any trees,.... Of any sort of
trees, as oaks or any other; not but that it was lawful to plant trees
and groves of them, but not for a religious or idolatrous use:
particularly

near unto the altar of the Lord thy God, which thou shalt make thee; as
the Heathens did near their altars, lest it should be thought to be done
for a like superstitious and idolatrous use; which evil the Jews
sometimes fell into in the times of wicked reigns, and which their good
and pious kings removed and destroyed; see [Kg2
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#004) and Hecataeus (b.md), an Heathen
historian, relates of the city of Jerusalem, that there were there no
image, nor plantation, nor grove, nor any such thing.

\(b\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 4. p. 408.

[Deuteronomy 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 16:22</span></span>

Neither shalt thou set up any image,.... Graven or molten, of man,
beast, fish, or fowl; the word signifies a "statue or pillar" (c) which
was set up for idolatry; for, as Aben Ezra observes, what was not set up
for idolatry was not forbidden, as when erected in memory of any action
or remarkable event; see [Jos 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010.md),
&c.

which the Lord thy God hateth; as he does every species, of idolatry, or
that has any tendency to it; it being so opposite to his being,
perfections, and glory; and therefore nothing should be done like it,
because it is so hateful to him.

\(c\) Sept. "statuam", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Tig. vers. Fagius,
Drusius, Grotius, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so Ainsworth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 17](deu017.md)

</div>
