<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu027)  [Next](deu029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 28:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 28

In this chapter Moses enlarges on the blessings and the curses which
belong, the one to the doers, the other to the transgressors of the law;
the blessings, [Deu 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001); the curses,
some of which concern individual persons, others the whole nation and
body of people, and that both under the former and present
dispensations, and which had their fulfilment in their former
captivities, and more especially in their present dispersion, [Deu
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015).

[Deuteronomy 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 28:1</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, if thou shalt hearken diligently unto the
voice of the Lord thy God,.... In his law, and by his prophets:

to observe and to do all his commandments, which I command thee this
day; for without observing them to do them, hearing them would be to
little purpose, and they were all of them to be observed and done, the
lesser and weightier matters of the law as they were commanded by Moses
in the name of the Lord, and as they would be taught, explained, and
enforced by the prophets:

that the Lord thy God will set thee on high above all nations of the
earth: as they were in the times of David and Solomon; See Gill on [Deu
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 28:2</span></span>

And all these blessings shall come on thee and overtake thee,.... After
mentioned, which should come upon them from God from heaven, by the
direction of his providence, and that freely and plentifully, and beyond
their expectations and deserts, and continue with them:

if thou shall hearken to the voice of the Lord thy God; obedience to the
law being the condition of their coming and continuance; for only
temporal blessings in the land of Canaan are here intended, as follow.

[Deuteronomy 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 28:3</span></span>

Blessed shalt thou be in the city,.... Not only in the city of
Jerusalem, where the temple would be built, and there be blessed with
the service, worship, and ordinances of God, but in all other cities of
the land; where they should dwell in title, large, and spacious houses,
and their cities should be walled and fenced, and be very populous; yet
should enjoy health, and have plenty of all sorts of provisions brought
unto them, as well as prosper in all kinds of merchandise there, as Aben
Ezra notes:

and blessed shalt thou be in the field; in the country villages, and in
all rural employments, in sowing and planting, as the same writer
observes; in all kinds of husbandry, in the culture of the fields for
corn, and of vineyards and oliveyards; all should prosper and succeed,
and bring forth fruit abundantly.

[Deuteronomy 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 28:4</span></span>

Blessed shall be the fruit of thy body,.... Their children, of which
they should have many, and these live; be healthful, thrive, and arrive
to manhood, and increase and perpetuate their families. Grotius thinks
this was eminently fulfilled in Mary, the mother of our Lord; see [Luk
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#042),

and the fruit of thy ground; of their gardens, orchards, and fields;
grass for the cattle, and the wheat, barley, vines, figs, pomegranates,
olives, and dates for the use of men:

and the fruit of thy cattle; which being distinguished from oxen and
sheep in the following clause, must be understood of camels and asses,
which were used for the carriage both of persons and burdens, and were
very serviceable, and were a considerable part of their substance in
those countries; see [Job 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003),

the increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep; of their cows and
oxen, and of their sheep and goats, which were very increasing
creatures, and in the increase of which much of their outward happiness
lay; see [Psa 144:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#013).

[Deuteronomy 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 28:5</span></span>

Blessed shall be thy basket,.... Which the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem restrain to the basket of firstfruits, and the cake of the
first of their dough; but it intends any and every vessel in which they
put their provisions for present use, and that that should never be
empty of them, and that they should always have a sufficiency:

and thy store; what remained, and was laid up in their barns, cellars,
and storehouses, for future use, or in proper places for seed.

[Deuteronomy 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 28:6</span></span>

Blessed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and blessed shalt thou be
when thou goest out. In all their business and employments of life
whether within doors or without; in the administration of every office,
whether more public or private; and in all their journeys going out and
coming home; and particularly when they went out to war, and returned,
all should be attended with success.

[Deuteronomy 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 28:7</span></span>

The Lord shall cause thine enemies that rise up against thee to be
smitten before thy face,.... As the Philistines, Moabites, Syrians,
Edomites, and Ammonites were, especially in the times of David:

they shall come out against thee one way: in a body, all together, in
large numbers, marching in great order, to give them battle:

and flee before thee seven ways; be entirely routed, and flee some one
way, and some another, even every way they could take to make their
escape. The phrase is expressive of an entire victory, and of a complete
rout and dispersion of an enemy.

[Deuteronomy 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 28:8</span></span>

The Lord shall command the blessing upon thee in thy storehouses,....
Barns, granaries, and cellar, where their corn, wine, and oil, were laid
up; by preserving the corn from being devoured by vermin, and the casks
of wine and oil from bursting and running out:

and in all thou settest thine hand unto; in all their manufactures,
occupations, and trades, in which they were employed, and in the culture
of their vines, olives, and other fruit trees:

and he shall bless thee in the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee;
with health and long life in it, and with an abundance of all good
things, it being a land flowing with milk and honey.

[Deuteronomy 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 28:9</span></span>

And the Lord shall establish thee an holy people unto himself,....
Having separated them from all others, for his service, honour, and
glory, should continue them as such, and settle them in the land, and
confirm all their privileges, natural, civil, and religious. The Targum
of Jonathan is,"the Word of the Lord shall establish thee, &c.''he that
brought them out of Egypt, through the Red sea and wilderness, to the
land of Canaan:

as he hath sworn unto thee: and to their fathers; see [Deu
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#012),

if thou shall keep the commandments of the Lord thy God, and walk in his
ways; by which tenure they held the land of Canaan, and their settlement
and continuance in it, and enjoyment of all the good things thereof; see
[Isa 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019).

[Deuteronomy 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 28:10</span></span>

And all the people of the earth shall see that thou art called by the
name of the Lord,.... Called his children, his people, his portion, and
his inheritance; and that they are his, and he is theirs, by the care he
takes of them, the provision he makes for them, and the protection they
have from him:

and they shall be afraid of thee; as not only the Canaanites were, but
all other nations; see [Deu 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#025).

[Deuteronomy 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 28:11</span></span>

And the Lord shall make thee plenteous in goods,.... In all temporal
good things, give them an affluence of them, even all things richly to
enjoy; the Targum of Jonathan is,"the Word of the Lord shall, &c."

in the fruit of thy body, and in the fruit of thy cattle, and in the
fruit of thy ground: increase their children, cattle, and substance, as
before, [Deu 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#004),

in the land which the Lord sware unto thy fathers to give thee; the land
of Canaan, often thus described.

[Deuteronomy 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 28:12</span></span>

The Lord shall open unto thee his good treasure,.... The Lord has his
treasures of snow and of hail, and of wind, [Job
38:22](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#022); but here his good treasure, as
appears by what follows, is his treasure of rain. In the Targum of
Jonathan it is said,

"there are four keys in the hand of the Lord of the whole world, which
he does not deliver into the hands of any prince; the keys of life, and
of the grave, and of food, and of rain:"

the heaven, to give the rain unto thy land in its season; that is, he
will open the heaven, where his good treasure of rain is laid up, and
bring it forth or, the land of Canaan for the enriching of it; or will
open the windows thereof, and pour down the blessing; see [Mal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#010); and that at the proper time,
both in autumn and spring, the one is called the former, and the other
the latter rain; the one was in Marchesvan, or October, and the other in
Nisan, or March, as the Targum of Jonathan; the former rain for the
fitting the earth for seed, or for watering it when sown, and the latter
for the plumping of it before harvest:

and to bless all the work of thine hand; in agriculture, for without the
blessing of rain, all the labour of the husbandman would be to little
purpose:

and thou shall lend unto many nations, and thou shall not borrow; See
Gill on [Deu 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu015.htm#016). The connection of
these words with what goes before may lead to observe this sense of
them, that they should furnish other countries with corn, and not need
any of theirs; see [Eze 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017).

[Deuteronomy 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 28:13</span></span>

And the Lord shall make thee the head, and not the tail,.... Give them
dominion over others, and not make them subject to them; the head
signifies rulers and governors, and the tail the common people that are
subjects; or the one such that are honourable and in high esteem, and
the other such that are mean and base; see [Isa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014); the Targum of Jonathan is,"the
Word of the Lord shall make thee, &c."

and thou shalt be above only, and thou shall not be beneath; which
explains what is meant by head and tail, being uppermost and lowermost,
as the head is the upper part, and the tail the lower part of a
creature; the one is more honourable, the other vile: the sense is, that
they should be superior to other people in honour and dignity, and not
below them, or vassals to them:

if that thou hearken to the commandments of the Lord thy God, which I
command thee this day to observe and to do them; which is the condition
on which all this happiness depended.

[Deuteronomy 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 28:14</span></span>

And thou shall not go aside from any of the words which I command thee
this day,.... Depart from them as a rule to walk by, turn out from them
as a path to walk in, neglect and disobey them, and go into practices
contrary to them: turning

to the right hand or to the left, to go after other gods to serve them;
which to do was to break the first and principal table of the law, than
which nothing was more abominable and provoking to God.

[Deuteronomy 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 28:15</span></span>

But it shall come to pass, if thou wilt not hearken to the voice of the
Lord thy God,.... As directed, exhorted, and encouraged to, [Deu
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#001), &c.

to observe to do all his commandments and his statutes, which I command
thee this day; both moral and ceremonial:

that all these curses shall come upon thee; from the hand of God,
certainly, suddenly, and unawares:

and overtake thee; pursuing after thee, will come up to thee, and seize
upon thee, though they may seem to move slowly; see [Zac
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#003); namely, the curses which follow.
Manasseh Ben Israel (f) divides them into two parts, the first from
hence to [Deu 28:45](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#045); which respects
the destruction of the first temple, and the things that went before or
related to that; and the second from thence to the end of the chapter,
which he thinks refers to the destruction of the second temple, and
their present case and circumstances; and it must be owned that for the
most part the distinction may seem to hold good; what is prophesied of
that should befall the Jews for their disobedience being more remarkably
and distinctly fulfilled in the one than in the other; yet there are
things in the whole which respect both, or that were fulfilled, some
under one dispensation, and some under another, and some that were
fulfilled in both; but chiefly and more manifestly at and since their
dispersion by the Romans.

\(f\) De Termino Vitae, l. 3. sect. 3. p. 126.

[Deuteronomy 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 28:16</span></span>

Cursed shalt thou be in the city, and cursed shalt thou be in the field.
In [Deu 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016) the curses are delivered
out in form, as the reverse of the blessings in [Deu
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003); and by observing what the
blessings mean, the sense of the curses may easily be understood, the
one being directly opposite to the other. See Gill on [Deu
28:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#003).

[Deuteronomy 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 28:17</span></span>

Cursed shall be thy basket and thy store. See Gill on [Deu
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#005), [Deu
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016).

[Deuteronomy 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 28:18</span></span>

Cursed shall be the fruit of thy body, and the fruit of thy land, the
increase of thy kine, and the flocks of thy sheep. See Gill on [Deu
28:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#004), [Deu
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016).

[Deuteronomy 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 28:19</span></span>

Cursed shalt thou be when thou comest in, and cursed shalt thou be when
thou goest out. See Gill on [Deu 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#006),
[Deu 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016).

[Deuteronomy 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 28:20</span></span>

The Lord shall send upon thee cursing,.... Which is either a general
word for all that follows, or rather, since that had been expressed
before in various instances, this may denote some particular judgment.
Jarchi interprets it of penury, of want of all good things, extreme
poverty, so as to be reduced to the utmost necessity, and as to stand in
need of the common comforts and supports of life, and even to have their
blessings and mercies turned into curses; the consequence of which must
needs be

vexation; trouble, distress, and anguish of spirit:

and rebuke; this may well be considered as a rebuke and correction in
Providence for sins committed, to awaken to a sense and acknowledgment
of them, and to repentance for them:

in all that thou settest thine hand to do; nothing done should prosper,
to relieve them under their pressing wants, a curse attending all their
efforts, and so sad disappointment follows; and all as a just rebuke for
their many sins: and this would be their case more or less:

until thou be destroyed, and until thou perish quickly; through famine,
and want of the common necessaries of life; as at the sieges of Samaria
and Jerusalem, by the kings of Syria, Assyria, and Babylon:

because of the wickedness of thy doings, because thou hast forsaken me;
their several immoralities and impieties, and particularly their
idolatry, which was a forsaking the worship of the true God, and
following idols; an iniquity to be punished by the judge, and of all
things the most provoking to the Lord.

[Deuteronomy 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 28:21</span></span>

The Lord shall make the pestilence cleave unto thee,.... Not only to
come upon them; but to continue with them:

until he have consumed thee from off the land whither thou goest to
possess it; which shows that this respects not some particular seasons,
when the pestilence came and continued awhile, and then ceased, as in
the times of David; but when it became more general, and issued with
other judgments in the utter consumption of them, as at the destruction
of Jerusalem, both by the Babylonians and the Romans; at what times the
pestilence raged and remained, until by that and other sore judgments
the land was wholly depopulated.

[Deuteronomy 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 28:22</span></span>

The Lord shall smite thee with a consumption,.... An emaciation of their
bodies, either through famine or wasting diseases, whereby the fluids
are washed off, and men are reduced to skin and bones:

and with a fever; a hot burning disease, which dries up the radical
moisture, consumes it, and so threatens with death; of which there are
various sorts, and some very pestilential and mortal Jarchi and Aben
Ezra interpret it of a fire in the face, by which they seem to mean what
is called St. Anthony's fire:

and with an inflammation, and with an extreme burning; either in the
inward parts, as an inflammation of the lungs; or in the outward parts,
as carbuncles, burning ulcers, and the like:

and with the sword; in the margin it is, "with drought"; so Aben Ezra
interprets the word, which seems better to suit with what it is in
company with; and designs either drought in human bodies, occasioned by
fevers, inflammations, and extreme burnings; or in the earth, through
the force of the sun, and want of rain, which render the earth barren
and unfruitful, and so cause a famine:

and with blasting and with mildew; whereby the corn that is sown, and
springs up, comes to nothing, being blasted by east winds, or turns pale
and yellow by the mildew, and so withers away; the consequence of which
is want of food, and so destruction and ruin; see [Amo
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009),

and they shall pursue thee until thou perish; follow hard after them,
and come so close one after another upon them, until they are utterly
destroyed.

[Deuteronomy 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 28:23</span></span>

And the heaven that is over thy head shall be brass,.... Or like brass,
not for its clearness, brightness, and splendour, or for its being
spread out like a molten looking glass which was of brass, [Job
37:18](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#018); but for its dryness and
hardness, no moisture being in it, or passing through it; no showers of
rain nor dew being let down from it:

and the earth that is under thee shall be iron; or like iron, hard and
impenetrable, into which the plough and spade will not enter; nor
anything spring out of it, for want of rain and dew to moisten and
soften it. The same is said in [Lev
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#019); only there is an inversion of
the figures; there the heaven is said to be as iron, and the earth like
brass, but signify the same thing.

[Deuteronomy 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 28:24</span></span>

The Lord shall make the rain of thy land powder and dust,.... That is,
instead of showers of rain in their season, to water, refresh, and
enrich the earth, and make it fruitful; and for want of them, and
through the heat of the sun, being dried and parched, and its clods
crumbled into dust, this should be raised up into the air by the force
of winds, and let down again in showers of dust; whereby the few herbs,
plants, or green trees on it would be utterly destroyed: and so the
Targum of Jonathan interprets it of the Lord's sending a wind that
should raise the dust and earth upon the herbs of their fields. Such
ploughing winds, that cast up the earth and sand, and dust, into the
air, whereby men and cattle are sometimes covered, are frequent in the
eastern countries; of which See Gill on [Jon
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon004.htm#008),

from heaven shall it come down upon thee until thou be destroyed; that
is, from the air, up to which the dust is carried by the wind, and then
let fall in vast quantities, like showers, which are very destructive.

[Deuteronomy 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 28:25</span></span>

The Lord shall cause thee to be smitten fore thine enemies,.... And by
them, as they sometimes were by the Philistines and others, before their
utter destruction, when they sinned against the Lord; and by the
Assyrians, Babylonians, and Romans:

thou shall go out one way against them, and flee seven ways before them;
march out against them in a body, promising themselves victory, but be
utterly routed; so that they shall flee every way they can for their
safety; see [Deu 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#007),

and shall be removed into all the kingdoms of the earth; this shows that
Manasseh's case [Kg2 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#001), observed
[Deu 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015); will not strictly and
entirely hold good, nor is there any necessity to adhere closely to it;
it is enough that the things threatened and prophesied of were at one
time or another fulfilled in these people; for neither the ten tribes,
when taken captive by Shalmaneser, were carried into all the kingdoms of
the earth, only to some particular places mentioned in [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006); nor the two tribes by
Nebuchadnezzar, who were carried by him to Babylon, and returned from
thence again at the end of seventy years; but this was exactly fulfilled
at their last destruction by the Romans, when they were sent by them
into various countries, and have been ever since scattered about in each
of the nations of the world. And yet it must be owned that Strabo (g),
who wrote before the last destruction of them, affirms, that it was not
easy to find any place in the world which had not received them, and was
not occupied by them.

\(g\) Apud Joseph. Antiqu. l. 14. c. 7. sect. 2.

[Deuteronomy 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 28:26</span></span>

And thy carcass shall be meat unto all fowls of the air, and unto the
beasts of the earth,.... Which was always reckoned a very grievous
calamity, have no other burial than in the bowels of beasts and birds;
and was the case of many of the Jews in the Antiochian persecution, [Psa
79:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa079.htm#002); and in a treatise of theirs (h),
which relates their many afflictions and sufferings in their present
captivity, speaking of a persecution of them in Spain, in the Jewish
year 5172, it is reported, how that those that fled to avoid punishment
were killed in the fields, where their carcasses lying unburied became a
prey to beasts:

and no man shall fray them away; the fowls and the beasts; none of their
friends being left to do it, and their enemies would not show so much
respect to them, and care of them.

\(h\) Shebat Judahm sive Hist. Jud. a Gentio, sect. 46. p. 312.

[Deuteronomy 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 28:27</span></span>

The Lord will smite thee with the botch of Egypt,.... Which some
understand of the leprosy, Of that sort of it called "elephantiasis",
frequent among the Egyptians; See Gill on [Lev
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#002). Thevenot (i) relates, that when
the time of the increase of the Nile expires, the Egyptians are attended
with sharp prickings in their skin like needles. So Vansleb says
(k),"the waters of the Nile cause an itch in the skin, which troubles
such as drink of them when the river increases. This itch is very small,
and appears first about the arms, next upon the stomach, and spreads all
about the body, which causes a grievous pain; and not only the river
water, but that out of the cisterns drank of, brings it, and it lasts
about six weeks.''Though some take this botch to be the botch and blain
which the Egyptians were plagued with for refusing to let Israel go,
[Exo 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#009),

and with the emerods; or haemorrhoids, the piles, a disease of the
fundament, attended sometimes with ulcers there; see [Sa1
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1005.htm#009),

and with the scab and with the itch: the one moist, the other dry, and
both very distressing:

whereof thou canst not be healed; by any art of men; which shows these
to be uncommon ones, and from the immediate hand of God.

\(i\) Apud Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 3. p. 426, 427. (k) Relation
of a Voyage to Egypt, p. 35, 36.

[Deuteronomy 28:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 28:28</span></span>

The Lord shall smite thee with madness,.... At the calamities befallen
them, and through the force of diseases on them:

and blindness; not of body, but of mind; with judicial blindness and
hardness of heart:

and astonishment of heart; at the miserable condition they and their
families should be in.

[Deuteronomy 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 28:29</span></span>

And thou shalt grope at noon day as the blind gropeth in darkness,....
That is, being in darkness through the loss of their sight; otherwise
the darkness and the light are alike to them, and they grope in the one
as well as in the other. This comparison shows that the darkness and
blindness of the Jews, threatened them, is to be understood not of the
darkness of their bodily eyes, but of their minds; not being able to
understand, or form a judgment of things that are as clear as noon day;
and being at the utmost loss what methods to take and pursue, when they
are plain and manifest before them; but being infatuated and besotted,
follow the lusts and counsels of their own hearts, which lead them
wrong:

and thou shall not prosper in thy ways; in any steps they may take to
extricate themselves out of their difficulties, distresses, and
calamities, or to bring themselves into easy and comfortable
circumstances; to get wealth and riches, and honour and esteem with men;
but, on the contrary, become forlorn and miserable, poor and wretched,
mean and despicable:

and thou shalt be only oppressed and spoiled evermore; continually,
every day, all the days of their lives, oppressed with taxes and
tributes, with mulcts and fines, and spoiled of their goods and
substance under one pretence or another; which has been generally their
case in Popish countries; for this seems not to refer to the Babylonish
captivity, where they built houses, and dwelt in them, and planted
gardens, and ate the fruit of them; and in the peace of cities had peace
themselves, [Jer 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#005),

and no man shall save thee; from the oppressions, exactions, and spoils
of their enemies, nor deliver them out of their hands; whereas in
process of time they had deliverance and salvation from the Babylonish
captivity, by the means of Cyrus king of Persia.

[Deuteronomy 28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">deu 28:30</span></span>

Thou shall betroth a wife, and another man shall lie with her,....
Espouse a woman in order to make her his wife, and before he can take
her home, and consummate the marriage, through some calamity or another
coming upon them, they should be set at a distance from each other, and
she should fall into the hands of another man, who either should ravish
her, or gain her consent to lie with her, or become his wife; which,
when the marriage was so near being consummated, must be a grievous
disappointment, and a great vexation:

thou shall build an house, and thou shall not dwell therein; being,
before it is quite finished, or however before he is got into it,
carried captive, or obliged to flee to a distant place:

thou shall plant a vineyard, and shall not gather the grapes thereof; or
make it common, on the fourth year to eat the fruits of it, as Jarchi;
which might not be done until sanctified and redeemed according to the
law in [Lev 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#023); See Gill on [Deu
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#006).

[Deuteronomy 28:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">deu 28:31</span></span>

Thine ox shall be slain before thine eyes, and thou shalt not eat
thereof,.... Shall be taken from the herd, and out of the field or
stall, by the enemy, and killed for the soldiers to feed on, and not the
least part of it given to them:

thine ass shall be violently taken away from before thy face, and shall
not be restored unto thee; no leave shall be asked to take it, but
without their consent, and against their will, it should be taken away
by the soldiers to carry them and their burdens, and it may be the booty
and spoil of them, and never returned more:

thy sheep shall be given unto thine enemies, and thou shall have none to
rescue them; not given them by themselves, but they should be suffered
to fall into their hands, and they should never be able to get them out
again, nor any for them. These, strictly and literally taken, suppose
them to be in their own land, when those things would be done, where
they were possessed of farms, and fields, cattle, being much employed in
husbandry; but they may be put for any kind of substance they would be
possessed of, which they should be stripped of under one pretence or
another; which has been frequently their case in their present
dispersion in several countries, and in ours; when Popish princes have
wanted money, they have made very exorbitant demands on the Jews in
their countries, and sadly squeezed and oppressed them, and who were not
able to resist them, and never had any restoration made to them.

[Deuteronomy 28:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">deu 28:32</span></span>

Thy sons and thy daughters shall be given unto another people,.... This
also was not true in the Babylonish captivity; for then their sons and
daughters went with them, and continued with them, and returned again;
but has been oftentimes verified since their captivity by the Romans;
frequently their sons and daughters have been taken from them by force,
to be brought up in another religion, by the edicts of kings and popes,
and by the canons of councils, and particularly of the fourth council of
Toledo:

and thine eyes shall look and fail; with longing:

for them all the day long; expecting every day their children would be
returned to them, at least wishing and hoping they would; their hearts
yearning after them, but all in vain:

and there shall be no might in thy hand; to recover them out of the
hands of those who had the possession of them, or fetch them back from
distant countries, whither they were carried. By an edict of the
Portuguese, the children of the Jews were ordered to be carried to the
uninhabited islands; and when, by the king's command, they were had to
the ships in which they were to be transported, it is incredible, the
Jewish historian says (l), what howlings and lamentations were made by
the women; and there wore none pitied them and comforted them, or could
help them.

\(l\) Shebet Judah, sive Hist. Jud. sect. 59. p. 332.

[Deuteronomy 28:33](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">deu 28:33</span></span>

The fruit of thy land, and all thy labour, shall a nation which thou
knowest not eat up,.... The same was prophesied of by Jeremiah,
concerning the Babylonish captivity, and was fulfilled in it, [Jer
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#017); and has been also verified in
the frequent pillage and spoil of this people, in their present state;
for though they have no land to till, from whence to gather fruit, yet
they are employed in manufactures and merchandise, the fruit and benefit
of which they have been frequently stripped of:

and thou shall be only oppressed and crushed always; this seems best to
agree with their present case; for in their former captivities they were
not always oppressed and crushed, but had respite and deliverance; See
Gill on [Deu 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#029).

[Deuteronomy 28:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">deu 28:34</span></span>

So that thou shalt be mad, for the sight of thine eyes that thou shall
see. On account of the shocking things seen by them, their dreadful
calamities, oppressions, and persecutions, such as before related; not
only violent diseases on their bodies, which were grievous to behold, as
well as their pains were intolerable, and made them mad; but to be
deprived of a betrothed wife, a newly built house, and a newly planted
vineyard; to have an ox slain, and an ass taken away by their enemies,
and their sheep given to them before their eyes; to have their sons and
daughters taken from them, and brought up in another religion, and to be
stripped of their substance; these have made them stark mad, insomuch
that they have sometimes destroyed themselves and their families. In
Germany, in their rage and madness, they burnt a city and themselves in
it; and, in the same country, being summoned by an edict to change their
religion, or to be burnt, they agreed to meet together in a certain
house, and destroy one another; and first parents killed their children,
and husbands their wives, and then killed themselves; leaving only one
person to be their doorkeeper, who finished the tragedy by destroying
himself, as their own historian relates (m). Other stories of the like
kind are reported of them, and some such facts as done in our own nation
(n).

\(m\) Ib. (Shebet Judah, sive Hist. Jud.) sect. 34, 36. p. 214, 215,
216, 217. (n) See Bishop Patrick in loc. and Dr. Newton (Bishop of
Bristol) on Prophecies, vol. 1. Dissert. 7. sect. 14. p. 195, 196.

[Deuteronomy 28:35](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">deu 28:35</span></span>

The Lord shall smite thee in the knees, and in the legs, with a sore
botch, that cannot be healed,.... Which in those parts as it is very
painful, so is not easily cured; and this which is threatened was
incurable by the art of man, as others in [Deu
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027); and which should not stop there
in the lower parts of the body, but proceed and spread:

from the sole of thy foot unto the top of thy head; and so be filled
with them, as Job was with his boils and ulcers.

[Deuteronomy 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">deu 28:36</span></span>

And the Lord shall bring thee, and thy king which thou shall set over
thee,.... This was fulfilled both in Jehoiachin and in Zedekiah, kings
of Judah, who were carried captive to Babylon, by Nebuchadnezzar, [Kg2
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#015),

unto a nation which neither thou nor thy fathers have known; the land of
Babylon, which was at a distance from them, and is represented in
Scripture as afar off, [Jer 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015); and
which the Jews, not being a trading people, or dealing in merchandise in
foreign parts, were unacquainted with:

and there shall thou serve other gods, wood and stone; which they were
obliged to do in Babylon, of which it seems best to understand it; for
though it may be interpreted of their compliance with the image worship
of the Papists in their present condition, as the former clause may be
of their rulers and governors, included in the name of king, carried
captive by the Romans; who were a nation as little, if not less known
than the Babylonians: but the former sense seems to suit best here, as
this does with [Deu 28:64](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#064); where the
language is somewhat different, and very appropriate. The Targum of
Jonathan is,"shall pay tribute to those that worship idols of wood and
stone.''

[Deuteronomy 28:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">deu 28:37</span></span>

And thou shall become an astonishment,.... To neighbouring nations, that
shall hear of their overthrow and captivity, and that shall see the
miserable condition they are brought into:

a proverb and a byword among all nations whither the Lord shall lead
thee; both for the wickedness committed by them, and for the ill usage
of them by the nations among whom they should be, as they were in the
Babylonish captivity; see [Jer 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#009);
and now are, it being common to say,"do you think I am a Jew?''or,"none
but a Jew would have done such a thing.''

[Deuteronomy 28:38](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">deu 28:38</span></span>

Thou shall carry much seed into the field,.... And sow it plentifully;
this and what is said in some following verses plainly refer to them
while in their own land, before carried captive, and not to their
present case and circumstances:

and shall gather but little in at harvest; little springing up, or not
coming to perfection, being blighted and blasted, and so yielded but a
small crop; see [Hag 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#009); and chiefly
for the following reason:

for the locust shall consume it; which is a great destroyer of the
fruits of the earth; see [Joe 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004).

[Deuteronomy 28:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">deu 28:39</span></span>

Thou shalt plant vineyards, and dress them,.... Plant them and prune
them, in expectation of much fruit from them:

but shall neither drink of the wine nor gather the grapes; so far from
drinking of the wine of them, that they should not be able to gather any
grapes from them:

for the worms shall eat them; a sort of worms pernicious to vines, which
the Greeks call "ipes", or "ikes" (o); and the Latins "convolvuli" and
"volvoces", as Pliny (p).

\(o\) See Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 4. c. 27. col. 622, 623. (p)
Nat. Hist. l. 17. c. 28.

[Deuteronomy 28:40](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">deu 28:40</span></span>

Thou shalt have olive trees throughout thy coasts,.... In the several
parts of the land of Canaan, which is therefore called a land of olive
oil, [Deu 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008),

but thou shalt not anoint thyself with the oil; nor any other relations,
friends, guests, as was usual at entertainments; see [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005); for the phrase "thyself" is not
in the text. The reason why they should not anoint is, because they
would have no oil to anoint with:

for thine olive shall cast his fruit; before it is ripe, by one means or
another, as by winds, or blasting and mildew; see [Amo
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#009).

[Deuteronomy 28:41](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">deu 28:41</span></span>

Thou shalt beget sons and daughters, but thou shall not enjoy them,....
Or, "they shall not be thine" (q); being taken from them, and given to
others, see [Deu 28:32](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#032); and for the
following reason:

for they shall go into captivity; as when the ten tribes were carried
captive by Shalmaneser, and the two tribes by Nebuchadnezzar, and all
the people of the Jews by the Romans.

\(q\) "et non erunt tibi", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Deuteronomy 28:42](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">deu 28:42</span></span>

All thy trees and fruit of thy land shall the locust consume. Which is a
creature that not only consumes grass, and herbs, and the corn of the
field, but all green trees; see [Exo
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#015). This sort here has its name
from the shade they make, hiding the light of the sun, and darkening the
face of the earth at no on day; or from the noise they make with their
wings in flying; see [Joe 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#005).

[Deuteronomy 28:43](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">deu 28:43</span></span>

The stranger that is within thee shall get up above thee very high,....
In wealth and riches, in power and authority, in honour and dignity.
This Manasseh Ben Israel (r) interprets of the Samaritans, whom the king
of Assyria drove out of Samaria, and the neighbouring places; but the
design of the expression is to show how mean and abject they should be
in another country; that even one who had been a stranger or proselyte
of the gate, when in their own country, should now be vastly above them:

and thou shall come down, very low; into a very mean condition, to be in
great subjection, a vassal and a slave; see [Psa
106:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#041); and much more when reduced by
the Romans, and sent to the mines in Egypt.

\(r\) De Termino Vitae, l. 3. sect. 3. p. 128.

[Deuteronomy 28:44](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">deu 28:44</span></span>

He shall lend to thee, and thou shall not lend to him,.... The stranger,
or one of another nation, shall be in a capacity of lending to the Jew,
when the Jew would not be able to lend to the Gentile, his circumstances
being so low and mean; to show which is the design of the expression,
and not the kindness or unkindness of either; see [Deu
28:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#012),

he shall be the head, and thou shalt be the tail; he shall be ruler and
governor, and thou shalt be subject to him; see [Deu
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#013).

[Deuteronomy 28:45](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">deu 28:45</span></span>

Moreover, all these curses shall come upon thee,.... Before related, as
well as what follow:

and shall pursue thee, and overtake thee till thou be destroyed; which
though they would endeavour to flee from and escape, should not be able,
since they would follow them so closely and swiftly, and overtake them,
and seize upon them; see [Deu 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#015),

because thou hearkenedst not unto the voice of the Lord thy God, to keep
his commandments and his statutes which he commanded thee; to which
disobedience all the curses are to be imputed that go before or follow
after.

[Deuteronomy 28:46](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">deu 28:46</span></span>

And they shall be upon thee for a sign and for a wonder,.... That is,
those curses before pronounced, [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015), and what follow, should rest
and remain upon them, continue with them, and be very visible on them;
so as to be observed by others, as a sign of the wrath and displeasure
of God, and of the fulfilment of prophecy, and of the truth of divine
revelation: and so "for a wonder": as it is most astonishing to observe
how exactly all the curses threatened them have fallen upon them and
have abode with them, as they did in their former captivities, and more
especially do in the present one: and, what is the greater wonder, that
notwithstanding these dreadful calamities, and so long continued, enough
to have crushed any people from being a people, yet they have continued,
and still do continue, a distinct people; which is a standing miracle,
and one would think sufficient to convince the most hardened and
obstinate deist of the truth and authority of the sacred Scriptures; in
which stand so many glaring prophecies that have been fulfilled, and are
continually fulfilling in this people:

and upon thy seed for ever; this shows that these curses, said to be
upon them, not only refer to those that came upon them at and in the
Babylonish captivity, but to those that came upon them at their
destruction by the Romans, and which have continued on them nineteen
hundred years; and how much longer they will continue none can say: it
will be their case, until new heavens and a new earth are created, or
there will be a new state of things, at least with them; when they shall
be converted to the Lord, and all Israel saved; see [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017); and it may be observed, that
the ten tribes carried captive never returned.

[Deuteronomy 28:47](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">deu 28:47</span></span>

Because thou servedst not the Lord thy God,.... By attending his
worship, and keeping his commandments:

with joyfulness and gladness of heart, for the abundance of all things;
which they enjoyed in the land of Canaan, a land that abounded with all
good things; which laid them under great obligations to serve the Lord:
and yet, as they were wanting in a ready attendance on his worship, and
in a cheerful obedience to his laws, so in their sacrifices, of praise
and thanksgivings for their manifold mercies; and, because of all this,
the curses written in this book came upon them.

[Deuteronomy 28:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">deu 28:48</span></span>

Therefore shall thou serve thine enemies, which the Lord shall send
against thee,.... Since they would not serve the Lord their God, who was
so good a master to them, and supplied them with all good things, and
with plenty of them, they should serve other lords, their enemies, whom
God would raise up and send against them; not only, the Assyrians,
Chaldeans, and Babylonians, but the Romans, after described, whom they
should find hard masters, and from whom they; should have very severe
usage, and should be

in hunger and in thirst, and in nakedness, and in want of all good
things; being destitute of food, and drink and raiment, and the common
necessaries of life, and so in famishing and starving circumstances:

and he shall put a yoke of iron upon thy neck; bring them into a state
of subjection to their enemies, which would be intolerable to them, and
from which they would not be able to free themselves, any more than to
break an iron yoke; which, as it agrees with the Babylonish captivity,
and their subjection in that state, see [Jer
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#013); so more especially with their
bondage under the Romans, who are the legs of iron in Nebuchadnezzar's
image, and the fourth beast with great iron teeth in Daniel's vision,
[Dan 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#033), and this yoke was to
continue

until he have destroyed thee; the Jews were under the Roman yoke, Roman
governors being set over them, and Judea made a Roman province many
years before the destruction of their nation, city, and temple, by them.

[Deuteronomy 28:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">deu 28:49</span></span>

The Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far, from the end of the
earth,.... Now though Babylon is represented as a country distant from
Judea, and said to be a nation "from far", [Jer
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015); yet not "from the end of the
earth"; as here; and though the Roman nation, strictly speaking, was not
at so great a distance from Jerusalem, yet the Roman emperors, and great
part of their armies brought against it, were fetched from our island of
Great Britain, which in former times was reckoned the end of the earth,
and the uttermost parts of the world (s); and so Manasseh Ben Israel (t)
interprets this nation of Rome, and observes, that Vespasian brought for
his assistance many nations (or soldiers) out of England, France, Spain,
and other parts of the world: and not only Vespasian was sent for from
Britain to make war with the Jews, but when they rebelled, in the times
of Adrian, Julius Severus, a very eminent general, was sent for from
thence to quell them. And it appears to be a very ancient opinion of the
Jews, that this passage is to be understood of the Romans, from what is
related in one of their Talmuds (u): they say, that"Trajan, being sent
for by his wife to subdue the Jews, determined to come in ten days, and
came in five; he came and found them (the Jews) busy in the law on that
verse, "the Lord shall bring a nation against thee from far", &c. he
said unto them, what are ye busy in? they answered him, so and so; he
replied to them, this is the man (meaning himself) who thought to come
in ten days, and came in five; and he surrounded them with his legions,
and slew them:"

as swift as the eagle flieth; which may respect not so much the
swiftness of this creature, the words which convey the idea being a
supplement of the text, as the force with which it flies when in sight
of its prey, and hastes unto it and falls upon it, which is
irresistible; and this is the sense of the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin
versions, and is what is ascribed to the eagle by other writers (w). Now
though this figure is used of the Chaldeans and Babylonians, [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013); it agrees full as well or better
with the Romans, because of their swiftness in coming from distant
parts, and because of the force and impetus with which they invaded
Judea, besieged Jerusalem, and attacked the Jews everywhere; and
besides, the eagle was borne on the standard in the Roman army (x):

a nation whose tongue thou shalt not understand; which, though it is
also said of the language of the Chaldean nation, [Jer
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015); yet as the Chaldee and Hebrew
languages were only dialects of one and the same language, common to the
eastern nations, the Chaldee language, though on account of termination
of words, pronunciation, and other things, might be difficult, and hard
to be understood by the Jews, yet must be much more easy to understand
than the Roman language, so widely different from theirs.

\(s\) "----In ultimos orbis Britannos", Horat. Carmin. l. 1. Ode 35. (t)
De Termino Vitae, l. 3. sect. 3. p. 129. (u) T. Hieros. Succah, fol. 55.
2. (w) Vid. Homer. Iliad. 21. l. 252. (x) Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 10.
c. 4.

[Deuteronomy 28:50](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">deu 28:50</span></span>

A nation of fierce countenance,.... Or, "strong of face" (y); which
aptly describes the old Romans, who are always represented as such; and
whereas it is said of the Chaldeans, that they were a nation dreadful
and terrible, [Hab 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hab001.htm#007); the same is
said of the fourth beast, or Roman empire, [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007); who were a terror to all the
world:

which shall not regard the person of the old, nor show favour to the
young: cruel, unmerciful, and uncompassionate, to persons of whatsoever
age or sex; which, as it was the character of the Chaldeans, [Ch2
36:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#017); so of the Romans, who
especially showed no mercy to the Jews, as Josephus (z), who was an
eyewitness, testifies."The Romans (says he) showed no mercy to any age,
out of hatred to the nation (of the Jews), and in remembrance of the
injuries done to Cestius;''one of their governors, when among them. And
in another place he says (a),"the Romans, remembering what they suffered
in the siege, spared none, and showed no mercy.''

\(y\) "fortem faciebus", Montanus; "robustam facie", Vatablus. (z) De
Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 1. (a) Ibid. sect. 34.

[Deuteronomy 28:51](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">deu 28:51</span></span>

And he shall eat the fruit of thy cattle,.... Larger and lesser, oxen
and sheep, as their calves and lambs, and kids of the goat:

and the fruit of thy land; their wheat, barley, figs, grapes,
pomegranates, olives, and dates:

until thou be destroyed; the land of Judea, and all the increase of it:
this being before said, [Deu 28:31](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#031);
and here repeated, shows that the same should be fulfilled at different
times, as by the Chaldeans, so by the Romans; whose nation, or army,
with their general at the head of them, may be more especially here
intended by "he", that should eat up their fruit until utter destruction
was brought upon them:

which also shall not leave thee either corn, wine, or oil, or the
increase of thy kine, or flocks of thy sheep, until he have destroyed
thee; all being consumed by the Roman army. There is a promise and
prophecy, that though this would be the case, as it has been, there
shall be a time when it shall be so no more; see [Isa
62:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#008).

[Deuteronomy 28:52](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">deu 28:52</span></span>

And he shall besiege thee in all thy gates,.... That is, in all their
cities and walled towns, which had gates and bars for security:

until thy high and fenced walls come down, wherein thou trustedst,

throughout all thy land; the Jews had several cities well fenced and
strongly fortified, besides Jerusalem, which was fortified both by art
and nature, and in which they greatly put their trust and confidence;
but these were broken down, particularly by the battering rams of the
Romans:

and he shall besiege thee in all thy gates, throughout all thy land,

which the Lord thy God hath given thee; this is repeated for the
certainty of it, and that it might be taken notice of, and abate their
trust and confidence in their outward strength. Now all this was
fulfilled, partly in the siege of Samaria by the king of Assyria, who
went through all the land of the ten tribes, [Kg2
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#005); and in Sennacherib's taking the
fenced cities of Judah, [Kg2 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013);
and in the siege of Jerusalem, and breaking down the walls of it by
Nebuchadnezzar, [Kg2 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#010); and, last
of all, in the siege of Jerusalem, and battering down the walls of it,
by the Romans; at which time also all their strong and fenced cities
throughout the land were taken and demolished.

[Deuteronomy 28:53](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">deu 28:53</span></span>

And thou shall eat the fruit of thine body,.... Than which nothing can
be more shocking and unnatural, which is explained as follows:

the flesh of thy sons and of thy daughters, which the Lord thy God hath
given thee; which is an aggravation of the cruel and inhuman fact:

in the siege, and in the straitness wherewith thine enemies shall
distress thee; this shows the cause of it, a famine by reason of the
closeness of the siege, so that no provisions could be brought in for
their relief; and all within being eaten up, and everything that was
eatable, even the most nauseous and disagreeable, they would be led on
to this strange, unheard of, and barbarous action, eating their own
children. This was fulfilled in the siege of Samaria, [Kg2
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#025); and in the siege of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar, [Lam 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#010) and again in
the Apocrypha:"Moreover he hath delivered them to be in subjection to
all the kingdoms that are round about us, to be as a reproach and
desolation among all the people round about, where the Lord hath
scattered them.'' (Baruch 2:4)and in the siege of the same city by the
Romans; of which an instance will be hereafter given.

[Deuteronomy 28:54](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">deu 28:54</span></span>

So that the man that is tender among you, and very delicate,.... Not
only the rustic that has been brought up meanly, and used to hard
living; but one that has been bred very tenderly, and lived in a
delicate manner, like the rich man in [Luk
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019); that fared sumptuously every
day:

his eye shall be evil towards his brother, and towards the wife of his
bosom, and towards the remnant of his children which he shall leave;
that is, he shall begrudge his brother, who is so nearly related to him,
the least bit of food; yea, his wife, he dearly loved, and is one flesh
with him, his other self, and even his children, which are parts of
himself, such of them as were left not eaten by him; or his eye should
be evil upon then, he should look with an evil eye on them, determining
within himself to kill and eat them next. Though the particular instance
in which his eye would be evil to them follows, yet no doubt there are
other instances in which his eye would be evil towards them, as there
were at the siege of Jerusalem, and have been since. Josephus (b)
says,"that in every house where there was any appearance of food (or
anything that looked like it, that had the shadow of it) there was a
battle; and the dearest friends fought with one another, snatching away
from each other, the miserable supports of life;''as the husband from
his wife and children, and the wife from her husband and children; see
more in [Deu 28:56](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#056); and, in later
times, we told by the Jewish historian (c), that wrote an account of
their sufferings and distresses since their dispersion, that at Fez the
Jews sold their children for slaves for bread.

\(b\) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 3. sect. 3. (c) Shebet Judah, sive Hist.
Jud. p. 326.

[Deuteronomy 28:55](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">deu 28:55</span></span>

So that he will not give to any of them of the flesh of his children
whom he shall eat,.... Neither give to a brother, nor to a wife, nor to
any of his remaining children, the least bit of the flesh of a child he
has killed and dressed for his own food; which adds to the barbarity of
his action:

because he hath nothing left him in the siege, and in the straitness
wherewith thine enemies shall distress thee in all thy gates; every
creature being eaten up, dogs, cats, &c. and whatsoever else could be
any ways made food of; as the dung of beasts, belts, shoes, the leather
on shields, &c. as Josephus (d) says they did eat; and this being the
case, nothing eatable remaining, therefore his heart would be hardened
against his nearest relations, and not allow them the least part with
him, even of what was so shocking and unnatural.

\(d\) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 3. sect. 3.

[Deuteronomy 28:56](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">deu 28:56</span></span>

And the tender and delicate woman amongst you,.... Who is instanced in
because of her sex, which is more pitiful and compassionate, and
especially one that has been brought up genteelly, and has always lived
deliciously, on the most delicate fare, and nicest dainties, and used to
all the delights of nature:

which would not venture to set her foot upon the ground for delicateness
and tenderness; for fear of taking cold, or defiling her feet:

her eye shall be evil towards the husband of her bosom, and towards her
son, and towards her daughter; begrudge them every bit they eat, and
restrain food from them as much as in her lies, and even snatch it out
of their mouths; so Josephus (e) relates, that"women snatched the food
out of the mouths of their husbands, and sons out of the mouths of their
fathers; and, what is most miserable, mothers out of the mouths of their
infants.''

\(e\) De Bello Jud. l. 5. c. l0. sect. 3.

[Deuteronomy 28:57](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">deu 28:57</span></span>

And toward her young one that cometh out from between her feet,.... Or
her secundine, "her afterbirth", as in the margin of our Bibles; so the
Targum of Jonathan and Aben Ezra interpret it. The latter describes
it,"the place of the fetus, while it abides in the womb of its
mother;''the membrane in which the child is wrapped; and it is suggested
that, as nauseous as that is, the delicate woman should eat it, and then
the newborn child that was wrapped in it; so Jarchi interprets it,
little children; though it seems to be distinguished from the children
she bears or brings forth in the next clause:

and towards her children which she shall bear; that is, have an evil eye
towards them, to eat them as follows:

for she shall eat them for want of all things secretly in the siege and
straitness wherewith thine enemy shall distress thee in thy gates; that
is, eat her children, being reduced to the utmost extremity, being in
want of all things, having nothing at all to abate her sharp hunger;
which, and nothing else, could incline her, and prevail upon her to do
an action so monstrously horrid: and which she would do in the most
private and secret manner; both lest others should partake with her, as
well as being conscious of the foulness and blackness of the crime, that
would not by any means bear the light; and all this owing to the
closeness of the siege, and the unspeakable distress they should be in
through it. For the illustration of this, take the following story as
related by Josephus (f);"a woman, whose name was Mary, that lived beyond
Jordan, illustrious for her descent and riches fled with the multitude
to Jerusalem when besieged carrying with her her substance, and what
food she could get that were left to her by the spoilers; where being
pressed with famine, she took her sucking child, killed it boiled it,
and ate half of it, and then laid up the rest, and covered it; and when
the seditious party entered the house, they smelt it, and demanded her
food, threatening to kill her if she did not deliver it; which when she
brought forth, declaring what she had done, they were struck with
horror; to whom she said, this is my son, and this my own deed; eat, for
I have eaten; be not more tender or softer than a woman, and more
sympathizing or more pitiful than a mother.''All the ideas that this
prophecy of Moses conveys are to be met with in this account; as of a
woman well bred and delicate, reduced to the utmost distress, and
wanting all the necessaries of life, killing her tender infant, a
sucking babe, eating it secretly, and laying up the rest covered for
another time. If Moses had lived to have known the fact committed, as
Josephus did, he could not have expressed it well in stronger and
clearer terms than he has done. This is a most amazing instance of a
prophecy delivered out two thousand years or more before the fact was
done, and of the exact accomplishment of it; and if the observation of a
learned critic (g) can be established, that the first word of this verse
should be and so be rendered, "and she shall boil that which cometh out
from between her feet, even her children which she shall bear", the
fulfilment of the prophecy will appear still more exact, both at the
siege of Samaria, [Kg2 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#020); and of
Jerusalem, as in the above relation of Josephus.

\(f\) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 3. sect. 4. (g) Dr. Kennicot's State of the
Hebrew Text, Dissert. 1. p. 421.

[Deuteronomy 28:58](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">deu 28:58</span></span>

If thou wilt not observe to do all the words this law, that are written
in this book,.... Of Deuteronomy, in which there is a repetition of the
laws before delivered, and an addition of some new ones; all which were
to be so observed as to be done, to this end:

that thou mayest fear this glorious and fearful name of the Lord thy
God; or that it might appear that the fear of God was before their eyes,
and in their hearts, by their obedience to his law; that they had a
proper awe and reverence of him, who is glorious in his titles and
attributes, and whose name Jehovah is holy and reverend; and who, as the
covenant God of his people, is to, be feared for his goodness sake.

[Deuteronomy 28:59](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">deu 28:59</span></span>

Then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful,.... Visible, remarkable,
distinguishable, and astonishing to all that see them:

and the plagues of thy seed; for they were to continue, as they have
done, With their posterity, age after age:

even great plagues, and of long continuance; great as to quality and
quantity, and firm, sure, lasting, and durable; the word used is
rendered "sure" in [Isa 55:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#003); sure by
prophecy and in the event; and which when inflicted remained, as they
have 1700 years; all which might be believed as certain, or what would
certainly come to pass, and be depended on:

and sore sicknesses, and of long continuance; besides those diseases
mentioned [Deu 28:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#027); or however
others including them.

[Deuteronomy 28:60](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">deu 28:60</span></span>

Moreover, he will bring upon thee all the diseases of Egypt,.... All
that in a way of judgment were brought upon the Egyptians for refusing
to let Israel go; or all such diseases as were peculiar to them, and
common among them, as the leprosy, the itch, ulcers, &c.

which thou wast afraid of; when living among them, lest they should
catch them of them, or they should be inflicted on them by the hand of
God:

and they shall cleave unto thee; not only should come upon them, but
continue with them; they should not easily get rid of them, or be cured
of them.

[Deuteronomy 28:61](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">deu 28:61</span></span>

Also every sickness and every plague which is not written in the book of
this law,.... Which is not here mentioned or threatened; and it
suggests, that whatsoever sickness or disease that could be thought of
or named, or were at any time in any place among men, might be expected
to come upon them for their disobedience:

them will the Lord bring upon thee until thou be destroyed; the Jews
themselves (h) own this has been fulfilled on them.

\(h\) Shebet Judah, p. 318.

[Deuteronomy 28:62](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">deu 28:62</span></span>

And ye shall be left few in number,.... There were but very few left in
the land of Judea by Nebuchadnezzar's general when Jerusalem was taken
by him; and these were of the poorer sort, and were left for
vinedressers and husbandmen, [Jer
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#010); and how much they were reduced
by the Romans will appear by the accounts Josephus gives of those that
were slain, and made prisoners by them: he says (i),"there were
1,100,000 slain at the siege of Jerusalem and by the war, and 97,000
made prisoners;''and it is computed that 1,240,490 were destroyed in
Jerusalem and other parts of the nation (k); and it is also said by
their historian (l), that of those that were transported from Jerusalem
and other parts of Palestine into Spain, scarce a thousandth part
remained and that an infinite number were slain in France and Germany;
and though their number equalled those that came out of Egypt, yet
scarce five thousand of them were left:

whereas ye were as the stars of heaven for multitude; and, as it is
sometimes said, as the sand of the sea, as was promised to Abraham, [Gen
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005); and was fulfilled in the days of
Solomon [Kg1 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#020),

because thou wouldest not obey the voice of the Lord thy God; in his
law, and by his prophets; and especially by the voice of the true
Messiah, in his everlasting Gospel; of whom it is said, "today if ye
will hear his voice"; &c. [Heb 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#007).

\(i\) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 9. sect. 3. (k) See Dr. Newton (Bp. of
Bristol) on Prophecies, vol. 1. Dissert. 7. sect. 6. p. 186. (l) Shebet
Judah, sect. 49. p. 316.

[Deuteronomy 28:63](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">deu 28:63</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that as the Lord rejoiced over you to do you
good,.... The Word of the Lord, as the Targum of Jonathan; who with
great delight and pleasure in them brought them out of Egypt, conducted
them through the wilderness, protecting them and providing all good
things for them; and brought them into the land of Canaan, a land
flowing with milk and honey, and settled them there; and gave them
judges and kings, priests and prophets, for a long series of time, with
other innumerable blessings he bestowed upon them:

and to multiply you; so that they became as the stars of heaven, and the
sand of the sea, as before observed:

so the Lord will rejoice over you to destroy you and to bring you to
nought; take as much pleasure in their ruin and destruction, whereby his
justice would be glorified, and the honour of his laws preserved, as
before in bestowing good things on them, in which mercy and kindness
were displayed:

and ye shall be plucked from off the land whither thou goest to possess
it; in a violent manner, by their enemies, and against their wills, they
being loath to leave it. The Emperor Adrian, to prevent their
insurrections and rebellions, which had given him a great deal of
trouble, ordered by an edict that no Jew should come into Jerusalem, nor
into the land of Judea, or be seen in it, which is observed by several
writers (m); by which means the country was cleared of them. In later
times some of them did get thither again, but they were but few.
Benjamin of Tudela, a Jew of the twelfth century, travelled into several
parts of the world in quest of his countrymen, and particularly into
Judea, and his view was to magnify his people; and yet owns he found at
Jerusalem only two hundred persons, whose employment was dyeing wool,
and dwelt in a corner of the town under the tower of David; and but
twelve at Bethlehem, three at Maresha, at Shunem indeed three hundred,
none at Gilead, two at Nob, who were dyers, three at Ramah, one at
Joppa, none at Jafne, where had been a famous academy, none at Ashdod,
and at Tiberias about fifty (n). And our countryman Sandys (o), who
travelled into Judea in the seventeenth century, says,"here be some
Jews, yet inherit they no part of the land, but in their own country do
live as aliens.''

\(m\) Justin Martyr, Tertullian, Eusebius. See Dr. Newton ut supra.
(Prophesies, vol. 1. Dissert. 7. sect. 6. p. 186.) (n) Itinerar. p.
41-53. (o) Travels, sect. 3. p. 114. Ed. 5.

[Deuteronomy 28:64](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">deu 28:64</span></span>

And the Lord shall scatter thee among all people, from the one end of
the earth even to the other,.... Which refers to their present
dispersion, being now, more or fewer, in all parts of the world, east,
west, north, and south:

and there thou shalt serve other gods, which neither thou nor thy
fathers have known, even wood and stone: it may be observed, that the
phrase, "which either thou nor fathers have known", is fitly added here,
which is not used of them, [Deu 28:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#036);
and well agrees with the idols of the Papists, their images of the
Virgin Mary, and saints departed, made of wood and stone, which were
such the fathers of the Jews never knew; just as it is said of the host,
the consecrated wafer, the breaden god honoured by antichrist, that it
is "a god who his fathers knew not", [Dan
11:38](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#038); the apostles and ancient
fathers of the church. Now in Popish countries the Jews have often been
prevailed upon to change, or at least dissemble their religion, and
embrace Popery: and have worshipped images of wood and stone. The author
of the history of their calamities and sufferings owns this;"multitudes
(he says (p)) in Spain and Portugal forsook the law of Moses, and joined
the Papists, pretending at least to be of their religion.''

He makes mention of sixteen thousand at one time (q), and some, he say
(r),"that were driven out of Spain, came into Italy, where the young men
pressed with famine could not bear it, and changed their religion, and
began to worship images that they might have to satisfy their hunger;
and the Papists used to go about with a crucifix in one hand, and a
piece of bread in the other, promising the bread to those that would
worship the crucifix; and so many famishing persons forsook the law of
Moses, and mixed with them:''and to this day the convents of monks and
nuns in Spain are full of them; and most of their canons, inquisitors,
and bishops, are Jews (s). The Targum of Jonathan indeed, to clear them
from idolatry itself, gives another sense of these words, paraphrasing
them,"ye shall pay tribute to the worshippers of idols.''

\(p\) Shebet Judah, p. 108, 154, 312, 313, 338, 339. (q) Ibid. p. 312.
(r) Ibid. sect. 56. p. 327. (s) See Addison's present State of the Jews,
c. 3. p. 3o, 31. Dr. Newton ut supra, (Prophesies, vol. 1. Dissert. 7.)
sect. 15. p. 197.

[Deuteronomy 28:65](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">deu 28:65</span></span>

And among these nations shalt thou find no ease, neither shall the sole
of thy foot have rest,.... No quiet settlement, nor certain dwelling,
being obliged to move from place to place through cruel edicts, heavy
fines and mulcts, exorbitant taxes and impositions, and diligent search
made after them by the courts of the inquisition, especially where any
substance was to be gotten. The Jews themselves (t) own that this
passage is now fulfilled in them:

but the Lord shall give thee there a trembling heart; being always in
fear lest their persons should be seized on, their children taken from
them, and their goods confiscated; hence the poet (u) gives them the
epithet of "trembling":

and failing of eyes: in looking for a vainly expected Messiah, to
deliver them from all their fears and troubles:

and sorrow of mind; under their present afflictions and calamities.

\(t\) Shebet Judah, p. 108, 109. Manasseh Ben Israel de Termino Vitae,
l. 3. sect. 3. p. 132. (u) "----Judea tremens----". Juvenal, Satyr 6. v.
543.

[Deuteronomy 28:66](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">deu 28:66</span></span>

And thy life shall hang in doubt before thee,.... Whether it shall be
spared or not by the enemy:

and thou shalt fear day and night; being in continual dread of being
killed:

and shalt have none assurance of thy life; of its being continued a
moment scarcely, but live in constant fear and expectation of its being
taken away.

[Deuteronomy 28:67](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#067)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_067">deu 28:67</span></span>

In the morning thou shalt say, would God it were even,.... Wishing they
might get through the day well, fearing their life would be taken away
before night, or some sad calamity befall them before the day was past:

and at even thou shall say, would God it were morning; dreading what
would happen to them in the night, that some messenger of death would be
sent to dispatch them, or they should be haled out of bed to a court of
inquisition, and cast into a dungeon:

for the fear of thine heart wherewith thou shalt fear, and for the sight
of thine eyes which, thou shalt see; often beholding such dreadful
sights, as their countrymen put upon the rack, and cruelly tortured, and
then burnt alive; and so their hearts would fear and tremble, lest they
should be the next that would be taken up and used in this manner;
besides other severities and hard usages, with which their brethren were
treated, and they in continual fear of.

[Deuteronomy 28:68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#068)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_068">deu 28:68</span></span>

And the Lord shall bring thee into Egypt again with ships,.... Either
into a state of hard bondage and slavery, like that their fathers were
in, in Egypt; or rather, strictly and literally, should be brought into
Egypt again, since it is said to be "with" or "in ships". This does not
respect the going of those Jews into Egypt who were left in the land of
Judea, after the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar; for that
was against the express command of God, [Jer
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#013). There were several movings of
them into Egypt after that time; an Heathen historian (w) tells us, that
not a few thousands of Jews went into Egypt and Phoenicia, because of
the sedition in Syria after the death of Alexander; and where, it seems,
in process of time, they became slaves: for we are told by Josephus (x),
that 120,000 slaves were set free by Ptolemy Philadelphus; but what is
chiefly respected here is their case in the times of the Romans, and by
their means. Now when Jerusalem was taken by Titus, those above
seventeen years of age were sent by him to the works, or mines, in
Egypt, as the same historian relates (y); and after their last overthrow
by Adrian many thousands were sold, and what could not be sold were
transported into Egypt, and perished by "shipwreck", or famine, or were
slaughtered by the people (z) whereby this prophecy was literally and
exactly fulfilled, and which is owned by the Jews themselves. Manasseh
Ben Israel (a) observes, that though Vespasian banished the Jews into
various countries, Egypt is only mentioned by way of reproach, as if it
had been said, ye shall go captives into the land from which ye went out
triumphant:

by the way whereof I spake unto thee, thou shall see it no more again;
the Targum of Jonathan is,"the Word of the Lord shall bring thee into
Egypt again in ships;''even the same divine Word, the Son of God, that
brought them out of it, and went before them in a pillar of cloud and
fire, now provoked by their rejection of him, would lead them back again
thither; the paraphrast adds,"through the midst of the Red sea, in the
path in which ye passed;''as if they were carried over into Egypt in
ships, just in that part of the sea in which they had passed before; but
that was an unknown and unseen path, after the waters were closed up,
and never to be seen more, and which is here meant; for not Egypt, but
the way in which they passed, was to be seen no more:

and there ye shall be sold unto your enemies for bondmen and for
bondwomen, and no man shall buy you; that is, there in Egypt they would
be offered to sale, and so many would be sold until the market was
glutted with them, and there would be no buyers. The Targum of Jonathan
is,"ye shall be sold there at first to your enemies, at a dear price, as
artificers, and afterwards at a mean price as servants and handmaids,
until ye become despised, and be brought to serve for nothing, and there
be none to take you in.''Jarchi interprets it of they themselves being
desirous, and seeking to be sold, to avoid cruelties and death; which
agrees with the sense of the word, which may be rendered, "ye shall
offer yourselves for sale"; but there will be no buyer, because their
enemies will determine upon the slaughter and consumption of them; and
to the same purpose Aben Ezra. There were such numbers of them to be
sold both at Egypt and at Rome, that the sellers of them had but a poor
market for them; and it seems not only because of their number, but the
ill opinion had of them as servants. Hegesippus (b) says,"there were
many to be sold, but there were few buyers; for the Romans despised the
Jews for service, nor were there Jews left to redeem their own.''It is
said (c), that thirty were sold for a penny; a just retaliation to them,
who had sold their Messiah for thirty pieces of silver.

\(w\) Hecataeus apud Joseph. contr. Apion, l. 1. sect. 22. (x) Antiqu.
l. 12. c. 2. sect. 1. (y) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 9. sect. 2. (z) Hieron.
in Zech. ii. fol. 120. I. (a) De Termino Vitae, l. 3. sect. 3. p. 131,
132. (b) De excidio Urb. Hieros. l. 5. c. 47. p. 645. (c) Ib. p. 680.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 29](deu029)

</div>
