<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](num036)  [Next](deu001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY

This book is sometimes called "Elleh hadebarim", from the words with
which it begins; and sometimes by the Jews "Mishneh Torah", the
repetition of the law; and so in the Syriac version, with which agrees
the Arabic title of it; and when the Greeks, and we after them, call it
"Deuteronomy", it is not to be understood of a second, a new, or another
law, but of the law formerly delivered, but now repeated, and also more
largely explained; to which are likewise added several particular laws,
instructions, and directions; all which were necessary, on account of
the people of Israel, who were now a new generation, that either were
not born, or not at an age to hear and understand the law when given on
Mount Sinai; the men that heard it there being all dead, excepting a
very few; and these people were also now about to enter into the land of
Canaan, which they were to enjoy as long as they kept the law of God,
and no longer, and therefore it was proper they should be reminded of
it; and besides, Moses was now about to leave them, and having an hearty
desire after their welfare, spends the little time he had to be with
them, by inculcating into them and impressing on them the laws of God,
and in opening and explaining them to them, and enforcing them on them,
which were to be the rule of their obedience, and on which their civil
happiness depended. And sometimes the Jews call this book "the book of
reproofs", because there are in it several sharp reproofs of the people
of Israel for their rebellion and disobedience; and so the Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem begin it by calling it the words of reproof which
Moses spake, &c. That this book was written by Moses there can be no
doubt, from [Deu 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001), only the eight
last verses, which give an account of his death, and of his character,
were wrote by another hand, equally inspired by God, as either Eleazar
the priest, as some, or Samuel the prophet, as others; or, as it is the
more commonly received opinion of the Jews, Ezra; though it is highly
probable they were wrote by Joshua his successor. This book was written
and delivered by Moses, at certain times in the last month of his life,
and towards the close of the fortieth year of the children of Israel's
coming out of Egypt. And that it is of divine authority need not be
questioned, when the several quotations out of it are observed, as made
by the apostles of Christ, in [Act
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#022), [Heb
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#030) out of [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015) and by our Lord himself, [Mat
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#016) from [Deu
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015). Yea, it is remarkable, that all
the passages of Scripture produced by Christ, to repel the temptations
of Satan, are all taken out of this book, [Mat
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#007) compared with [Deu
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#003), and the voice from heaven,
directing the apostles to hearken to him, refers to a prophecy of him in
[Deu 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 1](deu001)

</div>
