<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu026)  [Next](deu028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 27:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 27

In this chapter the people of Israel are ordered to write the law on
plastered stones, and set them on Mount Ebal, [Deu
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001); where they are bid to erect an
altar, and offer sacrifices on it, [Deu
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005); and are charged by Moses and the
priests to obey the Lord, and keep his commandments, [Deu
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#009); and a direction is given to each
tribes which should stand and bless, and which curse, and where, [Deu
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011); and the curses which the
Levites should pronounce with a loud voice, and the people should say
Amen to, are recited, [Deu 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#014); and
the whole is concluded with a curse on all who in general do not perform
the whole law, [Deu 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026).

[Deuteronomy 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 27:1</span></span>

And Moses, with the elders of Israel, commanded the people,

saying,.... The seventy elders, at the head of whom was Moses, which
made the great sanhedrim, or council of the nation; Moses having recited
all the laws of God to the people, these joined with him in an
exhortation to them to observe and obey them:

keep all the commandments which I command you this day; not in his own
name, as being the supreme legislator, but in the name of the Lord, whom
they had avouched to be their God and King, from whom he had received
them.

[Deuteronomy 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 27:2</span></span>

And it shall be, on the day when you shall pass over Jordan,.... Not the
precise day exactly, but about that time, a little after they passed
that river, as soon as they conveniently could; for it was not till
after Ai was destroyed that the following order was put in execution;
indeed as soon as they passed over Jordan, they were ordered to take
twelve stones, and did; but then they were set up in a different place,
and for a different purpose; see [Jos
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#003),

unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee, that thou shalt set
thee up great stones; not in Jordan, as Jarchi, but on Mount Ebal, [Deu
27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004); nor had the stones set up in
Jordan any such inscription as what is here ordered to be set on these:

and plaster them with plaster: that so words might be written upon them,
and be more conspicuous, and more easily read.

[Deuteronomy 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 27:3</span></span>

And thou shall write upon them all the words of this law,.... Not the
whole book of Deuteronomy, as some think, at least not the historical
part of it, only what concerns the laws of God; and it may be only a
summary or abstract of them, and perhaps only the ten commandments.
Josephus (q) is of opinion that the blessings and the curses after
recited were what were written on them:

when thou art passed over; that is, the river Jordan:

that thou mayest go in unto the land which the Lord thy God giveth thee,
a land flowing with milk and honey; this account of the land of Canaan
is so frequently observed, to imprint upon their minds a sense of the
great goodness of God in giving them such a fruitful country, and to
point out to them the obligation they lay under to observe the laws of
God ordered to be written on plastered stones, as soon as they came into
it:

as the Lord God of thy fathers hath promised thee; [Exo
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008).

\(q\) Antiqu. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 44.

[Deuteronomy 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 27:4</span></span>

And therefore it shall be, when ye be gone over Jordan,.... Some time
after they had passed that river:

that ye shall set up these stones, which I command you this day, in
Mount Ebal; a mountain near Shechem in Samaria, and was, as Benjamin of
Tudela says (r), dry as stones and rocks itself, and perhaps had its
name, as some think (s), from the root in the Arabic language which
signifies to strip a tree of its leaves, and a derivative from it, white
stones and a mountain in which such are found. Hither the stones
commanded to be set up were to be brought, and fixed here; from whence
it is not certain; it may be from some part of the mountain. Here the
Samaritan version has Gerizim instead of Ebal, which is generally
thought to be a wilful corruption of the Samaritans, in favour of their
temple built at Gerizim:

and thou shall plaster them with plaster; as before directed, [Deu
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#002).

\(r\) Itinerar. p. 40. (s) Reland. Dissert. 3. de Monte Gerizim, p. 128.
See Castel. Lexic. Heptaglott col 2642.

[Deuteronomy 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 27:5</span></span>

And there shall thou build an altar to the Lord thy God,.... On the same
mountain, though not of the same stones. Jarchi's note is,"after that
(the setting up of the plastered stones) thou shalt bring from thence
(from Jordan) others, and build of them an altar on Mount Ebal;''but
Josephus (t) places this altar not on Mount Ebal, but between that and
Gerizim. This altar, he says, was ordered to be built towards the rising
sun, not far from the city of Shechem, between two mountains, Gerizim
and Ebal; but the text is express, that it was to be built where the
stones were set up, which was on Mount Ebal, and there it was built,
[Jos 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030); an altar of stones; of
whole stones, as in [Deu 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#006), not
broken, nor hewed, but rough as they were when taken out of the quarry:

thou shalt not lift up any iron tool upon them; to hew them, and make
them smooth; See Gill on [Exo 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#025);

\(t\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 44.)

[Deuteronomy 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 27:6</span></span>

Thou shall build the altar of the Lord thy God of whole stones,.... And
of such Joshua did build it, [Jos
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#031),

and thou shalt offer burnt offerings thereon unto the Lord thy God; and
very likely sin offerings too; for these frequently went together, the
one to make atonement for sin, and the other as a gift, and by way of
thankfulness for the acceptance of the former; and both typical of
Christ, the true sacrifice, and the antitype of all the legal
sacrifices.

[Deuteronomy 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 27:7</span></span>

And thou shall offer peace offerings,.... Part of which belonged to God,
which was burnt on the altar, and another part to the priest that
offered them; and the rest to the owner that brought them, which he eat
of with his friends; so it follows:

and shall eat there, and rejoice before the Lord thy God: now this
altar, where these sacrifices were offered, was on the very spot where
the stones were on which the law was written; and may point at the
gracious provision God has made for the redemption of his people from
the curse of it by Christ, who became a substitute for them in their
legal place and stead. The altar being of rough unhewn stones was a type
of him in his human nature, who is the stone in the vision cut out of
the mountain without hands; and being unpolished may denote the meanness
of his outward appearance, on account of which he was rejected by the
Jewish builders; and no iron tool being to be lifted up on them, may
signify that nothing of man's is to be added to the sacrifice and
satisfaction of Christ, and salvation by him; and this being in Ebal,
where the curses were pronounced, shows that Christ, by the offering up
of himself for the sins of his people, has made atonement for them, and
thereby has delivered them from the curse of the law, being made a curse
for them; all which is matter of joy and gladness to them.

[Deuteronomy 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 27:8</span></span>

And thou shall write upon the stones all the words of this law,.... Not
upon the stones of the altar, but upon the first stones brought to Mount
Ebal, and set up there before, and on which the words were inscribed
before the altar was erected; though according to the Misnah (u) the
altar was built of these stones, and on that the law written; for it is
said,"they shall bring the stones (\#De 27:2,4) and build the altar, and
plaster it with plaster, and write upon it all the words of the
law:''with which Josephus agrees, who says (w),"that when Moses was
about to die, he ordered the blessings and the curses to be written on
the altar, on both sides of it:''could this be made clearly to appear,
it would be easy to observe the accomplishment of it in Christ, who was
made under the law, became subject to it, had it written on his heart,
obeyed the precepts and bore the penalty of it, and had all the curses
of it laid on him, and thereby redeemed his people from them. However,
be it on which it may that the words of the law were written, they were
written

very plainly; so that they might be easily read; in seventy languages,
according to the Jewish writers; which they say was done, that whoever
would learn the law might learn it, and so the Gentiles had no excuse
(x); for it is a prevailing notion with them, that there were so many
nations and languages. The law being written on stones denotes the
duration of it, which continued not only during the times of the Old
Testament dispensation, and to the times of John, and had its fulfilment
in Christ, but still continues; for though Christ has redeemed his
people from the curse and condemnation of it, yet it is in his hands as
a rule of direction to them as to their walk and conversation: nor is it
made void by any doctrine of the Gospel, and nothing more strongly
enforces obedience to it than the Gospel. The moral law is immutable,
invariable, and eternal in its nature, and in the matter of it. This may
also point at the hardness of men's hearts, their non-subjection to the
law, and disobedience of it; and these stones being covered with plaster
may be an emblem of formalists and hypocrites, who are like whited walls
and sepulchres, [Mat 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#027), have a
form of the law in their heads, but not in their hearts; are Jews
outwardly, but not inwardly, [Rom
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028); externally righteous before men,
as if they were strict observers of the law, but internally very wicked;
and have hard, blind, and impenitent hearts, under the cover of the law,
and a profession of strict regard to it; and this being done on the same
mount where the curses were pronounced, shows that they were on account
of the breach of this law.

\(u\) Sotah, c. 7. sect. 5. (w) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 4. c. 8. sect.
44.) (x) Sotah, ib. & Bartenora in ib. Targum Jon. & Jerus. & Jarchi in
loc.

[Deuteronomy 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 27:9</span></span>

And Moses and the priests the Levites spake unto all Israel,.... The
priests who were Levites, as all the priests that were lawful ones were;
and there were none but such at this time, who were. Eleazar and
Ithamar, and their sons; these joined with Moses in the following
exhortations to the people of Israel, as being particularly concerned in
instructing them in the knowledge of the laws, and in seeing them put in
execution:

saying, take heed, and hearken, O Israel; to what was about to be said
unto them, as well as to what had: been said:

this day thou art become the people of the Lord thy God; they were his
people before; he had chosen them to be his special people above all
others; he had redeemed them out of Egypt; he had led them through the
wilderness, and provided for them and protected them there, and had
given them laws and statutes to observe to walk in; all which showed
them to be his peculiar people: but now in a very formal and solemn
manner they were avouched and declared by him to be his people, and they
had solemnly avouched and declared that he was their God and King; and
every day, according to Jarchi, was to be considered as this day, as if
it was the day of entering into covenant with him.

[Deuteronomy 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 27:10</span></span>

Thou shalt therefore obey the voice of the Lord thy God,.... In
whatsoever he directs in his word, and by his prophets, and especially
by his Son, eminently called the Word of the Lord:

and do his commandments and his statutes, which I command thee this day;
See Gill on [Deu 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#001).

[Deuteronomy 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 27:11</span></span>

And Moses charged the people the same,.... That he gave the above orders
to set up stones, and plaster them, and write the law on them, and build
an altar in the same place, and offer sacrifices when come into the land
of Canaan:

saying; as follows.

[Deuteronomy 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 27:12</span></span>

These shall stand upon Mount Gerizim to bless the people,

widen ye are come over Jordan,.... Which was a mountain in Samaria
opposite to Mount Ebal, a valley of a furlong broad lay between them
(y); and, according to Hillerus (z), had its name from being broken off
from that, they being, as it should seem, originally one mountain, and
now two tops of the same; so Burchard; but others think it signifies the
mountain of the mowers or cutters down (a); that is, of grass or corn,
being a very fruitful one; and Benjamin of Tudela says (b), that in his
time, on Mount Gerizim were fountains and orchards; and being such a
fertile mountain, it was very proper to bless upon. Mr. Maundrel (c), a
late traveller in those parts, says,"though neither of the mountains
have much to boast of as to their pleasantness, yet as one passes
between them, Gerizim seems to discover a somewhat more verdant fruitful
aspect than Ebal; the reason of which may be, because fronting towards
the north it is sheltered from the heat of the sun by its own shade;
whereas Ebal looking southward, and receiving the sun that comes
directly upon it, must by consequence be rendered more scorched and
unfruitful.''Josephus (d) says, that Gerizim was on the right hand, and
Ebal on the left; which may serve to strengthen the observation of
Ainsworth, in allusion hereunto, that in the last judgment those on the
right hand will be pronounced blessed, and those on the left hand
cursed:

Simeon, and Levi, and Judah, and Issachar, and Joseph, and Benjamin:
these appointed for blessing were children of the mistress, or free
woman, as Aben Ezra and many others have observed; the four first were
the sons of Leah, and the two last the sons of Rachel, and therefore
employed in the most honourable and desirable service: and who so proper
to pronounce or receive the blessing as the children of the free woman,
of Jerusalem above, which is free, the mother of us all that are born
again, and are made free by the Son of God, and are free indeed, and are
entitled to all the blessings of grace and glory?

\(y\) Vid. Maundrel's Journey from Aleppo, &c. p. 59, 62. (z) Onomastic.
Sacr. p. 168. (a) Reland. Dissert. de Monte Gerizim. p. 128. (b)
Itinerar. p. 40. (c) Journey from Aleppo, &c. p. 61. Edit. 7. (d)
Antiqu. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 44.

[Deuteronomy 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 27:13</span></span>

And these shall stand upon Mount Ebal curse,.... Which was dry and
rocky, barren and fruitful, and like the earth, that bears briers and
thorns, is rejected and nigh unto cursing, and so a proper place to
curse, and a fit emblem of those to be cursed; see [Heb
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#008),

Reuben, Gad, and Asher, and Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali; four of these
appointed for cursing were the children of the handmaids, Gad, Asher,
Dan, and Naphtali; and since two were wanting, as Aben Ezra observes,
and the sons of Leah were many, the oldest and the youngest were taken;
Reuben, who had defiled his father's bed, and exposed himself to the
curse of the law, and Zebulun, the last and youngest of Leah's sons; see
[Gal 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010).

[Deuteronomy 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 27:14</span></span>

And the Levites shall speak, and say unto all the men of Israel,....
Rather, "answer (e) and say"; not the whole tribe of Levi, for that
stood on Mount Gerizim to bless, [Deu
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012); but the priests of that tribe
who were placed in the valley, between the two mountains, and pronounced
both the blessings and the curses in the hearing of all the tribes of
Israel, to which they were to answer Amen; and that they might plainly
hear, they expressed their words

with a loud voice, clearly and distinctly, as follow.

\(e\) "respondebunt", Montanus.

[Deuteronomy 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 27:15</span></span>

Cursed be the man that maketh any graven or molten image,.... The
blessings and the form of them are not recorded, because they were not
to be had from the law, and through obedience to it; and therefore there
is a profound silence about them, to put men upon seeking for them
elsewhere, and which are only to be had in Christ, especially spiritual
ones; but we may suppose they were delivered in the same form, and
respecting the same things as the curses, only just the reverse of them;
as, "blessed is the man that maketh not any graven image", &c. The order
of both is given in the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem; See Gill on
[Deu 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#029). This curse respects the
breach of the first table of the law, and everything included in it
relating to the nature and being of God, the worship of him, and the
honour of his name; to do anything contrary to which, particularly to
make an image, whether graven or molten, to worship, is

an abomination to the Lord; and therefore subjects a man to the curse of
his law, it being

the work of the hands of the craftsman; and therefore it must be a most
stupid thing to ascribe deity to it, and worship it as such:

and putteth it in a secret place; though it is not set in a place of
public worship, or the house, so as to be seen by everyone; but in some
retired place, in a secret chamber, and there worshipped, or kept to
look at with pleasure; which would be a temptation, and lead on to
idolatry, and therefore is forbidden, and to be guarded against: now one
that committed idolatry, or anything like it, in the most secret manner,
was liable to this curse; for the omniscient God, the legislator, knows
what is done in the most private manner, and will resent and revenge
every affront and injury to his honour and glory. And Aben Ezra
observes, that all that follow respect things done in a secret way, and
which were not cognizable by the civil magistrate, and therefore to
deter persons from them these curses were pronounced:

and all the people shall answer and say Amen; even those on the one
mountain as on the other, thereby approving of, and assenting to, the
justice of the sentence pronounced.

[Deuteronomy 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 27:16</span></span>

Cursed be he that setteth light by his father, or his mother,.... That
secretly despises them in his heart, and by looks and gestures mocks at
them in a private manner, unseen by others, [Pro
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017); for if he publicly cursed them,
that was cognizable by the civil magistrate, and he was to be put to
death, [Lev 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009). This follows next,
as in the order of the ten commands, to that which respects the fear and
worship of God; honouring parents being next to the glorifying of God,
the Father of all:

and all the people shall say Amen; applaud the righteous sentence,
saying, "so let it be".

[Deuteronomy 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 27:17</span></span>

Cursed be he that removeth his neighbour's landmark,.... Removes it
backward, and steals ground, as Jarchi explains it; this is commonly
done secretly; see [Deu 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014),

and all the people shall say Amen; See Gill on [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015); See Gill on [Deu
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016).

[Deuteronomy 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 27:18</span></span>

Cursed be he that maketh the blind to wander out of the way,.... By
directing him wrong knowingly, or laying a stumbling block in his way,
[Lev 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#014). The Targum of Jonathan
is,"that maketh a traveller wander out of the way, who like a blind
man;''who knows his way no more than a blind man does. Jarchi interprets
it,"that blinds in anything, and gives evil counsel;''which leads men to
take wrong steps, whether in things civil, or moral, or religious; all
which are usually done privately:

and all the people shall say Amen; See Gill on [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015); See Gill on [Deu
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016).

[Deuteronomy 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 27:19</span></span>

Cursed be he that perverteth the judgment of the stranger,

fatherless, and widow,.... Who have none to assist them, and take their
part, and therefore judges may be tempted to do an unjust thing; but God
is the patron of them, and takes notice of every injury done them, and
is the avenger of all such:

and all the people shall say Amen; See Gill on [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015); See Gill on [Deu
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016).

[Deuteronomy 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 27:20</span></span>

Cursed be he that lieth with his father's wife,.... As Reuben did, and
which is forbidden [Lev 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#008),

because he uncovereth his father's skirt; see [Deu
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#030),

and all the people shall say Amen; the tribe of Reuben said this as well
as the rest.

[Deuteronomy 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 27:21</span></span>

Cursed be he that lieth with any manner of beast,.... See [Lev
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#023),

and all the people shall say Amen; as being shocking and abhorrent to
human nature.

[Deuteronomy 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 27:22</span></span>

Cursed be he that lieth with his sister,.... Which is forbid, [Lev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#009),

the daughter of his father, or the daughter of his mother; whether his
sister by father or mother's side:

and all the people shall say Amen; detesting such uncleanness.

[Deuteronomy 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 27:23</span></span>

Cursed be he that lieth with his mother in law,.... See [Lev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#007). All these incestuous or brutal
copulations may well be supposed to be done in secret:

and all the people shall say Amen; as abhorring such incest.

[Deuteronomy 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 27:24</span></span>

Cursed be he that smiteth his neighbour secretly,.... And kills him, and
the murder is not known; the curse of God follows such, and overtakes
them sooner or later. Some interpret this of smiting with the tongue, of
secret backbiting and slander; so the Targum of Jonathan,"that smiteth
with the third tongue;''or false accusation:

and all the people shall say Amen; as disapproving of and condemning
such a practice, even slander, and especially murder.

[Deuteronomy 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 27:25</span></span>

Cursed be he that taketh reward to slay an innocent person,.... As an
assassin, to murder him privately; or as a judge, that takes a bribe to
condemn to death an innocent person: so Aben Ezra observes, that
according to the sense of some a judge is meant; but, says he, in my
opinion a false witness; one that swears a man's life away for the sake
of a reward given him:

and all the people shall say Amen; at so detestable a crime.

[Deuteronomy 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 27:26</span></span>

Cursed be he that confirmeth not all the words of this law to do
them,.... That is, who does not perfectly perform all that the law
requires, and continues to do so; for the law requires obedience, and
that perfect and constant, and in failure thereof curses, in proof of
which the apostle produces this passage; see Gill on [Gal
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#010), for the reconciliation of these
Scriptures, as to what seeming difference there is between them:

and all the people shall say, Amen; See Gill on [Deu
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#015); See Gill on [Deu
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#016).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 28](deu028)

</div>
