<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu)  
  [Previous](deu002)  [Next](deu004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 3

In this chapter the account is carried on of the conquest of the
Amorites by Israel, of Og king of Bashan, and his kingdom, [Deu
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001), and of the distribution of their
country to the tribes of Reuben and Gad and the half tribe of Manasseh,
[Deu 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#012) and then the command to the
said tribes is observed, to go out armed before their brethren, and
assist them in the conquest of the land of Canaan, and then return to
their possessions, [Deu 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#018) and also
that to Joshua not to fear, but to do to the Canaanitish kings and
kingdoms what he had seen done to the two kings of the Amorites, [Deu
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#021). After which Moses relates the
request he made, to go over Jordan and see the good land, which was
denied him, only he is bidden to look from the top of an hill to see it,
[Deu 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#023). And the chapter is closed
with the charge he was to give Joshua, [Deu
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#028) which was received in the valley
where they abode, [Deu 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#029).

[Deuteronomy 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 3:1</span></span>

Then we turned and went up the way to Bashan,.... Which seems to have
been higher than the kingdom of Sihon: this was a fine country for
pasturage, for the breeding of cattle, larger and lesser, and was famous
for its oaks: it is the same country which in Josephus and others goes
by the name of Batanea:

and Og the king of Bashan came out against us; got his forces together,
and came out from Ashteroth, the royal city where he dwelt:

he and all his people, to battle at Edrei; another city in his kingdom,
about six miles from the former; see [Deu
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#004).

[Deuteronomy 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 3:2</span></span>

And the Lord said unto me,.... When Og was marching with all his forces
against Israel:

fear him not, &c; See Gill on [Num
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#034).

[Deuteronomy 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 3:3</span></span>

So the Lord our God delivered into our hands Og also the king of Bashan,
and all his people,.... As well as Sihon king of Heshbon:

and we smote him, till none was left to him remaining; or left alive,
all were slain with the sword; See Gill on [Num
21:35](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#035).

[Deuteronomy 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 3:4</span></span>

And we took all his cities at that time,.... Not only Edrei where the
battle was fought, and Ashteroth his capital city, but all the rest in
his kingdom:

there was not a city which we took not from them; not one stood out, but
all surrendered on summons; the number of which follows:

three score cities; which was a large number for so small a country, and
shows it to be well inhabited:

all the region of Argob; which was a small province of

the kingdom of Og in Bashan: Aben Ezra and Jarchi observe, that it was
called after a man, i.e. whose name was Argob; the Targum of Onkelos
names it Tracona, and the Targum of Jonathan Targona, the same with
Trachonitis in Josephus and other authors; see [Luk
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#001), Jerom relates (h) that in his
time, about Gerasa, a city of Arabia, fifteen miles from it to the west,
there was a village which was called Arga, which seems to carry in it
some remains of the ancient name of this country; and the Samaritan
version, in all places where Argob is, calls it Rigobaah; and in the
Misnah (i) mention is made of a place called Ragab, beyond Jordan,
famous for its being the second place for the best oil.

\(h\) De loc. Heb. fol. 87. M. (i) Misn. Menachot, c. 8. sect. 3.

[Deuteronomy 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 3:5</span></span>

All these cities were fenced with high walls, gates, and bars,.... That
is, all the cities in the kingdom of Bashan; and though they were, it
hindered not their falling into the hands of the Israelites; and this
might serve to encourage them against those fears they were possessed of
by the spies, with respect to the cities in the land of Canaan; see [Num
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#028).

besides unwalled towns a great many; small towns and villages adjacent
to the several cities, as is common.

[Deuteronomy 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 3:6</span></span>

And we utterly destroyed them,.... Not the cities, but the inhabitants
of them:

as we did to Sihon king of Heshbon; they did not destroy his cities, for
they took them and dwelt in them; but the people that lived there, as
follows here:

utterly destroying the men, women, and children, of every city; see [Deu
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#034).

[Deuteronomy 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 3:7</span></span>

But all the cattle, and the spoil of the cities,.... The oxen and sheep,
camels and asses; their gold and silver, and the furniture of their
houses; their stores of corn, and of other fruits of the earth, even all
their substance of whatsoever kind:

we took for a prey to ourselves; made them their own property, and used
them for their own profit and service, whereby they became greatly
enriched.

[Deuteronomy 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 3:8</span></span>

And we took at that time out of the hands of the two kings of the
Amorites,.... Sihon king of Heshbon, and Og king of Bashan:

the land that was on this side Jordan; where Moses then was, being in
the plains of Moab, and was the country beyond Jordan, with respect to
the land of Canaan, and when in that:

from the river of Arnon unto Mount Hermon; Arnon was a river which
divided Moab and the Amorites, [Num
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#013) and Hermon was a mountain of
Gilead, which ended where Lebanon began, and was the northerly border of
this country. It was remarkable for the dew that fell on it; See Gill on
[Psa 133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003).

[Deuteronomy 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 3:9</span></span>

Which Hermon the Sidonians call Sirion,.... Which name it has in [Psa
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#006) a name the inhabitants of Sidon
gave it, but for what reason it is not easy to say; however, that it was
well known to Tyre and Sidon, appears from snow in summer time being
brought to the former, as will be hereafter observed:

and the Amorites call it Shenir; in whose possession it was last.
Bochart (k) thinks it had its name from the multitude of wild cats in
it, Shunar in the Chaldee tongue being the name of that creature; but
Jarchi says Shenir in the Canaanitish language signifies "snow"; so, in
the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, it is called the mountain of snow;
and the Hebrew who read to Jerom, and taught him, affirmed to him that
this mountain hung over Paneas, from whence snow in summer time was
brought to Tyre for pleasure (l), and the same is confirmed by Abulfeda
(m). There is said to be upon the top of it a famous temple, which is
used for worship by the Heathens, over against Paneas and Lebanon (n);
and it is highly probable there was one even at this time, when it was
possessed by the Amorites, since it is called Mount Baalhermon, [Jdg
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003), from the worship of Baal, or some
other idol upon it, as it should seem. Besides these, it had another
name, Mount Sion, [Deu 4:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#048) but to be
distinguished from Mount Zion near Jerusalem. The names of it in this
place are very differently interpreted by Hillerus (o); though he thinks
it had them all on account of the snow on it, which was as a net all
over it; for Hermon, he observes, signifies a net, a dragnet, and Shenir
an apron, and Sirion a coat of mail, all from the covering of this mount
with snow.

\(k\) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 3. c. 14. col. 865. (l) De loc. Heb. fol.
88. B, C. (m) Apud Reland. Palestin. Illustrat. par. 2. p. 920. (n) De
loc. Heb. fol. 88. B, C. (o) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 561, 562, 786, 929.

[Deuteronomy 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 3:10</span></span>

All the cities of the plain,.... There was a plain by Medeba, and
Heshbon and her cities were in a plain, with some others given to the
tribe of Reuben, [Jos 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#016).

and all Gilead; Mount Gilead, and the cities belonging to it, a very
fruitful country, half of which fell to the share of the Reubenites, and
the rest to the half tribe of Manasseh:

and all Bashan; of which Og was king, called Batanea, a very fertile
country, as before observed:

unto Salcah and Edrei, cities of the kingdom of Og in Bashan; which seem
to be frontier cities of the latter: see [Deu
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#004). The former, Adrichomius (p) says,
was situated by the city Geshur and Mount Hermon, and was the boundary
of the country of Bashan to the north; and according to Benjamin of
Tudela (q), it was half a day's journey from Gilead: as Edrei seems to
be its boundary to the south.

\(p\) Thestrum Terrae Sanct. p. 94. (q) Itinerar. p. 57.

[Deuteronomy 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 3:11</span></span>

For only Og king of Bashan remained of the remnant of giants,.... The
meaning seems to be, either that he was the only one that was left of
the race of the giants the Ammonites found when they took possession of
this country, [Deu 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#020) or that was
left when the Amorites took it from the Ammonites; and who having by
some means or other ingratiated himself into their affections, because
of his stature, strength, and courage, and other qualifications they
might discern in him, made him their king:

behold, his bedstead was a bedstead of iron: his body being so large and
bulky, he might think it most proper and safest for him to have a
bedstead made of iron to lie upon, or to prevent noxious insects
harbouring in it; nor was it unusual to have bedsteads made of other
materials than wood, as of gold, silver, and ivory; See Gill on [Amo
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004). Some learned men (r) have been of
opinion, that the beds of Typho in Syria, made mention of by Homer (s),
refer to this bedstead of Og:

is it not in Rabbath of the children of Ammon? which was the royal city
of the Ammonites, in the times of David, [Sa2
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026), now called Philadelphia, as
Jerom says (t). This bedstead might be either sent thither by Og, before
the battle at Edrei, for safety, or rather might be sold by the
Israelites to the inhabitants of Rabbath, who kept it, as a great
curiosity:

nine cubits was the length thereof, and four cubits the breadth of it,
after the cubit of a man; a common cubit, so that it was four yards and
a half long, and two yards broad. Onkelos renders it, after the king's
cubit; and the king's cubit at Babylon, according to Herodotus (u), was
larger by three fingers than the common one; such as the cubit in [Eze
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005), which was a cubit and an hand's
breadth; and this makes the dimensions of the bedstead yet larger. And
by this judgment may be made of the tallness of Og's stature, though
this is not always a sure rule to go by; for Alexander, when in India,
ordered his soldiers to make beds of five cubits long, to be left behind
them, that they might be thought to be larger men than they were, as
Diodorus Siculus (w) and Curtius (x) relate; but there is little reason
to believe that Og's bedstead was made with such a view. Maimonides
observes (y), that a bed in common is a third part larger than a man; so
that Og, according to this way of reckoning, was six cubits high, and
his stature doubly larger than a common man's; but less than a third
part may well be allowed to a bed, which will make him taller still; the
height of Og is reckoned by Wolfius (z) to be about thirteen feet eleven
inches of Paris measure.

\(r\) Vid. Dickinson. Delph. Phaenieizant. c. 2. p. 12. (s) Iliad. z.
(t) De loc. Heb. fol. 94. C. (u) Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 175. (w)
Bibliothec. l. 17. p. 563. (x) Hist. l. 9. c. 3. (y) Moreh Nevochim,
par. 2. c. 47. p. 325. (z) Apud Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 3. p.
401.

[Deuteronomy 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 3:12</span></span>

And this land, which we possessed at that time,.... Or took possession
of, having conquered it; for it still remained in their possession:

from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon: on the borders of Moab, from
thence as far as Gilead was the land which was taken from Sihon king of
Heshbon, [Deu 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#036).

and half Mount Gilead, and the cities thereof: which were taken from Og
king of Bashan, [Deu 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#010).

gave I unto the Reubenites, and to the Gadites; at their request, on
certain conditions to be performed by them, afterwards repeated.

[Deuteronomy 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 3:13</span></span>

And the rest of Gilead,.... The other half of the mount, with the cities
belonging to it:

and all Bashan, being the kingdom of Og, gave I unto the half tribe of
Manasseh; see [Num 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#033).

all the region of Argob, with all Bashan; the region of Trachonitis, in
Bashan; see [Deu 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#004),

which was called the land of giants; or of Rephaim; this Jarchi says is
the country of the Rephaim given to Abraham, [Gen
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#020).

[Deuteronomy 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 3:14</span></span>

Jair the son of Manasseh took all the country of Argob,.... Or
Trachonitis; the small towns belonging to Gilead, as in [Num
32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041).

unto the coasts of Geshuri and Maachathi; these were little kingdoms in
Syria, on which the country of Argob bordered, and had kings over them
in the time of David, and came not into the possession of the
Israelites; see [Jos 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#013).

and called them after his own name, Bashanhavothjair, unto this day; see
[Num 32:41](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#041).

[Deuteronomy 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 3:15</span></span>

And I gave Gilead unto Machir. The son of Manasseh; not to him
personally, who cannot be thought to have been living at this time, but
to his posterity, to the Machirites; see [Num
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#040).

[Deuteronomy 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 3:16</span></span>

And unto the Reubenites, and unto the Gadites,.... The tribes of Reuben
and Gad:

I gave from Gilead even unto the river Arnon: see [Deu
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012).

half the valley and the border; or rather half the river, the river
Arnon; and so it is rendered "the middle of the river", in [Jos
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#002) and so here the middle of the
torrent by the Vulgate Latin and Septuagint versions, and by Onkelos:

even unto the river Jabbok, which is the border of the children of
Ammon; beyond which the land given to the tribes of Reuben and Gad
reached not; see [Deu 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#037).

[Deuteronomy 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 3:17</span></span>

The plain also, and Jordan,.... The plain by Jordan, the plains of Moab
on the side of it, together with the river:

and the coast thereof; the country adjoining to it:

from Chinnereth even unto the sea of the plain, even the salt sea; that
is, from Gennesaret, as the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, called the
land of Gennesaret, [Mat 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#034), from
thence to the sea of Sodom, the sea of the plain, where the cities of
the plain stood, Sodom, Gomorrah, &c. and the salt sea, so called from
the salt and nitrous waters of it, the lake Asphaltites:

under Ashdothpisgah eastward; mentioned among the cities given to the
tribe of Reuben, [Jos 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#020) rendered
"the springs of Pisgah", [Deu 4:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#049),
the word having the signification of effusions, pourings out; so the
Targums.

[Deuteronomy 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 3:18</span></span>

And I commanded you at that time,.... Not all Israel, but the tribes of
Reuben and God, and the half tribe of Manasseh; for what follows only
concerns them:

saying, the Lord your God hath given you this land to possess it; the
land before described, lately in the hands of Sihon and Og; this at
their request Moses gave them, by the direction of the Lord, on the
following condition:

you shall pass over armed before your brethren the children of Israel,
all that are meet for the war; that is, they should pass over Jordan
with the rest of the tribes, being armed to assist them in the conquest
of Canaan: for this phrase, which we render "before your brethren", does
not signify that they went in the forefront of them, only that they were
present with them, and joined them in their war against their enemies;
see [Num 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#029) and therefore should be
rendered "with your brethren" (a); even as many of them as were able to
bear arms, at least as many as Joshua would choose to take of them; for
he did not take them all by a great many; see [Jos
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#013).

\(a\) "cum fratribus vestris", Noldius, p. 531, No. 1492.

[Deuteronomy 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 3:19</span></span>

But your wives, and your little ones, and your cattle,.... These were to
be left behind: for

I know that ye have much cattle; which made the countries of Gilead and
Bashan, so famous for pasturage, agreeable to them; see [Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001) these, under the care of
servants, and also their wives and children:

shall abide in your cities which I have given you; and which they
rebuilt and repaired, [Num 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034).

[Deuteronomy 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 3:20</span></span>

Until the Lord have given rest unto your brethren, as well as unto
you,.... Rest from their enemies, and habitations to dwell quietly in;
so the land of Canaan is called a rest, [Deu
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#009) typical of the rest which remains
for the people of God:

and until they also possess the land which the Lord your God hath given
them beyond Jordan; for so Canaan was with respect to Moses and the
people with him, who were then in the plains of Moab; otherwise the
country in which he was with respect to Canaan is usually called beyond
Jordan; this the Lord had given in promise to Israel, and they were just
now ready to enter into and possess it, by virtue of his gift, and which
made it sure unto them:

and then shall ye return every man unto his possession, which I have
given you; as accordingly they did, [Jos
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001).

[Deuteronomy 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 3:21</span></span>

And I commanded Joshua at that time,.... After the conquest of the two
kings, and the assignment of their countries to the above tribes; and
after Moses had it made known to him that he should quickly die, and
Joshua should be his successor; then, by the direction of God, he gave
him the following charge:

saying, thine eyes have seen all that the Lord your God hath done unto
these two kings; Sihon and Og; how their kingdoms were taken from them,
and given to Israel, and they slain with the sword; this Joshua was an
eyewitness of, and was, no doubt, greatly concerned in the battles with
them, being the general in the Israelitish armies; at least this was
sometimes his post, and he cannot be thought to have been unemployed in
these wars:

so shall the Lord do unto all the kingdoms whither thou passest; all the
kingdoms in the land of Canaan, where there were many, thirty one at
least; these would be all conquered and put into the hands of the
Israelites, and their kings slain.

[Deuteronomy 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 3:22</span></span>

Ye shall not fear them,.... On account of the numbers, strength,
courage, and gigantic stature of the inhabitants, at least some of them;
nor on account of their walled towns, and fortified cities:

for the Lord your God he shall fight for you; as he did, particularly at
Jericho, the walls of which city fell at the sound of rams' horns; and
at Gibeon, when he cast down hailstones on their enemies, and more were
slain by them than with the sword; and in all their battles it was he
that gave them success and victory.

[Deuteronomy 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 3:23</span></span>

And I besought the Lord at that time,.... When he was told he should
die, and Joshua should succeed him; or when the two kings were slain,
and their kingdoms conquered; this being the beginning, pledge, and
earnest of what God had promised to do for the people of Israel; Moses
was very desirous of living to see the work completed, and therefore
sought the Lord by prayer and supplication:

saying; as follows.

[Deuteronomy 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 3:24</span></span>

O Lord God, thou hast begun to show thy servant thy greatness and thy
mighty hand,.... To give a specimen of the greatness of his power in
subduing the two kings and their kingdoms, and delivering them up into
the hands of the Israelites. Moses had seen instances of the mighty
power of God in Egypt, at the Red sea, and in the wilderness; but this
was the beginning of his power, in vanquishing the Canaanites, and
putting their land into the possession of the Israelites, as he had
promised; of which the Amorites were a part, and a principal nation of
them: and thus God, when he begins a work of grace upon the soul of man,
begins to show the exceeding greatness of his power, and which is
further exerted in carrying it on, and bringing it to perfection:

for what God is there in heaven or in earth that can do according to thy
works, and according to thy might? here Moses speaks according to the
notion of Heathens, who supposed there were other gods in heaven and in
earth besides the true God; and upon this supposition observes, let
there be as many as they will, or can be imagined, there is none of them
like the Lord God of Israel for power and might; or are able to do such
works as he has done, in nature, in the creation of all things out of
nothing, in providence, in supporting what he has made, and in governing
the world; and in those amazing instances of his power, in bringing down
judgments upon wicked men, kings, and kingdoms; and in the deliverance
of his own people from them, and putting them and their kingdoms into
the possession of them; which were the wondrous works of might Moses had
in view, and a sense of which was impressed on his mind at this time.

[Deuteronomy 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 3:25</span></span>

I pray thee, let me go over and see the good land that is beyond
Jordan,.... The land of Canaan, the land flowing with milk and honey; a
land which he describes as a most excellent one, [Deu
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007). To see this land, he was very
desirous of going over the river Jordan, beyond which it lay with
respect to the place where he now was:

that goodly mountain, and Lebanon; or, "that goodly mountain, even
Lebanon"; which lay to the north of the land of Canaan, and was famous
for cedar and odoriferous trees. But if two distinct mountains are
meant, the goodly mountain may design Mount Moriah, on which the temple
was afterwards built, and of which Moses might have a foresight; and
some by Lebanon think that is meant, which was built of the cedars of
Lebanon, and therefore goes by that name, [Zac
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#001) and a foreview of this made the
mountain so precious to Moses, and desirable to be seen by him. So the
Targum of Jonathan;"that goodly mountain in which is built the city of
Jerusalem, and Mount Lebanon, in which the Shechinah shall dwell''to
which agrees the note of Aben Ezra, who interprets the goodly mountain
of Jerusalem, and Lebanon of the house of the sanctuary. In the
Septuagint it is called Antilibanus. Mount Libanus had its name not from
frankincense growing upon it, as some have thought; for it does not
appear that any did grow upon it, for that came from Seba in Arabia
Felix; but from the whiteness of it, through the continual snows that
were on it, just as the Alps have their name for the same reason; and so
Jerom says (b) of Lebanon, that the snow never leaves from the tops of
it, or is ever so overcome by the heat of the sun as wholly to melt; to
the same purpose also Tacitus (c) says, and Mr. Maundrell (d), who was
there in May, speaks of deep snow on it, and represents the cedars as
standing in snow.

\(b\) In Hieremiam, c. 18. 14. (c) Hist. l. 5. c. 6. (d) Journey from
Aleppo, p. 139, 140.

[Deuteronomy 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 3:26</span></span>

But the Lord was wroth with me for your sakes,.... Not at this time, and
for this prayer of his, but on account of he and Aaron not sanctifying
him at the waters of Meribah; or of some expressions of unbelief, and
unadvised words, which dropped from his lips through their provocation
of him; see [Num 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012).

and would not hear me; now, and grant the above request, having before
declared that he and Aaron should not bring the people of Israel into
the land he had given them; and Moses with all his entreaties could not
prevail upon him to repeal the sentence:

and the Lord said unto me, let it suffice; that he had seen the conquest
of the two kings, and the delivery of their kingdoms into the hands of
Israel; and that he had brought the people through the wilderness to the
borders of the land of Canaan, and that he should have a distant sight
of the land, as after directed:

speak no more unto me of this matter; intimating it would be in vain,
and to no purpose, to solicit such a favour, since it would never be
granted; it was a determined point, and he would never recede from it.

[Deuteronomy 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 3:27</span></span>

Get thee up into the top of Pisgah,.... Which was the highest eminence
of Mount Nebo, and so a very proper place to take a prospect from; see
[Deu 32:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#049).

and lift up thine eyes westward, and northward, and southward, and
eastward; to all the four points of the heaven, and to all the four
quarters and borders of the land of Canaan:

and behold it with thine eyes; even the land of Canaan, and particularly
Lebanon, though it lay to the north of it, that mountain he had such a
desire to see. Moses, though old, his natural sight was very strong, and
not in the least dim; and it is not improbable that it might be more
than ordinarily increased and assisted at this time:

for thou shall not go over this Jordan; into the land of Canaan; this
affair, of not being suffered to enter there, Moses frequently takes
notice of, no less than four or five times, it being what lay near his
heart.

[Deuteronomy 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 3:28</span></span>

But charge Joshua, and encourage him, and strengthen him,.... Charge him
to take the care of the children of Israel, to introduce them into the
good land, and put them into the possession of it; encourage him against
all fear of his and their enemies, and strengthen him with promises of
the presence of God, and of his gracious help and assistance:

for he shall go over before this people; over the river Jordan, at the
head of them, as their leader and commander; a type of Christ, the
leader and commander of his people, who as their King goes forth at the
head of them, and will introduce them all into his Father's kingdom and
glory:

and he shall cause them to inherit the land which thou shalt see; and no
more; not enter into, but Joshua should; and having conquered it, should
divide it by lot for an inheritance to them, and their children after
them; a type of Christ, in whom and by whom the saints obtain an
inheritance by lot, [Eph 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#011).

[Deuteronomy 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 3:29</span></span>

So we abode in the valley over against Bethpeor. In the plains of Moab,
over against a temple built for Baalpeor upon a mountain, so called from
that idol, or that idol from the mountain; this is the valley where
Moses was buried, [Deu 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 4](deu004)

</div>
