<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Deuteronomy Index](deu.md)  
  [Previous](deu028)  [Next](deu030.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Deuteronomy Chapter 29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001.md)

[Deuteronomy](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">deu 29:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO DEUTERONOMY 29

This chapter begins with an intimation of another covenant the Lord was
about to make with the people of Israel, [Deu
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001.md); and, to prepare their minds to
an attention to it, various things which the Lord had done for them are
recited, [Deu 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#002.md); the persons are
particularly mentioned with whom the covenant would now be made, the
substance of which is, that they should be his people, and he their God,
[Deu 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#010.md); and since they had seen
the idols in Egypt and other countries, with which they might have been
ensnared, they are cautioned against idolatry and idolaters, as being
most provoking to the Lord, [Deu
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#016.md); which would bring destruction
not only on particular persons, but upon their whole land, to the
amazement of posterity; who, inquiring the reason of it, will be told,
it was because they forsook the covenant of God, and particularly were
guilty of idolatry, which, whether privately or openly committed, would
be always punished, [Deu 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022.md).

[Deuteronomy 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">deu 29:1</span></span>

These are the words of the covenant,.... Not what go before, but follow
after, in the next chapters, to the end of the book; in which are
various promises of grace, and promises of good things, both with
respect to Jews and Gentiles, intermixed with other things:

which the Lord commanded Moses to make with the children of Israel in
the land of Moab; or to declare unto them, and acquaint them with, they
being now in the plains of Moab, ready to enter into the land of,
Canaan:

besides the covenant which he made with them at Horeb: or Sinai; which
Jarchi interprets, besides the curses in Leviticus, delivered on Sinai;
he seems to have respect to [Lev
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#014.md). This covenant was different
from that at Sinai, spoken of [Exo
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#008.md); being made not only at a
different time, at near forty years' distance, and at a different place,
nor Sinai; but when Israel were come nearer Mount Sion, and were
actually possessed of part of their inheritance, the land of promise,
that part of the land of Moab which the two kings of the Amorites had
seized and dwelt in, whom Israel had dispossessed; and with different
persons, that generation being dead, excepting a very few, which were at
Sinai: but it was different as to the substance and matter of it, it not
only including that, and being a renewal of it, as is generally thought,
but containing such declarations of grace which had not been made
before, not only respecting the repenting and returning Israelites, but
the Gentiles also; for this covenant was made with the stranger, as well
as with Israel, [Deu 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#011.md); and
relates to the times of the Messiah, the call of the Gentiles, the
conversion of the Jews, and their return to their own land in the latter
day.

[Deuteronomy 29:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">deu 29:2</span></span>

Moses called unto all Israel,.... He had been speaking before to the
heads of them, and delivered at different times what is before recorded;
but now he summoned the whole body of the people together, a solemn
covenant being to be made between God and them; or such things being to
be made known unto them as were of universal concernment:

and said unto them; what is in this chapter; which is only a preparation
or introduction to what he had to declare unto them in the following:

ye have seen all that the Lord did before your eyes in the land of
Egypt; the Targum of Jonathan is,"what the Word of the Lord did;''for
all the wonderful things there done in Egypt were done by the essential
Word of God, Christ, the Son of God; who appeared to Moses in the bush,
and sent him to Egypt, and by him and Aaron wrought the miracles there;
which many now present had seen, and were then old enough to take notice
of, and could remember, though their fathers then in being were now
dead:

unto Pharaoh and unto all his servants, and unto all his land; the
plagues he inflicted on the person of Pharaoh, and on all his courtiers,
and on all the people in Egypt, for they reached the whole land.

[Deuteronomy 29:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">deu 29:3</span></span>

The great temptations which thine eyes have seen,.... Or trials, the ten
plagues which tried the Egyptians, whether they would let Israel go; and
tried the Israelites, whether they would believe in the Lord, and trust
in his almighty power to deliver them:

the signs and those great miracles: as the said plagues were such as
were beyond the power of nature to produce, and which only Omnipotence
could really effect.

[Deuteronomy 29:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">deu 29:4</span></span>

Yet the Lord hath not given you an heart to perceive,.... They had some
of them seen the above miracles with their bodily eyes, but had not
discerned with the eyes of their understanding the power of God
displayed in them, the goodness of God to them on whose behalf they were
wrought, in order to obtain their deliverance, and the vengeance of God
on the Egyptians for detaining them; so Jarchi interprets it of an heart
to know the mercies of the Lord, and to cleave unto him:

and eyes to see, and ears to hear, unto this day; to see and observe the
gracious dealings of God with them, and to hearken to his voice and obey
it: so the understanding heart, the seeing eye, and hearing ear, in
things spiritual, are from the Lord, are special gifts of his grace,
which he bestows on some, and not on others; see [Pro
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro020.htm#012.md). The Targum of Jonathan is,"the
Word of the Lord did not give you an heart, &c.''

[Deuteronomy 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">deu 29:5</span></span>

And I have led you forty years in the wilderness,.... From the time of
their coming out of Egypt unto that day, which though not quite
complete, is given as a round number. Eupolemus (d), an Heathen writer,
confirms this date of the ministry of Moses among the Israelites; he
says, Moses performed the office of a prophet forty years:

your clothes are not waxen old upon you: were not worn out; all those
forty years they had been in the wilderness, they had never wanted
clothes fitting for them, according to their age and stature, and which
decayed not; See Gill on [Deu 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#004.md),

and thy shoe is not waxen old upon thy foot; which were necessary to
wear in travelling, and especially in a rugged wilderness; and yet,
thought they had been always in use during so long a time, were not worn
out, which was really miraculous; See Gill on [Deu
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#004.md).

\(d\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 30. p. 447.

[Deuteronomy 29:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">deu 29:6</span></span>

Ye have not eaten bread,.... Bread made of corn, common bread, of their
own preparing, made by the labour of their own hands; but manna, the
food of angelS, the bread of heaven:

neither have you drank wine, nor strong drink; only water out of the
rock, at least chiefly, and for constancy; though it may be, when they
were on the borders of other countries, as of the Edomites, they might
obtain some wine for their money:

that ye might know that I am the Lord your God; who was both able and
willing to provide food, drink, and raiment for them, and supply them
with all good things, and support them without the use of the common
necessaries of life; which were abundant proofs of his power and
goodness.

[Deuteronomy 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">deu 29:7</span></span>

And when ye came unto this place,.... The borders of Moab, the
wilderness before it, to which joined the plains they were now in; see
[Num 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#013.md),

Sihon king of Heshbon, and Og king of Bashan, came out against us unto
battle; not together, but one after the other, and that very quickly; as
soon almost as they had fought with the one, and conquered him, the
other came out against them:

and we smote them; killed them and their armies, and the inhabitants of
their countries; the history of which see in [Num
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#023.md).

[Deuteronomy 29:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">deu 29:8</span></span>

And we took their land,.... Which belonged to the two kings, the lands
of Jazer, Gilead, and Bashan, fine countries for pasturage:

and gave it for an inheritances unto the Reubenites, and to the Gadites,
and to the half tribe of Manasseh; who requested it, and to whom it was
granted on certain conditions, and they were now in possession of it;
see [Num 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001.md).

[Deuteronomy 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">deu 29:9</span></span>

Keep therefore the words of this covenant, and do them,.... To do which
they were laid under great obligations, through the goodness of God to
them, in giving them victory over the two kings, and delivering their
countries into their hands, as well as by all the favours bestowed on
them in the wilderness, where they were sufficiently supplied with food,
drink, and raiment; all which is made use of as a motive and argument to
engage them to observe and keep the covenant the Lord made with them:

that ye may prosper in all that ye do: in all their occupations and
businesses of life, in their manufactures and commerce, in the culture
of their fields and vineyards, and in whatsoever they were employed in a
lawful way; the word used has sometimes, the signification of acting
wisely and prudently, as in [Isa
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#013.md); hence the Septuagint version
is, "that ye may understand all that ye do"; and so the Jerusalem
Targum.

[Deuteronomy 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">deu 29:10</span></span>

Ye stand this day all of you before the Lord your God,.... Being
gathered together at the door of the tabernacle, at the summons of
Moses. Aben Ezra interprets it round about the ark, which was the symbol
of the divine Presence:

your captains of your tribes; the heads and rulers of them:

your elders and your officers, with all the men of Israel; not the
seventy elders only, but their elders in their several tribes, cities,
and families, men of gravity and prudence, as well as of age, and who
were in some place of power and authority or another: and the "officers"
may design such who attended the judges, and executed their orders; see
[Deu 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018.md); and with them were the
common people, the males, who were grown persons. Aben Ezra thinks they
stood in the order in which they here are mentioned, which is not
improbable; next to Moses the princes, then the elders, and after them
the officers, and next every man of Israel, the males; and then the
little ones with the males; after them the women, and last of all the
proselytes.

[Deuteronomy 29:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">deu 29:11</span></span>

Your little ones, your wives,.... Who are scarce ever mentioned in any
special law or solemn transaction:

and thy stranger that is in thy camp; not only the proselyte of
righteousness, who embraced the Jewish religion entirely, but the
proselyte of the gate, who was admitted to dwell among them, having
renounced idolatry. These standing with the Israelites, when this
covenant was made, has respect to the Gentiles, who as well as the Jews
have an interest in the covenant of grace made with Christ; in whom
there is, neither Jew nor Gentile, any difference between them:

from the hewer of thy wood to the drawer of thy water; that hewed wood
for firing and other uses, and drew water for the camp; who were
generally mean persons, and perhaps some that came out of Egypt with
them are here intended; however, mean and abject persons are meant, and
signifies that none should be excluded from a concern in this solemn
affair on account of their meanness.

[Deuteronomy 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">deu 29:12</span></span>

That thou shouldest enter into covenant with the Lord thy God,.... That
is, they were all to appear and stand in this order before the Lord,
that they might solemnly avouch him to be their God, and hear him
declaring them to be his people, and the many promises and prophecies of
good things he should deliver to them, as well as threatenings of wrath
and vengeance in case of disobedience to him: or "that thou shouldest
pass" (e): which some think is an allusion to the manner of making
covenants, by slaying a creature, and cutting it in pieces, and passing
between them, as in [Jer 34:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer034.htm#018.md); so
Jarchi and Aben Ezra:

and into his oath; annexed to his covenant and promise, to show the
immutability and certain fulfilment of it on his part; and may signify
not only the oath he swore that they should be his people, but the oath
he gave them, and they took, that he should be their God:

which the Lord thy God maketh with thee this day; which refers both to
the covenant and the oath, or the covenant confirmed by an oath, even
the covenant now made in the plains of Moab, distinct from that at Horeb
or Sinai.

\(e\) "ut transeas", V. L. Tigurine version, Munster, Vatablus,
Pagniuns, Cocceius; "ad transeundum", Montanus.

[Deuteronomy 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">deu 29:13</span></span>

That be may establish thee this day for a people unto himself, and that
he may be unto thee a God,.... Which contains the sum and substance of
the covenant; see [Jer 32:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#038.md),

as he hath said unto thee, and as he had sworn unto thy fathers, to
Abraham, to Isaac, and to Jacob; [Deu
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017.md).

[Deuteronomy 29:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">deu 29:14</span></span>

Neither with you only do I make this covenant and this oath. That is,
Moses; for he was ordered to make this covenant with them in the name of
the Lord; what promises of good things, or declarations of his mind and
will, God would make, Moses was to deliver to them; and what was
required of them he would inform them of. Aben Ezra interprets it, not
only you, but those that will come after you, your sons and your sons'
sons.

[Deuteronomy 29:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">deu 29:15</span></span>

But with him that standeth here with us this day before the Lord our
God,.... Who are before specified according to their dignity, age, sex,
and station of life; or rather, "but as with him that standeth", &c.

and so with him that is not here with us this day; detained at home by
illness and indisposition of body, or by one providence or another; so
that they could not come out of their tents, and make their appearance
before the tabernacle; though Jarchi interprets this of the people of
future generations.

[Deuteronomy 29:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">deu 29:16</span></span>

For ye know how we have dwelt in the land of Egypt,.... How long they
and their fathers had dwelt there, the number of years they had been in
the land, as the Targum of Jonathan, which was upwards of two hundred
years; and being a country the inhabitants of which were much given to
idolatry, they had seen many of their idols, and much of their
idolatrous worship; and their hearts had been apt to be ensnared by it,
and the minds of some tinctured with it, and the remembrance thereof
might make ill impressions on them; to remove or prevent which this
covenant was made:

and how we came through the nations which ye passed by; as the Edomites,
Ammonites, Moabites, and Midianites, as Aben Ezra observes, through
whose borders they came, as they passed by their countries in their
journeys in the wilderness.

[Deuteronomy 29:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">deu 29:17</span></span>

And ye have seen their abominations and their idols,.... Or, "their
abominations, even their idols"; for the same are meant by both: it is
common in Scripture to call the idols of the Gentiles abominations,
without any other explanation of them; see [Kg1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005.md); because they are abominable to
God, and ought to be so to men: the word for idols has the signification
of dung, and may be rendered dunghill gods, either referring to such
that were bred and lived in dung, as the beetle, worshipped by the
Egyptians, as Bishop Patrick observes; or which were as much to be
loathed and abhorred as the dung of any creature:

wood and stone, silver and gold; these are the materials of which the
idols they had seen in the several countries they had been in, or passed
through, were made of; some of wood, others of stone cut out of these,
and carved; others more rich and costly were made of massive gold and
silver, and were molten ones; or the images of wood were glided with
gold and silver:

which were among them; now these being seen by them in as they passed
along, they might run in their minds, or be called to remembrance by
them, and so they be in danger of being drawn aside to make the like,
and worship them.

[Deuteronomy 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">deu 29:18</span></span>

Lest there should be among you man or woman, or family, or tribe,....
These words stand in connection with [Deu
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#015.md), with [Deu
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#016.md) being in a parenthesis, as may
be observed, and show the design of this solemn appearance of the
people, and their entering afresh into covenant; which was to prevent
their falling into idolatry, and preserve them from it, whether a single
person of either sex, or a whole family, or even a tribe, which might be
in danger of being infected with it, and so all the people:

whose heart turneth away this day from the Lord our God, to go and serve
the gods of those nations; whose heart is enticed and drawn aside at the
remembrance of the idols he has seen worshipped by others; and is
looking off from the Lord God, his faith in him being weakened, his fear
of him removed, and his affections for him lessened; and is looking
towards the idols of the nations, with a hankering mind to serve and
worship them:

lest there should be among you a root that beareth gall and wormwood:
the word "rosh", which we render "gall", signifies, according to Jarchi,
a bitter herb, which better suits with a root than gall, and is
elsewhere by us rendered "hemlock", [Hos
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004.md); and is by him very rightly
interpreted of a wicked man among them; for not a principle of
immorality, or heresy, rooted in the mind, productive of bitter fruits,
or evil actions, is meant; but a bad man, particularly an idolater, who
is rooted in idolatry, and is guilty of and commits abominable actions;
the issue of which will be bitterness and death, if not recovered; which
agrees with what the apostle says, [Heb
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#015.md); who manifestly alludes to this
passage; see the Apocrypha:"In those days went there out of Israel
wicked men, who persuaded many, saying, Let us go and make a covenant
with the heathen that are round about us: for since we departed from
them we have had much sorrow.'' (1 Maccabees 1:11)and is confirmed by
what follows.

[Deuteronomy 29:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">deu 29:19</span></span>

And it cometh to pass, when he heareth the words of this curse,.... That
is, the man before compared to a root bearing bitter herbs, when he
should hear the curses pronounced by the law against such persons as
himself:

that he bless himself in his heart; inwardly pronounce himself blessed,
thinking himself secure from the curse of the law, and flattering
himself it will never reach him nor come upon him:

saying, I shall have peace; all happiness and prosperity, in soul, body,
and estate; inward peace of mind now, and eternal peace hereafter:

though I walk in the imagination of my heart; in worshipping idols which
he vainly and wickedly imagined to be gods; to the worship of which his
wicked heart prompted him, and he was resolutely and stubbornly bent
upon, and in which he continued:

to add drunkenness to thirst; as a thirsty man to quench his thirst
drinks, and adds to that, or drinks yet more and more until he is
drunken; so a man inclined to idolatry, that has a secret desire after
it, thirsts after such stolen or forbidden waters, and drinks of them,
adds thereunto, drinks again and again until he is drunk with the wine
of fornication, or idolatry, as it is called [Rev
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002.md); so the Targums of Onkelos and
Jonathan understand the words of adding sin to sin, particularly of
adding sins of ignorance to pride, or to presumptuous ones. Wicked men,
deceivers and deceived, always grow worse and worse, increasing to more
ungodliness, and yet promise themselves peace and impunity, [Th1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003.md).

[Deuteronomy 29:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">deu 29:20</span></span>

Then the Lord will not spare him,.... Have no mercy upon him, nor
forgive him, being an hardhearted, impenitent, stubborn, and obstinate
sinner, as well as guilty of the grossest and most provoking sin, as
idolatry is:

but then the anger of the Lord, and his jealousy, shall smoke against
that man; or, "the nose of the Lord shall smoke" (f); alluding to an
angry, wrathful, furious man, whose brain being heated, and his passions
inflamed, his breath steams through his nostrils like smoke; it denotes
the vehement anger, the greatness of God's wrath and indignation against
such a person, and his burning zeal or jealousy for his own honour and
glory injured by the idolater:

and all the curses that are written in this book shall lie upon him: for
as he that offends in one point is guilty of all, and especially in such
a principal point as this, which concerns the being and worship of God;
so he makes himself liable to all the curses of the law, which shall not
only come upon him, but abide on him; and there is no person clear of
them but by redemption through Christ, who, by being made a curse for
his people, has redeemed them from the curse of the law:

and the Lord shall blot out his name from under heaven; he shall have no
name in Israel, not in the church, and among the people of God, from
whom he is to be excommunicated; shall have no name and place in the
earth, being cut off from the land of the living; and shall have no name
or fame after his death, his memory shall rot and perish; and he shall
appear to have no name in the book of life; see [Psa
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028.md).

\(f\) "fumabit nasus Domini", Montanus.

[Deuteronomy 29:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">deu 29:21</span></span>

And the Lord shall separate him unto evil out of all the tribes of
Israel,.... Unto the evil of punishment, devote and consign him to it,
and make him a visible and distinguished mark of his displeasure and
vengeance. So some men are righteously separated from others, and
preordained unto condemnation, being wicked and ungodly men; for such
God has made or appointed for the day of evil; see [Pro
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#004.md),

according to all the curses of the covenant that are written in this
book of the law; the evil of punishment he shall be separated unto shall
be according to them, or include them all; the sense is, that the wrath
of God, and the whole curse of the law due to him for his sin, shall
come upon him; see [Deu 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016.md), &c.

[Deuteronomy 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">deu 29:22</span></span>

So that the generation to come of your children that shall rise up after
you,.... Not the next generation, but in future times, in ages to come,
at a great distance, even after the destruction of Judea by the Romans;
to which [Deu 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023.md) seems to refer:

and the stranger that shall come from a far land; on trade and business,
or for the sake of travelling, his road either lying through it, or his
curiosity leading him to see it:

shall say, when they see the plagues of the land; cities and towns in
ruins, fields lie uncultivated, and the whole land depopulated, and all
become a barren wilderness, which was once a fruitful country, a land
flowing with milk and honey:

and the sicknesses which the Lord hath laid upon it; upon the
inhabitants of it, as the pestilence and other diseases, which shall
have swept the land of them; see [Deu
28:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#022.md). This case supposes a general
departure from the worship of God to the service of idols; otherwise
single individuals are punished in their own persons, as in the [Deu
29:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#021.md).

[Deuteronomy 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">deu 29:23</span></span>

And that the whole land thereof is brimstone and salt,

and burning,.... That is, is become exceeding barren, as all such land
is where there are sulphureous mines, or salt pits, or burning
mountains; not that this would be, or has been the case of the land of
Judea in a strict literal sense; only these are expressions made use of
to show the barrenness of it, which is its case at this day, not through
the nature of its soil being changed, but through the slothfulness of
the inhabitants of it; to which time it better agrees than to the time
of its falling into the hands of the Chaldeans, who left men in it for
husbandmen and vinedressers. Aben Ezra understands this as a prayer to
God, that the land might be burnt up; that is, for the sins of the
people:

that it is not sown, nor beareth, nor any grass groweth therein; not
being sown, it would bear and produce no corn for men; and not being
manured, no grass would spring up for the cattle: and so would be

like the overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah, of Admah and Zeboim; which
indeed are, strictly speaking, become a sulphurous and bituminous lake,
called the salt sea, and the lake Asphaltites, and where no green grass
or corn, or any kind of fruit grow: which the Lord overthrew in his
anger and in his wrath the Targum of Jonathan is,"which the Word of the
Lord overthrew;''and it was Jehovah, the Word, or Son of God, who
rained, from Jehovah the Father, out of heaven, fire and brimstone on
Sodom and Gomorrah, and the rest of the cities; See Gill on [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024.md), in which chapter is the history
of this fatal overthrow.

[Deuteronomy 29:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">deu 29:24</span></span>

Even all nations shall say,.... For the destruction of this land, and
the people of it, would be, as it has been, so very great and awful, and
so very remarkable and surprising, that the fame of it would be heard
among all the nations of the world, as it has been; who, upon hearing
the sad report of it, would ask the following questions:

wherefore hath the Lord done thus unto this land? so distinguished from
all others for the fruitfulness and pleasantness of it; the people, the
inhabitants of which, he chose, above all others, to be a special and
peculiar people; and where he had a temple built for him, and where he
had his residence, and worship used to be given unto him:

what meaneth the heat of this great anger? what is the reason of his
stirring up his fierce wrath, and causing it to burn in so furious a
manner? surely it must be something very horrible and provoking indeed!

[Deuteronomy 29:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">deu 29:25</span></span>

Then men shall say,.... The answer that will be returned to the above
questions will be this

because they have forsaken the covenant of the Lord God of their
fathers: breakers of covenants with men are always reckoned among the
worst of men, see [Rom 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#031.md); and
especially breakers of covenant with God, and with such a God as the God
of Israel was, so good, so kind, and gracious; and of such a covenant he
made with them, in which so many good things were promised unto them, on
condition of their obedience; as the continuance in, such a land they
dwelt in, with an abundance of privileges, civil and religious: and this
covenant God of theirs was the God of their fathers also; and it was
always reckoned an heinous sin among the Heathens to forsake the gods of
their ancestors; see [Jer 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011.md),

which he made with them when he brought them out of the land of Egypt;
which is another aggravation of their breach of the covenant the Lord
made with them; it being made with them by that God, and at that time,
when he in so wonderful a manner, with such mighty power, and a
outstretched arm, and in great kindness and tenderness to them, brought
then, out of hard bondage and most wretched slavery in Egypt.

[Deuteronomy 29:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">deu 29:26</span></span>

For they went and served other gods, and worshipped them,.... As did all
Israel, in the times of Solomon, and the ten tribes under Jeroboam, and
other succeeding kings of Israel; and the two tribes in the times of
Ahaz, and especially of Manasseh, when they worshipped all the host of
heaven; see [Kg1 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033.md),

gods whom they knew not; to whom they, as well as their fathers before
them, were strangers and approved not of them; and of whose power and
goodness they had no experience, and of which there never were any
instances; yet such was their stupidity, as to leave their God, the only
true God, of whom they had many proofs in both respects, and worship
these idols, which had never been profitable and serviceable to them on
any account:

and whom he hath not given unto them; which version seems not to afford
a good sense; for to what people soever has God, the true God, given
other gods to worship, which this seems to imply, though he had not
given or allowed any to them? Onkelos paraphrases it, "did not do them
good"; which Jarchi explains, the gods they chose them did not impart to
them any inheritance, or any portion; for the word used signifies to
divide, or part a portion or inheritance; now the Lord God did divide to
Israel the land of Canaan for an inheritance, but these idols had never
divided anything to them, and had been in no instance profitable or
advantageous to them; and therefore it was madness and folly in them to
worship them, as well as great ingratitude to the Lord their God, who
had done such great and good things for them; for so the words may be
rendered, "and did not impart" or "divide to them" (g) anything; that
is, not anyone of them did; for the verb is singular.

\(g\) "qui nihil impertitus est eis", Pagninus; "et quorum nullus
impertitus fuerat eis quidquem", Piscator; "neque partitus est ipsis",
Cocceius.

[Deuteronomy 29:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">deu 29:27</span></span>

And the anger of the Lord was kindled against this land,.... For this
their idolatry and base ingratitude:

to bring upon it all the curses that are written in this book; in this
book of Deuteronomy, and particularly [Deu
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#016.md); see [Dan
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#011.md).

[Deuteronomy 29:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">deu 29:28</span></span>

And the Lord rooted them out of the land,.... Which was true both at the
Babylonish captivity by Nebuchadnezzar, and at their present one by the
Romans; and especially the latter, by whom they have been so rooted out,
as that they have not been able to return to it these 1700 years, nor to
have any inheritance or possession in it; whereas, at the end of seventy
years, they returned from the Babylonish captivity to their land again:
and which was done

in anger, and in wrath, and in great indignation; which were most
abundantly shown in the utter destruction of their land, city, and
temple, by the Romans:

and cast them another land, as it is this day; the ten tribes were cast
into Assyria, and from thence into the cities of the Medes, the two
tribes into the land of Chaldea, and now into all lands; and none their
own, but another, a strange and foreign country. The word "cast" denotes
the vehemence of the divine displeasure at them, expressed by the
removal of them out of their own land into another. In the Hebrew word
for "cast", a middle letter in it is greater than usual; the reason of
which perhaps is, that this dealing of God with them might be observed
and taken notice of as very remarkable; and Ainsworth thinks it is to
observe the greatness of the punishment; and the Jews understand this of
the casting away of the ten tribes: and they gather from hence that the
ten tribes shall not return, though about it they are divided; for so
they say in the Misnah (h),"the ten tribes shall not return, as it is
said, and cast them into another land, as this day; as the day goes and
does not return, so they go and return not; these are the words of R.
Akiba. R. Eliezer says, as the day brings on darkness and light, so the
ten tribes who are now dark shall be enlightened.''

\(h\) Sanhedrin, c. 11. sect. 3.

[Deuteronomy 29:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">deu 29:29</span></span>

The secret things belong unto the Lord our God,.... Respecting the
people of Israel, and the providential dealings of God with them, and
especially the final rejection of them; with respect to which, the
apostle's exclamation agrees with this, [Rom
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#033.md); and though the Lord had
revealed many things which should befall them, there were others still
secret with him, and the reasons of others; and particularly the times
and seasons of their accomplishment, which he retains in his own power,
[Act 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#006.md). There are many secret things
in nature, which cannot be found out and accounted for by men, which the
Lord only knows; and there are many things in Providence, which are
unsearchable, and past finding out by finite minds, especially the true
causes and reasons of them; and there are many things relating to God
himself, which remain secret with him; notwithstanding the revelation he
has made of himself; for not only some of his perfections, as eternity,
immensity, &c. are beyond our comprehension; but the mode of subsistence
of the three divine Persons in the Godhead, the paternity of the one,
the generation of the other, and the procession of the Spirit from them
both; the union of the two natures, divine and human, in the person of
Christ; the thoughts, purposes, and decrees of God within himself, until
brought into execution; and so there are many things relating to his
creatures, as the particular persons predestinated unto eternal life,
what becomes of such who die in infancy, what will befall us in life,
when we shall die, where and in what manner, and also the day and hour
of the last judgment. The Jews generally interpret this and what follows
of the sins of men, and punishment for them, and, particularly,
idolatry; take Aben Ezra's sense instead of many,"he that commits
idolatry secretly, his punishment is by the hand of heaven (from God
immediately); he that commits it openly, it lies upon us and upon our
children to do as is written in the law:"

but those things which are revealed belong to us and to our children for
ever; the things of nature and Providence, which are plain and manifest,
are for our use and instruction; and especially the word and ordinances
of God, which are the revelation of his will, the doctrines and promises
contained in the Scriptures, each of the duties of religion, and the
commandments of God, such as are of eternal obligation, which may be
chiefly designed, because it follows:

that we may do all the words of this law: for the end of this revelation
is practice; hearing and reading the word will be of no avail, unless
what is heard and read is practised. Some render the words (i),"the
secret things of the Lord our God are revealed to us and to our
children;''but neither the construction of the words in the original,
nor the Hebrew accents, will admit of such a version; otherwise it would
furnish out a very great truth: for the secrets of God's love, of his
council and covenant, are revealed unto his people, as well as many of
his providences, and the mysteries of his grace; see [Psa
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#014.md). There are some extraordinary
pricks in the Hebrew text on the words "to us and to our children":
which are designed to point out the remarkable and wonderful
condescension and goodness of God, in making a revelation of his mind
and will, both with respect to doctrine and duty, to the sons of men.

\(i\) So some in Fagius and Vatablus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Deuteronomy Chapter 30](deu030.md)

</div>
