<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc005)  [Next](ecc007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ECCLESIASTES 6

The wise man goes on to expose the vanity of riches, as possessed by a
covetous man, who makes no use of them; an evil, and a common one under
the sun, [Ecc 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#001); Who is described by
the good things he has; which he has not a power to enjoy, but a
stranger enjoys them, [Ecc 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#002); by his
numerous offspring and long life; yet neither is he satisfied with good
in life, nor has he a burial at death; wherefore an abortive is
preferred unto him, [Ecc 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003); For
though many things may be said of that which are disagreeable, yet worse
of him, and that has more rest than he; and besides, they both go to one
place, the grave, [Ecc 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#004); and the
vanity of an anxious labour for riches is further argued from the use of
them, at most and best, which is only for the body, and the sustenance
of it, but cannot satisfy the mind or soul, [Ecc
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#007); and this use a fool can make of,
them, as well as a wise man; and a poor man, that is knowing, diligent,
and industrious to live, as well as the rich, [Ecc
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#008). Wherefore it is best to enjoy and
be content with present mercies, than to let loose the wandering desires
after what may never be had, [Ecc 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#009);
and especially it should be considered, that let a man be in what
circumstances he will, he is but a man; and these circumstances are
determined and appointed by God, which he cannot alter; and therefore it
is both vain and sinful to contend with him, [Ecc
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#010). And, after all, a man is never
the better for his carking cares and wandering desires, since there are
so many things that increase vanity, [Ecc
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#011); and a man is so ignorant of what
is good for him for the present, and of what shall be after him, [Ecc
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#012).

[Ecclesiastes 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 6:1</span></span>

There is an evil which I have seen under the sun,.... The Vulgate Latin
version reads it, another evil; but wrongly, for the same is considered
as before, the evil of covetousness; which is one of the evil things
that come out of the heart of man; is abominable to the Lord, contrary
to his nature and will, and a breach of his law, which forbids it, and
is the root of all evil; this is an evil under the sun, for there is
nothing of this kind above it; and it fell under the observation of
Solomon in various instances;

and it is common among men; or, "great over men" (u); or "over the man",
the covetous man: it spreads itself over them; few were free from it,
even so long ago, in those early times, and in such times in which
silver was made no account of, and was like stones in Jerusalem, as
common as they; and yet the sin of covetousness, of hoarding up money
and making no use of it, for a man's own good, and the good of others,
was very rife among men, [Kg1 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#027).

\(u\) "et multum ipsum super hominem", Montanus; "et magaum est illud
super hominem istum", Rambachius.

[Ecclesiastes 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 6:2</span></span>

A man to whom God hath given riches, wealth, and honour,.... By "riches"
may be meant gold and silver, things which a covetous man is never
satisfied with; and by "wealth", cattle, with which farms and fields are
stocked: the wealth of men, especially in former times, and in the
eastern countries, lay very much in these, as did the wealth of Abraham
and Job, [Gen 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#002); and all these, as
they are reckoned glorious and honourable in themselves; so they create
honour and glory among men, and raise to high and honourable places; and
these, as they go, they are usually put together, and are called by the
name of honour and glory itself; see [Pro
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#016). And they are all the gifts of
God, which he either as blessings bestows upon men, or suffers men to
attain unto, though a curse may go along with them; which is the case
here, for no man whatever is possessed of them but by the will of God or
his divine permission; see [Ch1 29:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#012);
and which a man may, and sometimes has, such a plentiful portion of;

so that he wanteth nothing for his soul of all that he desireth: he has
not only for the supply of his wants, what is necessary for his daily
use and service, but even what is for delight and pleasure; yea, as much
as he could reasonably wish for; nay, more than heart could wish, [Psa
73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007);

yet God giveth him not power to eat thereof; the Targum adds, "because
of his sin"; either he takes it away from him, he making no use of it;
or his appetite is taken away, that he has no desire to it; or rather he
has no heart to enjoy what he has, and scarce any part of it; not to eat
and drink, and wear suitably to his circumstances, but grudges whatever
he lays out on his back or belly, or in housekeeping in his family; for
though God gives him a large substance, yet not a heart to make use of
it, without which he cannot enjoy it; and therefore it would have been
as good, or better for him, to have been without it; see [Ecc
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#019);

but a stranger eateth it; the Syriac version adds, "after him"; enjoys
it, not only a part of it, but the whole; one that is not akin to him,
and perhaps was never known by him; and yet, by one means or another,
either in a lawful or unlawful way, comes into the possession of all he
has; this has been always reckoned a great unhappiness, [Lam
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#002). Hence it follows,

this is vanity, and it is an evil disease; it is a vain thing to be
possessed of great substance, and not enjoy anything of it in a
comfortable way, through the sin of covetousness; which is a spiritual
disease, and a very bad one; very prejudicial to the soul, and the state
of it, and is rarely cured. Juvenal (w) calls it frenzy and madness for
a man to live poor, that be may die rich; he is like the ass that
Crassus Agelastus saw, loaded with figs, and eating thorns.

\(w\) "Cum furor dubius", &c. Satyr. 14. v. 136. exposed by Persius,
Sat. 6. v. 69, &c. "unge puer caules", &c.

[Ecclesiastes 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 6:3</span></span>

If a man beget an hundred children,.... Sons and daughters, a certain
number for an uncertain. Some have had many children, and almost this
number; Rehoboam had twenty eight sons and threescore daughters; and
Ahab had seventy sons, how many daughters is not said, [Ch2
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#021); this was reckoned a great
honour and happiness to have many children; happy was the man that had
his quiver full of them, [Psa 127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003);
such a case is here supposed;

and live many years, so that the days of his years be many; or
"sufficient", as Jarchi interprets it; he lives as long as life is
desirable; lives to a good old age, to the full age of men, threescore
years and ten; yea, supposing he was to live to be as old as Methuselah,

and his soul be not filled with good; does not enjoy the good things he
has; has no pleasure nor satisfaction in the temporal good things of
life, has not the comfort of them, and is always uneasy, because he has
not more of them; and especially if his soul is not filled with
spiritual good things, the grace of God, and righteousness of Christ;

And also that he have no burial; as Jezebel, Jehoiakim, and others; who
is either destroyed by robbers and cutthroats, for the sake of his
substance, and cast into a ditch or a river, or some place, where he is
never found to be interred; or else, being of such a sordid disposition,
he provides not for a decent burial, suitably to his circumstances, or
forbids one; or, being despised and disesteemed by all men, his heirs
and successors either neglect or refuse to give him one; see [Jer
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#029);

I say that an untimely birth is better than he; an abortive is to be
preferred unto him; it would have been better for him if he had never
been born, or had been in such a case.

[Ecclesiastes 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 6:4</span></span>

For he cometh in with vanity,.... The Targum adds, "into this world."
Some understand this of the abortive, and render it, "though he cometh
in with vanity" (x), yet is to be preferred to the covetous man: others
interpret it of the covetous man himself; and scrape of both: or,
however, they may be compared together in these instances; the abortive
comes into the world in vain, for nothing, and answers no purpose, as
can well be observed; and the same may be said of a covetous rich man;
he walks in a vain show, and is altogether vanity, in his coming in, in
his life, and going out;

and departeth in darkness; or, "into darkness" (y); goes out of the
world without any notice taken of him; and goes down to the dark grave,
where he lies in obscurity;

and his name shall be covered with darkness; the abortive has no name,
and is never spoken of; and so the name and memory of such a man as is
here described rot and perish: and in this respect the abortive has the
preference to him; for though he is covered with darkness, yet no ill is
ever spoken of him; whereas the name of the wicked covetous man is
cursed.

\(x\) "quamvis venit", Drusius. (y) "in tenebrositatem", Montanus; "in
tenebras", Tigurine version, Mercerus, so Broughton.

[Ecclesiastes 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 6:5</span></span>

Moreover, he hath not seen the sun,.... This must be spoken of the
abortive, and seems to confirm the sense of the former text, as
belonging to it; and whereas it has never seen the light of the sun, nor
enjoyed the pleasure and comfort of it, it is no ways distressing to it
to be without it. The Targum is,

"the light of the law he seeth not; and knoweth not between good and
evil, to judge between this world and that to come:''

so the Vulgate Latin version, "neither knows the difference of good and
evil";

nor known anything; not the sun, nor anything else: or "experienced" (z)
and "felt" the heat of the sun, and its comfortable influences; which a
man may, who is blind, and has never seen it, but an abortive has not;
and indeed has known no man, nor any creature nor thing in this world,
and therefore it is no concern to it to be without them; and besides,
has never had any knowledge or experience of the troubles of lifts,
which every living man is liable to. Wherefore this is certain,

this hath more rest than the other; that is, the abortive than the
covetous man; having never been distressed with the troubles of life,
and now not affected with the sense of loss.

\(z\) "ueque expertus est", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Rambachius,
so Broughton.

[Ecclesiastes 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 6:6</span></span>

Yea, though he live a thousand years twice told,.... Or two thousand
years, which no man ever did, nor even one thousand years; Methuselah,
the oldest man, did not live so long as that; this is than twice the age
of the oldest man: there is one sort of the Ethiopians, who are said (a)
to live almost half space of time longer than usual, called from thence
Macrobii; which Pliny (b) makes to be one hundred and forty years, which
is just double the common term of life. This here is only a supposition.
Aben Ezra interprets it, "a thousand thousand", but wrongly; so the
Arabic version, "though he lives many thousand years";

yet hath he seen no good, not enjoyed the good of his labour, what he
has been labouring for and was possessed of; and therefore has lived so
long as he has to very little purpose, and with very little comfort or
credit; and especially he has had no experience of spiritual good;

do not all go to one place? that is, the grave; they do, even all men;
it is the house appointed for all living, [Job
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#023); and hither go both the
abortive, and the covetous rich man; so that he has in this no
pre-eminence to it. Jarchi interprets it of hell, the one place, whither
all sinners go; but the former sense is best.

\(a\) Mela tie Situ Orbis, l. 3. c. 9. (b) Nat. Hist. 1. 7. c. 2.

[Ecclesiastes 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 6:7</span></span>

All the labour of man is for his mouth,.... For the food of his mouth,
as the Targum; for the sustenance of his body, for food and clothing,
part being put for the whole: all that a man labours for is to get this;
and if he does not enjoy it, his labour is in vain; meats are for the
belly, which are taken in by the mouth, and for these a man labours; and
if he does not eat them, when he has got them, he labours to no purpose;

and yet the appetite is not filled; even the bodily or sensual appetite;
no, not even by those who eat the fruit of their labour; for though
their hunger is allayed for the present, and the appetite is satisfied
for a while, yet it returns again, and requires more food, and so
continually: or, "the soul is not filled", or "satisfied" (c); it is the
body only that is filled or satisfied with such things, at best; the
mind of man grasps after greater things, and can find no contentment or
satisfaction in earthly or sensual enjoyments. This seems to be a new
argument, proving the vanity of riches, from the narrow use of them;
which only reaches to the body, not to the soul.

\(c\) "anima non implebitur", Pagninus, Montanus; "anima non expletur",
Mercerus, Gejerus; "non impletur", Cocceius, so Broughton; "non
satiatur", Drusius.

[Ecclesiastes 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 6:8</span></span>

For what hath the wise more than the fool,.... More delight and
pleasure, in gratifying his senses, by eating and drinking: the wise man
enjoys no more than the fool; the fool finds as much pleasure in the
labour of his hands, which is for his mouth, as the wise man does; and
the wise man can get no more satisfaction to his mind, from these
outward gratifications, than the fool;

what hath the poor, that knoweth to walk before the living? either, what
does the poor man want more than the rich man, that knows how to get his
bread, and is diligent and industrious among men to live, and does get a
livelihood for himself and family; he enjoys all the sweets and comforts
of life, as well as the rich man: or what hath the poor knowing man? as
Aben Ezra interprets it, according to the accents; what has he more or
does he enjoy more, than the poor foolish man, provided he has but sense
enough to behave himself among men, so as to have bread to eat, and
clothes to wear; which is as much as any man can enjoy, be he ever so
rich or so wise?

[Ecclesiastes 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 6:9</span></span>

Better is the sight of the eyes than the wandering of the desire,.... By
"the sight of the eyes" is not meant the bare beholding outward riches,
as in [Ecc 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#011); but the enjoyment of
present mercies; such things as a man is in the possession of, and with
which he should be content, [Heb 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005);
and by "the wandering of the desire", the craving appetite and
insatiable lust of the covetous mind, which enlarges its desire as hell,
after a thousand things, and everything it can think of; such a mind
roves through the whole creation, and covets everything under the sun:
now it is better to enjoy contentedly things in sight and in possession,
than to let the mind loose in vague desires, after things that may never
be come at, and, if attained to, would give no satisfaction;

this is also vanity and vexation of spirit: a most vain thing, to give
the mind such a loose and liberty in its unbounded desires after worldly
things; and a vexation of spirit it is to such a craving mind, that it
cannot obtain what it is so desirous of.

[Ecclesiastes 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 6:10</span></span>

That which hath been is named already, and it is known that it is
man,.... Which may be understood of the first man Adam, who has been,
has existed, was produced by the immediate power of God, creating and
forming him out of the dust of the earth; was made after the image, and
in the likeness of God, a wise and knowing creature, a rich and powerful
one, the figure of him that was to come, being the head and
representative of all his posterity; and he has been named already, he
had his name from the Lord himself, suitable to his nature and
formation; he called his name Adam, from "Adamah", the earth, from
whence he was taken; and though he was so wise and great, and even
affected deity, which was the snare laid for him by his enemy, it is
well known he was but a man, of the earth, earthly, and returned to it
again. Some have applied this to the second man, the Lord from heaven,
as the ordinary gloss, and Jerom; and render it, "that which shall be",
so the Vulgate Latin version; as yet he was not man, though he had
agreed to be and was prophesied of that he should; however be was named
already the seed of the woman, Shiloh, Ithiel, the Messiah, or Anointed;
hence by Solomon, in allusion to this name, his "name is said to be as
ointment poured forth", [Sol 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003); and
as it was known that he should be man, so it is now known that he is
really and truly man; though not merely so, but God as well as man; yet
as to his human nature his Father is greater and mightier than he; but
this sense some interpreters despise and laugh at: and indeed though the
whole of it is truth, it does not seem to be the truth of the text, nor
suitable to the context: rather the words are to be understood of
mankind in general, of all men, not only that have been, but that are or
shall be; these were all appointed to come into being by the Lord; they
have been in his eternal purposes and decrees, and their names are
written or not written in the Lamb's book of life; and they have all one
common name, that of "man", weak, frail, mortal, wretched man; they are,
as is said of the Egyptians, men and not God, [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003); particularly this is true of
persons the most famous that have been in the world; such who have been
in ages past, and their names have been called, or they have obtained a
name among men, men of renown, that are on the list of fame; such who
have been the most famous for wisdom, for riches, for strength, or for
power and authority, and have even had deity ascribed to them, and
divine worship given them; yet it has been notorious that they were but
men, and not God, so Jarchi; and died as such; see [Psa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020). Moreover, this may be understood
of all things relating to men; that all that has been, is, or shall be,
has been already named of God, determined and appointed by him; so the
Targum renders it,

"all is the decree of the Word of the Lord;''

all things relating to the temporal affairs of men, as to their birth
and place of abode, their callings and stations of life; so to their
circumstances of poverty or riches, which with all their craving desires
and carking cares it is impossible for them to alter, or make them
otherwise than they are; which is observed, to check the wandering and
insatiable desires of men after worldly things;

neither may he contend with him that is mightier than he; the Lord of
the world, as the Targum; not the angel of death, as Jarchi; the devil,
which had the power of death, and is stronger than men; nor death
itself, as others, against which there is no standing, [Ecc
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#008), [Isa
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#015); but God himself, who is
mightier than men, and with whom a creature should not strive or
contend; either about his being and the make of it, or concerning his
circumstances in the world, that they are not, greater and better than
they be; or about God's decrees concerning these or other things; but
quietly submit to his will, and be content in whatsoever circumstances
they are, considering that he is the Creator, and a sovereign Being,
they are creatures, and dependent on him; and let their circumstances be
what they will, wise or unwise, rich or poor, they are but men, and can
never rise higher; see [Job 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#003). It is
observed by the Masorites that this is just the middle of the book.

[Ecclesiastes 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 6:11</span></span>

Seeing there be many things that increase vanity,.... As appears by all
that has been said in this and the preceding chapters; such as wisdom
and knowledge, wealth and riches, pleasure, power, and authority. Man is
a poor vain creature himself, all he is and has is vanity; and these
serve but to increase it, and make him vainer and vainer still;

what is man the better? for these things? not at all, rather the worse,
being more vain; there is no profit by them, no excellency arises to him
from them, no happiness in them, nothing that will be of any service to
him, especially with respect to a future state, or when he comes to die.
It may be rendered, as it is in the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin
versions, "seeing there are many words that multiply vanity"; as all
such words do that are used with God by way of murmur and complaint
concerning a man's lot and condition in this world, and as expostulating
and contending with him about it; these increase sin, and by them men
contract more guilt, and therefore are not the better for such
litigations, but the worse; and so the words stand in connection with
[Ecc 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#010), but the former sense seems
best, this being the conclusion of the wise man's discourse concerning
vanity. So the Targum and Jarchi understand it of things, and not words.

[Ecclesiastes 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 6:12</span></span>

For who knoweth what is good for man in this life?.... To be in a higher
or lower station of life, to live in grandeur or meanness, to be rich or
poor, learned or unlearned; since that which seems most agreeable to
human nature is at, ended with so much vanity, the occasion of so much
sin, and often issues in ruin and misery, that no man knows what is best
for him; and therefore it is the wisest way to be content with what a
man has, and enjoy it in the most comfortable manner, and use it to the
best ends and purposes he can. The Targum is,

"for who is he that knows what is good for a man in this world, but to
study in the law, which is the life of the world?''

so the Midrash,

all the days of his vain life, which he spendeth as a shadow? or "the
number of the days of vain life, which he makes as a shadow" (d); that
is, which God makes as a "shadow", as Cocceius observes; makes to pass
away swiftly: this is a description of the vanity, brevity, and
uncertainty of human life; it consists of days, rather than of months
and years; and those such as are easily numbered, and which pass away
suddenly and swiftly, like a shadow that has no substance and reality in
it, and leaves nothing behind it; or like a bird that flies away, as
Jarchi, and is seen no more; such is the life of man, a most vain life,
vanity itself; so it may be rendered, "the number of the days of the
life of his vanity" (e); since therefore he has so short a time to enjoy
anything in, it is hard to say what is best for him to have, and the
rather since he is quite ignorant of what is to come;

for who can tell a man what shall be after him under the sun? he does
not know himself, nor can any man inform him, what will become of his
wealth and riches after his death, which he has got together; who shall
enjoy them, and how long and what use will be made of them, either to
their own good, or the good of others.

\(d\) "et facit eos at umbram", Cocceius. (e) "numero dierum vitae",
("vitarum", Montanus), "vanitatis suae", Pagninus, Rambachius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 7](ecc007)

</div>
