<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ecclesiastes Index](ecc)  
  [Previous](ecc002)  [Next](ecc004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ecclesiastes Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001)

[Ecclesiastes](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ecc 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ECCLESIASTES 3

The general design of this chapter is to confirm what is before
observed, the vanity and inconstancy of all things; the frailty of man,
and changes respecting him; his fruitless toil and labour in all his
works; that it is best to be content with present things, and cheerful
in them, and thankful for them; that all comes from the hand of God;
that such good men, who have not at present that joy that others have,
may have it, since there is a time for it; and that sinners should not
please themselves with riches gathered by them, since they may be soon
taken from them, for there is a time for everything, [Ecc
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001); of which there is an induction of
particulars, [Ecc 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#002); so that though
every thing is certain with God, nothing is certain with men, nor to be
depended on, nor can happiness be placed therein; there is no striving
against the providence of God, nor altering the course of things; the
labour of man is unprofitable, and his travail affliction and vexation,
[Ecc 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#009); and though all God's works
are beautiful in their season, they are unsearchable to man, [Ecc
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011); wherefore it is best cheerfully
to enjoy the present good things of life, [Ecc
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#012); and be content; for the will and
ways and works of God are unalterable, permanent, and perfect, [Ecc
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#014); and though wicked men may abuse
the power reposed in them, and pervert public justice, they will be
called to an account for it in the general judgment, for which there is
a time set, [Ecc 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016); and yet, such
is the stupidity of the generality of men, that they have no more sense
of death and judgment than the brutes, and live and die like them, [Ecc
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#018); wherefore it is best of all to
make a right use of power and riches, or what God has given to men, for
their own good and that of others, since they know not what shall be
after them, [Ecc 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#022).

[Ecclesiastes 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ecc 3:1</span></span>

To every thing there is a season,.... A set determined time, when
everything shall come into being, how long it shall continue, and in
what circumstances; all things that have been, are, or shall be, were
foreordained by God, and he has determined the times before appointed
for their being, duration, and end; which times and seasons he has in
his own power: there was a determined time for the whole universe, and
for all persons and things in it; a settled fixed moment for the world
to come into being; for it did not exist from everlasting, nor of
itself, nor was formed by the fortuitous concourse of atoms, but by the
wisdom and power of God; nor could it exist sooner or later than it did;
it appeared when it was the will of God it should; in the beginning he
created it, and he has fixed the time of its duration and end; for it
shall not continue always, but have an end, which when it will be, he
only knows: so there is a determined time for the rise, height, and
declension of states and kingdoms in it; as of lesser ones, so of the
four great monarchies; and for all the distinct periods and ages of the
world; and for each of the seasons of the year throughout all ages; for
the state of the church in it, whether in suffering or flourishing
circumstances; for the treading down of the holy city; for the
prophesying, slaying, and rising of the witnesses; for the reign and
ruin of antichrist; for the reign of Christ on earth, and for his second
coming to judgment, though of that day and hour knows no man: and as
there is a set time in the counsels and providence of God for these more
important events, so for every thing of a lesser nature;

and a time to every purpose under the heaven; to every purpose of man
that is carried into execution; for some are not, they are superseded by
the counsel of God; some obstruction or another is thrown in the way of
them, so that they cannot take place; God withdraws men from them by
affliction or death, when their purposes are broken; or by some other
way; and what are executed he appoints a time for them, and overrules
them to answer some ends of his own; for things the most contingent,
free, and voluntary, fall under the direction and providence of God. And
there is a time for every purpose of his own; all things done in the
world are according to his purposes, which are within himself wisely
formed, and are eternal and unfrustrable; and there is a time fixed for
the execution of them, for every purpose respecting all natural and
civil things in providence; and for every purpose of his grace, relating
to the redemption of his people, the effectual calling of them, and the
bringing them to eternal glory; which are the things that God wills,
that he takes delight and pleasure in, as the word (e) signifies. The
Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions render it, "to everything under
the heaven there is a time"; and Jarchi observes that in the Misnic
language the word used so signifies. The Targum is,

"to every man a time shall come, and a season to every business under
heaven.''

\(e\) "omni voluntati", Montanus, Mercerus, Cocceius; i.e. "rei proprie
capitae ac desideratae", Drusius.

[Ecclesiastes 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ecc 3:2</span></span>

A time to be born,.... The Targum is,

"to beget sons and daughters;''

but rather it is to bear them, there being a time in nature fixed for
that, called the hour of a woman, [Job
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#001);

and a time to die; the time of a man's coming into the world and going
out of it, both being fixed by the Lord (f): this is true of all men in
general, of all men that come into the world, for whom it is appointed
that they shall die; and particularly of Christ, whose birth was at the
time appointed by the Father, in the fulness of time; and whose death
was in due time, nor could his life be taken away before his hour was
come, [Joh 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#030); and this holds good
of every individual man; his birth is at the time God has fixed it; that
any man is born into the world, is of God; no man comes into it at his
own pleasure or another's, but at the will of God, and when he pleases,
not sooner nor later; and the time of his going out of the world is
settled by him, beyond which time he cannot live, and sooner he cannot
die, [Job 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005); and though no mention
is made of the interval of life between a man's birth and death, yet all
events intervening are appointed by God; as the place of his abode; his
calling and station of life; all circumstances of prosperity and
adversity; all diseases of body, and what lead on to death, and issue in
it: the reason why these two are put so close together is, to show the
certainty of death; that as sure as a man is born, so sure shall he die;
and the frailty and shortness of life, which is but an hand's breadth,
passes away like a tale that is told, yea, is as nothing; so that no
account is made of it, as if there was no time allotted it, or that it
deserved no mention; and also to observe that the seeds of mortality and
death are in men as soon as they are born; as soon as they begin to live
they begin to die, death is working in them;

a time to plant; a tree, as the Targum, or any herb;

and a time to pluck up that which is planted; a tree or herb, as before,
when grown to its ripeness, and fit for use; or when grown old, barren,
and unfruitful; there are particular seasons for planting plants, and
some for one and some for another. This may be applied in a civil sense
to planting and plucking up kingdoms and states; see [Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010); as it is by the Jews,
particularly to the planting and plucking up of the kingdom of Israel;
the people of Israel were a vine brought out of Egypt and planted in the
land of Canaan, and afterwards plucked up and carried captive into
Babylon; and afterwards planted again, and then again plucked up by the
Romans; and will be assuredly planted in their own land again; see [Psa
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008); It may be illustrated in a
spiritual sense by the planting of the Jewish church, sometimes compared
to a vineyard; and the plucking it up, abolishing their church state and
ordinances; and by planting Gospel churches in the Gentile world, and
plucking them up again, as in the seven cities of Asia; or removing the
candlestick out of its place; and by planting particular persons in
churches, and removing them again: some indeed that are planted in the
house of the Lord are planted in Christ, and rooted and grounded in the
love of God; are plants which Christ's Father has planted, and will
never be rooted up; but there are others who are planted through the
external ministry of the word, or are plants only by profession, and
these become twice dead, plucked up by the roots; and there are times
for these things, [Psa 92:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#014).

\(f\) "Stat sua cuique dies, breve et irreparabile tempus omnibus est
vitae"; Virgil. Aeneid. l. 10.

[Ecclesiastes 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ecc 3:3</span></span>

A time to kill, and a time to heal,.... A time to kill may be meant of a
violent death, as a time to die is of a natural one; so the Targum,

"a time to kill in war;''

or else, by the hand of the civil magistrate, such who deserve death.
Aben Ezra interprets it "to wound", because of the opposite "to heal";
and so there is a time when wounds and diseases are incurable, and
baffle all the skill of the physician, being designed unto death; and
there is a time when, by the blessing of God on means, they are healed;
the wound or sickness not being unto death: so the Targum paraphrases
the last clause,

"to heal one that lies sick.''

This may be applied in a civil sense to calamities in kingdoms, and a
restoration of peace and plenty to them; which is the property of God
alone, who in this sense kills and makes alive in his own time, [Deu
32:39](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#039); And in a spiritual sense to the
ministers of the word, who are instruments of slaying souls by the law,
which is the killing letter, and of healing them by the Gospel, which
pours in the oil and wine of peace and pardon through the blood of
Christ, and so binds up and heals the broken hearted; and there is a
time for both;

a time to break down, and a time to build up; to break down a building,
and build a waste, as the Targum; to break down cities and the walls of
them, as the of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar; and to build them up: as in
the times of Nehemiah and Zerubbabel: and so in a spiritual sense to
break down the church of God, the tabernacle of David, and to raise up
and repair the breaches of it; to build up Zion, and the walls of
Jerusalem, or to restore the Gospel church state to its glory, for which
there is a set time; see [Amo 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#011).

[Ecclesiastes 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ecc 3:4</span></span>

A time to weep, and a time to laugh,.... There is a time for these
things, as it goes ill or well with persons, as to their health, estate,
or friends; and as it goes ill or well with kingdoms and states. The
Jews wept when they were in Babylon, and their mouths were filled with
laughter when their captivity was returned, [Psa
137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001); and as it goes ill or well with
the church of Christ, when there are corruptions in doctrine and
worship, a neglect of ordinances, declensions in faith and practice, few
instances of conversion, and there are divisions and contentions, it is
a time for the mourners in Zion to weep but when God creates Jerusalem a
rejoicing, and her people a joy, or makes her an eternal excellency, and
the praise of the whole earth, then it is a time to rejoice and be glad,
[Isa 61:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#003); and as it is, with
believers, when Christ is withdrawn from them, it is a time to lament,
but, when the bridegroom is with them, it is a time of joy; when it is a
night of darkness and desertion, weeping endures, but when the morning
comes, the day breaks, and the sun of righteousness arises, joy comes
with it, [Mat 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#015) [Joh
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#019). Now in the present state is the
saints' weeping time; in the time to come they will laugh, or be filled
with joy unspeakable and full of glory, [Luk
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#021);

a time to mourn, and a time to dance; to mourn at funerals, and to dance
at festivals; in a spiritual sense, God sometimes turns the mourning of
his people into dancing, or joy, which that is expressive of; see [Psa
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#011).

[Ecclesiastes 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ecc 3:5</span></span>

A time to cast away stones, and a time to gather stones together,.... To
cast stones out of a field or vineyard where they are hurtful, and to
gather them together to make walls and fences of, or build houses with;
and may be understood both of throwing down buildings, as the temple of
Jerusalem, so that not one stone was left upon another; of pouring out
the stones of the sanctuary, and of gathering them again and laying them
on one another; which was done when the servants of the Lord took
pleasure in the stones of Zion, and favoured the dust thereof. Some
understand this of precious stones, and of casting them away through
luxury, wantonness, or contempt, and gathering them again: and it may be
applied, as to the neglect of the Gentiles for a long time, and the
gathering of those stones of which children were raised to Abraham; so
of the casting away of the Jews for their rejection of the Messiah, and
of the gathering of them again by conversion, when they shall be as the
stones of a crown, lifted up as an ensign on his land, [Zac
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#016);

a time to embrace, and a time to refrain from embracing: or "to be far
from" (g) it; it may not only design conjugal embraces (h), but parents
embracing their children, as Jacob did his; and one brother embracing
another, as Esau Jacob, and one friend embracing another; all which is
very proper and agreeable at times: but there are some seasons so very
calamitous and distressing, in which persons are obliged to drop such
fondnesses: it is true, in a spiritual sense, of the embraces of Christ
and believers, which sometimes are, and sometimes are not, enjoyed, [Pro
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#008).

\(g\) "tempus elongandi se", Pagninus, Montanus; "tempus longe fieri",
V. L. (h) "Optatos dedit amplexus", Virgil. Aeneid. 8. v. 405.

[Ecclesiastes 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ecc 3:6</span></span>

A time to get, and a time to lose,.... To get substance, as the Targum,
and to lose it; wealth and riches, honour and glory, wisdom and
knowledge: or, "to seek, and to lose" (i); a time when the sheep of the
house of Israel, or God's elect, were lost, and a time to seek them
again; which was, lone by Christ in redemption, and by the Spirit of
God, in effectual calling;

a time to keep, and a time to cast away; to keep a thing, and to cast it
away, into the sea, in the time of a great tempest, as the Targum; as
did the mariners in the ship in which Jonah was, and those in which the
Apostle Paul was, [Jon 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#005); It may be
interpreted of keeping riches, and which are sometimes kept too close,
and to the harm of the owners of them; and of scattering them among the
poor, or casting them upon the waters; see [Ecc
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#013).

\(i\) "tempus quaerendi", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version,
Piscator, Mercerus, Gejerus, Rambachius.

[Ecclesiastes 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ecc 3:7</span></span>

A time to rend, and a time to sew,.... To rend garments, in case of
blasphemy, and in times of mourning and fasting, and then to sew them up
when they are over; see [Isa 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#001);
This the Jews apply to the rending of the ten tribes from Rehoboam,
signified by the rending of Jeroboam's garment, [Kg1
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#030); the sewing up or uniting of
which is foretold, [Eze 37:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#022). Some
interpret it of the rending of the Jewish church state, signified by the
rending of the vail, at the death of Christ; and of the constituting the
Gospel church state among the Gentiles;

a time to keep silence, and a time to speak (k); when it is an evil
time, a time of calamity in a nation, it is not a time to be loquacious
and talkative, especially in a vain and ludicrous way, [Amo
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#013); or when a particular friend or
relation is in distress, as in the case of Job and his friends, [Job
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#013); or when in the presence of
wicked men, who make a jest of everything serious and religious, [Psa
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001); and so when under afflictive
dispensations of Providence, it is a time to be still and dumb, and not
open the mouth in a murmuring and complaining way, [Lev
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#003). And, on the other hand, there is
a time to speak, either publicly, of the truths of the Gospel, in the
ministry of it, and in vindication of them; or privately, of Christian
experience: there is a time when an open profession should be made of
Christ, his word and ordinances, and when believers should speak to God
in prayer and praise; which, should they not, the stones in the wall
would cry out.

\(k\) , , Homer. Odyss. 11. v. 378.

[Ecclesiastes 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ecc 3:8</span></span>

A time to love, and a time to hate,.... For one to love his friend, and
to hate a man, a sinner, as the Targum; to love a friend while he
continues such, and hate him, or less love him, when he proves
treacherous and unfaithful; an instance of a change of love into hatred
may be seen in the case of Amnon, [Sa2
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#015). A time of unregeneracy is a
time of loving worldly lusts and sinful pleasures, the company of wicked
men, and all carnal delights and recreations; and a time of conversion
is a time to hate what was before loved, sin, and the conversion of
sinners, the garment spotted with the flesh, the principles and
practices, though not the persons, of ungodly men; and even to hate,
that is, less love, the dearest friends and relations, in comparison of,
or when in competition with, Christ;

a time of war, and a time of peace; for nations to be engaged in war
with each other, or to be at peace, which are continually revolving; and
there is a time when there will be no more war. In a spiritual sense,
the present time, or state of things, is a time of war; the Christian's
life is a warfare state, though it will be soon accomplished, in which
he is engaging in fighting with spiritual enemies, sin, Satan, and the
world: the time to come, or future state, is a time of peace, when
saints shall enter into peace, and be no more disturbed by enemies from
within or from without. In the Midrash, all the above times and seasons
are interpreted of Israel, and applied to them.

[Ecclesiastes 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ecc 3:9</span></span>

What profit hath he that worketh in that wherein he laboureth? That is,
he has none. This is an inference drawn from the above premises, and
confirms what has been before observed, [Ecc
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#003); Man has no profit of his labour,
since his time is so short to enjoy it, and he leaves it to another, he
knows not who; and, while he lives, is attended with continual
vicissitudes and changes; sometimes it is a time for one thing, and
sometimes for its contrary, so that there is nothing certain, and to be
depended on; and a man can promise himself nothing in this world
pleasant or profitable to him, and much less that will be of any
advantage to him hereafter. The Targum adds,

"to make treasures and gather mammon, unless he is helped by Providence
above;''

though it is man's duty to labour, yet all his toil and labour will be
fruitless without a divine blessing; there is a time and season for
everything in providence, and there is no striving against that.

[Ecclesiastes 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ecc 3:10</span></span>

I have seen the travail which God hath given to the sons of men,.... The
pains and trouble they are at to get a little wisdom and knowledge, [Ecc
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#013); and so to obtain riches and
honour, peace and plenty, which sometimes they do obtain, and sometimes
not; and when they do, do not keep them long, for there is a time for
everything. This the wise man had observed, in a variety of instances;
and he considered the end of God in it, which was for men

to be exercised in it, or "by it"; or "to afflict" or "humble them by
it" (l); to let them see that all their toil and labour signified
little; all depended on a divine blessing, and no happiness was to be
had in the creatures; all was vanity and vexation of spirit; See Gill on
[Ecc 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#013).

\(l\) "ad affligendum se in ea", Montanus; "ut eos adfligat in ea, sc.
per eam", Rambachius; "ut ea redderet humiles", Tigurine version.

[Ecclesiastes 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ecc 3:11</span></span>

He hath made every thing beautiful in his time,.... That is, God has
made everything; as all things in creation are made by him, for his
pleasure and glory, and all well and wisely, there is a beauty in them
all: so all things in providence; he upholds all things; he governs and
orders all things according to the counsel of his will; some things are
done immediately by him, others by instruments, and some are only
permitted by him; some he does himself, some he wills to be done by
others, and some he suffers to be done; but in all there is a beauty and
harmony; and all are ordered, disposed, and overruled, to answer the
wisest and greatest purposes; everything is done in the time in which he
wills it shall; be done, and done in the time most fit and suitable for
it to be done; all things before mentioned, for which there is a time,
and all others: all natural things are beautiful in their season; things
in summer, winter, spring, and autumn; frost and snow in winter, and
heat in summer; darkness and dews in the night, and light and brightness
in the day; and so in ten thousand other things: all afflictive
dispensations of Providence; times of plucking up and breaking down of
weeping and mourning, of losing and casting away are all necessary, and
seasonable and beautiful, in their issue and consequences: prosperity
and adversity, in their turns, make a beautiful checker work, and work
together for good; are like Joseph's coat, of many colours, which was an
emblem of those various providences which attended that good man; and
were extremely beautiful, as are all the providences of God to men: and
all his judgments will be, when made manifest; when he shall have
performed his whole work, and the mystery of God in providence will be
finished; which is like a piece of tapestry; when only viewed in parts
no beauty appears in it, scarce any thing to be made of it but when all
is put together, it is most beautiful and harmonious. The words may be
rendered, "the beautiful One hath made all things in his time" (m); the
Messiah; who, as a divine Person, is the brightness of his Father's
glory; as man, is fairer than the sons, of Adam; as Mediator, is full of
grace and truth; is white and ruddy, altogether lovely, exceeding
precious to his people: this fair and lovely One has made all things in
creation; works with his Father in the affairs of providence; and has
done all things well in grace and redemption, [Joh
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002);

also he hath set the world in their heart; so that no man can find out
the work that God maketh from the beginning to the end; not a sinful
love of the world, and the things of it; not a criminal desire after
them, and a carking care for them, whereby persons have no heart and
inclination, time and leisure, to search into and find out the works of
God; for though all this is in the heart of the sons of men, yet, not
placed, there by the Lord: nor an opinion of living for ever; of a long
time in this world, the word for "world" having the signification of
perpetuity in it; so that they regard not, the work of the Lord, nor the
operations of his hands, tomorrow being with them as this day, and much
more abundant; but this sense meets with the same difficulty as the
former. Rather the meaning is, that God hath set before the minds of
men, and in them, the whole world of creatures, the whole book of
nature, in which they may see and read much of the wisdom power, and
goodness of God in his works; and to some he gives an inclination and
desire hereunto; but yet the subject before them is so copious, there is
such a world of matter presented to them, and their capacity so small,
and life so short, that they cannot all their days find out the works of
God, either of creation or providence, to perfection; or find out what
God works, from the beginning of the world to the end of it; for, of
what he has wrought, but a small portion is known by them, and they know
less still what shall be done hereafter: some of God's works of
providence are set on foot and but begun in the life of some men; they
do not live to see them finished, and therefore cannot find them out;
and others are so dark and obscure, that they are obliged to say, "O the
depth of the riches both of the wisdom and knowledge of God! how
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!" see [Rom
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#019); and though everything is
beautiful in its time, yet till they are made manifest, and all viewed
together; they will not be perfectly understood, or the beauty of them
seen, [Rev 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004). For God has put
something "hidden", or "sealed up", in the midst of them, as it may be
rendered (n), so that they cannot be perfectly known.

\(m\) "haec omnia facit pulcher in tempore suo, i.e. Messias"; so some
in Rambachius. (n) Vid. Schultens de Defect. Hod. Ling. Heb. s. 180.

[Ecclesiastes 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ecc 3:12</span></span>

I know that there is no good in them,.... In these things; as the Arabic
version; in the creatures, as Jarchi; in all sublunary enjoyments; in
everything the wise man had made a trial of before, as natural Wisdom
and knowledge, worldly pleasure, riches, and wealth; the "summun bonum",
or happiness of men, did not lie in these things; this he knew by
experience, and had the strongest assurance of it: or in them, that is,
the children of men, as the Targum: there is no real good thing in them,
nor comes out of them, nor is done by them; they cannot think a good
thought, nor do a good action, of themselves. Or rather the sense is, I
know there is nothing better for them than what follows:

but for a man to rejoice; not in sin and sinful pleasures, in a riotous,
voluptuous, and epicurean manner; but to be cheerful, and enjoy the
blessings of life in a comfortable way, and with a thankful heart; and
especially to rejoice in spiritual things, and above all in Christ; and
not in any self-boastings or carnal confidences, all such rejoicing is
evil; see [Ecc 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#007). The Targum is,

"but that they rejoice in the joy of the law;''

but it is much better to rejoice in the things of the Gospel, which is
indeed a joyful sound;

and to do good in his life: to himself and family, by making use of the
good things of life, and not withholding and hoarding them up; and to
others, to all men, as opportunity offers, and especially to the
household of faith; and not only by liberality and alms deeds, but by
doing all good works, from right principles and to right ends, and that
always, as long as he lives, [Gal 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#009).

[Ecclesiastes 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ecc 3:13</span></span>

And also that every man should eat and drink,.... Not to excess, but in
moderation; and yet freely, plentifully, and cheerfully; and not alone,
but giving the poor a portion with him; and in all having in view the
glory of God, [Co1 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031);

and enjoy the good of all his labour; take the comfort of what he has
been labouring for, and not lay it up for, and leave it to, he knows not
who: the Targum is,

"and see good in his days, and cause his children, at the time of his
death, to inherit all his labour;''

it is the gift of God; not only to have, but to enjoy, and make a proper
use of the mercies of life. This is the same doctrine which is delivered
[Ecc 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#024).

[Ecclesiastes 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ecc 3:14</span></span>

I know that whatsoever God doeth, it shall be for ever,.... Which some,
as Jarchi, understand of the works of creation, the heavens and the
earth, which are however of long standing and duration; and though they
shall be dissolved and perish, as to their form and quality, yet not as
to the substance of them: the earth particularly is said to abide for
ever, [Ecc 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004); the sun and moon, and
stars, keep their course or station; and the several seasons of the year
have their constant revolution, and shall as long as the earth endures;
see [Gen 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022); the several kinds of
creatures God has made, in the earth, air, and sea, though the
individuals die, their species remain; and man, the chief of creatures,
though he dies, shall live again, and live for ever; so the Arabic
version,

"I have learned that all the creatures which God hath made shall
perpetually remain in the same order and condition:''

though Abarbinel (o) interprets this of the continuance of the world for
a certain time, and then of the destruction of it; which he thinks is
supported by [Ecc 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#015), and which is
to be understood of the creation of one world after another; and that
which is past he explains of the world that is destroyed. But rather
this is to be understood of the decrees of God, which are his works "ad
intra"; the thoughts of his heart, that are to all generations; the
counsel of his will, which always stands, and is performed; his mind,
which is one, the same always, and invariable, and which he never
changes; his pleasure he always does; his purposes and appointments,
which are always accomplished, never frustrated and made void: for he is
all wise in forming them, all knowing, and sees the end from the
beginning, so that nothing unforeseen can turn up to hinder the
execution of them; he is unchangeable, and never alters his will; and
all powerful, able to effect his great designs; and faithful and true,
cannot deny himself, nor ever lie nor repent. To this sense is the
Targum,

"I know, by a spirit of prophecy, that all which the Lord does in the
world, whether good or evil, after it is decreed from his mouth, it
shall be for ever.''

This holds good of all his works, and acts of grace; election of persons
to eternal life stands firm, not on the foot of works, but of grace, and
has its certain effect; it can never be made void, nor be surer than it
is; it will ever take place, and continue in its fruit and consequences:
the covenant of grace, as it is made from everlasting, continues to
everlasting; its promises never, fail, its blessings are the sure
mercies of David: redemption by Christ is eternal; such as are redeemed
from sin, Satan, and the law, are ever so, and shall never be brought
into bondage to either again: the work of grace upon the heart being
begun, shall be performed and perfected; the graces wrought in the soul,
as faith, hope, and love, ever remain; the blessings of grace bestowed,
as pardon, justification, adoption, and salvation, are never reversed,
but ever continue; such as are regenerated, pardoned, justified,
adopted, and saved, shall be ever so; and the work of God, as it is
durable, so perfect;

nothing can be put to it, nor anything taken from it; the works of
nature have been finished and perfected from the foundation of the
world; the decrees of God are a complete system of his will, according
to which he does all things invariably, in providence and grace; the
covenant of grace is ordered in all things, and nothing wanting in it;
the work of redemption is completely done by Christ, who is a rock, and
his work is perfect; and the work of grace on the heart, though at
present imperfect, shall be perfected; nor is it in the power of men to
add anything to it, nor take anything from it;

and God doth it, that men should fear before him; his works of creation
being done in so much wisdom, and giving such a display of his power and
goodness, command art awe of him in his creatures, [Psa
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#006); his works of providence, being
all according to his wise purposes and decrees, should be patiently and
quietly submitted to; and men should be still, and know that he is God,
and humble themselves under his mighty hand: his decrees, respecting the
present or future state of men, do not lead to despair, nor to a neglect
of means, nor to a dissolute life, but tend to promote the fear of God
and true holiness, which they are the source of; and the blessings of
grace have a kind influence on the same; particularly the blessing of
pardoning grace, which is with God, that he may be feared, [Psa
130:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#004); and one principal part of the
work of grace on the heart is the fear of God; and nothing more strongly
engages to the whole worship of God, which is often meant by the fear of
him, than his grace vouchsafed to men; see [Heb
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#028). The Targum refers this to the
vengeance of God in the world: and Jarchi, to the unusual phenomena in
it; as the flood, the sun's standing still and going backward, and the
like.

\(o\) Miphalot Elohim Tract. 8. c. 7. fol. 57. 4.

[Ecclesiastes 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ecc 3:15</span></span>

That which hath seen is now; and that which is to be hath already
been,.... That which has been from the beginning now is; that which
cometh, and what shall be in the end of days, has been already, as the
Targum. Jarchi interprets this of God and his attributes, which are
always the same; he is the "I am that I am", [Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014); the immutable and eternal
Jehovah, which is, and was, and is to come, invariably the same. Or
rather it designs his decrees and purposes; what has been decreed in his
eternal mind is now accomplished; and what is future has been already in
his decrees; nor does anything come to pass but what he has appointed.
So it is interpreted, in an ancient tract (p) of the Jews, of

"what was before it came into the world, so that there is nothing new
under the sun; now it is obliged to come into this world, as it is said,
"before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee", [Jer
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005).''

This will also hold true of natural things, and of the identity of them;
of some individuals, as the sun, moon, and stars, which are as they
always were, and will be; the sun rises and sets as it used to do; and
the moon increases and decreases, as it always has done; and the stars
keep the same station or course, and so they ever will, as they have:
the same seasons are now in their turn as heretofore, and such as will
be have been already; as summer, winter, spring, autumn, seedtime,
harvest, cold, heat, night, and day: the same kinds and species of
creatures, that have been, are; and what will be have been already; so
that there is no new thing under the sun; the same thing is here
expressed as in [Ecc 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#009);

and God requireth that which is past; his decrees and purposes to be
fulfilled, which are past in his mind; the same seasons to return which
have been; and the same kinds and species of creatures to exist which
have already. The words may be rendered, "and God seeketh that which is
pursued", or "persecuted" (q): and accordingly the whole will bear a
different sense; and the preacher may be thought to have entered upon a
new subject, which he continues in some following verses, the abuse of
power and authority: and the meaning then is, the same acts of
injustice, violence, and persecution, have been done formerly as now,
and now as formerly; and what hereafter of this kind may be, will be no
other than what has been; from the beginning persecution was; Cain hated
and slew his brother, because of his superior goodness; and so it always
has been, is, and will be, that such who are after the flesh persecute
those who are after the spirit; but God will make inquisition for blood,
and require it at the hands of those that shed it; he will seek out the
persecuted, and vindicate him, and, avenge his persecutor. This way the
Midrash, Jarchi, and Alshech, and the Septuagint version, render the
words; and so the Syriac version, "God seeketh him that is afflicted,
who is driven away"; and to this agrees the Targum,

"and in the great day which shall be, the Lord will require the mean and
poor man of the hands of the wicked that persecute him.''

And what follows seems to confirm this sense.

\(p\) Tikkune Zohar Correct. 69. fol. 104. 2. (q) "Deus quaerit
propulsum, seu quod persecutionem veluti passum est", Gejerus, Schmidt.

[Ecclesiastes 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ecc 3:16</span></span>

And moreover I saw under the sun the place of judgment,.... Courts of
judicature, where judges sit, and, causes are brought before them, and
are heard and tried; such as were the Jewish sanhedrim, of which the
Midrash and Jarchi interpret it;

that wickedness was there, wicked judges sat there, and wickedness was
committed by them; instead of doing justice they perverted it; condemned
the righteous, and acquitted the wicked; and oppressed the widow,
fatherless, and stranger, whose cause, being just, they should have
defended. So the Targum,

"in which lying judges condemn the innocent.''

Well does the wise man say he saw this "under the sun", for there is
nothing of this kind above it; nor approved of by him that is above it;

and the place of righteousness, that iniquity was there; this signifies
the same as before, only it is expressed in different words. The Midrash
and Jarchi interpret this of the middle gate in Jerusalem, where Nergal
Sharezer, and other princes of the king of Babylon, sat, and which
Solomon foresaw by a spirit of prophecy; but the better sense is, that
Solomon had observed a great deal of this kind in reading the histories
and annals of nations; knew that much of this sort was practised in
other countries, and had seen a great deal of it in his own, done in
inferior courts, and by subordinate officers; and though he was a wise
and righteous prince, yet was not able to rectify all these abuses, for
want of sufficient proof, which yet he lamented, and it gave him a
concern; compare with this [Isa 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#021).

[Ecclesiastes 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ecc 3:17</span></span>

I said in mine heart, God shall judge the righteous and the wicked,....
This he considered in his mind, and set it down for a certain truth, and
which relieved him under the consideration of the sad perversion of
justice; and made him easy under it, and willing to leave things to him
that judgeth righteously, and wait his time when everything that was now
wrong would be set right: he knew from reason, from tradition, and from
the word of God, that there was a judgment to come, a general,
righteous, and eternal one; that this judicial process would be carried
on by God himself, who is holy, righteous, just, and true, omniscient,
and omnipotent; and, being the Judge of all the earth, would do right;
when he would vindicate the righteous, and clear them from all calumnies
and charges; acquit and justify them, and condemn the wicked, pass a
just sentence on them, and execute it;

for there is a time there for every purpose, and for every work; or
"then", as Noldius; in the day of the great judgment, as the Targum
adds; and which continues to paraphrase the words thus,

"for a time is appointed for every business, and for every work which
they do in this world they shall be judged there;''

there is a time fixed, a day appointed, for the judgment of the world;
though of that day and hour knows no man; yet, it is settled, and will
certainly come, [Act 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031); and when
it is come, every purpose, counsel, and thought of men's hearts, will be
made manifest, as well as every work, good or bad, open or secret, yea,
every idle word, and men will be judged according to these; see [Co1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005), [Mat
12:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#036).

[Ecclesiastes 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ecc 3:18</span></span>

I said in mine heart concerning the estate of the sons of men,.... He
thought of the condition of the children of men, their sinful and
polluted state; he weighed and considered in his mind their actions,
conversation, and course of life; and was concerned how it would go with
them at the day of judgment on account of the same. Some render it, "I
said in mine heart after the speech of the children of men" (r);
speaking in their language, and representing the atheist and the
epicure, as some think the wise man does in the following verses; though
he rather speaks his own real sentiments concerning men, as they are in
their present state, and as they will appear in the day of judgment;

that God might manifest them; or "separate them" (s); as the chaff from
the wheat, and as goats from the sheep; as will be done at the day of
judgment, [Mat 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010); or "that they
might clear God" (t); as they will, when he shall judge and condemn
them;

and that they might see that they themselves are beasts; as they are
through the fall, and the corruption of nature, being born like the wild
ass's colt, stupid, senseless, and without understanding of spiritual
things; nay, more brutish than the beasts themselves, than the horse and
the mule that have no understanding, [Psa
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#009); "mulo inscitior", as is
Plautus's (u) phrase; see [Psa 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012),
[Isa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003); this is now made manifest to
the people of God by the word and Spirit; is seen, known, and
acknowledged by them, [Psa 73:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#021); and
the wicked themselves will see, know, and own what beasts they are and
have been, at the day of judgment; how they have lived and died like
beasts; how like brute beasts they have corrupted themselves in things
they knew naturally; and that as natural brute beasts, made to be taken
and destroyed, spoke evil of things they understood not, and perished in
their own corruption, [Jde 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#010), [Pe2
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#012); and that they have been beasts
to themselves, as Jarchi renders and interprets it; made beasts of
themselves by their brutish gratifications; have been cruel to
themselves, ruining and destroying their own souls; or among themselves,
and to one another, "homo lupus homini"; hence wicked men are compared
to lions, foxes, evening wolves, vipers, and the like. So Mr. Broughton
renders it, "how they are beasts, they to themselves."

\(r\) "super verbum filiorum Adam", Montanus; "verbis hominum", Arabic
and Syriac versions. (s) "ut discernat illos", Cocceius; "quia delegit
eos", some in Vatablus; so Aben Ezra and Ben Melech. (t) "Ut ipsi
expurgent Deum", Anglic. in Reinbeck; some in Rambachius render it thus,
"ut seligant ipsi (homines) Deum"; so Varenius. (u) Cisteilaria, Act. 4.

[Ecclesiastes 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ecc 3:19</span></span>

For that which befalleth the sons of men befalleth beasts,.... Aben Ezra
says this verse is according to the thoughts of the children of men that
are not wise; but rather the wise man says what he does according to his
own thoughts, and proceeds to prove the likeness and equality of men and
beasts;

even one thing befalleth them; the same events belong to one as to
another; the same diseases and disasters, calamities and distresses:
Noah's flood carried away one as well as another; they both perished in
it; several of the plagues of Egypt were inflicted on both; and both are
beholden to God for their health, preservation, and safety; see [Gen
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#021);

as the one dieth, so dieth the other; the Targum compares a wicked man
and an unclean beast together, in the former clause; and paraphrases
this after this manner,

"as an unclean beast dies, so dies he who is not turned to repentance
before his death:''

he dies unclean in his sins, stupid, senseless; no more thoughtful of
his future state, and of what will become of his precious and immortal
soul, than a beast that has none; see [Psa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#014); perhaps unjust judges,
persecuting tyrants, may particularly be regarded: who, though princes,
shall not only die like men, but even like beasts, [Psa
82:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#007);

yea, they have all one breath; the same vital breath, or breath of life,
which is in the nostrils of the one as of the other; they breathe and
draw in the same air, and have the same animal and vegetative life, and
equally liable to lose it, [Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007);

so that a man hath no preeminence above a beast: he has reason and
speech, which a beast has not; which gives him a preference to them, did
he make a right use of them; but, as an animal, he has no preeminence,
being liable to the same accidents, and to death itself: the Targum
excepts the house of the grave, man being usually buried when he dies,
but a beast is not: yea, in some things a beast has the preeminence of a
man; at least some have, in strength, agility, quickness of the senses,
&c.

for all is vanity; all the gratifications of the senses; all riches,
honours, pleasures, power, and authority, especially when abused.

[Ecclesiastes 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ecc 3:20</span></span>

All go unto one place,.... The earth (w) from whence they came;

all are of the dust, and all turn to dust again; Adam's body was made of
the dust of the earth, and so all his posterity, all of them; in which
they agree with beasts, who are made of the dust also; and, when they
die, return to it; see [Gen 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#007).

\(w\) "Magna parens terra est", Ovid. Metamorph. l. 1. Fab. 7.

[Ecclesiastes 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ecc 3:21</span></span>

Who knoweth the spirit of man that goeth upward?.... There is indeed a
difference between a man and a beast; though they have one breath, they
have not one spirit or soul; man has a rational and immortal soul,
which, when he dies, goes upwards to God that gave it; to be judged by
him, and disposed of by him, in its proper apartment, until the day of
the resurrection of the body;

and the spirit of the beast that goeth downward to the earth? when the
beast dies, its spirit goes down to the earth, from whence it came, and
is resolved into it, and is no more. But who is it that sees, or can see
and know with the eyes of his body, the difference of these two spirits,
or the ascent of the one, and the descent of the other?, Or who knows by
the dint of reason, by the strength of his own understanding, without a
divine revelation, that man has an immortal soul which goes upwards at
death, when that of a beast goes downwards? No man, clearly and fully,
as appears from the doubts and half faith of the wisest Heathens
concerning it: or rather who knows and considers this difference between
the spirit of a man and the spirit of a beast, and thinks within himself
what a precious and immortal soul he has, and is concerned for the
salvation of it? Very few; and hence it is they live and die like
beasts, as they do. The Midrash interprets this of the souls of the
righteous that go up to heaven, and of the souls of the wicked that go
down to hell.

[Ecclesiastes 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ecc 3:22</span></span>

Wherefore I perceive that there is nothing better than that a man should
rejoice in his own works,.... The Targum is, "in his good works"; not as
justifying him before God, but as vindicating him before men, from
unjust censures and charges: rather the sense is, that this is the wise
man's conclusion, and this his sentiment, upon the whole; that there is
nothing better for a man, than cheerfully to enjoy the fruit of his
labours; to eat and drink in moderation, freely, joyfully, and
thankfully; and make use of his riches, power, and authority, for his
own good, the good of his family for the present, and the good of his
fellow creatures; see [Ecc 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#021);

for that is his portion; what is allotted to him, and thus enjoyed, is a
very good one, and for which he has reason to be thankful;

for who shall bring him to see what shall be after him? to see who shall
succeed him, and what use they will make of what he leaves them; he
shall never return after death to see anything of this kind, nor shall
any acquaint him with it; he shall not be able to know when he is dead
what shall befall his sons, whether they will prosper or rio, so Jarchi;
wherefore it is best for him to enjoy his substance himself in a
comfortable way, and be beneficial to others, and not oppressive to
them. The Midrash illustrates it thus,

"who shall bring David to see what Solomon did? and who shall bring
Solomon to see what Rehoboam did?''

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ecclesiastes Chapter 4](ecc004)

</div>
