<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Esther Index](est.md)  
  [Previous](est005)  [Next](est007.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001.md)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ESTHER 6

Ahasuerus, not being able to sleep in the night, ordered the book of
records to be brought and read to him, where a fact of Mordecai's was
registered, and, upon inquiry, it appeared that nothing had been done to
him for it, [Est 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001.md) and Haman being
in the outward court, was ordered in, with whom the king consulted what
should be done to the man the king delighted to honour; to which Haman
gave answer, and was bid to do as he said, [Est
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004.md), which he did, but went home after
it confounded and sorrowful, and told his mournful case to his wife and
friends, who plainly foresaw his downfall, [Est
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#011.md).

[Esther 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 6:1</span></span>

On that night could not the king sleep,.... The night after he had been
at Esther's banquet, which it might be thought would rather have caused
sleep; and therefore Jarchi calls it a miracle; and no doubt it was
owing to the overruling providence of God, and not to anxious thoughts
about his neglect of Esther so long, nor what should be her request to
him, nor jealousy of any amorous intrigue with Haman, nor of any
conspiracy of theirs against his life:

and he commanded to bring the book of records of the chronicles; the
diaries or journal, in which memorable facts were recorded; this he did
to divert himself, and pass away time; though here also the providence
of God was specially concerned; for otherwise he might have sent for any
of his wives and concubines, or singing men and women, to have diverted
him:

and they were read before the king; until the morning, until it was time
to rise, as appears by what follows.

[Esther 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 6:2</span></span>

And it was found written,.... Upon reading, and in which there was also
a peculiar hand of Providence, directing to the reading of that part of
them in which the affair of Mordecai was registered: and if what the
latter Targum says is true, it was the more remarkable, that when
Shimshai the scribe, who was ordered to bring the book and read, and
who, according to the former Targum, was Haman's son, seeing what was
recorded of Mordecai, turned over the leaves of the book, being
unwilling to read it; but the leaves rolled back again, and he was
obliged to read it:

that Mordecai had told of Bigthana and Teresh, two of the king's
chamberlains, the keepers of the door, who sought to lay hand on the
King Ahasuerus; see [Est 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#021.md), and it
was usual in such diaries to record the names of persons, who, by any
actions, had deserved well of the king, that they might be rewarded as
there was an opportunity for it; and such, in the Persian language, were
called Orosangae, as Herodotus relates (o).

\(o\) Urania, sive, l. 8. c. 85.

[Esther 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 6:3</span></span>

And the king said, what honour and dignity hath been done to Mordecai
for this?.... He judged it an action worthy of regard, and what ought to
be rewarded, as it was the saving of his life; but had forgot whether
any royal favour had been shown to the person for it:

then said the king's servants that ministered unto him; the lords of his
bedchamber then in waiting:

there is nothing done for him; not on that account, nothing more than
what he had; he had an office at court before, but was not advanced to
anything higher on this account.

[Esther 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 6:4</span></span>

And the king said, who is in the court?.... Being in haste to confer
some honour on Mordecai for what he had done:

now Haman was come into the outward court of the king's house; though it
was early in the morning, being eager to get to the speech of the king
before he was engaged in any business, to obtain a grant from him:

to hang Mordecai on the gallows that he had prepared for him; of which
he made no doubt of having, and therefore had prepared for it.

[Esther 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 6:5</span></span>

And the king's servants said unto him, behold, Haman standeth in the
court,.... In the outward court; for into the inward court none might
enter without being called, for which he was waiting:

and the king said, let him come in; into his bedchamber; and it was of
God, no doubt, that Haman should be on the spot at this very time, when
the king was in the humour to do honour to Mordecai, and by him.

[Esther 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 6:6</span></span>

So Haman came in,.... But was prevented speaking to the king about the
business he came upon by the following speech of the king:

what shall be done unto the man whom the king delighteth to honour? he
mentions not the name of any man, that he might the more freely, and
unbiasedly, and disinterestedly give his advice; nor might the king know
of any resentment of Haman to Mordecai:

(now Haman thought in his heart, to whom would the king delight to do
honour more than to myself?) who had been advanced above all the princes
and nobles of the realm, and was now in such high honour both with the
king and queen, with whom he was to be at a banquet that day; and he
might conclude, that by putting this question to him, he could have in
view none but himself: Aben Ezra observes, that some from hence gather,
that this book was written by the spirit of prophecy, because none could
know the thoughts of the heart but God; but though he believes it to be
written by the Holy Ghost, yet, as he observes, Haman might disclose
this thought of his heart to his friends afterwards.

[Esther 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 6:7</span></span>

And Haman answered the king,.... At once, being very prompt to suggest
the honours he hoped to have done to himself:

for the man whom the king delighteth to honour; let the following things
be done.

[Esther 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 6:8</span></span>

Let the royal apparel be brought which the king useth to wear,.... Not a
whole suit of clothes, but a single garment; the purple robe, as both
the Targums, such as kings wore; that which Cyrus appeared in public in
was half purple, and half white, and no other person besides might wear
such an one (p); it was a capital crime with the Persians to wear any of
the king's apparel; Trebazus, an intimate of Artaxerxes, having begged
an old gown of him, it was granted, on condition that he would not wear
it, it being contrary to the laws of Persia; but he, regardless of the
order, appeared in it at court; which affront to the king was so
resented by the Persians, that they were for punishing him rigorously,
according to the law, had not Artaxerxes declared, that he had ordered
him to appear in that dress as his fool (q); hence Artabanus, though
uncle to Xerxes, was very unwilling to obey his orders, to put on his
royal robes, sit on his throne, and sleep on his bed (r); so that this
was a daring proposal in Haman, which he would never have ventured to
have made, had it not been for the great confidence he had in the king's
favour:

and the horse that the king rideth upon: the kings of Persia, as
Herodotus (s) relates, had horses peculiar to them, and those were
Nisaean horses, which were brought from Armenia, as Strabo says (t), and
were remarkable for their beauty (u); and if the same law obtained in
Persia as did in Judea, no man might ride on the king's horse any more
than sit on his throne, or hold his sceptre (w) and perhaps this horse
here was not proposed for the person to ride on, but to be led in state
before him; and though it is afterwards said that Mordecai rode on
horseback, yet it might not be on the king's horse, which might be only
led; and what follows seems to confirm it:

and the crown royal which is set upon his head; or, "let it be set", &c.
not the head of the man, but on the head of the horse; and so Aben Ezra;
and which sense is countenanced by the Targum, and by the Syriac
version, and is approved of by Vatablus and De Dieu; and which the order
of the words requires, the horse being the immediate antecedent; and no
mention is made of the crown afterwards, as set on the head of Mordecai;
nor would Haman have dared to advise to that, nor could it be granted;
but this was what was wont to be done, to put the royal crown on the
head of a horse led in state; and this we are assured was a custom in
Persia (x), as it is with the Ethiopians to this day (y); and so, with
the Romans, horses drawing triumphal chariots were crowned (z) which
Tertullian calls (a) public horses with their crowns.

\(p\) Xenophon Cyropaedia, l. 8. c. 23. (q) Plutarch. in Artaxerxe. (r)
Herodot. Polymnia, sive, l. 7. c. 15, 16. (s) Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 192.
(t) Geograph. l. 11. p. 365. (u) Julian. Opera, par. 1. Orat. 2. p. 94.
(w) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 2. sect. 5. (x) Brisson. apud Castell. Lexic.
col. 4008. (y) Alvarez Hist. Ethiop. c. 105. apud ib. col. 3869. (z)
Paschal. de Coronis, l. 8. c. 5. p. 536. (a) De Corona Militis, c. 13.

[Esther 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 6:9</span></span>

And let this apparel and horse be delivered to the hand of one of the
king's most noble princes,.... The one:

that they may array the man withal whom the king delighteth to honour;
and the other to be led in state before him:

and bring him on horseback through the street of the city; on another
horse, that all might see what honour was done him:

and proclaim before him; as before Joseph, when advanced next to
Pharaoh, [Gen 41:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#043.md) this was not to be
done by an herald, but by a nobleman, to whom the apparel and horse were
to be delivered, and was done by Haman, [Est
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#011.md),

thus shall it be done to the man whom the king delighteth to honour;
these were the words said in the proclamation, signifying this was the
man the king delighted to honour, and this the manner in which he would
have it done.

[Esther 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 6:10</span></span>

Then the king said to Haman, make haste,.... And without delay go into
the royal treasury, or wardrobe, as the Targum adds: "and take the
apparel"; the royal robe, the purple one, or one of the precious purple
robes; and then, as the same Targum, go to the king's stable, and take
thence the king's "horse", that stands in the chief place in the stable,
whose name is "Shiphregaz"; but how the Targumist came by the name of
it, I know not; however it was not unusual for kings to give a name to
their favourite horse, as Alexander the great did to his called
Bucephalus and even for all kings of Persia, as Darius Hystaspis (b):

as thou hast said, and do even so to Mordecai the Jew, that sitteth at
the king's gate; the person he meant this honour for he describes by
name, by nation, and by office, that there might be no mistake:

let nothing fail of all that thou hast spoken; the king objected not to
anything that had been proposed, and insisted on it that every thing be
done punctually by Haman as he had advised, and from which he could not
with honour recede; though nothing could be more mortifying to him to
do, to a man he came to court to get a grant to hang on a gallows he had
prepared.

\(b\) Herodot. Thalia, sive, l. 3. c. 88.

[Esther 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 6:11</span></span>

Then took Haman the apparel, and the horse,.... The one out of the
wardrobe, the other out of the stable, and the crown also no doubt,
though no mention is made of it, since the king made no objection to it,
yea, commanded that nothing fail of what had been spoken; but this was
included in the pomp and state of the led horse: and brought him on
horseback through the street of the city; the most grand and public part
of it, thus arrayed, and in this state: and proclaimed before him, thus
shall it be done to the man whom the king delighteth to honour; See Gill
on [Est 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#009.md).

[Esther 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 6:12</span></span>

And Mordecai came again to the king's gate,.... To attend his post and
office at court; which confirms what has been already hinted, that he
was in some office in the court, which this phrase is expressive of, and
not a porter at the gate; for it is not probable he should return to
such a station, after so much honour had been done him; and much less
that he returned to his sackcloth and fasting, as Jarchi and the former
Targum; since he might reasonably conclude things were taking a turn in
his favour, and that of his people; though as yet he knew not what
success Esther had had, to wait for which he returned to court:

but Haman hasted to his house; pushed forward as fast as he could:

mourning; at his sad disappointment:

and having his head covered; through grief and sorrow, confusion and
shame; so Demosthenes, being hissed, went home with his head covered
(c), as confounded and ashamed to be seen (d).

\(c\) Plutarch in Demosthene. (d) See more instances in Lively's
Chronology of the Persian monarchy, p. 18, 19.

[Esther 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 6:13</span></span>

And Haman told Zeresh his wife, and all his friends, every thing that
had befallen him,.... How he was prevented speaking to the king on this
errand he went; instead of which, he had the mortification of being
obliged to do the honour to Mordecai which he thought would never have
been given to any but himself, and so related the whole affair as above:

then said his wise men; before called his friends; perhaps they were
magicians and soothsayers he kept in his house, to advise with about the
proper methods and times of advancing himself, and destroying his
enemies:

and Zeresh his wife unto him; who joined with the wise men in giving her
opinion, and who set up for a knowing woman, and of whom Haman thought
highly:

if Mordecai be of the seed of the Jews; as it was said he was; and
therefore Haman had vowed and plotted revenge on the people of the Jews
for his sake:

before whom thou hast begun to fall; as he did, by being obliged to
execute the king's will in doing him so much honour:

thou shall not prevail against him; to get him hanged, or his people
destroyed, though he had prepared a gallows for the one, and had got an
edict for the other:

but shall surely fall before him: which might be concluded from his
being set above him, who would not fail of using his power and interest
to crush him, who had showed himself to be such an implacable enemy to
him; or they might have some knowledge of the history of the Jews, and
of what wonderful things God often did for them, in defeating the
designs of their enemies, and in raising them up from a low to an high
estate.

[Esther 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 6:14</span></span>

And while they were yet talking with him,.... About these things, and
giving their opinion of the issue of them, upon the present appearance
of them:

came the king's chamberlains, and hasted to bring Haman unto the banquet
that Esther had prepared; the time appointed for it being very near, or
quite up, and Haman being backward and dilatory, having no stomach to go
to it, and perhaps fearing worse things were coming upon him he should
hear of there.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 7](est007.md)

</div>
