<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Esther Index](est)  
  [Previous](est006)  [Next](est008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#001)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ESTHER 7

Esther, being solicited by the king to tell him her petition, asks for
her life and the lives of her people, who were sold to be destroyed,
[Est 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#001), the king, amazed at her
request, inquires who was the person that dared to do so vile a thing;
and was told by her it was Haman there present, [Est
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#005) on which the king went out into
the garden in wrath, and, returning, found Haman on Esther's bed, which
still more incensed him; and being told that Haman had prepared a
gallows for Mordecai, the king ordered that he himself should be hanged
upon it, which was done accordingly, [Est
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#007).

[Esther 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 7:1</span></span>

So the king and Haman came to banquet with Esther the queen. Or, "to
drink with her" (e), that is, wine; for in the next verse it is called a
banquet of wine; so they did according to the invitation the queen had
given them, [Est 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#008).

\(e\) "ut biberent", V. L. Tigurine version; "ad bibendum", Pagninus,
Montanus, Drusius, Vatablus.

[Esther 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 7:2</span></span>

And the king said again to Esther on the second day, at the banquet of
wine,.... This was the third time he put the following question to her,
being very desirous of knowing what she had to ask of him; and it was of
God that this was kept upon his mind, and he was moved to solicit her
petition, or otherwise it would not have been so easy for her to have
introduced it:

what is thy petition, Queen Esther? and it shall be granted thee: and
what is thy request? and it shall be performed, even to the half of my
kingdom; see [Est 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#003).

[Esther 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 7:3</span></span>

Then Esther the queen answered and said,.... Not rolling herself at the
king's knees, as Severus (f) writes; but rather, as the former Targum,
lifting up her eyes to heaven, and perhaps putting up a secret
ejaculation for direction and success:

if I have found favour in thy sight, O king; as she certainly had
heretofore, and even now:

and if it please the king, let my life be given me at my petition; not
riches, nor honour, nor any place or post at court, or in any of the
king's dominions for any friend of her's, was her petition; but for her
own life, that that might not be taken away, which was included in the
grant the king had made to Haman, though ignorantly, to slay all the
Jews, she being one of them:

and my people at my request; that is, the lives of her people also, that
was her request; her own life and her people's were all she had to ask.

\(f\) Hist. Sacr. l. 2.

[Esther 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 7:4</span></span>

For we are sold, I and my people, to be destroyed, to be slain, and to
perish,.... She makes use of these several words, to express the utter
destruction of her and her people, without any exception; not only the
more to impress the king's mind with it, but she has respect to the
precise words of the decree, [Est 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#013)
as she has also to the 10,000 talents of silver Haman offered to pay the
king for the grant of it, when she says, "we are sold", or delivered to
be destroyed:

but if we had been sold for bondmen and bondwomen, I had held my tongue:
should never have asked for deliverance from bondage, but have patiently
submitted to it, however unreasonable, unjust, and afflictive it would
have been; because it might have been borne, and there might be hope of
deliverance from it at one time or another; though it is said, slaves
with the Persians were never made free (g); but that being the case
would not have been so great a loss to the king, who would have reaped
some advantage by their servitude; whereas, by the death of them, he
must sustain a loss which the enemy was not equal to, and which he could
not compensate with all his riches; which, according to Ben Melech, is
the sense of the next clause:

although the enemy could not countervail the king's damage; or, "for the
enemy cannot", &c. the 10,000 talents offered by him, and all the riches
that he has, are not an equivalent to the loss the king would sustain by
the death of such a multitude of people, from whom he received so large
a tribute; but this the enemy regarded not; and so Jarchi interprets it,
the enemy took no care of, or was concerned about the king's damage; but
there is another sense, which Aben Ezra mentions, and is followed by
some learned men, who take the word for "enemy" to signify "distress",
trouble, and anguish, as in [Psa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001)
and read the words, "for this distress would not be reckoned the king's
damage" (h), or loss; though it would have been a distress to the Jews
to have been sold for slaves, yet the loss to the king would not be so
great as their death, since he would receive benefit by their service.

\(g\) Alex. ab. Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 3. c. 20. (h) "adversitas",
Drusius, De Dieu; "angustia", Cocc. Lexic. in rad.

[Esther 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 7:5</span></span>

Then the King Ahasuerus answered and said unto Esther the queen,.... The
words in the original text lie thus, "and the King Ahasuerus said, and
he said to Esther the queen"; which doubling of the word does not
signify, as Jarchi suggests, that before he spoke to her by a messenger,
or middle person, but, now he knew she was of a royal family, he spoke
to her himself; but it is expressive of the ruffle of his mind, and the
wrath and fury he was in, that he said it again and again, with a stern
countenance and great vehemence of speech:

who is he? and where is he? who is the man? and where does he live?

that durst presume in his heart to do so; that has boldness, impudence,
and courage enough to perpetrate so vile an action: or "that has filled
his heart" (i); the devil no doubt filled his heart to do it, see [Act
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#003), but the king had either forgot
the decree he had granted, and the countenance he had given him to
execute it; or, if he remembered it, he was now enraged that he should
be drawn in to such an action by him; and perhaps till now was ignorant
of Esther's descent, and knew not that she would be involved in the
decree.

\(i\) "qui replevit cor suum", Drusius; "implevit", De Dieu.

[Esther 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 7:6</span></span>

And Esther said, the adversary and enemy is this wicked Haman,.... Who
was not only an enemy to her and her people, but an adversary to the
king, by advising and persuading him to that which was to the loss of
his revenues, as well as of his reputation; also, she pointed at him,
and gave him his just character; her charge of wickedness upon him, as
it was true, it was honourably made to his face before the king, of
which, if he could, he had the opportunity of exculpating himself:

then Haman was afraid before the king and the queen; gave visible signs
of his confusion, consternation, and trouble of mind, by the fall of his
countenance, his pale looks, his trembling limbs, and quivering lips,
being struck dumb, and not able to speak one word for himself.

[Esther 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 7:7</span></span>

And the king, arising from the banquet of wine in his wrath, went into
the palace garden,.... Not being able to bear the sight of Haman, who
had done such an injury both to himself and to the queen; as also that
his wrath might subside, and he become more composed and sedate, and be
able coolly to deliberate what was fitting to be done in the present
case:

and Haman stood up to make request for his life to Esther the queen;
hoping that her tender heart might be wrought upon to show mercy to him,
and be prevailed on to entreat the king to spare his life; and this
request he made in the most submissive manner:

for he saw that there was evil determined against him by the king; he
perceived it both by the king's countenance, by the rage he went out in,
and by the threatening words which he very probably uttered as he went
out.

[Esther 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 7:8</span></span>

Then the king returned out of the palace garden into the place of the
banquet of wine,.... Being a little cooler, and more composed in his
mind, see See Gill on [Est 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#005).

and Haman was fallen upon the bed whereon Esther was; not the bed she
lay on to sleep in the night, (for it cannot be thought that it was a
bedchamber in which the banquet was,) but on the bed or couch on which
she sat or reclined at the banquet, as was the custom in the eastern
countries; now, "by", or "near" this, as the word may be rendered, Haman
fell down, even at the feet of the queen, begging for mercy; and some
think he might embrace her feet or knees, as was the custom of the
Greeks and Romans as they were supplicating (k); and so it seems to have
been with the Jews, see [Kg2 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#027), and
being in this posture, it might appear the more indecent, and give the
king an opportunity to say as follows:

then said the king, will he force the queen also before me in the
house?, that is, ravish her; not that he really thought so; it was not a
time nor place for such an action; nor can it be thought that Haman, in
such terror and confusion he was in, could be so disposed; and besides
there were others present, as the next clause shows: but this he said,
putting the worst construction on his actions, and plainly declaring his
opinion of him, that he thought him a man capable of committing the
vilest of crimes, and that his supplications were not to be regarded:

as the word went out of the king's mouth, they covered Haman's face; the
servants present, as a man unworthy to see the light; and they took what
the king said to amount to a sentence of condemnation, and that it was
his will he should die; and they covered his face, as condemned
malefactors used to be; which was a custom among the Greeks and Romans,
of which many instances may be given (l); though Aben Ezra says it was
the custom of the kings of Persia, that their servants covered the face
of him the king was angry with, that he might not see his face any more,
which was well known in the Persian writings.

\(k\) "Genibusque suas", &c. Claudian. de Raptu Proserpin l. 1. ver. 50.
& Barthius in ib. Vid. Homer. Iliad. 21. l. 75. Plin. l. 1. Ep. 18. (l)
"Caput obnubito", &c. Ciceron. Orat. 18. "pro Rabirio", Liv. Hist. l. 1.
p. 15. Curt. Hist. l. 6. c. 11. Vid. Solerium de Pileo, sect. 2. p. 20.
& Lipsii not. in lib. 1. c. 1. de Cruce, p. 203, 204.

[Esther 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 7:9</span></span>

And Harbonah, one of the chamberlains, said before the king,.... One of
the seven chamberlains, see [Est 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#010),
his name, with Josephus (y), is Sabouchadas.

Behold also, the gallows fifty cubits high, which Haman had made for
Mordecai, who had spoken good for the king, standeth in the house of
Haman. This man, perhaps, had seen it there, when he went with others to
fetch Haman to the banquet, [Est 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/est006.htm#014).
The sin of Haman is aggravated by preparing a gallows for a man before
he was accused to the king, or condemned, or had a grant for his
execution, and for a man that had well deserved of the king for
discovering a conspiracy against him, and whom now the king had
delighted to honour:

then the king said, hang him thereon; immediately, being ready prepared,
the king's word was enough, being a sovereign and tyrannical prince.

\(y\) Antiqu. l. 11. c. 6. sect. 11.

[Esther 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 7:10</span></span>

So they hanged Haman on the gallows that he had prepared for
Mordecai,.... Not within his house, [Est
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/est007.htm#009), but more probably in his
courtyard, in the sight of his family and friends; or, it may be, the
gallows was taken from thence, and set up without the city, where he was
hanged: for so it is said in the additions of the book of Esther,"For he
that was the worker of these things, is hanged at the gates of Susa with
all his family: God, who ruleth all things, speedily rendering vengeance
to him according to his deserts.'' (Esther 16:18)that he was hanged
without the gates of Shushan; see [Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015),

then was the king's wrath pacified; having inflicted punishment on such
a wicked counsellor of his, and the contriver of such mischief.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 8](est008)

</div>
