<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Esther Index](est.md)  
  [Previous](est002)  [Next](est004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001.md)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ESTHER 3

This chapter gives an account of the promotion of Haman, and of the
mortification of him by Mordecai, who refused to bow to him, upon which
he vowed revenge on him, and on all his people the Jews, [Est
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001.md), for which purpose, through a
false representation of them, he obtained letters of the king, and sent
to the deputies of all the provinces to destroy them all on a certain
day fixed, [Est 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007.md).

[Esther 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 3:1</span></span>

After these things,.... After the marriage of Esther, and the discovery
of the conspiracy to take away the king's life, five years after, as
Aben Ezra observe, at least more than four years, for so it appears from
[Est 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007.md)

did King Ahasuerus promote Haman the son of Hammedatha the Agagite; whom
both the Targums make to descend from Amalek, and to be of the stock or
family of Agag, the common name of the kings of Amalek; and so Josephus
(g); but this is not clear and certain; in the apocryphal Esther he is
said to be a Macedonian; and Sulpitius the historian says (h) he was a
Persian, which is not improbable; and Agag might be the name of a family
or city in Persia, of which he was; and Aben Ezra observes, that some
say he is the same with Memucan, see [Est
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#014.md),

and advanced him, and set his seat above all the princes that were with
him; erected a throne for him, higher than the rest, either of his own
princes and nobles, or such as were his captives, see [Kg2
25:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#028.md). It was the custom of the kings
of Persia, which it is probable was derived from Cyrus, to advance those
to the highest seats they thought best deserved it: says he to his
nobles, let there be seats with you as with me, and let the best be
honoured before others;--and again, let all the best of those present be
honoured with seats above others (i).

\(g\) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 11. c. 6.) sect. 5. (h) Hist. Sacr. l. 2. p.
78. (i) Xenophon, Cyropaedia, l. 8. c. 41.

[Esther 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 3:2</span></span>

And the king's servants that were in the king's gate,.... Or court, all
his courtiers; for it cannot be thought they were all porters, or such
only that

bowed and reverenced Haman; gave him divine honours, as to a deity; for
such were given to the kings of Persia (k), and might be given to their
favourites, and seems to be the case; for, though Haman might not erect
a statue of himself, or have images painted on his clothes, as the
Targum and Aben Ezra, for the Persians did not allow of statues and
images (l); yet he might make himself a god, as Jarchi, and require
divine worship, with leave of the king, which he had, yea, an order for
it:

for the king had so commanded concerning him; which shows that it was
not mere civil honour and respect, for that in course would have been
given him as the king's favourite and prime minister by all his
servants, without an express order for it; this, therefore, must be
something uncommon and extraordinary:

but Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence; which is a further proof
that it was not mere civil honour that was required and given; for that
the Jews did not refuse to give, and that in the most humble and
prostrate manner, and was admitted by them, [Sa1
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#008.md) [Kg1
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#016.md), nor can it be thought that
Mordecai would refuse to give it from pride and sullenness, and thereby
risk the king's displeasure, the loss of his office, and the ruin of his
nation; but it was such kind of reverence to a man, and worship of him,
which was contrary to his conscience, and the law of his God.

\(k\) Vid. Salden. Otia Theolog. l. 3. Exercitat. 1. sec. 4, 5. (l)
Laert. Prooem. ad Vit. Philosoph. p. 5, 6.

[Esther 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 3:3</span></span>

Then the king's servants, which were in the king's gate,.... Observing
the behaviour of Mordecai towards Haman from time to time:

said unto Mordecai, why transgressest thou the king's commandment? of
giving reverence to Haman, which they knew he could not be ignorant of.

[Esther 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 3:4</span></span>

Now it came to pass, when they spake daily unto him,.... Putting him in
mind of his duty to obey the king's command, suggesting to him the
danger he exposed himself to, pressing him to give the reasons of his
conduct:

and he hearkened not unto them; regarded not what they said, and
continued disobedient to the king's order, and disrespectful to Haman

that they told Haman, to see whether Mordecai's matters would stand;
they informed Haman that Mordecai refused to give him reverence as the
king had ordered; this they did to try whether such a conduct would be
suffered and bore with, and whether Mordecai would persevere in it when
taken notice of:

for he had told them that he was a Jew; which was all the reason he gave
why he would not reverence Haman; and a reason sufficient, because, by a
fundamental law of his religion, he was not to worship mere man, but God
only: and this confirms what has been before observed; for this would
have been no reason for refusing civil respect and honour, but was a
strong one for denying religious worship and reverence; and no wonder
that the Jews should refuse it, when even the Grecians, though Heathens,
refused to give the Persian kings the divine honours they required (m);
yea, the Athenians put Timagoras to death for prostrating himself in
such a manner to Darius (n); for the Persian kings were, as Aristotle
says (o), called Lord and God, and said to hear and see all things.

\(m\) Herodot. Polymnia, sive, l. 7. c. 136. Justin e Trogo. l. 6. c. 2.
Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 1. 21. (n) Plutarch. in Artaxerxe, Valer. Maxim.
l. 6. c. 3. (o) De Mundo, c. 6.

[Esther 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 3:5</span></span>

And when Haman saw that Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence,....
For, after the information given him, he observed and watched him, to
see whether he bowed and did him reverence or not:

then was Haman full of wrath; exceedingly displeased and angry; it was
such a mortification to him he could not bear.

[Esther 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 3:6</span></span>

And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone,.... That would not
be a sufficient gratification of his revenge; he was too low and mean a
person only to wreak his vengeance on; nothing short of his whole nation
would satisfy him:

for they had showed him the people of Mordecai; that they were the Jews;
for Mordecai had told the king's servants, that talked with him on the
subject, that he was a Jew, and gave that as a reason why he could not
and would not reverence Haman:

wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews that were throughout the
whole kingdom of Ahasuerus; even the people of Mordecai; and that not
merely to be revenged on Mordecai, but because he plainly saw, that both
by his example, and upon the same principle with him; they would all to
a man refuse to give him reverence; and therefore he was resolved to
root them out of the whole empire, that he might not be mortified by
them.

[Esther 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 3:7</span></span>

In the first month, that is the month Nisan,.... Which was the first
month of the sacred year of the Jews, by divine appointment, [Exo
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002.md), and there called Abib, and
answers to part of February and part of March; from hence it is clear
this book was written by a Jew, and very probably by Mordecai:

in the twelfth year of King Ahasuerus; four years and near two months
after his marriage of Esther, [Est
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#016.md),

they cast Pur, that is, the lot, before Haman; being a Persian word, it
is explained in Hebrew a lot, the word signifying "steel" in the Persian
language. Reland (p) conjectures that this was that sort of lot called
"sideromantia". Who cast this lot is not said; whether Haman himself, or
one of his servants: perhaps a diviner. The latter Targum calls him
Shimshai the scribe:

from day today, and from month to month, to the twelfth month, that is
the month Adar; which answers to part of January and part of February;
so that the lot was cast for every month and every day of the month
throughout the year, to find out which was the most lucky month, and
which the most lucky day in that month, to destroy the Jews in and none
could be found till they came to the last month, and the thirteenth day
of that month, [Est 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#013.md), the
providence of God so overruling the lot, that there might be time enough
for the Jews, through the mediation of Esther to the king, to prevent
their destruction; so in other nations the Heathens had their lucky and
unlucky days (q).

\(p\) Antiqu. Heb. par. 4. c. 12. sect. 1. (q) Vid. Macrob. Saturnal l.
1. c. 16. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 4. c. 20.

[Esther 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 3:8</span></span>

And Haman said unto King Ahasuerus, Or "had said" (r), as some choose to
render it; nor indeed is it likely that Haman should cast lots to know
when would be a proper time to destroy the Jews, until he had got leave
of the king to do it:

there is a certain people scattered abroad, and dispersed among the
people in all the provinces of thy kingdom; for, though many of the Jews
returned to their own land, on the proclamation of Cyrus, yet others
remained, being well settled as to worldly things, and not having that
zeal for God and his worship as became them, and not caring to be at the
trouble and expense of such a journey, and especially those of the ten
tribes; now Haman, through contempt of them, mentions them not by name,
only describes them as a scattered insignificant people:

and their laws are different from all people; concerning their diet and
observation of days, and other things; so Empedocles, an Heathen,
observes (s) of the Jews, that they were a separate people from all
others in those things; for he says,"they separated not only from the
Romans, but even from all men; for, having found out an unmixed way of
living, they have nothing common with men, neither table nor libations,
nor prayers, nor sacrifices, but are more separate from us than the
Susians or Bactrians, or the more remote Indians:"

neither keep they the king's laws; and, no doubt, he had a special
respect to the non-observance of the king's command to give him
reverence; and in like manner the Jews are represented by Heathen
writers, as by Tacitus (t), Juvenal (u), and others:

therefore it is not for the king's profit to suffer them; that is, to
dwell in his dominions; he got nothing by them, and they might be
prejudicial to his subjects, and poison them with their notions; and
since they were not obedient to the laws of the kingdom, it was not fit
and equitable that they should be continued in it.

\(r\) "dixerat enim", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius, so
Patrick. (s) Apud Philostrat. Vit. Apollon. l. 5. c. 11. (t) Hist. l. 5.
c. 4. (u) "Romanas antem soliti", &c. Satyr. 14. ver. 99.

[Esther 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 3:9</span></span>

If it please the king, let it be written, that they may be
destroyed,.... That is, a law made, signed and sealed, for their
destruction, and letters written and sent everywhere, ordering it to be
put in execution:

and I will pay ten thousand talents of silver to the hands of those who
have the charge of the business, to bring it into the king's treasury;
this he proposed, to prevent any objection that might be made from the
loss of tribute paid by this people to the king; and this was a very
large sum for him to pay out of his own estate, it being near four
millions of our money; it is computed by Brerewood (x) at 3,750,000
pounds; for as to what is suggested by some, that he intended to repay
himself out of the spoil of the Jews, it may be observed, that,
according to the king's letter, they that were employed in destroying
the Jews were to have the spoil for a prey or booty to themselves, [Est
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#013.md). Now this sum of money he
proposed not to put into the hands of them that should slay the Jews,
but into the hands of the king's receivers of the dues, that they might
lay it up in the king's treasury or exchequer.

\(x\) De Pret. & Ponder. Vet. Num. c. 5.

[Esther 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 3:10</span></span>

And the king took his ring from his hand, and gave it unto Haman, the
son of Hammedatha the Agagite, the Jews' enemy. As a token of his
affection for him, and a mark of honour to him; with the Persians (w)
for a king to give a ring to anyone was a token and bond of the greatest
love and friendship imaginable; and it may be this was given to Haman,
to seal with it the letters that were or should be written, giving order
for the destruction of the Jews. It seems as if as yet Esther had not
acquainted the king who her kindred and people were; or it can hardly be
thought he would have so easily come into such a scheme, or so highly
favoured an enemy of her people.

\(w\) Alex. ab. Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 1. c. 26. & l. 2. c. 19.

[Esther 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 3:11</span></span>

And the king said unto Haman, the silver is given unto thee,.... The
10,000 talents of silver Haman proposed to pay into the treasury were
returned to him, or the king out of his great munificence refused to
take them:

the people also, to do with them as seemeth good unto thee; that is, the
people of the Jews; he gave him full power to do with them as he thought
fit, and who breathing revenge upon them, would not spare them.

[Esther 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 3:12</span></span>

Then were the king's scribes called, on the thirteenth day of the first
month,.... The month Nisan, [Est 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007.md),
after Haman had leave and power from the king to destroy the Jews, and
his ring given him in token of it; the king's scribes or secretaries of
state were called together on that day, to write the letters for that
purpose:

and there was written according to all that Haman had commanded;
whatever he would have done; he had an unlimited power to do what he
pleased, and he made use of it, and directed the scribes what they
should write:

unto the king's lieutenants, and to the governors that were over every
province; the deputy governors of the one hundred and twenty seven
provinces, [Est 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)

and to the rulers of every people of every province; it seems there were
different people in every province, which had their rulers; and these
were sent to:

according to the writing thereof, and to every people after their
language; and letters were written in the language, and character of the
language, each people spoke, that they might be understood by them:

in the name of King Ahasuerus was it written, and sealed with the king's
ring. All this Haman took care to have done so early as the thirteenth
of Nisan, though the execution was not to be until the thirteenth of
Adar, eleven months after; partly that there might be time enough to
send the letters everywhere, even to the most distant parts; and chiefly
lest Ahasuerus should change his mind, and be prevailed upon to revoke
his grant; and, it may be, either to keep the Jews in continual dread,
or cause them to flee.

[Esther 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 3:13</span></span>

And the letters were sent by post into all the king's provinces,.... Or
by the runners (x); by which it seems as if these letters were carried
by running footmen, men swift of foot; or rather they were running
horses, on which men rode post with letters, and which the Persians
called Angari; a scheme invented by Cyrus, for the quick dispatch of
letters from place to place, by fixing horses and men to ride them at a
proper distance, to receive letters one from another, and who rode night
and day (y), as our mail men do now; and nothing could be swifter, or
done with greater speed; neither snow, nor rain, nor heat, nor night,
could stop their course, we are told (z): the purport of these letters
was:

to destroy, to kill, and to cause to perish, all Jews, both young and
old, little children and women, in one day, even upon the thirteenth day
of the twelfth month, which is the month Adar; see [Est
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#007.md). The orders were to destroy, by
any means whatsoever, all the Jews, of every age and sex, all in one
day, in all the provinces which are here named, that they might be cut
off with one blow: and to take the spoil of them for a prey; to be their
own booty; which was proposed to engage them in this barbarous work, to
encourage them in it to use the greater severity and dispatch.

\(x\) "in manu cursorum", Montanus; so the Tigurine version, Drusius, V.
L. Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (y) Xenophon. Cyropaedia, l. 8. c. 43.
(z) Herodot. Urania, sive, l. 8. c. 98.

[Esther 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 3:14</span></span>

The copy of the writing, for a commandment to be given in every
province, was published unto all people,.... Not only letters were sent
to the governors, but a copy, or the sum of the contents of them, was
published by heralds, or stuck up as with us, in various places, that it
might be publicly known by the common people everywhere:

that they should be ready against that day; and fall upon the people of
the Jews, and slay them, and seize on their goods as a prey.

[Esther 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 3:15</span></span>

The post went out, being hastened by the king's command,.... Both to set
out and make as much dispatch as possible:

and the decree was given in Shushan the palace; by the king, and with
the advice of his courtiers:

and the king and Haman sat down to drink; at a banquet which perhaps
Haman had prepared, in gratitude to the king for what he had granted
him, both being highly delighted with what had been done:

but the city Shushan was perplexed; the court was agreed, but the city
was divided, as the former Targum says, with the joy of strange nations,
and the weeping of the people of Israel, there being many Jews in the
city; with whom no doubt there were many in connection, through affinity
or friendship, or commerce, that were concerned for them; or, however,
were shocked at such a barbarous scheme; and which they knew not where
it would end, and how far they themselves might be involved in it, when
once a mob had such a power granted to them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 4](est004.md)

</div>
