<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Esther Index](est.md)  
  [Previous](est003)  [Next](est005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Esther Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001.md)

[Esther](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">est 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ESTHER 4

This chapter relates the mourning of Mordecai, and of the Jews in every
province, on account of the edict to destroy them, [Est
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001.md), the information Esther had of it,
and what passed between her and Mordecai, through Hatach, a chamberlain,
by whom he put her upon making a request to the king in their favour,
[Est 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#004.md), to which she at first
objected, because of a law in Persia which forbids any to come to the
king unless called, [Est 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#009.md), but
being pressed to it by Mordecai, she agreed, and ordered a general fast
among the Jews, [Est 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#013.md).

[Esther 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">est 4:1</span></span>

When Mordecai perceived all that was done,.... By the king, at the
instigation of Haman, against the Jews; which he came to the knowledge
of, either by some of the conflicts or by common fame, or on the sight
of the edicts which were published in Shushan; though the Jews think it
was made known to him in a supernatural way, either by Elijah, as the
former Targum (x), or by the Holy Ghost, as the latter:

Mordecai rent his clothes: both behind and before, according to the same
Targum; and this was a custom used in mourning, not only with the Jews,
but with the Persians also, as Herodotus (y) relates:

and put on sackcloth with ashes; upon his head, as the former Targum;
which was usual in mourning, even both; [Job
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#012.md)

and went out into the midst of the city; not Elam the province, as Aben
Ezra, but the city Shushan:

and cried with a loud and bitter cry; that all the Jews in the city
might be alarmed by it, and inquire the reason of it, and be affected
with it; and a clamorous mournful noise was used among the Persians, as
well as others, on sad occasions (z).

\(x\) So Midrash Esther, fol. 94. 1. (y) Thalia, sive, l. 3. c. ----.
Urania, sive, l. 8. c. 99. (z) Calliope, sive, l. 9. c. 24.

[Esther 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">est 4:2</span></span>

And came even before the king's gate,.... Or court, that Esther might if
possible be made acquainted with this dreadful calamity coming upon her
people:

for none might enter into the king's gate clothed with sackcloth: or
appear in such a dress at court, where nothing was admitted to damp the
pleasures of it.

[Esther 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">est 4:3</span></span>

And in every province whithersoever the king's commandment and his
decree came,.... For destroying the Jews on such a day, in every place
where they were to be found:

there was great mourning among the Jews, and weeping, and wailing; which
continued all day:

and many lay in sackcloth and ashes: all night; made use of no other bed
to lie on, nor clothes to cover them with.

[Esther 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">est 4:4</span></span>

So Esther's maids and her chamberlains came and told it her,.... Her
maids of honour and eunuchs that attended her, which they might tell her
merely as a piece of news, there being something shocking in it to
tender minds; or perhaps nothing more than that Mordecai was in
sackcloth; and they might have observed, by some incident or another,
that there was some connection between Mordecai and Esther, and that she
had a peculiar respect for him:

then was the queen exceedingly grieved; even though she might not know
the whole of the matter; but perceiving whatever it was it greatly
affected Mordecai, with whom she sympathized:

and she sent raiment to clothe Mordecai, and to take away his sackcloth
from him; that so he might appear at court, and she get better
intelligence of the cause of all this:

but he received it not; refusing to be comforted, or appear cheerful
under such melancholy circumstances.

[Esther 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">est 4:5</span></span>

Then called Esther for Hatach, one of the king's chamberlains, whom he
had appointed to attend upon her,.... Which, according to the Targum,
was Daniel (a); but it is not likely that Daniel should have lived to
this time; however, this officer was not only intrusted with the care of
the queen by the king, but she had also an high opinion of him, and
therefore employed him in this affair:

and gave a commandment to Mordecai, to know what it was, and why it was;
what was the reason of his appearing in sackcloth, and why he did not
receive the clothes she sent him.

\(a\) So Midrash Esther, fol. 94. 3. & Jarchi in Dan. iv. 5.

[Esther 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">est 4:6</span></span>

So Hatach went forth to Mordecai, unto the street of the city,.... Where
he was, in a public manner, expressing his grief and sorrow:

which was before the king's gate: that led to the royal palace.

[Esther 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">est 4:7</span></span>

And Mordecai told him of all that had happened unto him,.... How that,
for refusing to reverence Haman, he was incensed against him, and
against all the Jews for his sake; and had vowed revenge on them, and
had formed a scheme for the ruin of them:

and of the sum of money that Haman had promised to pay to the king's
treasuries for the Jews, to destroy them the 10,000 talents of silver he
proposed to pay into the king's exchequer in lieu of the Jews' tribute;
which Mordecai observes, to show how bent he was upon the destruction of
the Jews, and cared not what it cost him to gain his point; and perhaps
Mordecai as yet might not know that the king had remitted it.

[Esther 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">est 4:8</span></span>

Also he gave him the copy of the writing of the decree that was given at
Shushan to destroy them,.... Which had now been published in the city;
by which means Mordecai had had a sight of it, and had transcribed it;
see [Est 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#014.md)

to show it unto Esther, and to declare it unto her; what Haman intended
against the people of the Jews; as the Targum adds:

and to charge her; in his name; whose charges she had always regarded,
both before and since she was queen; or in the name of God:

that she should go in unto the king to make supplication unto him, and
to make request before him for her people; signifying there was a
necessity of doing it speedily, and of urging her request with great
earnestness and importunity, since it was not the life of a single
person, but the lives of a body of people, and her own, that lay at
stake.

[Esther 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">est 4:9</span></span>

And Hatach came and told Esther the words of Mordecai. Both the case of
the Jews, and the cause of it, and what he would have her do at this
critical juncture.

[Esther 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">est 4:10</span></span>

Again Esther spake unto Hatach,.... For there was no other way of
corresponding and conversing but by an eunuch; the wives of kings being
altogether under their watch and care:

and gave him commandment unto Mordecai; to go unto him, and what he
should say to him from her, which is as follows.

[Esther 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">est 4:11</span></span>

All the king's servants and the people of the king's provinces do
know,.... Not only the princes and courtiers, but all the king's
subjects, the meanest of them; there is scarce a person throughout the
whole empire, to whom the following law is not known; this is said, to
show how notorious it was:

that whosoever, whether man or woman, shall come unto the king into the
inner court, who is not called, there is one law of his to put him to
death; according to the former Targum, Human got this law to be made
now, to prevent any application to the king about this affair; but then
it would not have been so universally known as before declared; and it
appears that there was such a law among the Medes, made by Dejoces, that
none should go into the king's presence, but all should be done by
messengers (b); and this was altered among the Persians, for the seven
princes that slew Smerdis made an agreement, that whoever of them was
chosen king, the rest should have the liberty of going unto him when
they pleased, without a messenger to introduce them (c); it seems by
this account it was death to go into the inner parlour, where the king
usually was, without leave, or being called; this was made both for the
king's safety, and for awe and reverence of his majesty, and to prevent
any insinuations into him by ill-designing persons:

except such to whom the king shall hold out the golden sceptre, that he
may live; which, whether he would or not, was very precarious; so that a
person ran a great risk to go in uncalled:

but I have not been called to go in unto the king these thirty days;
which looked as if the king had not that fond affection for her he
formerly had; and therefore there was greater danger in going in to him
uncalled, and the less hope of success.

\(b\) Herodot. Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 99. (c) Herodot. Thalia, sive, l. 3.
c. 84.

[Esther 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">est 4:12</span></span>

And they told to Mordecai Esther's, words. The messengers she sent to
him.

[Esther 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">est 4:13</span></span>

Then Mordecai commanded to answer Esther,.... Gave in charge to the
messengers what they should say to Esther from him, by way of reply:

think not with thyself that thou shall escape in the king's house, more
than all the Jews; signifying that her being queen, and in the king's
palace, would be no protection to her; and she would be no safer there
than the Jews elsewhere, since they had no greater enemies any where
than in the king's court; and it was or would be known of what nation
she was, and therefore must not expect to escape the fury of the enemy.

[Esther 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">est 4:14</span></span>

For if thou altogether holdest thy peace at this time,.... And will not
speak to the king in favour of the Jews, because of the danger she would
be exposed to in doing it:

then shall there enlargement and deliverance arise to the Jews from
another place; Mordecai seemed confident of it, that by some means or
another the Jews would be delivered; if not through the intercession of
Esther, yet from some other quarter, or by some other hand:

but thou and thy father's house shall be destroyed; for such neglect of
the people of God when in distress, want of pity to them, and not
exerting herself as she might in their behalf; so that seeing she and
her family must perish, it was better to perish in a good cause than in
a bad one:

and who knoweth whether thou art come to the kingdom for such a time as
this? he intimates that he believed that the providence of God had
raised her to that dignity, that she might be an instrument of saving
his people in the time of their distress; and this he said to encourage
her to make the experiment.

[Esther 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">est 4:15</span></span>

Then Esther bade them return Mordecai this answer. Which follows, and
was sent by the messengers she sent the above to him.

[Esther 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">est 4:16</span></span>

Go, gather together all the Jews that are present in Shushan,.... To
acquaint them with what follows; but not to continue in a body together,
which might cause suspicion of an ill design in them; according to the
latter Targum, 12,000 chosen priests were found in it; but that must be
an exaggeration of their number; it can hardly be thought there were so
many Jews in all there:

and fast ye for me; that is, pray for her, that she might have courage
to go in to the king, and meet with success; for prayer was the
principal thing, fasting only an accessory to it, and as fitting for it,
and expressive of affliction and humiliation of soul:

and neither eat nor drink three days, night nor day; it was to be a
continued fast unto the third day; as Aben Ezra interprets it, they were
not to eat at evening, but fast two whole days, and two whole nights,
until the third day came, on which Esther went in to the king, [Est
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/est005.htm#001.md).

I also and my maidens will fast likewise; in the same manner and as
long; these maids of honour were either proselytes, perhaps of her
making, or Jewish ladies, she being allowed by the king to choose whom
she pleased:

and so will I go in unto the king, which is not according to the law; or
"afterwards", or "and then" (d) when they, and she and her maids, had
fasted and prayed so long, then she was determined in the strength of
the Lord to go into the king's presence with her petition, though it was
contrary to law:

and if I perish, I perish; signifying, that she readily and cheerfully
risked her life for the good of her people; and if such was the pleasure
of God, that she should lose it, she was content, and acquiesced in his
will, leaving herself entirely in his hands, to dispose of her as he
thought fit.

\(d\) "et postea", Noldius, p. 198. No. 899. so the Targum, Sept. "et
tune", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "tum", Tigurine version.

[Esther 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/est004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">est 4:17</span></span>

So Mordecai went his way,.... About the business he was directed to; the
word used having sometimes the signification of passing over or
transgressing, Jarchi interprets it of Mordecai's transgressing the
command, by fasting on a festival; the letter being written on the
thirteenth of Nisan, [Est 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#012.md), the
next day was the passover, on which he supposes the fast began; and the
three days were, the fourteenth, fifteenth, and sixteenth of the month,
and belonged to the feast of the passover and of unleavened bread; so
the Targum:

and did according to all that Esther had commanded him; got the Jews
together, and kept a fast three days; according to the Midrash (e) they
were the thirteenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth of Nisan.

\(e\) Midrash Esther, fol. 94. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Esther Chapter 5](est005.md)

</div>
