<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo021)  [Next](exo023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 22:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 22

This chapter contains various laws concerning theft, [Exo
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001), concerning damage done to fields
and vineyards by beasts, and to corn in stacks or standing, by fire,
[Exo 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#005), concerning anything or
creature deposited in the hands of a neighbour, and they be stolen or
lost by one means or another, [Exo
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007), concerning anything borrowed,
and it comes to any damage, [Exo
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#014), concerning fornication, [Exo
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#016) concerning witchcraft,
bestiality, and idolatry, [Exo 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018)
concerning oppression, and affliction of the stranger, fatherless, and
widow, [Exo 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021) concerning taking
usury and pledges, [Exo 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025),
concerning irreverence to magistrates, [Exo
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028), concerning the offering of
firstfruits to God, [Exo 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029) and the
chapter is concluded with a prohibition of eating anything torn by
beasts, [Exo 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031)

[Exodus 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 22:1</span></span>

If a man shall steal an ox or a sheep,.... In which the substance of men
chiefly lay in those times, and particularly the people of Israel, who
were now come out of Egypt, with their flocks and herds, and these lying
near together, were the more liable to be stolen; and hence also the
laws in the preceding chapter concerning oxen and damages done by them,
and oxen and sheep are only mentioned; perhaps chiefly because used in
sacrifice, as well as serviceable for other things; not but that
stealing other cattle and other things were criminal and forbidden, and
to be punished in proportion:

and kill it, or sell it; either of which cases would plainly show that
he took it away with an intention to deprive the owner of it, and to
convert it to his own use:

he shall restore five oxen for an ox, and four sheep for a sheep; the
reason of this difference, five being obliged to be given for the one,
and but four for the other, is, because the one was more valuable than
the other, as well as more useful, and also more easily stolen, and
therefore the greater mulct or fine was laid upon the theft of it, to
deter from it: the Targum of Jonathan expresses the reason of the law
thus; five for oxen, because the theft of them hindered from ploughing,
or made to cease from it; and for sheep but four, because there was
trouble in the theft of them, and there was no tillage or agriculture by
them: and Saadiah Gaon observes, that the damage that comes to the owner
of the ox is more than that by a lamb, because with it, the ox, he
ploughs, which is a creature that was used in those countries to be
employed in that service, as well as in treading out the corn:
Maimonides (u) accounts for it thus,"the restitution of the theft of
oxen is increased by one, because the theft of them is easy; sheep are
fed in flocks, and are easily kept and watched, and can scarcely be
taken away by theft but in the night; but oxen are fed scattered here
and there, and therefore cannot be so easily kept by the herdsmen; hence
also their theft used to be more common:''four fold restitution was in
use with the ancient Persians, with whom it was a rule,"whoever took any
substance of another, in retaliation they took fourfold from him, and if
he restored it, he gave fourfold of the same (w).''

\(u\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c. 41. (w) Lib. Shed-dar, apud Hyde Relig.
Vet. Pers. p. 472.

[Exodus 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 22:2</span></span>

If a thief be found breaking up,.... An house, in order to steal money,
jewels, household goods, &c. or breaking through any fence, hedge, or
wall of any enclosure, where oxen, or sheep, or any other creatures are,
in order to take them away: the Targum of Jonathan is,"if in the hole of
a wall (or window of it) a thief be found;''that is, in the night, as
appears from the following verse, "if the sun", &c. to which this is
opposed, as Aben Ezra observes; some render it, with a digging
instrument (x); and it is a Jewish canon (y), that"if anyone enter with
a digging instrument: he is condemned on account of his end;''his
design, which is apparent by the instrument found upon him; for, as
Maimonides (z) observes,"it is well known, that if anyone enters with a
digging instrument, that he intends, if the master of the house opposes
him to deliver his goods out of his power, that he will kill him, and
therefore it is lawful to kill him; but it does not signify whether he
enters with a digging instrument, either by the way of the court, or
roof;"

and be smitten that he die be knocked down with a club, by the master of
the house, or any of his servants, or be run through with a sword, or be
struck with any other weapon, to hinder him from entrance and carrying
off any of the goods of the house, and the blow be mortal: there shall
no blood be shed for him: as for a man that is murdered; for to kill a
man when breaking into a house, and, by all appearance, with an
intention to commit murder, if resisted, in defence of a man's self, his
life and property, was not to be reckoned murder, and so not punishable
with death: or, "no blood" shall be "unto him" (a); shall be imputed to
him, the man that kills the thief shall not be chargeable with his
blood, or suffer for shedding it; because his own life was risked, and
it being at such a time, could call none to his assistance, nor easily
discern the person, nor could know well where and whom he struck.

\(x\) "cum perfossorio", Pagninus; "cum instrumento perfosserio",
Tigurine version. (y) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 8. sect. 6. (z) Comment. in
ib. (a) "non ei sanguines", Montanus, Vatablus, Drusius.

[Exodus 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 22:3</span></span>

If the sun be risen upon him,.... Either upon the thief, or upon the
master of the house, or the person that finds the thief and smites him
that he dies; it matters not which it is interpreted, it is true of
both, for when it is risen on the one, it is on the other:

there shall be blood shed for him; the person that kills him shall die
for it: the Targum of Jonathan is,"if it is as clear as the sun (and so
Jarchi), that not to kill any he entered, and he should kill him, there
is guilt of shedding innocent blood:''because coming at broad daylight,
and when the sun was up, it was a plain case he came not with a design
to murder, but only to steal; besides, being at such a time, the master
of the house could call for help and assistance, and take him; which is
what is suggested he should do, and not take away his life, but oblige
him, if he had got any of his goods, to restore them, as follows:

for he should makes full restitution; by returning them and as much
more, as the following verse shows:

if he have nothing, then he shall be sold for his theft, by the
sanhedrim, or court, of judicature: as the Targum of Jonathan, before
whom he should be brought, and the theft proved upon him, and unto the
year of the remission or release, as the same Targum; nor were such to
be sold to strangers, or to serve forever, for they were to be dismissed
after six years, as Josephus (b) observes: and it is a canon with the
Jews (c), that,"an Hebrew servant whom the sanhedrim sell, they do not
sell him but to an Israelite, or to a proselyte of
righteousness;''according to the Targum of Jonathan, it seems as if he
was to be sold to the person from whom he stole, since it is,"he shall
he sold to him;''but if not, however, the price he was sold at was to be
given to him for a recompence of his loss; so says Maimonides (d),"if he
have not goods, neither movable nor immovable the sanhedrim sell him,
and give the price to him that is injured, as it is said: "if he have
nothing", &c. and adds, a man is sold for his theft but not a woman
(e):''from hence it appears that theft was not a capital crime by the
law of Moses: Draco is said to be the first who made it so; but his law
being thought by the Athenians to be too severe, was annulled by them
(f): the law of the twelve tables, with the Romans greatly agrees with
the Mosaic laws about theft; these permitted to kill a thief who should
be taken in open theft, if either when he committed the theft it was
night or if in the daytime, and he defended himself with weapons when
about to be taken (g) or, as elsewhere expressed (h), an open thief was
delivered to servitude to him who was robbed, but nocturnal thief it was
lawful to kill by the law of the twelve tables.

\(b\) Antiqu. l. 16. c. 1. sect. 1. (c) Maimon. Abadim. c. 1. sect. 3.
(d) Hilchot Genubah, c. 3. sect. 11. (e) So Misn. Sotah, c. 3. sect, 8.
(f) A. Gell Noct. Attic. l. 11. c. 18. (g) Ib. (h) Ib. l. 20. c. 1.

[Exodus 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 22:4</span></span>

If the theft be certainly found in his hand alive,.... Or, "in finding
be found" (i), be plainly and evidently found upon him, before
witnesses, as the Targum of Jonathan; so that there is no doubt of the
theft; and it is a clear case that he had neither as yet killed nor sold
the creature he had stolen, and to could be had again directly, and
without any damage well as it would appear by this that he was not an
old expert thief, and used to such practices, since he would soon have
made away with this theft in some way or another:

whether it be ox, or ass, or sheep, or any other creature; and even, as
Jarchi thinks, anything else, as raiment, goods, &c.

he shall restore double; two oxen for an ox, two asses for an ass, and
two sheep for a sheep: and, as the same commentator observes, two living
ones, and not dead ones, or the price of two living ones: so Solon made
theft, by his law, punishable with death, but with a double restitution
(k); and the reason why here only a double restitution and not fourfold
is insisted on, as in [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001) is,
because there the theft is persisted in, here not; but either the thief
being convicted in his own conscience of his evil, makes confession, or,
however, the creatures are found with alive, and so more useful being
restored, and, being had again sooner, the loss is not quite so great.

\(i\) "inveniendo inventum fuerit", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator. (k) A.
Gell, l. 11. c. 18.

[Exodus 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 22:5</span></span>

If a man shall cause a field or vineyard to be eaten,.... Which is not
his own, by putting cattle into it to feed upon it, as it is explained
in the next clause:

and shall put in his beast, and shall feed in another man's field; do
damage in one or both those two ways, either by his feet treading down
the grass and fruits of the earth, which the Rabbins, as Jarchi says,
think, is meant by putting in his beast; or with his beast eating up the
same, which is intended by the latter phrase:

of the best of his own field, and of the best of his own vineyard, shall
he make restitution for what damage is done by his beast in his
neighbour's field or vineyard; and this held good of any garden or
orchard injured in like manner; and it is a general rule with the Jews,
that when any damage is sustained, he that does the damage is obliged to
pay with the best the earth produces (l), even though better than was
the man's that suffered the loss, that for the future he might be more
careful of doing injury to another (m).

\(l\) Misc. Bava Kama, c. 1. sect. 1. (m) Bartenora in Misn. Gittin, c.
5. sect. 1.

[Exodus 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 22:6</span></span>

If fire break out,.... Even though of itself, as Jarchi interprets it:

and catch in thorns a thorn hedge or fence, with which cornfields might
be en closed:

so that the stacks of corn, or the standing corn, or the field, be
consumed therewith; whether it be corn cut down, bound up in sheaves,
and laid up in heaps or stacks, or whether it be yet growing, and not
fully ripe, at least not cut down, or any other fruits of the field; if
the fire that takes the thorns which are near them should reach to
those, and kindle upon them and destroy them:

he that kindleth the fire, shall surely make restitution: that is,
though he kindles the fire upon his own ground, yet being careless of
it, it breaks out without his intention and design, and catches hold on
a thorn hedge between him and his neighbour's field, and so spreads
itself to the corn there, whether standing or in stacks, or to other
fruits either lying or growing there; now, though he did not kindle the
fire in the corn, and among the stacks or heaps of fruit in his
neighbours field, yet, for his carelessness in not looking after the
fire he had kindled in his own field, he was to make good all the
damages his neighbour sustained hereby: the Jewish canons relating to
this affair are these;"if a man kindles a fire by the hands of a deaf
man, or a fool, or a child, he is free by human judgment, but he is
bound by the judgment of heaven (that is, to make restitution); if he
kindles it by the hand of a knowing and understanding man, he is bound;
one brings fire and another "afterwards" brings wood, he that brings the
wood is bound; one brings wood and another "afterwards" brings fire, he
that brings the fire is bound; "after that", another comes and blows the
flame (or fire), he is bound; "but if" the wind blows it they are all
free; he that kindles fire and it consumes wood or stones, or dust, he
is bound, as it is said, [Exo 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#006) "if
fire break out", &c. if the fire passes over a fence four cubits high,
or a public road, or a river, he is free (n);''those two things last
mentioned, feeding on another man's field and fire, with the ox and the
pit, observed in the preceding chapter, are with the Misnic doctors (o),
the four fathers' fountains, or sources of damages.

\(n\) Bartenora in Misn. Gittin, c. 5. sect. 4. (o) Ib. c. 1. sect. 1.

[Exodus 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 22:7</span></span>

If a man shall deliver unto his neighbour money or stock to keep,....
Without any reward for keeping it, as the Targum of Jonathan; and so
other Jewish writers (p) understand this passage of such as keep a
deposit freely, having nothing for it; whether it be money or goods,
gold, silver, jewels, raiment, household stuff or any kind of vessels or
instruments used in the house, or in trade; and also cattle, as appears
from [Exo 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#009).

and if it be stolen out of the man's house; into whose custody it was
delivered:

if the thief be found, let him pay double: the worth of what is stolen,
agreeably to the law in [Exo 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#004) that
is, if it was found in his hands; but if he had disposed of it, then he
was to pay five fold or four fold, as in [Exo
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001), and so runs the Jewish canon
(q),"if anyone delivers to his neighbour a beast or vessels, and they
are stolen or lost, he shall make restitution; but if he will not swear,
for they say, one that keeps for nothing, may swear and be free; then if
the thief should be found he shall pay double; if he has killed or sold,
he shall pay four fold or five fold: to whom shall he pay? to him with
whom the depositum is: if he swears, and will not pay, and the thief is
found, he shall pay double; if he has killed or sold he shall pay four
fold and five fold: to whom shall he pay? to the owner of the
depositum.''

\(p\) Jarchi in ver. 10. Bartenora in Misn. Shebuot, c. 6. sect. 5. (q)
Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 3. sect. 1.

[Exodus 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 22:8</span></span>

If the thief be not found,.... And so no account can be given of the
goods deposited, what is become of them, and it becomes a doubtful case
whether they have been stolen or embezzled, and there is suspicion of
the latter:

then the master of the house shall be brought unto the judges: here
called Elohim, gods, because they were God's vicegerents, and
represented him, and acted under his power and authority; and who at
this present were Moses, and those that judged the people under him, and
afterwards the seventy elders, and all such who in succeeding times were
judges in Israel, and bore the office of civil magistrates; before these
the master of the house, or the person who had any goods committed to
his care, and they were lost, was to be brought and put to his oath, and
upon it examined, in order to find out what was become of the goods
committed to him: to see whether he has put his hand to his neighbour's
goods: took them to himself, made use of them, or disposed of them to
his own advantage, and which was no other than a kind of theft.

[Exodus 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 22:9</span></span>

For all manner of trespass,.... With respect to what is committed to a
man's trust, and it is lost to the owner of it, there must be somewhere
or other a trespass committed, either by the person into whose hands it
was put, or by a thief that has stolen it from him:

whether it be for ox, for ass, for sheep, for raiment, or for any manner
of lost thing by which it appears that either of these, or any other
cattle not named, as well as money and vessels, or household goods, or
goods in trade, were sometimes, or might be lodged in the hands of
another as a depositum for safety or convenience; and for which, or any
other so deposited, and lost:

which another challengeth to be his, or affirms that he put into the
hands of his neighbour, to be kept by him for him; "or who shall say
this is he", or "he is" the person into whose hands I put it, or this is
"it" (r); such and such were the thing or things I delivered to him:

the cause of both parties shall come before the judges; who were to hear
what each party had to say, and to examine the witnesses each of them
brought, and consider the nature of the evidence given, and to judge and
determine:

and whom the judges shall condemn; or "pronounce wicked" (s), as having
done a wicked thing; either the one as having brought a false accusation
against his neighbour, charging him with a depositum he never had, or
the other as having converted it to his own use:

he shall pay double unto his neighbour; either the depositor, who
pretended to be so and was not, but brought a false charge against his
neighbour, or a false witness, as Jarchi, such as one was to pay double
to the person charged wrongfully; or, on the other hand, the person with
whom the depositum was put, if it appeared that he had acted a
fraudulent part, and abused his trust, then he was to pay double to the
depositor.

\(r\) "qui dixerit quod illud hoc", Montanus; "quum dixerit illud ipsum
esse", Junius & Tremellius; "de qua dixerit aliquis illum ipsum esse",
Piscator; so Ainsworth. (s) Vid. Ainsworth.

[Exodus 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 22:10</span></span>

If a man deliver to his neighbour an ass, or an ox, or a sheep, or any
beast to keep,.... And he keeps it without a reward, as the Targum of
Jonathan; but Jarchi and Aben Ezra more rightly interpret this of one
that keeps for hire, as herdsmen, shepherds, &c. The Jews say (t) there
are"four sorts of keepers; he that keeps for nought (or freely), he that
borrows, he that takes hire, and he that hires; he that keeps for nought
swears in all cases (and is free), he that borrows pays for all (that is
lost or stolen, &c.) he that takes hire, and he that hires, swear on
account of that which is torn, or carried away, or dies, and they pay
for that which is lost or stolen,''which are the cases after supposed:

and it die; either of the above, or any other under the care of another;
that is, dies of itself, not being killed by any, and its death sudden,
and not easily accounted for:

or be hurt; receive any damage in any part, though it die not; or "be
broken" (u); have any of its limbs or bones broken; or be torn by a wild
beast, as the Targum of Jonathan adds:

or driven away; from the flock or herd by thieves or robbers, or rather
carried captive by an enemy in an hostile way, see [Exo
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#012),

no man seeing it; die, or be hurt, or carried off; and so, as the above
Targum paraphrases it, there is no witness that sees and can bear
witness, that is, to any of the said things which have happened to it.

\(t\) Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 7. sect. 8. (u) "confractum", Pagninus,
Montanus; "fractum", Junius & Tremelius, Piscator, Drusius; so
Ainsworth.

[Exodus 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 22:11</span></span>

Then shall an oath of the Lord be between them both,.... Either by the
one, the keeper, for the satisfaction of the owner, or by them both; by
the owner, that he delivered such and such cattle to the keeper; and by
the keeper, that he was no ways concerned in the death, hurt, or
carrying off of the same: and this is called "the oath of the Lord", not
only because in this law required by him, but because sworn by him, or
in his name, and made before him, in his presence, who is hereby
appealed unto; and who is called upon to take vengeance on the person
that takes the oath of perjury; and such an oath only is a lawful one,
men are to swear only by the Lord. But this oath was not tendered to
anyone:"if a man was suspected of an oath (i.e. of perjury) they might
not give him his oath, neither the oath of the law, nor the oath from
their words (the scribes), nor the oath of imposition (imposed by the
wise wen); and even though he that brought the action would have it,
they might not hearken unto him: if a man has swore falsely a rash oath,
or an oath of testimony, or an oath concerning anything deposited, or a
vain oath, lo, he is suspected of an oath, and so everyone that is
rejected for witness on account of any transgression (w).''The oath to
be taken by the keeper, and who indeed seems to be the only person that
was to take one, was, "that he hath not put his hand unto his
neighbour's goods"; so as either to kill or maim, or drive away, or
suffer to be driven away, any of the cattle committed to his care, or
that he had not disposed of them to his own use and profit:

and the owner of it shall accept thereof; of the oath, as the Targum of
Jonathan and Jarchi, and so be satisfied, and give no further trouble,
such an oath being for the confirmation of the thing, and to put an end
to strife; or he shall take the ass, ox, or sheep, as it was, and be
content; but then, though he might take the dead or maimed one, he could
not take that which was driven or carried away, wherefore the first
sense, is best:

and he shall not make it good; or pay for it to the owner what it was
worth.

\(w\) Maimon. Hilchot Toan Venitan, c. 2. sect. 1, 2.

[Exodus 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 22:12</span></span>

And if it be stolen from him,.... Or "but if" (x) it was taken away by
theft; and that "from with him" (y), as it may be literally rendered,
from among his own cattle, and they not taken; and he being present,
pretending to have an eye upon them and keep them, but was careless and
negligent, at least, if he did not connive at the theft:

he shall make restitution to the owner thereof; for in such a case there
was ground for suspicion of fraud; however, there was apparent
carelessness, and it was but just he should make restitution, since he
had hire or wages for keeping it; which is the reason Aben Ezra gives
for it, and is suggested by the Targum of Jonathan; which adds to the
former clause, by way of explanation,"that which was with him to be kept
for a reward.''

\(x\) "si autem", Drusius. (y) "e cum eo", Montanus.

[Exodus 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 22:13</span></span>

If it be torn in pieces,.... By some wild beast, at least as pretended:

then let him bring it for witness; part of that which is torn, that it
may be witness for him that it was torn, as in [Amo
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#012) as Aben Ezra observes; and so the
Jerusalem Targurn,"let him bring of the members of it a witness,''which
would make it a clear case that it had been so used; but it is possible
that the whole carcass might be carried off, and nothing remain to be
brought as a proof of it; wherefore the Targum of Jonathan is,"let him
bring witnesses;''and so some versions render it (z); and to this agrees
Jarchi, whose note is,"let him bring witnesses of its being torn by
violence, and he is free,''such who saw it done; but it is before
supposed, that such cattle may be hurt, broken, or maimed, no man seeing
it, [Exo 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#010) and therefore in such a
case no witnesses could be brought, wherefore the first sense seems
best:

and he shall not make good that which was torn; or shall not pay for it,
pay the price of it, as much as it is worth. Here Jarchi
distinguishes,"there is that which is torn, for which a man pays, and
there is that which is torn, for which he does not pay; that which is
torn by a cat, or a fox, or a marten (a kind of weasel), he pays for,
but that which is torn by a wolf, a lion, or a bear, he does not pay
for:''the reason of which is, because it is thought the keeper might
have preserved and delivered from the former, and therefore was
culpable, when it was not in his power to save from the latter; and the
Misnic doctors observe, that one wolf is not violence, but two are; so
that what is torn by one, the keeper is bound to pay for, but not what
is torn by more. But two dogs are not violence, unless they come from
two different quarters, and then they are: a single thief is violence,
and so is a lion, a bear, a leopard, a basilisk, and a serpent, and this
only when they come willingly, and of themselves; but if they (the
cattle) are brought to places where there are troops of wild beasts, and
thieves, it is no violence (a), and in such a case the keepers are
liable to pay; and so unless he makes use of staves, and calls in other
shepherds to his assistance, as Maimonides (b) observes, when it is in
his power to do it; and so at least might make an attempt to save or
rescue the cattle.

\(z\) "adducet eum testem", Pagninus, Montanus; "adducat ille testem",
Munster, Fagius. (a) Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 7. sect. 9. (b) Hilchot
Shecirat, c. 3. sect. 6.

[Exodus 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 22:14</span></span>

And if a man borrow ought of his neighbour,.... Any beast, as it should
seem, as an ox to plough with, an ass, horse, or camel to ride on,
though the Jewish writers carry it also to any kind of household stuff:

and if he be hurt or die; if any damage comes to it, or it dies while it
is in the borrower's hands, and when employed in that work for which he
borrowed it; the Targum of Jonathan is,"and the vessel should be broke,
or the beast die:''and the owner thereof being not with it; at the time
of its being hurt, or of its death, and so could not be so well
satisfied whether used well or not, nor how the damage and death came to
it:

he shall surely make it good; pay the full price for it it is worth;
which, though it may seem hard, was necessary, in order to make men
careful of things they borrowed, and that lenders may not be losers for
their kindness.

[Exodus 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 22:15</span></span>

But if the owner thereof be with it,.... When it is hurt or dies; for in
some cases the owner might go along with his beast, being borrowed or
hired to do work with it; or, however, being upon the spot, must be
satisfied that it was not ill used; and it may be reasonably presumed he
would do all he could to preserve it: and this being the case:

he shall not make it good; that is, the borrower, but the loss would lie
upon the lender; seeing this might have been the case if it had been at
home, and not borrowed or lent. The Jewish writers understand all this
in a different manner, that if the owner is not with it in the time of
borrowing, though he is with it in the time of its being hurt, or of its
death, the borrower must pay; but if he was with it in the time of
borrowing, though not in the time of its receiving damage, or of its
death, the borrower was free (c); for, as Jarchi says, whether it be in
that work (for which he was borrowed), or in another work (it matters
not), if he was with it at the time of borrowing, there was no necessity
of his being with it at the time of its hurt or death. The reason of
which, I must confess, I do not understand; unless the meaning is, that
it was necessary that the owner, and the beast, should be both borrowed
or hired together; and which indeed seems to be the sense of the Misnah,
or tradition (d), which runs thus,"if a man borrows a cow, and borrows
or hires its owner with it; or if he hires or borrows the owner, and
after that borrows the cow, and it dies, he is free, as it is said, [Exo
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#015) but if he borrows the cow, and
afterwards borrows or hires the owner, and it dies, he is bound to pay,
as it is said, [Exo 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#013) if his owner
is not with it, &c.''If it be an hired thing, it came for its hire; that
is, if the beast which was come to some damage, or was dead, was hired,
and not borrowed, then, whether the owner was with it or not at that
time, he could demand no more than hire, and the person that hired it
was obliged to pay that and no more; or if the owner himself was hired
along with his beast, and so was present when it received its damage, or
its death, nothing more could come to him than what he agreed for.

\(c\) Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 8. sect. 1. Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. (d)
Ibid.

[Exodus 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 22:16</span></span>

And if a man entice a maid, that is not betrothed,.... For one might be
betrothed according to the custom of those times, and not be married, or
the nuptials consummated, and so be yet a maid or virgin; but being
betrothed, it made the case different, because such an one was as a wife
to a man: but the case here supposed is of a maid not betrothed, and
also not forced, but yielding to the solicitations of a man, as is
implied by her being enticed; which signifies his gaining upon her
affections, and obtaining her consent by expressing strong affection for
her, and making large promises to her, and so both by words and gestures
prevailing with her to yield to his desire:

and lie with her; in a way of carnal copulation; and such an action
between two single persons, by consent, is what is called simple
fornication: if this was done in a field, the maid was supposed to be
forced, since there she might cry out, and not be heard; but if in a
city, she is supposed to be enticed, and consent, since if she cried out
she might be heard; this the Jewish writers gather from [Deu
22:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#023), though the law there respects a
betrothed damsel:

he shall surely endow her to be his wife; give her a dowry in order to
be his wife, or, however, such an one as he would or must give if she
became his wife, even one suitable to her rank and dignity, whether he
married her or not; for he was not obliged to it whether he would or
not, and in some cases could not if he would, as follows.

[Exodus 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 22:17</span></span>

If her father utterly refuse to give her unto him,.... For wife, either
because of his character, family, or circumstances; or, however, being
disagreeable to him on one account or another, and therefore will by no
means agree to marry his daughter to him, and not only give him an
absolute denial, but resolutely persist in it: the Targum of Jonathan
has it,"if it seems not good to him;''if he do not like nor choose to
marry her; and some add also, if she herself do not approve of marrying
him:

he shall pay money according to the dowry of virgins; as virgins on
marriage have usually given them, according to their rank and dignity:
here is no sum fixed, but the Targum of Jonathan is,"he shall be mulcted
in fifty shekels of silver,''which is taken from [Deu
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#029) though that seems to be not
altogether a like case with this; for though it respects a virgin not
betrothed, as here, yet one that has been forced, and therefore the man
was obliged to marry her, and never put her away; and the mulct or fine
was to be paid to the damsel's father and not to her: the Septuagint
version here says, it was to be paid to the father.

[Exodus 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 22:18</span></span>

Thou shall not suffer a witch to live. Such that had familiar spirits,
and conversed with them, and by means thereof got knowledge of many
things relating to persons, at least pretending they did; and who did or
seemed to do many strange and surprising feats, as even to raise the
spirits of departed persons, to converse with them and gain knowledge by
them, though in reality they did not, and could not do such things, but
used some juggling tricks to deceive the people, and in which they might
be assisted by evil spirits; as appears from the case of the witch of
Endor, who was surprised at the appearance of Samuel, it being out of
the ordinary course of her art and practice really to bring up the
spirit of a man deceased, whatever pretensions might be made to it;
however, such being deceivers of the people, and leading them into
unwarrantable practices, and off of a dependence on God and his
providence, and from seeking to him, and asking counsel of him, they are
by this law condemned to death, such an one was not to be suffered to
live; not that it was lawful for anybody to kill her, or that any
private person might or must do it that knew her, or took her to be a
witch; but she was to be had before a court of judicature and tried
there, and, if found guilty, to be put to death by the civil magistrate:
so Jarchi's note is,"but she shall die by the house of judgment;''or the
sanhedrim; for these words are spoken to Moses the chief judge, and to
those that were under him, and succeeded him and them; though the Targum
of Jonathan prefaces them thus:"and my people, the children of Israel,
thou shalt not, &c.''and though only a witch is mentioned, or this is
only expressed in the feminine gender, because a multitude of this sort
of people were found among women, as Ben Melech observes, and so Aben
Ezra; yet wizards, or men that dealt with familiar spirits, are
included; and it may be reasonably concluded from hence, that if women,
who generally have more mercy and compassion shown them, yet were not
suffered to live when found criminal in this way, then much less men:
and this law is thought by some to follow upon the other, concerning
enticing and lying with a virgin not betrothed; because such sort of
persons were made use of to entice and decoy maids to gratify the lusts
of men.

[Exodus 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 22:19</span></span>

In like manner as a man and woman, by carnal copulation; this is a crime
so detestable and abominable, so shocking and dishonourable to human
nature, that one would think it could never be committed by any of the
human species, and that there was no occasion for making a law against
it; but, such is the depravity and corruption of mankind, that divine
wisdom saw it necessary, and, to deter from it, made it death, as
follows; such an one

shall surely be put to death; no mercy shown him, no pardon or respite
given him by the civil magistrate: according to the Targum of Jonathan,
the death of such a person was by stoning, for it paraphrases the
words,"he shall be killed with the casting of stones.''

[Exodus 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 22:20</span></span>

He that sacrificeth unto any god,.... To Elohim, to strange gods, to the
idols of the people, as the Targum of Jonathan; to the Egyptian deities,
to the gods of the Moabites, Amorites, Edomites, Canaanites,
Philistines, or any other: Aben Ezra says the word Elohim comprehends
angels; and by the exceptive clause it is plain it takes in all that had
been, were, or ever would be the objects of idolatrous worship,
especially the sun, moon, and stars, the principal objects of worship in
those days:

save unto the Lord only; the true and living God; Jehovah, the
self-existent, immutable, and eternal Being; the Creator of all things,
the possessor of heaven and earth, the most high God, and the only one:
sacrificing takes in all the acts of service performed to an idol as to
the true God, as offering incense, pouring out a libation, as well as
slaying and burning an animal as Jarchi observes: he shall be utterly
destroyed; be accursed, anathematized, devoted to destruction, as the
word used signifies: the Targum of Jonathan is,"he shall be killed with
the sword, and his goods consumed,''not only lose his life but his
substance, and so be destroyed in body and estate.

[Exodus 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 22:21</span></span>

Thou shall not vex a stranger,.... One that is not born in the same
country, but comes into another country to sojourn, as Jarchi; not a
native of the place, but of another kingdom or country; a stranger to
the commonwealth of Israel, that is only in it for a time on trade and
business, or through one providence or another; or else a proselyte is
meant, not a proselyte of righteousness, who has embraced the true
religion; but a proselyte of the gate, that takes upon him the commands
of the sons of Noah; or, as Aben Ezra here expresses it, who takes upon
him not to serve idols; such were allowed to dwell among the Israelites,
and they were to carry it friendly and kindly to them, and "not vex"
them, nor irritate them with words, as the Targum of Jonathan, and so
Jarchi; by calling them names, Gentiles, uncircumcised persons, and the
like; upbraiding them with their country, ignorance, and manner of life;
they were not to say to a proselyte, as Ben Melech observes, remember
thy former works; or, if the son of a proselyte, remember thy father's
works:

nor oppress him; by taking his goods, as the above Targum, and so
Jarchi; by refusing to assist him with advice or otherwise, to trade
with him, or to give him lodging, and furnish him with the necessaries
of life:

for ye were strangers in the land of Egypt: out of which they were but
just come, and therefore such a reason must be very striking and moving
upon them: the Targum of Jonathan prefaces it,"and my people, the house
of Israel, remember that ye were strangers, &c.''this they could not
have forgot in so short a time, and the remembrance of this should move
their compassion to strangers hereafter, when they came to settle in
their own land; and therefore, as they would that men should have done
to them when in such circumstances, the same they should do to others;
and besides, the remembrance of this would serve to abate their pride
and vanity, and their overbearing disposition.

[Exodus 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 22:22</span></span>

Ye shall not afflict any widow or fatherless child. Who have no friends,
husband, or father to be on their side and protect them, and are weak
and helpless to defend themselves, and therefore it must be barbarous to
do them any injury, either to their persons or property; no one ought to
be afflicted and distressed by another, either in body or mind, or
substance, and especially such as have no helper, not any to assist them
and sympathize with them; for this is a law for every man, as Jarchi
observes, is binding upon all; only the Scripture speaks of these,
because of their weakness, and because they are more frequently
afflicted than others, cruel and unmerciful men taking the advantage of
their inability to defend themselves.

[Exodus 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 22:23</span></span>

If thou afflict them in any wise,..... In any way, or by any means
whatever; their minds, by reproaches, censures, insults, and their
bodies by stripes, false imprisonment, &c. and in their substance, by
withholding from them what belongs to them, taking what they have, or
cheating and defrauding them in any respect; or, "in afflicting afflict
them" (e); afflict them much, and continue to do so:

and they cry at all unto me; in prayer, as the Targum of Jonathan; or,
"in crying cry" (f); cry vehemently, or importunately, and with
constancy, or rather, cry ever so little:

I will surely hear their cry; the voice of their prayer, as the same
Targum; or, "in hearing I will hear" (g); will certainly take notice of
their cries, and return an answer to them, by appearing on their side,
and avenging their injuries; for God is the Father of the fatherless,
and the husband of the widow, and the Judge of them both: the manner of
speaking or form of expression is the same in all these clauses, the
words being doubled.

\(e\) "affligendo afflixeris", Pagninus, Piscator, Ainsworth, Montanus,
Junius & Tremellius. (f) "clamando clamaverit", Pagninus, Montanus,
Piscator, Ainsworth. (g) "audiendo audiam", Pagninus, Montanus,
Piscator, Ainsworth.

[Exodus 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 22:24</span></span>

And my wrath shall wax hot,.... Against those that afflict them, being
so devoid of humanity, compassion, and tenderness, and so guilty of
oppression and injustice, which are aggravated by the circumstances of
the persons they ill treat, and therefore the more provoking to God:

and I will kill you with the sword; with the sword of death, says the
Targum of Jonathan; it designs one of God's sore judgments, the sword of
an enemy; the meaning is, that when such evils should become frequent
among them, God would suffer a neighbouring nation to break in upon them
in an hostile way, and put them to the sword; hence it follows:

and your wives shall be widows, and your children fatherless; be in the
same circumstances with those they have injured, and therefore should
consider not only the destruction that would come upon themselves, being
cutoff by the sword, but the case of their families; and how, could they
be sensible of it, they would like to have their wives and children used
as they have used the widows and fatherless.

[Exodus 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 22:25</span></span>

If thou lend money to any of my people that is poor by thee, Such only
need to borrow money, and to whom it should be freely lent, when it may
be to the good of the borrower, and not any injury to the lender: this
law, according to the Jewish writers, only respects Israelites, and not
Gentiles; agreeably to which is Jarchi's note,"if thou lend, that is,
not to a Gentile; and to which of my people? the poor, and to which of
the poor? that is with thee:"

thou shalt not be to him as an usurer; that will not lend without usury,
nor without an exorbitant interest, and deals very hardly with the
borrower if he is not punctual in the payment of it; the Israelites were
not only not to be usurers, but they were not to be like them; they were
not to require anything for lending a poor man a little money; as not
any settled interest, so neither were they to take any previous gift or
reward later, see [Luk 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#034).

neither shalt thou lay upon him usury; or oblige him to give interest
for money borrowed: it is in the plural, number, "neither shall ye lay";
and Aben Ezra observes, that the lender, scribe, and witness, all
transgress this law; that is, when a man lends money on interest, and a
bond is made by the scribe for it, and this signed by witnesses, all are
guilty of the breach of it: yea, some Jewish writers (h) say, not only
those, but whoever is a surety or bondsman for the payment, and even the
borrower himself; see Gill on [Psa
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#005).

\(h\) Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 5. sect. 11. Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Exodus 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 22:26</span></span>

If thou at all take thy neighbour's raiment to pledge,.... So that it
seems that the lender, though he might not impose usury on the borrower,
or oblige him to pay interest for what he lent him, yet for the security
of his money he might take his clothes, either his bed clothes or
wearing apparel, or any instruments or goods of his; but when he did, he
was bound to what follows:

thou shalt deliver it to him by that the sun goeth down; the reason of
which appears in the next verse, with respect to his bed clothes, should
that be the pledge: but Jarchi interprets it, not of his nocturnal
clothes, but of his apparel in the daytime, and paraphrases it thus,"all
the day thou shalt restore it to him until the setting of the sun; and
when the sun is set, thou shalt return and take it until the morning of
the morrow comes; the Scripture speaks of the covering of the day, of
which there is no need at night;''but rather night clothes are meant by
what follows.

[Exodus 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 22:27</span></span>

For that is his covering only,.... All that he has to cover him, the
only covering he has when he lies down to sleep; and therefore should be
restored to him by the time of sunset, at which time he returns from his
labour; and after some refreshment retires to his bed for rest, when his
covering will be necessary:

it is his raiment for his skin; which is next to his skin, and covers
his naked body, as it is when he lies down to sleep; and therefore if
not returned, he must lie naked without any covering, which to deprive
him of would be cruel: Jarchi interprets this covering of his shirt, but
it rather means his bed clothes: the Septuagint version calls it the
clothes of his shame, what cover and hide the shame of nakedness:

wherein shall he sleep? what shall he have to sleep in if this is
detained from him? nothing at all; or it may be read without an
interrogation, wherein he should sleep, or was used to sleep:

and it shall come to pass, when he crieth unto me; and complains of ill
usage, that he has nothing to cover him in the night season, when he
lies down to sleep, which is very uncomfortable, as well as unhealthful
and dangerous:

that I will hear; his cry and complaint, take notice of it, and resent
the usage of him:

for I am gracious; or merciful; and therefore everything cruel and
uncompassionate is disagreeable, and even abominable to him, and he will
take care in his providence that the injured person shall be redressed
and the injurer punished.

[Exodus 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 22:28</span></span>

Thou shalt not revile the gods,.... Meaning not the idols of the
Gentiles, which they reckon gods, and worship as such; which is the
sense of Philo, and some others, particularly Josephus (i), who, to
curry favour with the Roman emperors given to idolatry, has from hence
inserted the following among the laws given to Moses;"let no man
blaspheme the gods, which other cities think are such, nor rob strange
sacred places, nor receive a gift dedicated to any deity;''but this
cannot be the sense of the text, being contrary to [Deu
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#002) nor can it be thought that care
should be taken, lest the honour of the Heathen deities should be
detracted from; but civil magistrates, the judges of the land, and the
like, are meant, who are powers ordained of God, are in his stead, and
represent him, and therefore respect should be shown them; nor should
they be treated with any degree of slight and contempt, which may
discourage and intimidate them, and deter them from the execution of
their office: the Targum of Jonathan interprets them of judges very
rightly, agreeably to [Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001) and so
Aben Ezra says,"they are the judges and the priests, the sons of Levi,
with whom the law is:"

nor curse the ruler of thy people whether civil or ecclesiastic; the
last mentioned Jewish writer intend of the king, who is the supreme
ruler in things civil, and ought to be honoured and loved, served and
obeyed, and not hated and cursed, no, not secretly, not in the
bedchamber, nor in the thought of the heart, since not only the thing is
criminal but dangerous; it is much if it is not discovered, and then
ruin follows upon it, [Ecc 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#020). The
Apostle Paul applies it to the high priest among the Jews, who was the
ruler in sacred things, [Act 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#005) and
may be applicable to the prince of the sanhedrim, or chief in the grand
court of judicature; and even to all dignified persons, who ought not to
be spoken ill of, and to be abused in the execution of their office, and
especially when they perform well.

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 10. Contr. Apion. 1. 2. c. 33.

[Exodus 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 22:29</span></span>

Thou shall not delay to offer the first of thy ripe fruits,.... Which,
according to Maimonides (k), were of seven kinds only; for he says,"they
do not bring the firstfruits, but of the seven kinds, said in the praise
of the land, (the land of Canaan), [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008) and they are wheat, barley,
grapes, figs, pomegranates, olives, and dates;''and how much of these
were to be offered is not fixed by the law, but were left to the
generosity of the people: the above mentioned writer asks (l),"what
measure do the wise men set? a good eye (or a bountiful man) brings one
of forty (or the fortieth part of his fruits); a middling one (one that
is neither liberal nor niggardly) brings one of fifty (or the fiftieth
part); and an evil one (a covetous man) one of sixty (or the sixtieth
part), but never less than that.''Now this was not to be delayed, but to
be brought as soon and as early as could be: the Jewish writers seem to
understand this of postponing things, or inverting the order of them,
bringing that first which should be last, and that last which should be
first; so Jarchi interprets it,"thou shall not change the order of their
separation, to postpone that which should be first, and to put before
that which should be last; for the first oblation should not be brought
before the firstfruits, and the tithes before the first oblation.''And
thus runs one of their canons or traditions (m),"if anyone brings the
first oblation before the firstfruits, the first tithe before the first
oblation, the second tithe before the first, it is as if he transgressed
a negative precept: "thou shalt not delay or postpone", &c. [Exo
22:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#029)'

And of thy liquors: and these, according to Maimonides (n), were only
the firstfruits of liquors of olives and grapes:

the firstborn of thy sons thou shall give unto me; which is a repetition
of the law. See Gill on [Exo 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002).

\(k\) Hilchot Biccurim, c. 2. sect. 2. (l) Hilchot Trumot, c. 3. sect.
2. (m) Misn. Trumot, c. 3. sect. 6. (n) Biccurim, ut supra. (k))

[Exodus 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 22:30</span></span>

Likewise shalt thou do with thine oxen, and with thy sheep,.... That is,
with the firstborn, which were to be set apart to the Lord; and so the
Targum of Jonathan paraphrases it,"the firstborn of thine oxen, and of
thy sheep;''for having spoken of the firstborn of men, the Scripture
proceeds to speak of the firstborn of cattle, great and small, the
separation of which was enjoined in one and the same precept, [Exo
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#002),

seven days it shall be with his dam; whether it be a calf or a lamb;
before it was seven days old it was not to be taken from it, and given
to the Lord:

on the eighth day thou shall give it me; that is, they might do it then,
but not before; yet they were not obliged to bring it exactly on that
day, but they might do it any time within the month, and at a month's
end they were obliged to redeem it, that is, give the priest the sum of
five shekels for it, [Num 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/num018.htm#016). The
Jewish canon runs thus (n);"how long are Israelites bound for the
bringing of the firstborn, i.e. before they offer it to the priest? in
small cattle thirty days, in large cattle fifty days.''

\(n\) Misn. Becorot, c. 4. sect. 1.

[Exodus 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 22:31</span></span>

And ye shall be holy men unto me,.... They were so by God's act of
election, not special and particular, but general and national; choosing
and separating them to be an holy people to him, above all the people on
the face of the earth, and in a ceremonial sense they observing laws and
appointments of God of this kind; which is the sense here intended, as
appears by what follows: all men, and so these Israelites, ought to be
holy in a moral sense, and some are holy in a spiritual and evangelical
sense, being made holy by the Spirit of God; of these the Apostle Peter
speaks, in allusion to this, and such like passages, [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009).

neither shall ye eat any flesh that is torn of beasts in the field; or
in the house, as Jarchi notes; but the Scripture, as he observes, speaks
of the place where it is more usual for beasts to tear, and so Aben
Ezra; otherwise what is torn elsewhere, or by whatsoever accident it is
bruised and maimed, was not to be eaten: ye shall cast it to the dogs:
for even a stranger was not to eat of it, or if he did he was unclean,
and was obliged to wash his clothes, and bathe himself, [Lev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015) and yet Jarchi interprets this
figuratively of such as are like dogs, meaning the Gentiles, whom the
Jews used to call so, see [Mat 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026).
An Heathen poet gives instructions perfectly agreeable to this law;"do
not (says he) eat flesh fed upon by beasts, but leave the remains to the
swift dogs (o).''

\(o\) &c. Phocylides, ver. 136, 137.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 23](exo023)

</div>
