<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo024)  [Next](exo026.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 25:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 25

In this chapter an order is given for a freewill offering towards
various things for the worship and service of God, and the materials to
be offered, which would be useful and acceptable, are mentioned
particularly, [Exo 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001.md), as also
another order to build a sanctuary for God, after a model that he would
give, [Exo 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#008.md), and, an ark to put in
the law on tables of stone, the fashion of which, and the various things
belonging to it, are described, [Exo
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010.md), and a mercy seat with cherubim
on it to be set over the ark, where the Lord promises to meet Moses and
commune with him, [Exo 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017.md) and a
table with various appurtenances to it to place the shewbread on, [Exo
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023.md) and a candlestick of gold, whose
parts are described, and all the instruments relative to it, [Exo
25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031.md).

[Exodus 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 25:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... When on the mount, and in the midst
of the cloud with him:

saying; as follows.

[Exodus 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 25:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel,.... That is, when he should go down
from the mountain to the camp:

that they bring me an offering; the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan call
it a "separation": something separated from their substance, and devoted
to the service of God, and for the use of the sanctuary afterwards to be
built:

of every man that giveth it willingly, with his heart, ye shall take my
offering; or take what was offered to him, be it more or less, and of
whatsoever person, high and low, rich and poor, so be it it is freely
given from the heart; not grudgingly or through force, as the Targum of
Jonathan adds; and in such manner did David and his people many hundreds
of years after this offer towards building of the temple, and the
vessels belonging to that, see [Ch1
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#006.md) according to the Jewish writers,
none but the children of Israel were to offer to this service, and only
such who knew what they did; for thus they criticize on the words,"speak
unto the children of "Israel": this exempts an Heathen and an idolater;
"of every man"; this excludes a little one; "that giveth it willingly
with his heart"; this exempts a deaf and dumb man, and a fool, because
they have no knowledge to offer freely (z)''however, this we may learn
from hence, that whatever we do for the worship and service of God, we
should do it freely, cheerfully, and cordially; for God loves a cheerful
giver; and if this was required under the legal dispensation, it is much
more necessary and obligatory under the Gospel dispensation, and more
suitable to it where all things are done and given freely of God, and
such large blessings of grace are liberally bestowed by him on persons
undeserving.

\(z\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Trumot, c. 1. sect. 1.

[Exodus 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 25:3</span></span>

And this is the offering which ye shall take of them,.... That is, some
one or other of the following things were to be taken of each of them
that had a heart, and it was in the power of their hands to give; it was
not expected that something of each of these should be had of everyone,
but every man was to give, and it was to be received of him, what of
these would suit him best to bestow, some one thing, some another, as
they were possessed of, and had a heart to give; and for which service
many of them were abundantly supplied with what they had brought out of
Egypt; and as it was the Lord that gave them favour in the eyes of the
Egyptians to lend or give them the riches they had, they were under the
greater obligation to part with somewhat of it freely for his service;
and especially as it would be to the spiritual profit and advantage both
of them and theirs:

gold and silver, and brass; "gold", for those things that were to he
made of gold; as the mercy seat and cherubim, the candlestick, &c. or
were covered with it, as the ark, the shewbread table, and other things;
and silver, for those that were made of that, as the silver sockets to
the boards of the tabernacle, the silver trumpets, &c. and "brass" for
the altar of burnt offering, its pans, shovels, basins, rings, and
staves, and other things: Aben Ezra rightly observes, that no mention is
made of iron, there being no use of that for anything in the tabernacle
to be made of it; as also there was not in the temple of Solomon, and
where there was not so much as a tool of iron heard in it while it was
building, [Kg1 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#007.md) it may be, because
instruments of war, slaughtering weapons, were made of iron; and to show
that God is the God of peace in his sanctuary, and so in all the
churches: gold and silver vessels the Israelites borrowed or begged of
the Egyptians, and brought them with them when they came out of Egypt,
[Exo 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#002.md).

[Exodus 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 25:4</span></span>

And blue, and purple, and scarlet,.... The Jewish doctors are much
divided about the sense of the words so rendered by us; some will have
one colour, and some another meant; but, according to those learned men,
who have taken much pains in searching into the meaning of them, as
Bochart and Braunius, it appears that our version of them is most
correct: and by these we are not to understand the colours themselves,
which could not be brought, nor even the materials for dying them are
intended; but wool, or clothes, either silken or linen of those colours:
of the former the apostle has taught us to expound them, [Heb
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#019.md) and so Jarchi interprets them of
wool thus died, and Josephus (a) also; which was made up into yarn, and
wove, and was much used in the garments of the priests, in the curtains
of the tabernacle, and in the vail between the holy and the most holy
place:

and fine linen; the best of which was made in Egypt only, as Aben Ezra
says, and much wore there, especially by the priests; and they had such
an abundance of it that they traded to other nations with it, see [Isa
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#009.md) and of which the Israelites might
bring a considerable quantity with them out of Egypt; and

goats' hair; though the word hair is not in the text, it is rightly
supplied, as it is by the Septuagint version, and others, for not goats
themselves, but their hair must be meant; of this the curtains for the
covering of the tabernacle were made; Jarchi interprets it the down of
goats, the short, small, fine hair that grows under the other.

\(a\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 1.

[Exodus 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 25:5</span></span>

And rams' skins died red,.... Of these were made a covering for the tent
or tabernacle:

and badgers' skins, which were for the same use: the Septuagint version
calls them hyacinth or blue skins; according to which, they seem to be
the rams' skins died blue; and so Josephus (b) seems to have understood
it; and it is much questionable whether the same creature is meant we
call the badger, since that with the Israelites was an unclean creature;
nor is its skin made use of for shoes, or well could be, as the skin of
this creature is said to be, [Eze
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010.md). Jarchi says it was a kind of
beast only at that time; and Aben Ezra says, it was known in those days
but not now: and

shittim wood; supposed by the Jewish writers, as Kimchi (c), and Ben
Melech from him, to be the best and most excellent kind of cedar: Aben
Ezra conjectures, and he delivers it but as a conjecture, that there
might be near Mount Sinai a forest of "shittim" trees; and while the
Israelites were there they cut them down for booths, which they might
carry with them when they removed from thence; for, he says, Moses did
not speak of the tabernacle till after the day of atonement: and since
Acacia is by much the largest and the most common tree of the deserts of
Arabia, as Dr. Shaw (d) observes, he thinks there some reason to
conjecture, that the "shittim wood", whereof the several utensils of the
tabernacle, &c. were made, was the wood of Acacia: and long ago it was
the opinion of Cordus (e) that the "shittim wood" was the Acacia of
Dioscorides; and it is the same with the Senton or Santon of the
Arabians, which is the Egyptian thorn that grows in the wilderness, of
which Herodotus (f) says, they cut wood of two cubits out of and make
ships of burden of it: this is said to grow in the parts of Egypt at a
distance from the sea; in the mountains of Sinai, at the Red sea, about
Suez, in the barren wilderness; which circumstances seem to determine it
to be the "shittim wood" (g): some places where it might grow in plenty
seem to have had their names from it, see [Num
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001.md).

\(b\) Ut supra. (Antiq. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 1.) (c) Sepher Shorash. rad.
(d) Travels, p. 144. Ed. 2. (e) Apud Drus. Heb. Adag. Decur. 3. Adag. 4.
(f) Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 96. (g) Vid. Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol.
2. p. 204.

[Exodus 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 25:6</span></span>

Oil for the light,.... For the light of the lamps in the candlestick:
this was oil olive, as the Targum of Jonathan, and so Jarchi, see [Exo
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020.md),

spices for anointing oil; for the anointing of Aaron and his sons, and
the tabernacle and its vessels, such as pure myrrh, sweet cinnamon,
sweet calamus, and cassia:

and for sweet incense; as stacte, onycha, and galbanum; from whence they
had this oil and these spices, it is not easy to say, unless they
brought them out of Egypt with them; which is likely, since the deserts
of Arabia could not furnish them with them.

[Exodus 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 25:7</span></span>

Onyx stones,.... So called from their likeness to the nail of a man's
finger: the Targum of Onkelos calls them stones of beryl; and the Targum
of Jonathan gems of beryl; and the Septuagint version, stones of
sardius; and some take them to be the sardonyx stones, which have a
likeness both to the onyx and to the sardius:

and stones to be set in the ephod, and in the breastplate; two onyx
stones were set in the ephod, one of the garments of the high priest,
and an onyx stone, with eleven other precious stones, were set in the
breastplate of the high priest: these stones were doubtless among the
jewels set in gold and silver the Israelites had of the Egyptians, and
brought with them out of Egypt.

[Exodus 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 25:8</span></span>

And let them make me a sanctuary,.... An holy place to dwell in, and so
called from his dwelling in it, as follows:

that I may dwell amongst them; in the midst of them, where the
tabernacle was always placed; and there he dwelt as their King and their
God, to whom they might have recourse on all occasions, and whom they
should serve and worship; this sanctuary was to be made of many of the
materials before mentioned by the Israelites, whom Moses should employ,
and to whom he should give directions for the making it, according to
the pattern showed him: and so the Jewish writers interpret "make me",
or "to me", i.e. of mine, of mine holy things, things sanctified and
separated to his use; and they bring this passage to prove that the
workmen in the temple were to be paid only out of the holy things, or
money given for the repair of it (h): this was a type of the human
nature of Christ, the true sanctuary and tabernacle which God pitched
and not man, and in which the fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily; and
of the church of God, the temple of the living God, among whom he walks,
and with whom he dwells, [Heb 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002.md).

\(h\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Temurah, c. 7. sect. 1.

[Exodus 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 25:9</span></span>

According to all that I show thee,.... That is, the sanctuary was to be
made in all respects exactly according to the view of it that Moses now
had upon the mount from God, and which he was to communicate to the
workmen for their instruction and direction:

after the pattern of the tabernacle, and of the pattern of all the
instruments thereof, even so shall ye make it: and by the "pattern" is
not meant an idea of it, impressed on the mind of Moses, or a picture of
it which was shown him, but a little edifice representing it in all its
parts, a perfect model of it: and so Maimonides (i) says, "Tabnith", the
word here used, signifies the structure and disposition of anything,
i.e. the form of it in a four square, in roundness, in a triangle, or in
any of the like figures, see [Heb 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005.md)
and so David had, by the Spirit, a pattern of the temple, and which he
gave to his son Solomon, to build according to it, [Ch1
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#011.md).

\(i\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 1. c. 3.

[Exodus 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 25:10</span></span>

And they shall make an ark of shittim wood,.... A chest or coffer to put
things into, and into this were to be put the two tables of stone on
which the law was written, and it was to be made of the wood before
mentioned, [Exo 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005.md) this was a very
eminent type of Christ, with whom the name of an ark, chest, or coffer
where treasure lies, agrees; for the treasures of wisdom and knowledge,
and the riches of grace, even all the fulness of it, lie in him; and all
the epithets of this ark are suitable to him, as when it is called the
ark of God, the ark of his strength, the glory of God, the face of God,
Jehovah, and God himself, the holy ark, and ark of the covenant: and its
being made of "shittim wood", which is an incorruptible wood, a wood
that rots not, by which the Septuagint version here, and in [Exo
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005.md) and elsewhere render it, may
denote the duration of Christ in his person, and the natures united in
it; in his divine nature, from everlasting to everlasting, he is God; in
his human nature he saw no corruption, and though he died he lived
again, and lives for evermore; in his offices, as Mediator, Redeemer,
Saviour, prophet, priest, and King, he abideth for ever; and in his
grace and the fulness of it, which, like himself, is the same today,
yesterday, and forever:

two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a
half the breadth thereof, and a cubit and a half the height thereof; if
this cubit was a common cubit, consisting of a foot and a half or
eighteen inches, then the length of this ark was forty five inches, and
its breadth and height twenty seven each; according to Dr. Cumberland
(k), the Egyptian and Jewish cubit was above twenty one inches, and then
the ark must be fifty three inches long or more, and thirty two and
three quarters broad and high, or more: and Josephus (l) says, the
length of it was five spans, and the breadth and height of it three
spans each.

\(k\) Of Scripture Weights and Measures, ch. 2. p. 34, 56. (l) Antiqu.
l. 3. c. 6. sect. 5.

[Exodus 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 25:11</span></span>

And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold,.... Not gild it, but put a
plate of pure gold over it:

within and without shalt thou overlay it; so that nothing of the wood
could be seen: this may denote the glory of Christ in both his natures,
divine and human, the riches of his person and office, which are
unsearchable and durable, and his preciousness to them that believe,
[Sol 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010.md),

and shalt make upon it a crown of gold round about: or a cornish of pure
gold upon it, every way, which was a square on which the mercy seat was
set; which may point at the honour and glory of Christ, especially in
his kingly office, who has indeed on his head many crowns; one a crown
of pure gold, his divine Father has set upon him; another which the
church has crowned him with, and indeed both angels and saints cast
their crowns at his feet, and set the crown on his head, or give him the
glory of all they have and are.

[Exodus 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 25:12</span></span>

And thou shalt cast four rings of gold for it,.... For which a mould was
to be made, and the gold being melted was poured into it, and so the
rings were fashioned:

and put them in the corners thereof; or, "in its feet", as Aben Ezra,
though Jarchi says it had no feet; but as the word used so signifies
always, it is more probable it had feet; and the rather, that it might
not stand upon the ground, but on feet, as chests and coffers usually
do:

and two rings shall be in the one side of it, and two rings in the other
side of it; Jarchi says, at the upper corners, near the mercy seat were
they placed, two on one side and two on the other, at the breadth of the
ark; but it is more likely they were fixed in the lower part of it, as
Ramban, at the feet of it; and in the length of the ark, as Josephus
writes (m).

\(m\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 5

[Exodus 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 25:13</span></span>

And thou shall make staves of shittim wood,.... Of the same, wood the
ark was made of, see [Exo 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005.md) and
overlay them with gold; cover them with plates of gold, so that they
appeared to be all of gold, the wood being not to be seen.

[Exodus 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 25:14</span></span>

And thou shall put the staves into the rings by the sides of the
ark,.... This shows for what use the rings were; namely, to put the
staves into them and the use of the staves thus put was:

that the ark might be borne with them; which staves overlaid with gold,
and put into golden rings, figured the ministers of Christ, enriched
with the gifts and graces of his Spirit, and possessed of the truths of
the Gospel, more precious than gold and silver; who bear the name of
Christ, and carry his Gospel into the several parts of the world.

[Exodus 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 25:15</span></span>

The staves shall be in the rings of the ark,.... Not only be put into
them, but remain in them, yea, always:

they shall not be taken from it; or, as the Septuagint version is, be
immovable; so that those gold rings in the ark may signify the churches
of Christ, which are instrumental to bear his name, and spread his truth
in the world, comparable to rings for their circular form, being the
purest and most perfect bodies of men on earth, and to gold rings for
their worth and value, preciousness, excellency, and duration; and with
whom the ministers of the Gospel, comparable to golden staves, are
always to be, and never depart from them: or else they may signify the
perfect and precious doctrines of Christ, in which his ministers are
always to be; either in meditation on them, or in preaching of them, and
by which they are always to abide, see [Ti1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015.md).

[Exodus 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 25:16</span></span>

And thou shall put into the ark the testimony that I shall give thee.
Which was the principal use of it: by the "testimony" is meant the law,
written on two tables of stone; so called, because it was a
testification of the mind and will of God, what he would have done or
omitted; and as the Israelites had declared their approbation of it, and
assent unto it, and had promised obedience to it, therefore, should they
transgress it, it would be a testimony against them: now this was put
into the ark, and preserved there, see [Deu
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001.md), which may signify that the law
was in the heart of Christ, and which he undertook to fulfil, and with
pleasure did it; that he is become the fulfilling end of the law for
righteousness to them that believe in him; and that it remains with him
as a rule of walk and conversation to his people, so far as it is of a
moral, holy, and spiritual nature.

[Exodus 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 25:17</span></span>

And thou shall make a mercy seat of pure gold,.... Or "covering" (n); so
Jarchi and Aben Ezra; for so the word properly signifies; and what is
meant was no more than a cover of the ark, which was open at the top,
and this was the lid of it, and exactly answered to it, as appears by
the dimensions afterwards given of it; and because the root of this word
in one form signifies to propitiate or make atonement, some render it
the "propitiatory" or "propitiation" (o); which is favoured by the
apostle in [Heb 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#005.md) and to which he
seems to refer, [Rom 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md) and the
rather since God is represented sitting on this, as showing himself
propitious and well pleased with men, by his communing with them from
hence; the Septuagint version takes in both senses, rendering it the
"propitiatory covering" (p): this being called by what name it will, was
typical of Christ; he is the seat of mercy, or, as it is in the New
Testament expressed, the throne of grace; whereon, or in whom God shows
himself to be gracious and merciful to the children of men; all the
stores of mercy are in him, and all the vessels of mercy are put into
his hands; the mercy of God is displayed in the mission of him as a
Saviour, and is glorified by him in a way consistent with his justice
and holiness; through him only special mercy is communicated to sinful
men, to whom God is only merciful in Christ: and Christ himself is all
mercy to his people; his ways of old were mercy and truth, and all his
works, especially his great work of redemption, are done in mercy and
pity to them; he shows himself to be merciful to them, by sympathizing
with them, and supporting them under all their temptations and
afflictions, in granting them all the necessary supplies of grace here,
and by bestowing eternal life on them hereafter: he is their "covering",
the covering of their persons by his righteousness, imputed to them, and
of their sins, by his blood shed for them, and sprinkled on them, and of
the law, by his satisfaction for the transgressions of it; whereby they
are secured from the avenging justice of God, and wrath to come: and he
is the "propitiation" or "propitiatory", who has made atonement and
reconciliation for sin; and in and through whom God shows himself
propitious to his people, he being pacified, his wrath appeased, and his
justice satisfied by his obedience and sufferings: and this mercy seat,
being of "pure gold", without any alloy or mixture in it, may denote the
purity of Christ's obedience, righteousness, and sacrifice, in the
completeness of salvation by him, without any works of righteousness of
men; the worth and excellency of Christ, and of these blessings of his,
and the preciousness of his blood, and the continued virtue and efficacy
of it, and of his righteousness and sacrifice, by which the propitiation
is made:

two cubits and a half shall be the length thereof, and a cubit and a
half the breadth thereof: which are exactly the dimensions of the ark,
to which this was a lid or cover, see [Exo
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#010.md) in the mystical sense it
intimates, that Christ, in his nature, obedience, sufferings, and death,
is the end of the law for righteousness, which is entirely commensurate,
and answers to all its demands: his holy nature is answerable to the
holiness and spirituality of the law; his righteousness to all that
obedience it requires, and his sufferings and death to the penalty of
it; so that, through Christ, we have a righteousness to justify us
before God, as long and as broad as the law is, though the commandment
is exceeding broad, [Psa 119:96](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#096.md). Aben
Ezra observes, that there is no mention made of the thickness of the
mercy seat; and the same Jarchi takes notice of, but adds, that,
according to their Rabbins, it was an hand's breadth, and the Targum of
Jonathan says,"and its thickness an hand's breadth.''

\(n\) "opertorium", Montanus; "tegmen sive operimentum", Vatablus;
"operculum", Piscator. (o) "Propitiatorium", V. L. Pagninus, Munster,
Tigurine version. (p) Sept. "operculum propitiatorium", Junius &
Tremellius.

[Exodus 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 25:18</span></span>

And thou shalt make two cherubim of gold,.... Which some take to be in
the form of birds, and others of winged animals, such as the like were
never seen, so Josephus; the Jews commonly suppose they were in the form
of young men, which they observe the word signifies in the Chaldee
language; others, that they were in the form of an ox, the face of an ox
and a cherub being the same, [Eze 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010.md)
and indeed their form is best discerned from account of them in Ezekiel,
and in the Revelation, and from the latter we best learn what they were;
they were hieroglyphics or emblems, not of the two Testaments, as many
of the ancients, nor of the angels, since they are distinguished from
them, much less of the trinity of persons in the Godhead; but either of
the saints and true believers in Christ in common, of both
dispensations, legal and evangelical, and so signified by the number
"two"; and being made of gold may denote their excellency, worth, and
value in the esteem of Christ; for the precious sons of Sion are
comparable to fine gold for their preciousness, solidity, and duration,
as well as for their sincerity and simplicity; or rather of the
ministers of the word in particular; and these may be signified by two,
and at the prophets of the Old Testament and the apostles of the New;
and the ministers of the word in all ages, and particularly during the
reign of antichrist, are called the two witnesses that prophesy in
sackcloth; and being said to be of gold, may respect the grace of God
bestowed on "them", comparable to gold, the gifts of the Spirit of God
they are furnished with, as well as the precious truths of the Gospel
committed to their trust:

of beaten work shalt thou make them, in the two ends of the mercy seat;
not of gold melted and poured into a mould, and so received the form of
the cherubim; nor were they first made by themselves, and then placed at
the two ends of the mercy seat, and soldered to it; but they were made
of the same mass of gold with the mercy seat, and beaten out of it with
an hammer, and planished and smoothed, and so wrought up into this form,
as appears by the following verse; and may denote the union of believers
to Christ, who are one body and one spirit with him; and the union of
the Old and New Testament churches in him, and who are but one church,
one body, of which he is the head; and as he is the foundation of the
apostles or prophets, on whom they are laid, he is the cornerstone in
which they are united; and so it may likewise signify the nearness of
the ministers of the word to Christ, their dependence on him, and their
partaking of the same gifts and graces of his Spirit, only in measure,
being made by him able ministers of the Gospel.

[Exodus 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 25:19</span></span>

And make one cherub on the one end, and the other cherub on the other
end,.... The situation of the cherubim is particularly explained, lest,
as Jarchi observes, it should be thought that there were two at both
ends of the mercy seat; whereas there were only one at one end, and
another at the other, opposite to each other, and both pointing to the
mercy seat; which may express the situation and office of the ministers
of the word under each dispensation, who are so placed as to derive all
their gifts and graces from Christ, and to point him out unto the sons
of men as the only way of salvation, the only propitiation for sin, and
through whom alone grace and mercy are to be had:

even of the mercy seat shall ye make the cherubim on the two ends
thereof; this is not so much intended the more to inculcate and confirm
the situation of the cherubim, as more fully to explain the matter of
which they were made; for it was "of" or out of the mercy seat that they
were made, at the two ends of it; that is, they were made not only of
the same kind of metal with that, but out of the same mass or lump of
gold that was; a lid of gold being made commensurate to the ark, what
remained above that measure, at the ends of it, were beaten and formed
into two cherubim.

[Exodus 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 25:20</span></span>

And the cherubim shall stretch forth their wings on high,.... From
whence it appears they were in the form of winged creatures, as the
seraphim in Isaiah's vision, and the living creatures in those of
Ezekiel and John; and their wings did not hang down by them, or on the
side of them, but were stretched out upwards towards the heaven above
their heads; denoting the readiness, agility, and swiftness of the
ministers of the word to do the work and will of Christ, as well as
their expectation of all the supplies of gifts and grace from him to
enable them to do it:

covering the mercy seat with their wings; which reached each other;
though, as Jarchi (q) says, between them and the mercy seat there was a
hollow of ten hands' breadth; so high were they stretched upwards,
though they met each other:

and their faces shall look one to another; and which is expressive of
the harmony, concord, and agreement of the true and faithful ministers
of Christ one with another; who all agree in preaching Christ, and him
crucified, and in the several momentous and important doctrines of the
Gospel:

towards the mercy seat shall the faces of the cherubim be; as before
observed, it may denote their directing souls to Christ as the only way
of salvation, keeping always in all their ministrations this great truth
in view, atonement and satisfaction by the blood and sacrifice of
Christ, and salvation alone by him; which they make the rule of their
ministry, and from which they never swerve, taking care not to deliver
anything contrary to it, or which may serve to cast a veil over it.

\(q\) T. Bab. Succah, fol. 5. 2. Vid. Gloss. in ib.

[Exodus 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 25:21</span></span>

And thou shalt put the mercy seat above upon the ark,.... Over it, as a
covering for it: this situation of the mercy seat above the ark, where
the law was, signifies, that there is no mercy but in a way of
righteousness, or of satisfaction to the law of God, and in a
consistence with the honour of it; and the cherubim over the mercy seat
making a throne for the majesty of God, in which he sat, and the ark
below a kind of footstool for him, shows that Christ, the mercy seat and
propitiatory, stands between God and his law, and is the mediator
between God, and men the transgressors of that law, and by fulfilling it
has covered the sins of his people, which are violations of it; and
being above it, and having magnified and made it honourable, is able to
suppress its charges and accusations, and secure from its curse and
condemnation:

and in the ark thou shalt put the testimony that I shall give thee; or
"after thou shalt put in the ark", &c. (r), as the particle "vau" is
sometimes used; the sense is, that then the mercy seat should be put
above, and upon the ark, as the covering of it, after the law, or the
two tables of testimony, were put into it; for then it was covered, and
not to be opened any more; see [Exo
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#020.md).

\(r\) "postquam in area", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius. Vid.
Nold. Concord Ebr. part. p. 290.

[Exodus 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 25:22</span></span>

And there I will meet with thee,.... With Moses, and so with the high
priest in later times, when he should enter into the holy of holies, and
with the people of God as represented by him, when he should go in and
inquire for them of the Lord:

and I will commune with thee from above the mercy seat, from between the
two cherubim; converse with him and them about whatsoever they should
apply unto him for, these being the symbols of the divine presence:
hence the Lord is frequently described as "dwelling between the cherubim
which are upon the ark of the testimony"; that is, which cherubim are
upon it, being on the mercy seat, which was the cover of it; or rather
"which is upon" (s), which mercy seat is upon the ark of the testimony,
as it properly was; and here the Lord promises to commune

of all things which I shall give thee in commandment unto the children
of Israel: what they shall do, respecting those things which by Moses,
or the high priest, they should inquire the mind and will of God about:
this may signify that the way to communion with God lies through Christ,
the mercy seat and propitiation, through his blood and righteousness,
through the vail, that is to say, his flesh; and the encouragement to it
is from him, our great high priest, and from his propitiatory sacrifice;
and the enjoyment of it is through him; our fellowship is with the
Father, and his Son Jesus Christ; God speaks to us by him, and reveals
himself in him.

\(s\) "quod est", Vatablus.

[Exodus 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 25:23</span></span>

Thou shalt also make a table of shittim wood,.... As the sanctuary or
tabernacle was an house for God to dwell in, he would have the proper
furniture of an house, as a table, candlestick, &c. This table was to be
in the same place with the ark and mercy seat; they were set in the holy
of holies, where there were nothing else; but this in the holy place, on
the north side of it, [Exo 26:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#035.md) its
principal use was to set the shewbread on, as after mentioned, and was
typical of Christ, and communion with him, both in this life, and that
to come. There is the table of the Lord, to which his people are now
admitted, where he sits down with them, and they with him, to have
fellowship with him in the ministration of the word and ordinances, of
which he is the sum and substance; and this is very desirable and
delightful, and an instance of his condescending grace, [Sol
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012.md), and he will have a table in his
kingdom hereafter, where his saints shall eat and drink with him, in
which their chief happiness will consist, [Luk
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#030.md) This table may be considered as
typical of Christ himself, for he is both table and provisions and
everything to his people; and of him in both his natures; in his human
nature, it being made of shittim wood, incorruptible; for though Christ
died in, that nature, yet he saw no corruption, he rose again and lives
for evermore; in his divine nature, by the gold it was covered with:

two cubits shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof,
and a cubit and a half the height thereof; it was two Jewish square
cubits in length, which are about six English square feet and above
half, viz. ninety four inches, according to Bishop Cumberland (t). It
was neither so long nor so broad as the ark by half a cubit, but was of
the same height with it, being about thirty two inches high and three
quarters, according to the Jewish and Egyptian cubit, which was about
twenty one inches and more and was a proper height for a table; and this
measure, no doubt, takes in the thickness of the table, and the height
of the seat, as Jarchi and Aben Ezra observe.

\(t\) Ut supra. (Of Scripture Weights and Measures, ch. 2. p. 34, 36.)

[Exodus 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 25:24</span></span>

And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold,.... Cover it with a plate of
gold, so that the wood was not seen; which may denote either the
excellency of Christ's human nature, being pure and spotless, and
adorned with the grace of the Spirit of God without measure; or rather
of his divine nature, which is the head of Christ, and said to be as the
most fine gold, for in him dwells all the fulness of the Godhead bodily:

and make thereto a crown of gold round about; that is, on both sides and
at both ends; for though it is called a crown, it was a square, and this
was both to ornament the table, and to keep from falling off of it what
was set upon it. Jarchi says, it was a sign of the crown of the kingdom,
for a table signifies riches and greatness, as they say a king's table:
and indeed this was the table of the King of kings, who has on his head
many crowns, and one must be made upon his table.

[Exodus 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 25:25</span></span>

And thou shalt make unto it a border of art hand's breadth round
about,.... Jarchi says, their wise men are divided about this; some say
it was above, round about the table; others say it was below, fixed from
foot to foot at the four corners of the table, and the board of the
table lay upon the border:

and thou shalt make a golden crown to the border thereof round about;
this was not the same spoke of in the former verse, but another; that
was above, and upon the table, this below and under it; or rather that
was, as it may be better expressed, a lip, rim, or border, that went
round within the table (u); and this crown, surrounded that on the edge
of it.

\(u\) So R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 61. 2.

[Exodus 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 25:26</span></span>

And thou shalt make for it four rings of gold,.... As the ark had, and
for the same use as the rings of that were, though whether cast, as they
were, is not said:

and put the rings in the four corners that are on the four feet thereof;
as there were four feet at the four corners of the table, to each foot a
ring was fastened; the use of these follows.

[Exodus 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 25:27</span></span>

Over against the border,.... Or "under" it, as the Septuagint and
Vulgate Latin versions. Jarchi says the rings were fixed to the feet
over against the top of the border:

shall the rings be for placing of the staves to bear the table; into
these rings staves were to be put, to carry the table from place to
place, when it was necessary, as while they were in the wilderness, and
before the tabernacle had a fixed settled place for it; for wherever the
tabernacle was carried, the ark and the table were also: where the
church of Christ is, there he is, and there are the word and ordinances;
and which are sometimes moved from place to place, as from the land of
Judea into the Gentile world, from the eastern part of the world to the
more northern; and that by the ministers of the word, who bear the name,
and carry the Gospel of Christ into the several parts of the world, as
this table was bore by the Levites, [Num
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#007.md).

[Exodus 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 25:28</span></span>

And thou shall make the staves of shittim wood, and overlay them with
gold,.... In like manner as the staves for the ark, and which were made
of the same wood:

that the table may be borne with them; when moved from one place to
another; these staves did not remain in the rings, as the staves for the
ark did; but, as Josephus says (w), were taken out, because they
otherwise would have been in the way of the priests, who came every week
to it, to set the shewbread on; and these were put in only when they
carried it from place to place, as appears from [Num
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#008.md).

\(w\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 6.

[Exodus 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 25:29</span></span>

And thou shall make the dishes thereof,.... On which the shewbread
loaves were set. Jarchi says they were of the form of the bread, and
that there were two sorts, one of gold, and one of iron; in the iron one
the bread was baked, and when they took it out of the oven, they put it
into the golden one until the morrow of the sabbath, when they set it in
order upon the table; and that form is called "Kaarah", which we render
a dish:

and the spoons thereof; or rather "cups"; these, Jarchi says, were
censers, in which they put the frankincense; and there were two of them
for the two handfuls of frankincense, which they put upon the two rows
of shewbread, [Lev 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#007). Josephus (x.md)
calls them vials, and says, that on the bread were put two golden vials
full of frankincense:

and the covers thereof, and the bowls thereof, to cover withal; the one
to cover the bread, and the other to cover the frankincense; or all the
above said vessels were to cover the table, and with them all it must be
pretty well covered with vessels. The Jews give a different account of
these two last, and of their use, which we render "covers" and "bowls":
the first of these Jarchi says were like the half of hollow reeds
divided to their length, made of gold; and three of them were laid in
order on the top of every loaf, so that one loaf rested upon these
reeds; and they separated between loaf and loaf, so that the air could
come in between them, and they did not become mouldy; the latter, he
says, were props like stakes of gold standing on the ground, and they
were higher than the table, even as high as the rows of bread; and they
were forked with live forks, one above another, and the tops (or ends)
of the reeds, which were between each loaf, rested upon these forks,
that so the weight of the upper loaves might not be too heavy for the
lower ones, and break them. A like account of them Ben Melech gives, and
observes, that some make the first word to signify the props, and the
second the reeds; and so they are interpreted by Maimonides (y); and,
according to the Misnah (z), the props were four, and the reeds twenty
eight. According to the Septuagint version, these were vessels used in
libations, or drink offerings; and the last clause is rendered in it,
"with which thou shall pour out": wine or oil, and so in some other
versions; but it will be difficult to find any use for such libations or
drink offerings at this table.

\(x\) Antiq. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 6. (y) Pirush in Misn. Menachot, c. 11.
sect. 6. (z) Menachot, ib.

[Exodus 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 25:30</span></span>

And thou shall set upon the table shewbread before me always. Which
consisted of twelve cakes loaves, set in two rows upon the table, and
stood there a whole week, and every sabbath were renewed; and when the
old ones were took away, which were eaten by the priests, new ones were
set, so that they were always before the Lord; and being continually
before him, were called shewbread, or "bread of faces", being always
before the face of God. This was a memorial of the goodness of God in
daily providing bread for the people of Israel, and was presented to him
as a thankful acknowledgment of it, and being the same they ate at their
own tables; and this being eaten by the priests, was expressive of the
communion between God and them, they being guests of his, and feeding on
the same provisions. This shewbread may be considered either as typical
of the church and people of God, who are all one bread, [Co1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#017.md), these pure and unleavened cakes
may denote their purity, simplicity, and sincerity, being without the
leaven of malice and wickedness; the number twelve, the twelve tribes of
Israel, the whole spiritual Israel of God; their being called shewbread,
or bread of faces, the presentation of themselves to the Lord in public
worship, and their being ever under the eye and care of God; their being
set on the table, their standing in Christ, and security by him, who is
the foundation of the apostles and prophets; and being set in rows,
their order and harmony; being renewed every sabbath, the constancy of
their worship, and the succession of them in all ages; the frankincense
put on each row, the acceptance of their persons and services through
the incense of Christ's mediation; the border round about them, the
power of Christ around them to keep them from falling: or else as
typical of Christ himself, of his being the food of believers, the bread
of life: the shewbread of fine flour may fitly signify Christ, the
finest of the wheat, the corn of heaven, the bread that comes from
thence; its quantity, twelve cakes, the sufficiency of food with him,
bread enough and to spare for the whole Israel of God; its continuance,
the permanency of Christ as the food believers have always to feed upon;
the frankincense on it, the gratefulness of Christ to such, to whom his
flesh is meat indeed, and his blood drink indeed; and being set for
priests, and only for them, may show that Christ is only food to such
who are made priests to God: or this may be an emblem of the
intercession of Christ, who is the Angel of God's presence, ever before
him, and represents the whole Israel of God, for whom he intercedes; and
his intercession is continual, he ever lives to make intercession for
them, and that is always acceptable to God. The twelve loaves, Josephus
(a) says, signify the year divided into so many months.

\(a\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 7.

[Exodus 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 25:31</span></span>

And thou shalt make a candlestick of pure gold,.... Another piece of
household furniture, and an useful one, especially in a house where
there are no windows, as there were none in the tabernacle, denoting the
darkness of the legal dispensation, see [Kg2
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#010.md). This candlestick was set in the
holy place, on the south side of it, opposite the shewbread table, [Exo
26:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#035.md) and was typical of the church of
God; so the candlesticks John had a vision of signify seven churches,
[Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013.md), the general use of which
is, to hold forth light put into it, for it has none of itself, but what
is put there by Christ: and this is not the light of nature and reason,
nor the law of Moses, but the Gospel of Christ; which where it is set,
gives light and dispels darkness; is useful to walk and work by; does
not always burn alike, and will shine the brightest in the end of the
world: this light is put into the candlestick by Christ the fountain of
all light, and from whom all light is communicated, particularly the
Gospel; and being put there, lost sinners are looked up by it, strayed
ones are brought back, hypocrites are detected, and saints are
enlightened, comforted, and refreshed: and this candlestick being made
of "pure gold", may denote the worth and value of the church of God, and
the members of it, their splendour, glory, and purity they have from
Christ, and their duration; and thus the seven churches of Asia are
compared to seven golden candlesticks, [Rev
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012.md), and under the form of a golden
candlestick is the Gospel church set forth in [Zac
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#002). Josephus (b.md) is of opinion the
candlestick has some mystical meaning in it, it being of seventy parts,
as he says, refers to the twelve signs of the Zodiac, through which the
seven planets take their course, whom Milton (c) follows:

of beaten work shall the candlestick be made; not of gold melted, and
poured into a mould, from whence it might take its form; but it was
beaten with an hammer out of an entire mass of gold, and not the
following parts made separately, and then joined:

his shaft, and his branches, his bowls, his knops, and his flowers,
shall be of the same; not only of the same metal, but beaten out of the
same mass and lump of gold; these are the several parts of the
candlestick: the "shaft" is the trunk and body of the candlestick, which
stood in the middle of it, and in which the several parts united; and
may either be typical of Christ, who is principal and head of the
church, and stands in the middle of it, and is the cement of the several
parts of it, and is but one, the one head, Mediator and Saviour; or else
the church universal, of which particular ones are parts: its "branches"
may either signify the several members of churches, who are in Christ as
branches, and hold forth the word of light; or else minister, of the
Gospel, who have their commission and gifts from him, and are held by
him as stars in his right hand; or else particular churches, which are
branches of the church universal: its "bowls", which were to hold oil
for the lamps, may denote men of capacity in the churches, full of the
gifts and graces of the Spirit, able to teach others also: and the
"knops" and "flowers" were for decoration, and may signify the graces of
the Spirit, with which private members and believers are adorned; or the
gifts of the Spirit with which the ministers of the word are furnished,
and appear beautiful, publishing the glad tidings of salvation by
Christ.

\(b\) Antiq. l. 3. c. 7. sect. 7. (c) Paradise Lost. B. 12. ver. 254,
255, 256.

[Exodus 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 25:32</span></span>

And six branches shall come out of the sides of it,.... Out of the trunk
or shaft, being beaten out of it:

three branches of the candlestick out of one side, and three branches of
the candlestick out of the other side; Jarchi takes what we render the
"shaft" to be the lower part of the candlestick, from whence three feet
went out below; and the "branch" or "cane", for it is in the singular
number in the preceding verse, he takes to be the middle branch or
trunk, that went up from the middle of the foot upwards, and upon it was
the middle lamp, in the form of a censer, to pour oil into the midst of
it; and the six branches went out from the sides of that, here and there
drawn obliquely, and went up to the height of the candlestick, which is
the middle branch or cane; and they went up from the midst of that
middle cane, one above another, the lowermost long, and that above it
shorter than that, and the uppermost shorter than that; for the height
of the tops of them were equal to the height of the middle cane, that
is, the seventh, from whence the six went out.

[Exodus 25:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 25:33</span></span>

Three bowls made like unto almonds, with a knop and a flower in one
branch,.... There were three bowls or cups in the form of almond nuts to
each branch, which were either to hold oil for the lamps, as before
observed, or, as others think, to catch the snuff which fell from them;
and there were a "knop", which, according to the signification of the
word, was in the form of a pomegranate, and a flower, which the Targum
of Jonathan renders a lily; and they are both in Scripture emblems of
the saints endowed with the gifts and graces of the Spirit:

and three bowls made like almonds in the other branch; on the other side
of the candlestick, opposite to the former:

so in the six branches that come out of the candlestick; there were the
same number of bowls, with a knop and a flower in the rest of the
branches, as in those mentioned.

[Exodus 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 25:34</span></span>

And in the candlestick shall be four bowls,.... That is, in the trunk or
body of it; the branches had but three apiece, but this being larger had
four: and these were also

made like unto almonds, with their knops and their flowers; as the bowls
on the branches had with them.

[Exodus 25:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 25:35</span></span>

And there shall be a knop under two branches of the same,.... According
to Jarchi, from the middle of the knop (which was like a pomegranate,
or, as others, like an apple) two branches were drawn from the two sides
of it, here and there; so they teach in the work of the tabernacle, the
height of the candlestick was eighteen hands' breadth: this clause is
repeated twice in this verse, signifying there should be a knop under
each of the three branches on one side, and three on the other side: for
it follows:

according to the six branches that proceed out of the candlestick; out
of the trunk of it, as in [Exo 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#032.md).

[Exodus 25:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 25:36</span></span>

Their knops and their branches shall be of the same,.... Of the same
metal, gold, and of same mass:

all of it shall be one beaten work of pure gold not made in parts, and
then put and soldered together, but the whole candlestick in all its
parts and branches were to be beaten out of one piece of gold.

[Exodus 25:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">exo 25:37</span></span>

And thou shall make the seven lamps thereof,.... Which were, six of
them, on the top of the six branches that came out of the sides of the
candlestick, and the seventh on the top of the shaft which ran up in the
middle of it; which no doubt were made of gold as well as the rest, and
may signify the many members of churches bearing the lamp of a
profession: or the several gifts and graces of the Spirit, which are
sometimes, because of the perfection of them, called the seven spirits
of God, and are compared to seven lamps of fire burning before the
throne, [Rev 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#005.md) or else the ministers
of the Gospel, who are the lights of the world:

and they shall light the lamps thereof; Aaron and his sons, the priests
in successive generations:

that they may give light over against it to the table of shewbread,
which was opposite to it on the north side of the tabernacle, and so by
the light of these lamps the priests could see to place the shewbread in
its order; or the candlestick itself, the lamps being so placed as to
give light to the whole body of it, that it might be seen in all its
parts very distinctly; unless it can be thought that these lamps were
separate from the candlestick, and set around the sides of the holy
place, and gave light to it: and this may rather seem to be the case,
since these lamps are spoken of after the whole of it is said to be one
beaten work of pure gold; but then we have no account of the lamps of
the candlestick, unless they are supposed to be included in the
branches; wherefore the first sense seems best.

[Exodus 25:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">exo 25:38</span></span>

Which, according to Jarchi, was a sort of forks with which they took the
wicks out of the oil, and put them in the lamps; or, as some think, the
snuffers, but they are distinguished from tongs, [Kg1
7:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#049.md) and the snuffdishes thereof shall
be of pure gold; in which the tongs or snuffers were put, or into which
the snuff itself was put that was snuffed off. Jarchi says they were a
sort of small cups, in which they put the ashes of the lamp, morning by
morning, when they trimmed the lamps from the ashes of the wicks which
burned in the night, and were extinct: so Ben Gersom and Lyra say they
were vessels full of water where those were put which were snuffed off,
that they might not make a smoke, which is not improbable.

[Exodus 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">exo 25:39</span></span>

Of a talent of pure gold shall he make it, with all these vessels. The
common talent weighed sixty pounds, but the sacred talent was double,
and weighed one hundred and twenty pounds, as says Jarchi, and so Ben
Melech: a talent of gold amounted to 5067 pounds, three shillings and
ten pence of our money, according to Bishop Cumberland (d). (Assuming a
troy weight of 12 ounces to a pound, and an ounce of gold worth <span
class="small">400 U.S., than a talent would be worth about <span
class="small">600,000. Editor.)</span></span>

\(d\) Of Scripture Weights and Measures, p. 121.

[Exodus 25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">exo 25:40</span></span>

And look that thou make them,.... Or see that they are made by workmen
employed:

after their pattern, which was showed thee in the mount; from whence it
appears, that as Moses was showed the model of the tabernacle, so also
of the candlestick, and of all its appurtenances, and of every other
vessel in it; and he is strictly charged to look carefully and
diligently to it, that everything be done exactly according to the model
he had a view of, in which everything was particularly described, and
nothing was left to the will, humour, and fancy of men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 26](exo026.md)

</div>
