<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo018)  [Next](exo020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 19:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 19

In this chapter we have an account of the coming of the children of
Israel to Mount Sinai, [Exo 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001.md), of
the covenant made with them there, the proposal on the part of God, and
their acceptance of it, [Exo 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#003.md), the
previous notice God gave three days before of his appearance on the
mount, the orders for their preparation to meet him, and the execution
of them, [Exo 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009.md), the awful and
tremendous appearance of God upon the mount, [Exo
19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006.md) and the strict charge given, that
neither people nor priests should come near and gaze, only Moses and
Aaron with him were to come up, bounds being set to prevent the rest,
[Exo 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021.md), and the chapter is closed
with observing, that Moses went down from the mount, and delivered to
the people what the Lord spoke to and by him, [Exo
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#025.md).

[Exodus 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 19:1</span></span>

In the third month, when the children of Israel were gone forth out of
the land of Egypt,.... Which was the month Sivan, and answers to part of
May and part of June:

the same day came they into the wilderness of Sinai; which had its name
from the mountain situated in it, and that from the bushes which grew
upon it. Justin (z) calls it Synan, which he says Moses occupied, and
Strabo (a), Sinnan. Hither they came either on the same day they came
from Rephidim; which, according to Bunting (b), were eight miles from
it, or on the same day of the month, as to number, that is, on the third
day of the third month; and so Jerom (c) and others say it was on the
forty seventh day after their coming out of Egypt, three days after
which they received the law on Mount Sinai, it being a generally
received notion that the law was given fifty days after the passover;
hence the feast of weeks is called from thence the feast of pentecost,
or fifty days: or rather this was the first day of the month, as Jarchi
and R. Moses; with which agrees the Targum of Jonathan; and so was the
forty fifth of their coming out of Egypt, five days after which they
received the law; it being a tradition with the Jews, as Aben Ezra
observes, that that was given on the sixth of Sivan, and may be
accounted for thus; on the first day they came to Sinai, and encamped
there, on the day following Moses went up to God, [Exo
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#003.md), on the third day Moses gathered
the elders together, [Exo 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#007.md), and
declared to them the words of God, and on the third day after that,
which was the sixth, the law was delivered to them.

\(z\) E Trogo, l. 36. c. 2. (a) Geograph. l. 16. p. 520. (b) Travels, p.
82. (c) Epist. Fabiolae de 42 mansion. fol. 15. c. 1. tom. 3.

[Exodus 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 19:2</span></span>

For they were departed from Rephidim,.... After they had fought with
Amalek, and came to the western part of the mount to Horeb, where the
rock was smitten for them; and they were come from that now, and
encamped at Sinai, after Jethro had paid a visit to Moses:

and were come to the desert of Sinai, and had pitched in this
wilderness; that is, of Sinai, as in the preceding verse:

and there Israel encamped before the mount; Mount Sinai, from whence the
desert or wilderness was called. This, as Jarchi says, was on the east
side of the mount; Horeb and Sinai were but one and the same mountain,
which had two tops. Horeb was on the western side, near to which lay the
plain of Rephidim; and Sinai was on the eastern side, on which the
wilderness of that name bordered: so that the children of Israel, when
they came from Rephidim, came from the western side, and took a circuit
about and came to the eastern; which, according to a fore mentioned
writer, was eight miles, and was the twelfth station or mansion of the
children of Israel. This number twelve is taken notice of by some, as
having something singular and peculiar in it; there were the twelve
tribes of Israel, and at their twelfth mansion the law was given them;
Christ had twelve apostles, and there are twelve foundations of the new
Jerusalem, and 12,000 were sealed out of every tribe of Israel.

[Exodus 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 19:3</span></span>

And Moses went up unto God,.... Who was in the pillar of cloud upon the
top of the mount; this was on the second day, according to the Targum of
Jonathan: "the Lord called unto him out of the mountain"; or had called
unto him, as Aben Ezra, since without his leave he could not have gone
up. He called to him out of the cloud upon the top of the mountain to
come up, and being come near him, he called to him, and spoke with an
articulate voice, as follows:

saying, thus shalt thou say, to the house of Jacob, and tell the
children of Israel; which are the same, and are described as descending
from the same person, who was called by both names; the one was his name
in the former and lower state of his life, the other in the latter and
more prosperous one; and his posterity are called by these two names, as
Bishop Patrick observes, to put them in mind, that they who had lately
been as low as Jacob, when he went to Padanaram, were now grown as great
as God made him when he came from thence, and was called Israel.

[Exodus 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 19:4</span></span>

Ye have seen what I did to the Egyptians,.... The plagues he brought
upon them in Egypt, and the destruction of them at the Red sea; these
things they were eyewitnesses of, and needed no other proof or evidence
to convince and assure them of them, and therefore must be under
obligation to attend to what he was about to recommend unto them, for
which reason this is observed:

and how I bare you on eagles' wings; that is, as on eagles' wings, the
note of similitude being wanting, but to be supplied; for it cannot be
thought that they were literally bore on eagles' wings; but as that
creature is reported to be very affectionate to its young, and careful
of it, and, as is said, only to one; for, having more, it will cast away
all but one, and reserve that, which it carefully nourishes; and being
swift of flight, and strong of wing, it will in a remarkable manner take
its young upon it, and safely and swiftly convey it where it pleases; of
which See Gill on [Deu 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#011.md). The
eagle excels other birds both in its strength and in the size of its
body; and especially its pectoral muscles, by which its wings are
supported; are very strong, so that it can carry its young, and other
things, on its back and wings; and some such thing nature itself seems
to have required, as naturalists observe (d); and there are some
histories, which, if true, greatly confirm and illustrate this. Aelianus
(e) reports of Tilgamus, a Babylonian, and who afterwards was king of
Babylon, and who seems to be the Tilgath Pilneser of the Scriptures,
king of Assyria, that when a lad, being thrown down from the top of a
tower, an eagle, which is a very quick sighted bird, saw him, and,
before he came to the ground, flew under him, took him upon its back,
and carried him into a garden, and gently let him down. So it is related
of Aristomenes (f), that as he was casting headlong into a deep ditch by
the Lacedemonians, where they used to throw condemned malefactors, an
eagle flew under him, and bore him on its wings, and carried him to the
bottom, without any hurt to any part of his body. Jarchi observes, that
whereas other birds carry their young between their feet, for fear of
those that fly above them, the eagle flying above all others, and so in
no fear of them, carries its young upon its wings, judging it better
that a dart should pierce that than its young. The Targums of Jonathan
and Jerusalem paraphrase the words,"and I bore you on clouds, as on
eagles' wings;''which covered, and protected, and sustained them, as the
eagles' wings do its young; the former adds, from Pelusium, a city in
Egypt, supposed by the Targumist to be the same with Rameses; where
Jarchi observes the people of Israel were very swiftly gathered together
as the place of their rendezvous, and were as safely brought from thence
to the place where they now were. Thus the Lord showed an affectionate
concern for Israel, took them under his care and protection, stood
between them and the Egyptians in a pillar of cloud, and secured them
from their arrows, and swiftly and safely removed them from the land of
Egypt to the place where they now were, distinguishing them from all
other nations, having chosen them to be a special people to himself:

and brought you unto myself: to the mountain of God, where he had
appeared to Moses, and given this as a sign and token of the truth of
his mission, that he and Israel, when brought out of Egypt by him,
should serve him on this mount; and now they were brought thither, where
he was about not only to grant his presence in a very singular manner,
but to deliver his law unto them, and enter into a covenant with them,
and establish and settle them as his people; so that they were a people
near unto the Lord, taken into covenant, and indulged with communion
with him, and made partakers of various distinguished blessings of his:
both the above Targums are, "I brought you to the doctrine of my law",
to receive it at this mount.

\(d\) Scheuchzer. Physica Sacra, vol. 2. p. 186. (e) Hist. Animal. l.
12. c. 21. (f) Pausaniae Messenica, sive, l. 4. p. 250, 251.

[Exodus 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 19:5</span></span>

Now therefore,.... Since they had received such marks of his favour, and
were laid under great obligations to him:

if ye will obey my voice indeed; truly, sincerely, and heartily; or "in
hearkening hearken", or "in obeying obey" (g); that is, closely and
attentively hearken to what he should say to them, and thoroughly and
constantly yield a cheerful obedience to his commands:

and keep my covenant; now about to be made with them, which would
consist of promises of good things to be done to them on his part, and
of duties to be performed by them on their part, and so would constitute
a formal covenant by stipulation and restipulation:

then ye shall be a peculiar treasure unto me above all people; be as
highly valued by him, and as carefully preserved as the richest treasure
among men; even as the treasure of princes, consisting of gold and
silver, precious stones, pearls and jewels, and everything that is
valuable; and of this he would give such proof and demonstration, as
would make it appear that they were esteemed by him above all people
upon the face of the earth; being chosen for his peculiar treasure, and
redeemed out of the house of bondage and slavery to be his peculiar
people, and distinguished from all others by particular favours and
blessings:

for all the earth is mine; as it is, and the inhabitants of it, by
creation, sustentation, preservation, and dominion, all being made,
upheld, preserved, and governed by him; and therefore, as he had a right
to all, could choose what part he pleased for his special use and
service; or "though all the earth is mine" (h), as Marinus in Aben Ezra,
which yet the latter does not seem to approve of; and then the sense is,
though the whole world was his, and all that is in it, yet such was his
special affection, and peculiar regard to Israel, as to choose them, and
esteem them as his portion and inheritance, his jewel, and peculiar
treasure.

\(g\) "obediendo obedieritis", Pagninus, Montanus; "audiendo
audiveritis", Drusius; "auscultando auscultabitis", Piscator; so
Ainsworth. (h) "tametsi", Vatablus; "quamvis", Piscator, Drusius.

[Exodus 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 19:6</span></span>

And ye shall be unto me a kingdom of priests,.... Instead of being in a
state of servitude and bondage, as they had been in Egypt, they should
be erected into a kingdom, become a body politic, a free state, a
commonwealth governed by its own laws, and those laws of God's making;
yea, they should be a kingdom to him, and he be more immediately the
king of them, as he was not of others, the government of Israel being a
Theocracy; and this kingdom should consist of men that were priests, who
had access to God, served him, and offered sacrifice to him; or of men
greatly esteemed and honoured, as priests were in those times. Jarchi
interprets it, a kingdom of princes, as the word sometimes signifies:
the subjects of this kingdom were princes, men of a princely spirit, and
these princes, like those of the king of Babylon, who boasted they were
altogether kings; and like the Roman senators, of whom the ambassador of
Pyrrhus said, that he saw at Rome as many kings as he saw senators. And
so here all the Targums render it, "kings and priests": to which
reference seems to be had not only in [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md) but in [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006.md), they were kings when they got the
victory, as in the times of Joshua, over the several kings of Canaan,
and had their kingdoms divided among them; and before the priesthood was
settled in the family of Aaron, every head of a family in Israel was a
priest; and they were all priests at the passover, as Philo (i)
observes: and so the spiritual Israel of God are kings and priests; they
are kings, having the power and riches of kings; having got through
Christ the victory over sin, Satan, and the world; and being possessed
of the kingdom of grace, and heirs of the kingdom of glory; and priests,
being allowed to draw nigh to God, to present themselves, souls and
bodies, a holy and living sacrifice, to offer to him the sacrifices of
prayer and praise through Christ, by whom they become acceptable to him:
"and an holy nation"; being separated from all others, and devoted to
the worship and service of God, having holy laws, and holy ordinances,
and a holy service, and a holy place to perform it in, and holy persons
to attend unto it, as they afterwards had. In allusion to this, the
spiritual Israel, or people of God, are also called so, [Pe1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#009.md) being chosen unto holiness,
redeemed from all iniquity, called with an holy calling, sanctified by
the blood of Christ, and made holy by the Spirit of God, and under the
influence of his grace live holy lives and conversations:

these are the words thou shalt speak unto the children of Israel: what
he would have them do, and they were bound to do in a way of duty to
him, and what he in a way of grace would do for them, and they should be
unto him,

\(i\) De Vita Mosis, l. 3. p. 686.

[Exodus 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 19:7</span></span>

And Moses came and called for the elders of the people,.... After he had
heard the above words from the mouth of God, he came down from the mount
into the camp of Israel, and sent for the elders or principal men of the
tribes and families of Israel to come to him:

and, being gathered together:

laid before their faces all these words which the Lord commanded him;
expressed them in the plainest manner, set them in the clearest light to
their minds and consciences; so that they thoroughly understood them,
were fully convinced of the propriety of these things God required of
them, and their obligation to observe them, and saw plainly the
greatness and importance of what he promised unto them.

[Exodus 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 19:8</span></span>

And all the people answered together,.... By their heads and
representatives, the elders, summoned before Moses, to whom he declared
the whole will of God; or this being communicated by them to their
respective tribes and families, they were all of one mind; there was not
a contradicting voice among them, they all gave the same answer, or all
united in returning for answer what follows:

all that the Lord hath spoken we will do; obey his voice in all things
he directs unto, or commands to be done, and keep the covenant he should
make with them, and observe whatever was required on their parts; which
was well spoken, if with the heart, and if, under a consciousness of
their own weakness, they had expressed their desire of dependence upon
the grace of God to enable them to perform, see [Deu
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#028.md). The Septuagint version adds,
"and we will hear", or be obedient, as in [Exo
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007.md),

and Moses returned the words of the people unto the Lord; not for his
information, who knew very well what they had said, but for the
discharge of his office as a mediator and messenger between God and
them: this, according to Jarchi, was on the third day of the month.

[Exodus 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 19:9</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... As the Targum of Jonathan, on the
third day; though Jarchi says the fourth; which seems not so well to
agree with his words on the preceding verse, since it seems to be at the
same time that Moses returned the words of the people to the Lord, that
he said what follows to him:

lo, I come unto thee in a thick cloud; which was different from the
pillar of cloud in which he went before the people, and now stood in it
on the top of the mount; for he speaks not now of his present appearance
to Moses, but of his appearance on the mount three days after; wherefore
the Septuagint version wrongly renders it, "in a pillar of cloud": there
were appearances of the divine Majesty in a cloud frequently afterwards,
both in the Old and New Testament, see [Exo
40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034.md) and so Christ, the mighty Angel,
is said to be clothed with a cloud, [Rev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001.md). And from such appearances as
these, the Heathens have represented their deities, as Apollo (k), Venus
(l), Juno (m), and others, coming in a cloud, or clothed with one:

that the people may hear when I speak with thee, and believe thee for
ever; they had believed Moses already, particularly at the Red sea, when
they saw what was done there, but afterwards, as it seems, returned to
their unbelief again; but now, as they would be eyewitnesses of the
cloud in which the Lord would appear to Moses, so they would be ear
witnesses of what he said to him; for though the cloud was a thick one
in which he came, so that they could not see any similitude, any
likeness at all, not so much as a brightness, a shining glory, as they
had seen in the pillar of cloud, see [Exo
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#007.md), yet, the voice of God out of it
was so loud, when he spoke with Moses, that this vast body of people
being placed around, at the lower part of the mount, heard plainly and
distinctly all that was said; so that they were sure they were not
imposed upon by Moses, but that the law he delivered to them was from
God, since they heard it with their own ears; and therefore they and
their posterity believed it for ever, and never entertained the least
distrust of the divinity and authority of it. This case was widely
different from that of Numa or Mahomet, the one pretending to receive
instructions from the goddess Egeria, and the other from the angel
Gabriel; but all depended upon their own word, none were, nor did they
pretend that any were eye or ear witnesses of what they declared; but
such was the case here:

and Moses told the words of the people unto the Lord; the same which he
is said to return to him in the preceding verse, and here repeated for
the confirmation of it, and to lead on to what the Lord had to say
further concerning them.

\(k\) "Nnbe et candentes humeros amictus Augur Apollo. -----" Horat.
Carmin. l. 1. ode 2. (l) "Et Venus aethereos inter dea candida nimbos
Dona ferens aderat ----". Virgil. Aeneid, l. 8. "prope finem". "Hoc
Venus obscuro faciem circumdata nimbo Detulit. ----" Virgil. Aeneid, l.
12. (m) "Agens hyemem nimbo succincta, per auras ----". Ib. Aeneid. 10.

[Exodus 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 19:10</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... On the fourth day, according to the
Targum of Jonathan:

go unto the people; go down from the mountain, from the top of it, where
he now was, to the camp of Israel, which was pitched before it:

and sanctify them today and tomorrow; the fourth and fifth days of the
month; that is, he was, to instruct them how they were to sanctify
themselves in an external way, by washing themselves, as after
mentioned, their bodies and clothes, and by abstaining from all sensual
pleasures, lawful or unlawful:

and let them wash their clothes; which the Jews understood not of their
garments, but of their bodies also; teaching them by these outward
things the necessity of internal purity and holiness, to appear before
God: these outward rites were in use before the law of Moses, as appears
from [Gen 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#002.md) and the Heathens
themselves have similar notions of the cleanness of bodies and garments,
as well as the purity of mind, being acceptable to their deities (n).

\(n\) "Casta placent superis, pura cum veste venito". Tibullus.

[Exodus 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 19:11</span></span>

And be ready against the third day,.... Not the third day of the month,
but the third day from hence, this being the fourth, and the morrow the
fifth, and the third day, the day following that, the sixth, on which
day it is generally agreed by the Jews that the law was given; see Gill
on [Exo 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016.md).

for the third day the Lord will come down in the sight of all the people
upon Mount Sinai; which must be understood, consistent with his
omnipresence, and is only expressive of some visible display of his
power, and of some sensible token of his presence to the people; he was
now upon it in the pillar of cloud, but then he would appear in another
manner, and descend in a thick cloud and fire, which all the people
would see, though they could not see the similitude of anything in it.

[Exodus 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 19:12</span></span>

And thou shall set bounds to the people round about,.... That is, round
about the mountain, by drawing a line, throwing up a foss or ditch, or
else by laying up heaps of stones or sand, which might be come at
easily, or bushes and branches of trees, which grew thick on the mount,
from whence it had its name; but be it what will that were used, these
were to signify, that so far the people might go, but no further, which
their curiosity might prompt them to:

saying, take heed unto yourselves that ye go not up into the mount; so
far were they from being allowed to go up to the top of it, that they
were not allowed to ascend it at all, or to go any further than where
the ascent or rise began; it was at their peril to ascend, and this was
what they were to take heed unto, lest they incurred danger:

or touch the border of it; it being the mountain of God, and relatively
holy through his presence on it:

whosoever toucheth the mount shall be surely put to death; which severe
law was made to deter them from any attempt to go up the mountain, since
it was death even to touch it, see [Heb
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018.md).

[Exodus 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 19:13</span></span>

There shall not a hand touch it,.... The mountain or the border of it,
which is repeated that it might be taken notice of; and to show that it
would be resented if they were to stretch out their hand and only
lightly touch it, much more should they set their feet upon it and
attempt to ascend it: or rather, "shall not touch him" (o); that is, the
man that shall touch the mountain; he shall be so detestable and
abominable, whoever touches it or breaks through the bounds of it, and
attempts to ascend it, that no man shall follow him to lay hold on him,
in order to bring him back to justice, but shall dispatch him at once in
one or other of the ways directed to:

but he shall surely be stoned, or shot through; if near at hand, all
about him shall rise upon him, and take up stones and stone him; but if
he is got at a distance, then they were to shoot arrows at him; and in
this way Aben Ezra interprets it; the words, says he, refer to the man
that toucheth the mount, who is not to be followed and apprehended, but
those that see him, and are near, abiding in the place where they are,
are to stone him immediately, and if afar off they are to throw darts at
him: though the Targum of Jonathan seems to understand it, as if
punishment would be immediately inflicted upon such a person, not by the
hands of men, but by the hand of God; for it says, such an one shall be
stoned with hailstones, and fiery darts shall be spread upon him; or, as
the Jerusalem Targum, shall be shot at him:

whether it be beast, or man, it shall not live; that touches the
mountain, and so it is explained, [Heb
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#020.md), the word beast comprehends all
kinds of beasts, wild and tame, and all sorts of cattle, of the herd or
flock; as the word "man" takes in women as well as men, as Ben Gersom
observes; Aben Ezra thinks fowls are not mentioned, because they cannot
be taken, but fly away immediately; but then they might be shot:

when the trumpet soundeth long, they shall come up to the mount; this,
according to Jarchi, was a trumpet of a ram's horn; the word used in the
Arabic language signifying a ram; but it is a mere fancy and fable of
his, that this was of the ram of Isaac which was sacrificed in his
stead; it is much more likely that there was indeed no real trumpet,
only a sound was formed like the sound of one; and, it is highly
probable, was formed by the ministering angels; Aben Ezra observes, that
the sound of a trumpet was never heard until the day of the decalogue,
until the day that was given; and that there was not a greater wonder on
Mount Sinai than this: the design and use of it was to gather, this vast
body of people together, to come and hear what God had to say unto them;
and when its sound was protracted to a great length, or was in one
continued tone, and somewhat lower, as is usual when a trumpet is about
to cease blowing, then the people were to take it as a token that they
should approach the mountain; not to ascend it, but come to the lower
and nether part of it, where bounds were set to direct them how far they
might go, and no further: so the Septuagint version is,"when the voices
(or thunders) and the trumpets and the cloud departed from the mountain,
they went up to the mountain:''a certain Jewish writer (p) interprets
this, not of the people in general, but of Aaron and his sons, and of
the seventy elders, see [Exo 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#024.md).

\(o\) "non tanget eum", Vatablus, Drusius, "non feriet eum", Tigurine
version. (p) R. Samuel Ben Hophni, apud Aben Ezram, in loc.

[Exodus 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 19:14</span></span>

And Moses went down from the mount unto the people,.... The same day
that he went up, the fourth day of the month:

and sanctified the people; instructed them and ordered them what they
should do for their sanctification, in order to their hearing the law
from the mouth of the Lord:

and they washed their clothes; as the Lord had directed Moses to enjoin
them, and as he had commanded them; see Gill on [Exo
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#010.md).

[Exodus 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 19:15</span></span>

And he said unto the people, be ready against the third day,.... The
third day from thence, the sixth of the month Sivan, against which day
they were to prepare themselves, by washing their garments, and all
other outward acts of sanctification and purity they were directed to,
that they might be ready for the service of that day, to hear and
receive the law from God himself: Aben Ezra has this note on the
passage,"perhaps not a man slept that night, that he might hear the
voice of the Lord in the morning, as was the way or custom of the high
priest on the day of atonement;''that is, not to sleep the night before:

come not at your wives; or, "do not draw nigh to a woman" (q), to lie
with her; meaning not with a strange woman, or one that was not his
wife, for that was not lawful at any time; nor with a menstruous woman
who was unclean, and so forbidden, but with a man's own wife: what was
lawful must now be abstained from, for the greater sanctification and
solemnity of the service of this day, see [Co1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005), so Chaeremoh (r.md) the stoic says
of the Egyptian priests, that when the time is at hand that they are to
perform some very sacred and solemn service, they spend several days in
preparing for it; sometimes two and forty, sometimes more, sometimes
less, but never under seven; when they abstain from all animals, and
from all kind of herbs and pulse, and especially from venereal
conversation with women; and to this latter Juvenal (s) the poet has
respect.

\(q\) Sept. "to a woman", Ainsworth. (r) Apud Porphyr, de Abstinentia,
l. 4. sect. 7. Vid Clement. Alexand Stromat. l. 1. p. 306. (s) "Ille
petit veniam quoties non abstinet uxor, "Concubitu, sacris
observandisque diebus". Juvenal, Satyr 6.

[Exodus 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 19:16</span></span>

And it came to pass on the third day in the morning, The sixth of the
month, according to the Targum of Jonathan, and so Jarchi; on which day,
as the Jews generally say (t), the law was given, and which, they also
observe, was a sabbath day: yea, they are sometimes so very particular
as to fix the hour of the day, and say (u), it was the sixth hour of the
day, or twelve o'clock at noon, that Israel received the decalogue, and
at the ninth hour, at three o'clock in the afternoon, returned to their
stations:

there were thunders, and lightnings, and a thick cloud upon the mount;
which were to awaken the attention of the people to what they were to
hear and receive, and to strike their minds with an awe of the divine
Being; and to add to the solemnity of the day, and the service of it;
and to signify the obscurity and terror of the legal dispensation, and
the wrath and curse that the transgressors the law might expect, even an
horrible tempest of divine vengeance, see [Heb
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018.md).

and the voice of the trumpet exceeding loud; or, "exceeding strong" (w);
being blown by the mighty angels, and by ten thousand them, with whom
the Lord now descended:

so that all the people that was in the camp trembled, at the sound of
it, it was so loud and terrible, and it so pierced their ears and their
hearts: a different effect the Gospel trumpet the jubilee trumpet, the
joyful sound of love, grace, and mercy, has upon sensible sinners, and
on true believers: the law with its curses terrifies, the Gospel with
its blessings comforts.

\(t\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 86. 2. & Yoma, fol. 4. 2. Seder Olam Rabba,
c. 5. p. 18. (u) Pirke Eliezer, c. 46. (w) "fortis valde", Pagninus,
Montanus, Vatablus; so Ainsworth.

[Exodus 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 19:17</span></span>

And Moses brought forth the people out of the camp,.... Which was before
the mountain and near it, when the above tokens were given of the divine
Presence on it; as they were thrown into a panic upon the sound of the
trumpet, it was, perhaps, with some difficulty that they were brought
out of the camp, or persuaded to quit it; and nothing short of the
presence of Moses at the head of them, to go before them, and lead them
to the foot of the mountain, could have prevailed upon them to have done
it:

to meet with God; who came forth in such an awful and solemn manner, as
their King and lawgiver, to deliver a body of laws to them, to be the
rule of their future conduct:

and they stood at the nether part of the mount; at the bottom of it,
where bounds were set, and a fence made, that they should proceed no
further, and yet near enough to hear what God said to Moses and to them.

[Exodus 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 19:18</span></span>

And Mount Sinai was altogether on a smoke,.... Not from nature, as
volcanos, but for a reason after given; it seemed to be one large body
of smoke, nothing else to be seen but smoke; an emblem of the darkness
of the legal dispensation, which was full of obscure types and figures,
of dark shadows and smoky sacrifices, to which the clear day, of the
Gospel dispensation is opposed, see [Co2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#012.md).

because the Lord descended upon it in fire; in flaming fire, as the
Targums, which set the mountain on fire, and caused this prodigious
smoke; for if he, who is a consuming fire, but toucheth the hills and
mountains, they smoke, [Psa 104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032.md).

and the smoke thereof ascended as the smoke of a furnace such an one as
that which Abraham in vision saw, [Gen
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#017.md).

and the whole mount quaked greatly; to which circumstance Deborah refers
in her song, when she speaks of mountains melting and flowing from
before the presence of the God of Israel, and particularly of Sinai,
[Jdg 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004.md), and the psalmist, who makes
mention of the earth shaking, and the heavens dropping, and of Sinai
being moved at his presence, [Psa
68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008.md), it is probable there was an
earthquake at this time, which sometimes attends thunders and
lightnings, see [Rev 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#018.md).

[Exodus 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 19:19</span></span>

And when the voice of the trumpet sounded long,.... Not in one continued
tone, as before, [Exo 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#013.md), where a
different word is used, and when it decreased, and was about to cease,
which was to summon the people to attend; but now they were come to the
foot of the mount, and this sounding was a preparation to the giving of
the law unto them, and was not one continued even tone: but waxed louder
and louder; or, "going, and exceeding strong"; or, "strengthening itself
exceedingly" (x); it went on to an high pitch, until it was exceeding
vehement and strong, and so sonorous as scarce to be bore:

Moses spake; what he said is not here recorded; it is highly probable,
as has been observed by some, that he uttered those words related of him
in [Heb 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#021.md) "I exceedingly fear and
quake": such an impression did this loud and strong voice of the trumpet
make upon him:

and God answered him by a voice; a still and gentle one, in order to
encourage and comfort him; and so the Targum of Jonathan paraphrases
it,"with a pleasant and audible voice, and with delightful words.''

\(x\) , Sept. "iens et fortificans se valde", Montanus; "roborans se",
Vatablus; "quum pergeret et invalesceret valde", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator.

[Exodus 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 19:20</span></span>

And the Lord came down on Mount Sinai,.... In the above visible tokens
of his presence and power; otherwise he is the incomprehensible Jehovah,
that immense and omnipotent Being, who fills heaven and earth, and
cannot be contained and circumscribed in either:

on the top of the mount; where the fire he descended in rested, and
where the smoke and thick cloud were, as a token of his presence:

and the Lord called Moses up to the top of the mount; who either was at
the bottom of it with the people, or in a higher ascent of it between
God and them:

and Moses went up; to the top of it, where the Lord was, as he ordered
him: a certain traveller (y) tells us that the top of this mount was
scarce thirty feet in circumference.

\(y\) Baumgarten Peregrinatio, l. 1. c. 24. p. 61.

[Exodus 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 19:21</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses, go down,.... As soon as he was got to the
top of the mount he was bid to go down again to the bottom, with a
message to the people:

charge the people, lest they break through unto the Lord to gaze; to see
if they could observe any similitude or likeness of God, that they might
have an idea of it in their minds, or make an image like unto it; to
prevent which, the Lord, knowing the vanity and curiosity of their
minds, ordered Moses to give them a strict charge not to transgress the
bounds set them, or to break down or break through the fence of stones
and sand, or hedge of bushes, brambles, and branches of trees, or
whatever was placed for bounds:

and many of them perish; or "fall" (z); by the hand of God; either fall
by death, or into some grievous calamity, as the men of Bethshemesh
perished through looking into the ark, [Sa1
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#019.md).

\(z\) Sept. "et corruant", Pagninus, Tigurine version; "et cadat",
Montanus; "cadant", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius; so
Ainsworth.

[Exodus 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 19:22</span></span>

And let the priests also, which come near unto the Lord,.... Either the
firstborn, as the Jews generally interpret it, so Jarchi and Aben Ezra;
who were sanctified to the Lord, and in whose stead afterwards the
Levites were taken; or the sons of Aaron, who should be, and were
potentially, though not actually priests, as Ben Gersom expresses it,
from an ancient book of theirs called Mechilta; or rather some principal
persons, as heads of families and the like, who, before the priesthood
was settled in the family of Aaron, officiated as priests, and drew nigh
to God, and offered up sacrifices for themselves and others, and were
distinguished from others by this character, and therefore do not intend
princes, as some interpret the word; for the description of them will
not agree to them, but plainly points to a sort of men, to whom it was
peculiar to perform that office. These Moses is bid to charge that they

sanctify themselves; in the same manner as the people in general were
before ordered, and keep themselves within the same bounds; not daring
to transgress them, because they were persons that used to draw nigh to
God in the performance of religious actions:

lest the Lord break forth upon them; and smite them, that they die, in
like manner as he made a breach on Uzzah afterwards for touching the ark
of the Lord, [Sa2 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006.md).

[Exodus 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 19:23</span></span>

And Moses said unto the Lord,.... Upon his giving such strict orders
both with respect to the people and the priests:

the people cannot come up to Mount Sinai; suggesting as if there was no
need for him to go down on that account, to give them a charge not to
break through and gaze; since, as he thought, there was no probability
that they ever would attempt it, seeing such a solemn charge had been
given, nor any possibility of it, since such a fence was made:

for thou chargedst us, saying, set bounds about the mount, and sanctify
it; and accordingly bounds have been set, that the people may not go up
it, and the place has been declared sacred, that so none will presume to
do it, according to the solemn charge that has been given: some (a) read
the preceding clause by way of interrogation, "may not the people come
up to Mount Sinai?" may not any of them? or, if any of them, who may?
and there was the greater reason for asking such a question, since the
priests that drew near to God might not, and so the next words are
conceived to be an answer to it.

\(a\) So some in Vatablus.

[Exodus 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 19:24</span></span>

And the Lord said unto him, away, get thee down,.... And prevent the
people and priests from breaking through the bounds and gazing, to which
their curiosity would tempt them; as the Lord knew better than Moses,
and it was high time for him to be gone, the matter required haste, the
people were under great temptations of indulging their curiosity, to the
peril of their lives:

and thou shall come up, thou, and Aaron with thee; which is thought to
be an answer to the question, who might come up? only himself and Aaron,
who was his prophet and spokesman, and concerned with him in his
miracles, and in conducting the people of Israel; and who was to be
chief priest as Moses was to be, and was the leader and governor of the
people:

but let not the priests and the people break through to come up unto the
Lord, lest he break forth upon them; it required the immediate presence
of Moses below, and immediate care was to be taken by him, lest the
priests and people, led by a vain curiosity, should attempt to ascend
the mount, and come where God was, to see if they could observe any
likeness of him; which would so provoke him, that in just retaliation,
as they had broke through the bounds set, he would break forth on them
by inflicting sudden death upon them.

[Exodus 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 19:25</span></span>

So Moses went down to the people,.... As the Lord commanded him:

and spake unto them: charging them to keep their distance, and not
presume to pass the line he had drawn, or the foss or fence he had made:
in the Jerusalem Targum it is added,"come and receive the ten
words;''the decalogue or ten commands; and the Targum of Jonathan,"come
and receive the law with the ten words;''the ten commandments of the
law, which are delivered in the following chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 20](exo020.md)

</div>
