<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo039)  [Next](lev000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 40:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 40

This chapter contains the order for setting up the tabernacle, and
placing the furniture of it where it was the will of God it should be
put, [Exo 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001.md) and for the anointing
it, and all its vessels, and also Aaron and his sons, [Exo
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#009.md) all which were accordingly done,
the tabernacle was reared up, and everything was put in its proper
place, [Exo 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#016.md) upon which a cloud
covered the tent, and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle, so
that Moses could not enter; which cloud afterwards was a direction in
their journeys, by night and by day, [Exo
40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034.md).

[Exodus 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 40:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... When the tabernacle, and the work of
it, were finished, and he had taken a survey of it, and everything
belonging to it, which appeared to be done as was ordered:

saying; as follows.

[Exodus 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 40:2</span></span>

On the first day of the first month,.... Which was the month Nisan, as
the Targum of Jonathan expresses it; which was the month the children of
Israel came out of Egypt, out of which they had now been a whole year,
excepting fourteen days:

shalt thou set up the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation; the
tabernacle, which had a tent or covering over it, to which the people
were gathered at times for religious service.

[Exodus 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 40:3</span></span>

And thou shall put therein the ark of the testimony,.... The ark or
chest where the law was, a testimony of the divine will, and which was
to be put into the most holy place of the tabernacle:

and cover the ark with the vail; not with the propitiatory or mercy
seat, as the Targum of Jonathan; for though that was a covering or lid
to the ark, yet not a vail; this was the vail that divided between the
holy place and the most holy, and so covered or hid the ark from the
sight even of the priests that went into the holy place.

[Exodus 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 40:4</span></span>

And thou shall bring in the table,.... The table of shewbread, which was
to be set in the holy place:

and set in order the things that are to be set in order upon it; besides
the dishes, spoons, covers, and bowls, there were the twelve loaves of
shewbread to be set in two rows:

and thou shall bring in the candlestick, and light the lamps thereof;
which was to be brought and set in the same holy place with the
shewbread table; and though the lamps were to be lighted by Aaron, the
priest of the Lord, he being not yet consecrated, the office was
performed by Moses.

[Exodus 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 40:5</span></span>

And thou shalt set the altar of gold for the incense before the ark of
the testimony,.... Not in the most holy place where the ark was, but
over against it in the holy place:

and put the hanging of the door of the tabernacle; the door of entrance
into the holy place, where there were to be no other things set but
those now mentioned, the shewbread table, the candlestick, and the altar
of incense; and these being brought in, the hanging was to be put up,
which hid the sight of the above things, and forbid the entrance of the
people there.

[Exodus 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 40:6</span></span>

And thou shall set the altar of the burnt offering,.... Where the
sacrifices of the people were to be brought, and offered up by the
priests; and this was to be set up in the open court, as it was proper
it should, both because of the smell and smoke of the sacrifices:

before the door of the tabernacle of the tent of the congregation; just
a little before the entrance into the holy place.

[Exodus 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 40:7</span></span>

And thou shall set the laver,.... As is directed in [Exo
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018.md).

[Exodus 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 40:8</span></span>

And thou shall set up the court round about,.... Which consisted of
various hangings, east, west, north, and south; see [Exo
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009.md).

[Exodus 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 40:9</span></span>

And thou shall take the anointing oil, and anoint the tabernacle,.... In
this, and the two following verses [Exo
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#010.md), orders are given for the
anointing of the tabernacle and its vessels, the altar of burnt offering
and its vessels, the laver and its foot, whereby they were consecrated
for divine use and service, according to

[Exodus 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 40:12</span></span>

And thou shalt bring Aaron and his sons to the door of the tabernacle of
the congregation,.... To wash, anoint, and clothe them, as in the two
following verses [Exo 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#013.md), that they
might minister in the priest's office, according to

[Exodus 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 40:15</span></span>

And thou shall anoint them as thou didst anoint their father,.... For
Aaron was first anointed, and then his sons:

that they may minister unto me in the priest's office; which they might
not do before their anointing, though separated for it, and called unto
it:

for their anointing shall surely be an everlasting priesthood throughout
their generations; that is, this ceremony of anointing was to be used in
all ages at the investiture of the high priest with his office, until
the Messiah should come, who would put an end to the Aaronic priesthood;
for not common priests, only the successors of the high priest, were
anointed in later times; this present unction serving for all the
priests that should follow in successive generations, so long as the
priesthood continued.

[Exodus 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 40:16</span></span>

Thus did Moses,.... He set up the tabernacle, and every thing in its
place, and anointed them, and Aaron and his sons:

according to all that the Lord commanded him, so did he; by which he
approved himself to be a faithful servant in the house of God.

[Exodus 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 40:17</span></span>

And it came to pass in the first month, in the second year,.... Of the
departure of the children of Israel out of Egypt:

on the first day of the month, that the tabernacle was reared up; so
that this was in the spring of the year, about the vernal equinox, on a
new year's day, that this was done, which was beginning the year well:
it was within a fortnight of a year after their coming out of Egypt, and
when they had been about five months and a half in building the
tabernacle; for such a time it seems they were in doing that, and which,
considering the many things to be done, and in the winter season, it
shows great dispatch. Where was the place, in which the tabernacle was
reared up, is not said: it is (d) observed, that near the southwest
corner of that part of Mount Sinai, which is called Mount Episteme,
there is a little hill called Araone by the Arabs, and by the Greeks the
tabernacle of the testimony, where they say Aaron was consecrated, and
first performed the offices of the priesthood: probably, says a learned
man (e), on this hill was placed the tabernacle of the congregation,
which Moses was ordered to place without the camp afar off; but he seems
to mistake the tent of Moses, or however the little tabernacle erected
before the grand one was made, for this tabernacle in [Exo
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#007.md) which he seems to refer to; it is
more probable that it was now reared up in the midst of the camp of
Israel, see [Num 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#002.md).

\(d\) Pocock's Travels, p. 147. (e) Clayton's Chronology of the Hebrew
Bible, p. 350.

[Exodus 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 40:18</span></span>

And Moses reared up the tabernacle,.... Not of himself, but with the
help of others:

and fastened the sockets, and set up the boards thereof; fixed the
silver sockets all around, which were the foundation of the building,
and placed and established the shittim boards in them:

and put in the bars thereof; to keep the boards close and tight:

and reared up his pillars; the pillars that supported the vail between
the holy and holy of holies, and those on which the hanging for the door
of the tabernacle was put, as well as the several pillars all around the
court of the tabernacle for the hangings of that.

[Exodus 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 40:19</span></span>

And he spread abroad the tent over the tabernacle,.... Which were
curtains of goats' hair:

and put the covering of the tent above upon it; which was of rams' skins
died red, and over that another covering of badgers' skins:

as the Lord commanded Moses; [Exo
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#007.md).

[Exodus 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 40:20</span></span>

And he took and put the testimony into the ark,.... The ten commands,
called the "testimony", because they testified and declared what was the
will of God with respect to things to be done, or not done. The Targum
of Jonathan says, he put the broken pieces of the tables into it; but
what became of them, or were done with them, we nowhere read; and it
does not appear that any other, but those that Moses hewed by the order
of God, were put into the ark; see [Deu
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#001.md).

and set the staves on the ark; that it might be ready to be carried
whenever a remove was necessary:

and put the mercy seat above upon the ark; together with the cherubim.

[Exodus 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 40:21</span></span>

And he brought the ark into the tabernacle,.... Into that part of it
called the holy of holies:

and set up the vail of the covering, and covered the ark of the
testimony; the vail which divided between the and most holy place, and
so kept out of sight the ark of the testimony within, from being seen by
any, even by the priests in the holy place:

as the Lord commanded Moses; [Exo
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#033.md).

[Exodus 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 40:22</span></span>

And he put the table in the tent of the congregation,.... In the holy
place; for there the shewbread table, which is here meant, was put:

upon the side of the tabernacle northward, without the vail; on the
north side of the tabernacle, at a little distance from the walls, which
were the curtains and boards, even in the holy place on the outside of
the vail, which divided from the most holy place.

[Exodus 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 40:23</span></span>

And he set the bread in order upon it before the Lord,.... The
shewbread, the twelve cakes of it, in two rows, six in a row:

as the Lord had commanded Moses: [Exo
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#030.md).

[Exodus 40:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 40:24</span></span>

And he put the candlestick in the tent of the congregation,.... In the
same place, the holy place: over against the table: the shewbread table:

on the side of the tabernacle southward: directly opposite to the table.

[Exodus 40:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 40:25</span></span>

And he lighted the lamps before the Lord,.... The seven lamps belonging
to it: this, though it was the business of the priests of Aaron, and his
sons, yet they not being at present invested with their office, was done
by Moses, who in this and several other things mentioned in this chapter
officiated as a priest:

as the Lord commanded Moses, [Exo
25:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#037.md).

[Exodus 40:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 40:26</span></span>

And he put the golden altar,.... The altar of incense; so called because
it was overlaid with gold, and to distinguish it from the altar of burnt
offering, which was covered with brass: to this altar there is an
allusion in [Rev 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003.md).

in the tent of the congregation, before the vail; in the same place, the
holy place, where the shewbread table and candlestick were, and these
were all the furniture of it; and this was put, not within the vail, but
before it, over against the ark, as that stood within it, [Exo
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#005.md).

[Exodus 40:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 40:27</span></span>

And he burnt sweet incense thereon,.... Which is another branch of the
priestly office exercised by Moses, and which he would never have done
had he not had a command from God for it, as follows:

as the Lord commanded Moses; he commanded Moses indeed to order and
direct Aaron to do this, but he being not yet consecrated, Moses, being
the Lord's priest, did it.

[Exodus 40:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 40:28</span></span>

And he set up the hanging at the door of the tabernacle. That is, at the
door of the holy place, all being brought into it that were to be placed
there.

[Exodus 40:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 40:29</span></span>

And he put the altar of burnt offering by the door of the tabernacle of
the tent of the congregation,.... Of which see [Exo
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#006.md).

and offered upon it the burnt offering and the meat offering; either the
burnt offering the meat offering of the daily sacrifice, as Jarchi
interprets it, see [Exo 28:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#038.md) or it
may be rather the burnt offering and meat offering of the consecration
of Aaron and his sons, [Exo 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#001.md).

as the Lord commanded Moses; in the places referred to.

[Exodus 40:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 40:30</span></span>

And he set the laver between the tent of the congregation and the
altar,.... Of which position, see [Exo
30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018.md).

and put water there to wash withal; for the priests to wash their hands
and feet with; a type of that laver or fountain opened for the house of
David and inhabitants of Jerusalem to wash in, [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001.md).

[Exodus 40:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 40:31</span></span>

And Moses, and Aaron, and his sons, washed their hands and their feet
thereat. This laver was for the priests, and Moses, officiating as a
priest, washed in it, with Aaron, and his sons, whom he was now about to
consecrate to the priest's office, and invest with it by offering
sacrifice for them; Jarchi says this was on the eighth day of the
consecration.

[Exodus 40:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 40:32</span></span>

When they went into the tent of the congregation,.... Not only at this
time, but at all other times:

and when they came near unto the altar, they washed; to the altar of
burnt offering to offer sacrifice; and also to the altar of incense, and
burn incense on that; for before whatever service they performed in the
tabernacle they washed:

as the Lord commanded Moses; [Exo
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#020.md) this phrase is near twenty times
expressed in this and the preceding chapter, to show that everything was
done by the workmen, and everything put in its proper place by Moses,
exactly according to the will of God; no one pursuing his own fancy and
private judgment, but all consulting the mind of God, and acting
according to that.

[Exodus 40:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 40:33</span></span>

And he reared up the court round about the tabernacle and the altar,....
Which consisted of hangings one hundred cubits long and fifty broad; see
[Exo 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009.md), &c.

and set up the hanging of the court gate; which was at the east end of
it; and the hanging was of twenty cubits, hung upon four pillars, [Exo
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#016.md).

so Moses finished the work; of the tabernacle, in making it by workmen,
and in rearing it up by the help of others; and as the former was the
work of some months, so the latter, it is highly probable, was the work
of some days, at least, in doing all that is said to be done in this
chapter relative to it; for though it is said to be reared up on the
first day of the first month, yet not then fully set up, or everything
done requisite to the use and service of it; see [Num
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#001.md).

[Exodus 40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 40:34</span></span>

Then a cloud covered the tent of the congregation,.... The outside of
it; this cloud was the same with the pillar of cloud that went before
the Israelites, as soon almost as they came out of Egypt; and led them
through the Red sea, and conducted them to Mount Sinai; only it now
appeared in a different form, not erect as a pillar, but more expanded,
so as to cover the tabernacle without:

and the glory of the Lord filled the tabernacle; the inside of it, not
the most holy place only, but the holy place also: this was an uncommon
brightness, lustre, and splendour, a glorious stream of light, which the
eye of man could not well bear to behold; such a glory filled the temple
of Solomon at the dedication of that, [Kg1
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#011.md) and was an emblem of Christ, the
brightness of his Father's glory, dwelling in and filling the tabernacle
of the human nature, where the Godhead, the Shechinah, the divine
Majesty, dwells bodily, [Heb 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#003.md) [Col
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#009.md).

[Exodus 40:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 40:35</span></span>

And Moses was not able to enter into the tent of the congregation,....
He had been there before, both in the holy, and in the most holy place,
to see that the furniture of each were put as the Lord directed, which
being done he came out again; and now a cloud being on the outside of
it, and the glory of the Lord within, he was so struck with an awe and
reverence of the divine Being, of whose presence these were a symbol,
that he could not engage his heart, or had not boldness to go into the
tabernacle until he was called, [Lev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md) for so it follows:

because the cloud abode thereon, and the glory of the Lord filled the
tabernacle; there was something, no doubt, very venerable in the
spreading cloud, as well as very striking in the refulgent glory, which
commanded distance, even to a person that had been used to converse with
God; Moses, that went into the midst of the cloud where the Lord was,
now could not or durst not go into the tabernacle it covered; and he who
then was not deterred by the sight of the glory of God, which was like
devouring fire, [Exo 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#016.md) now could
not, or at least thought it not proper and advisable to enter into the
holy place erected for the service and worship of God; the chief reason
of which may be, because, as yet, he had not a call to enter, as he then
had, and as we find was afterwards given him, [Lev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md) and perhaps another reason may be,
because he was now no longer a priest; Aaron and his sons being invested
with the priestly office, whose business it was to draw nigh to God; and
indeed the call he afterwards had was not to come into the tabernacle,
but was a call unto him out of it.

[Exodus 40:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 40:36</span></span>

And when the cloud was taken up from over the tabernacle,.... By the
Lord himself, or it removed by his order, that is, rose up and stood
above the tabernacle, and appeared in the form of a pillar, and went
before it:

the children of Israel went onward in all their journeys; the motion of
the cloud was a direction to set forward and continue their journey as
long as it lasted; but when it rested and abode upon the tabernacle,
then they stopped and rested also, as is suggested in the following
verse [Exo 40:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#037.md), see [Num
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017.md) thus the saints are to be
followers of God as dear children, and to follow the Lamb whithersoever
he goes or directs, and walk after the Spirit, the dictates and
directions thereof; so the wheels in Ezekiel's vision went and stood, as
did the living creatures, and the spirit in them, [Eze
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019.md).

[Exodus 40:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">exo 40:37</span></span>

But if the cloud were not taken up, then they journeyed not,.... Even if
it continued so two days, or a month, or a year, as very probably it
sometimes did; which will in some measure account for the long
continuance of the Israelites in the wilderness, see [Num
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#022.md).

till the day that it was taken up: or, "of its ascent" (f), being
"lifted up", or going upwards, higher in the air, right over the
tabernacle, or perhaps more to the front of it; the word used before in
this and the preceding verse has the signification of ascending upwards.

\(f\) "sustolli ejus", Montanus.

[Exodus 40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">exo 40:38</span></span>

For the cloud of the Lord was upon the tabernacle by day,.... Or over it
(g), it covered it, when it abode upon it, and rested; and stood on high
over it when it moved and the people journeyed:

and fire was on it by night; the same phenomenon which had the
appearance of a cloud in the day time shone like fire in the night time:
or "fire was in it" (h); that is, in the cloud; so it appeared in the
night, and was, as the Targum of Jonathan here calls it, a pillar of
fire; the same with the pillar of cloud and fire, which departed not
from the people all the while they were in the wilderness, [Exo
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021.md) and this was

in the sight of all the house of Israel, throughout all their journeys;
whether by night or by day; for in hot countries they travel much by
night; and as the cloud was both a shelter from the heat of the sun in
the daytime, and a direction of their way; so the fire by night was of
the same use for direction, and might be also terrifying to wild beasts
in the wilderness, who are afraid of fire, and so be a security to the
Israelites from them; all which is an emblem of the guidance and
protection, light, joy, and comfort, the church of God has from his
gracious presence, while in the wilderness of this world; see [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005.md).

\(g\) "supra tabernaculum", Drusius. (h) "in ea"; Fagius, Junius &
Tremellius; Drusius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Introduction](lev000.md)

</div>
