<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Exodus Index](exo)  
  [Previous](exo013)  [Next](exo015) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 14:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 14

This chapter begins with directions of God to Moses, to be given to the
children of Israel about the course they were to steer in their journey,
with the reason thereof, [Exo 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001),
which they observing, a report was brought to Pharaoh that they were
fled, and this determined him and his servants to get ready and pursue
after them, as they did with a great army, [Exo
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#005), which when the Israelites saw,
it put them in great fear, and set them to murmuring and complaining
against Moses for bringing them out of Egypt, [Exo
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010), who desired them to be still
and quiet, and they should see the salvation of the Lord, [Exo
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013), and he is bid to order the
people to go on in their journey, and to take his rod and stretch it
over the sea and divide it, that Israel might pass through it on dry
ground, and the Egyptians follow them, whereby God would be honoured and
glorified, [Exo 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015), upon which the
Angel of the Lord in a pillar of cloud removed from before there, and
went behind them for their protection, [Exo
14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019), and Moses stretching out his
hand over the sea, and a strong east wind blowing upon it, the waters
divided and the Israelites went into it, and the Egyptians followed
them, but their host being troubled by the Lord, and their chariot
wheels taken off, they found themselves in great danger, and were thrown
into a panic, [Exo 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020) and upon
Moses's stretching out his hand again over the sea, the waters returned,
and Pharaoh and his host were drowned, but the Israelites passed through
safely, as on dry land, [Exo 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#026),
which great work of the Lord being observed by them, influenced their
fear of him, their faith in him and his servant Moses, [Exo
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#030).

[Exodus 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 14:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Out of the pillar of the cloud in
which he went before them; either while they were at Etham, or when
journeying from thence, and a little before they turned off to the
right, as they were now directed:

saying; as follows:

[Exodus 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 14:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel, that they turn,.... Not return to
Egypt, or to the place, or towards the place from whence they came, but
turn off, out of the road in which they were; for, as a late traveller
says (a),"there were two roads, through which the Israelites might have
been conducted from Cairo (which he supposes may be Rameses) to
Pihahiroth. One of them lies through the valleys, as they are now
called, of Jendily, Rumaleah, and Baideah, bounded on each side by the
mountains of the lower Thebais; the other lies higher, having the
northern range of these mountains (the mountains of Mocattee) running
parallel with it on the right hand, and the desert of the Egyptian
Arabia, which lies all the way open to the land of the Philistines, on
the left, (see [Exo 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#017)) about the
middle of this range we may turn short on our right hand into the valley
of Baideah, through a remarkable breach or discontinuation, in which we
afterwards continued to the very banks of the Red sea; this road then,
through the valley of Baideah, which is some hours longer than the other
open road, which leads directly from Cairo to Suez, was in all
probability the very road which the Israelites took to Pihahiroth, on
the banks of the Red sea.''And again he says (b), this valley ends at
the sea in a small bay, made by the eastern extremities of the
mountains, and is called "Tiah beni Israel", i.e. the road of the
Israelites, from a tradition of the Arabs, of their having passed
through it; as it is also called Baideah from the new and unheard of
miracle that was wrought near it, by dividing the Red sea, and
destroying therein Pharaoh, his chariots and horsemen:

and encamp before Pihahiroth: which was sixteen miles from Etham (c),
and by some (d) thought to be the same with the city of Heroes (or
Heroopolis), on the extreme part of the Arabic gulf, or the
Phagroriopolis, placed by Strabo (e) near the same place: according to
the above traveller (f), Pihahiroth was the mouth, or the most advanced
part of the valley of Baideah to the eastward toward the Red sea; with
which Jarchi in some measure agrees, who says Pihahiroth is Pithom, now
so called, because the Israelites became free: they (Hahiroth) are two
rocks, and the valley between them is called (Pi) the mouth of the
rocks: so Dr. Shaw observes (g); the word may be deduced from "a hole"
or "gullet", and by a latitude common in those cases, be rendered a
narrow "defile", road or passage, such as the valley of Baideah has been
described: but as the Israelites were properly delivered at this place
from their captivity and fear of the Egyptians, [Exo
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013) we may rather suppose that
Hhiroth denotes the place where they were restored to their liberty; as
Hhorar and Hhiroth are words of the like sort in the Chaldee: but
another very learned man (h) says, that in the Egyptian language
Pihahiroth signifies a place where grew great plenty of grass and herbs,
and was contiguous to the Red sea, and was like that on the other shore
of the sea, the Arabian, which Diodorus Siculus (i) speaks of as a
pleasant green field:

between Migdol and the sea; which signifies a tower, and might be one:
there was a city of this name in Egypt, and in those parts, but whether
the same with this is not certain, [Jer
44:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001).

over against Baalzephon; which the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem
take to be an "idol": and so does Jarchi, and say it was the only one
left of the idols of Egypt; see [Exo
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#012) and so some Christian as well as
Jewish writers suppose it to be; and that it was as a watch, or guard,
or amulet, to keep fugitives from going out of the land: but by Ezekiel
the tragedian (k) it is called a city; and so by Josephus (l), who says
they came to Baalzephon the third day, a place situated by the Red sea;
which is most likely, and it is highly probable that this and Migdol
were two fortified places, which guarded the mouth of the valley, or the
straits which led to the Red sea: Artapanus (m) the Heathen historian
agrees with Josephus in saying it was the third day when they came to
the Red sea:

before it shall ye encamp by the sea; and there wait till Pharaoh came
up to them.

\(a\) Dr. Shaw's Travels, p. 307. Ed. 2. (b) lb. p. 309. (c) Bunting's
Travels, p. 82. (d) See the Universal History, vol. 3. p. 387. (e)
Geograph. l. 17. p. 553. (f) Shaw, ib. p. 310. (g) Ut supra. (a)) (h)
Jablonski de Terra Goshen, Dissert. 5. sect. 9. (i) Bibliothec. c. 3. p.
175. (k) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 29. p. 444. (l) Antiqu.
l. 2. c. 15. sect. 1. (m) Apud Euseb. ib. c. 27. p. 436.

[Exodus 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 14:3</span></span>

For Pharaoh will say of the children of Israel,.... The Septuagint
version adds, "to his people", his ministers and courtiers, when he
hears where they are:

they are entangled in the land; have lost their way, and got into places
they cannot easily get out of, and are perplexed in their minds, and do
not know what way to take or course to steer:

the wilderness hath shut them in; or, "shut up the way to them" (n); the
wilderness between the mountains the above mentioned traveller speaks of
(o) the mountains of Gewoubee; these would stop their flight or progress
to the southward, as those of the Attackah would do the same towards the
land of the Philistines; the Red sea likewise lay before them to the
east, while Pharaoh (could) close up the valley behind them, with his
chariots and his horsemen; and which, no doubt, appeared very
advantageous and encouraging to him, as it must be very distressing to
the Israelites.

\(n\) "clausit viam illis", Pagninus, "praeclusit sese illis", Vatablus.
(o) Dr. Shaw's Travels, p. 309. Ed. 2.

[Exodus 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 14:4</span></span>

And I will harden Pharaoh's heart,.... Once more, as he had often done:

that he shall follow after them: to Pihahiroth, and even into the sea
after them:

and I will be honoured upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host; in his
wisdom, faithfulness, power, and justice, by the destruction of them:

that the Egyptians may know that I am the Lord; the only Jehovah, the
Lord God omnipotent; even those that feel the weight of his hand while
troubling their host, and bringing the waters upon them; especially
those that shall remain in the land, and will not be involved in the
catastrophe:

and they did so: the Israelites turned to the right to Pihahiroth,
instead of going by Bishbesh and Tinah (Bubastis and Pelusium), and so
along the sea coast towards Gaza and Ascalon, and encamped there between
Migdol and the sea over against Baalzephon, as they were ordered and
directed.

[Exodus 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 14:5</span></span>

And it was told the king of Egypt,.... By some of the Egyptians, or
mixed multitude that went out with Israel, but returned upon their
encampment at the Red sea, or by some spies Pharaoh sent with them to
observe their motions: the Targums of Jonathan and Jarchi make use of a
word which Buxtorf translates military officers: and the latter says,
they went out with them the three days' journey, but the Israelites not
returning to Egypt (as expected), they tell Pharaoh of it the fourth
day; and on the fifth and sixth he pursued them, and in the night of the
seventh went into the sea after them, and on the morning they (the
Israelites) sung the song, which was the seventh of the passover: these
reported to Pharaoh:

that the people fled; that under a pretence of going three days' journey
into the wilderness, to serve and sacrifice to the Lord, they were about
to make their escape out of the land:

and the heart of Pharaoh and of his servants were turned against the
people; who had so much favour in their sight, not only to give them
leave to go, and to hasten their departure, but to lend and give them
things of great value; but now their hearts were filled with hatred of
them, and with malice and revenge:

and they said, why have we done this, that we have let Israel go from
serving us? not Pharaoh only, but his servants said so, even those who
had entreated him to let them go, [Exo
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#007) yet now repent of it, and cannot
think what reason they had to do it, when at that time they saw reason,
and gave a very sufficient one, namely, the destruction of Egypt; but
now the judgments and plagues of God being no more upon them, they
recollect the great service of the Israelites to them and the benefits
and advantages they had reaped by it, and the loss they had sustained by
parting with them, and therefore reflect upon themselves for such a
piece of conduct.

[Exodus 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 14:6</span></span>

And he made ready his chariot,.... Which he usually rode in when he went
forth to war; for this seems to be a military chariot, and not for show
or grandeur; and this was got ready not by himself, as Jarchi, but
rather by his orders, as Aben Ezra:

and took his people with him; the Greek version reads, "all his people";
not all his subjects, but his soldiers; at least a great number, and
especially his cavalry.

[Exodus 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 14:7</span></span>

And he took six hundred chosen chariots,.... The chief and best he had,
war chariots, chariots of iron; perhaps such as had iron scythes to
them, to cut down men as they drove along; these were taken partly for
quickness of dispatch, that they might be able the sooner to overtake
the Israelites, who had got several days' marches before them; and
partly for their strength and the annoyance of their enemies with them:

and all the chariots of Egypt: as many as could in so short a time be
got together: for the words are not to be taken in the utmost latitude,
but to signify a great number, and all that could be conveniently come
at: the Greek version is, "all the horse", the cavalry, which better
distinguishes them from the former:

and captains over everyone of them: over everyone of the chariots, so
that they must each of them have many in them, to have captains over
them: and perhaps the infantry, or foot soldiers, for, quickness of
expedition, were put into them; for, besides these, there were horsemen:
Josephus (p) makes the whole number of his army to be 50,000 horse, and
200,000 foot, and the same number is given by a Jewish chronologer (q):
but Patricides, an Arabic writer, says (r) it consisted of 600,000, and
Ezekiel (s), the tragic poet, has made it amount to a million of horse
and foot: should it be asked where horses could be had to draw the
chariots, and horses for the horsemen after mentioned, when all were
destroyed by the hail, [Exo 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#025) it
may be replied, that only those in the field were killed, not such as
were in stables, where chariot horses and horses for war may be supposed
to be: besides, as the Targum of Jonathan intimates, these might belong
to these servants of Pharaoh who feared the word of the Lord, and took
their cattle home, [Exo 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#020).

\(p\) Antiqu. l. 2. c. 15. sect. 3. (q) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 77. 4.
(r) Apud Hottinger. Smegma, p. 464. (s) Apud Euseb. ut supra. (Praepar.
Evangel. c. 27. p. 436.)

[Exodus 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 14:8</span></span>

And the Lord hardened the heart of Pharaoh king of Egypt,.... As he said
he would, [Exo 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#004),

and he pursued after the children of Israel; took their rout in pursuit
of them:

and the children of Israel went out with an high hand: not once dreaming
they should be pursued by Pharaoh as an enemy, when they went out with
his full consent, and with such pressing solicitations to be gone, and
with so much favour shown them by the Egyptians; wherefore they set out,
and went on with great boldness, courage, and intrepidity; "with an
uncovered head", as the Targum of Onkelos, without any fear, and with
great alacrity and cheerfulness; they carried both their heads and their
hands high, were fearless and thoughtless of any danger when this mighty
preparation was making against them.

[Exodus 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 14:9</span></span>

But the Egyptians pursued after them,.... When they thought nothing of
it, and had no fears about it:

all the horses and chariots of Pharaoh, and his horsemen, and his army;
by the latter Aben Ezra understands the foot, as distinguished from the
cavalry, the horses and horsemen; and perhaps these, as before observed,
might be carried in the chariots for quicker dispatch:

and overtook them encamping by the sea, beside Pihahiroth, before
Baalzephon; where they had pitched their camp by divine appointment,
[Exo 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002).

[Exodus 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 14:10</span></span>

And when Pharaoh drew nigh,.... Or "caused to draw nigh" (t); that is,
his army, brought it very near to the camp of the Israelites:

the children of Israel lifted up their eyes, and, behold, the Egyptians
marched after them; in great numbers, with full speed, threatening them
with utter destruction:

and they were sore afraid; being an unarmed people, though numerous, and
so unable to defend themselves against armed and disciplined troops; and
besides, through their long time of slavery their spirits were broken,
and were a mean, abject, dispirited people; and especially were so on
the sight of the Egyptians, whom they had so many years looked upon and
served as their lords and masters:

and the children of Israel cried out unto the Lord: had they prayed unto
him in this their distress for help and assistance, protection and
preservation, with an holy and humble confidence in him for it, they had
acted a right and laudable part; but their crying out to him seems to be
only an outcry of the troubles they were in, and rather the effect of
despair than of faith and hope; and was by way of complaint and
lamentation of their miserable condition and circumstances, as appears
by what follows, which shows what temper of mind they were in.

\(t\) "fecit accedere", Pagninus, Montanus; "admovit castra", Junius &
Tremellius.

[Exodus 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 14:11</span></span>

And they said unto Moses,.... The Targum of Jonathan is,"the ungodly of
that generation said unto Moses;''but it seems rather to be understood
of the body of the people in general, and is not to be limited to some
particular persons of the worse characters among them:

because there were no graves in Egypt; as if there had been none, when
there were so many; the Egyptians being more solicitous about their
graves than their houses, as Diodorus Siculus reports (u); thus
upbraiding Moses in a sarcastic way for what he had done:

hast thou taken us away to die in the wilderness? that so there might be
room and graves enough to bury them in, for nothing but death was before
their eyes:

wherefore hast thou dealt thus with us, to carry us forth out of Egypt?
which was very ungrateful and disingenuous.

\(u\) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 47.

[Exodus 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 14:12</span></span>

Is not this the word that we did tell thee in Egypt,.... The thing they
suggested to him, and talked with him about while they were in the land
of Egypt, before they came out of it, particularly after their service
and bondage were made more severe and cruel upon Moses and Aaron's
demanding their dismission, see [Exo
5:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#021),

saying, let us alone, that we may serve the Egyptians? peaceably and
quietly, as we have been used to do, since there is no likelihood of
being freed, and since we are more evilly treated than before:

for it had been better for us to serve the Egyptians, than that we
should die in the wilderness: of such mean spirits were they, and had so
poor a notion of, and taste for liberty, and so ungrateful were they to
their deliverer.

[Exodus 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 14:13</span></span>

And Moses said unto the people,.... Not in wrath and anger, but very
coolly and sedately, agreeably to his character of the meekest man on
earth; though what they had said to him was very insulting and
provoking:

fear ye not; Pharaoh and his numerous host, do not be dismayed at them
or possess yourselves with a dread of them, and of destruction by them:

stand still; do not stir from the place where you are, do not offer to
run away, or to make your escape by flight (and which indeed seemed
impossible), keep your place and station, and put yourselves in such a
situation as to wait and observe the issue of things:

and see the salvation of the Lord which he will shew to you today; which
is expressive of great faith in Moses in the midst of this extremity,
who firmly believed that God would save them from this numerous and
enraged army, and that very quickly, even that day; at least within
twenty four hours, within the compass of a day; for it was the night
following that salvation was wrought for them, and their eyes beheld it:
and it may be called the salvation of the Lord, for it was his own hand
that only effected it, the Israelites not contributing anything in the
least unto it, and was typical of the great salvation which Christ with
his own arm, and without the help of his people, has wrought out for
them:

for the Egyptians whom ye have seen today, ye shall see them again no
more for ever; that is, in such a posture or manner, no more armed, nor
alive, and the objects of their fear and dread; for otherwise they did
see them again, but then they were on the sea shore dead; for it should
be rendered, not "whom", but "how", or "in what manner" (w).

\(w\) , Sept. "quemadmodum", Piscator; "quomod o", Noldius, p. 107. No.
544.

[Exodus 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 14:14</span></span>

The Lord shall fight for you,.... By commanding the wind of the heavens,
and the waves of the sea, and employing them against their enemies, and
on their behalf; they being unarmed, and so not in a condition to fight
for themselves, as well as they had no heart or spirit for it:

and ye shall hold your peace; be still, and quiet, and easy in your
minds, and forbear saying or doing anything; "be silent"; and neither
express the fear and distress of their minds, by any mournful sounds,
nor their joy of faith by shouts and huzzas; as they could not draw a
sword, they were not so much as to blow a trumpet, and break a pitcher,
and cry the sword of the Lord, and of Israel as they after did on
another occasion, at least their posterity.

[Exodus 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 14:15</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses, wherefore criest thou unto me?.... The
Targum of Jonathan is,"why standest thou and prayest before me?''and no
doubt this crying is to be understood of prayer, of mental prayer, of
secret ejaculations put up by Moses to the Lord without a voice, for no
mention is made of any: this shows, that though Moses most firmly
believed that God would work salvation for them, yet he did not neglect
the use of means, prayer to God for it; nor was the Lord displeased with
him on that account, only he had other work for him to do, and he had no
need to pray any longer, God had heard him, and would save him and his
people:

speak unto the children of Israel, that they go forward; a little
further, as Aben Ezra observes, until they were come to the sea shore,
near to which they now were; and thither they were to move in an orderly
composed manner, as unconcerned and fearless of their enemies.

[Exodus 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 14:16</span></span>

But lift thou up thy rod, and stretch out thine hand over the sea, and
divide it,.... Even the same rod with which so many wonders had been
done in Egypt; and Artapanus, the Heathen, says (x), that Moses being
bid by a divine voice to smite the sea with his rod, he hearkened to it,
and touched the water with it, and so it divided, as it is said it did,
[Exo 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021).

and the children of Israel shall go on dry ground through the midst of
the sea; and so they did, [Exo 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022).

\(x\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 27. p. 436.

[Exodus 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 14:17</span></span>

And I, behold, I will harden the hearts of the Egyptians,.... That they
shall have no sense of danger, and be fearless of it, incautious and
thoughtless, hurried on with wrath and fury, malice and revenge:

and they shall follow them; the Israelites into the sea, supposing it to
be as safe for the one as the other:

and I will get me honour upon Pharaoh, and upon all his host, upon his
chariots, and upon his horsemen: by the utter destruction of them, in
just retaliation for the many innocent infants that had been drowned by
them in the river Nile.

[Exodus 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 14:18</span></span>

And the Egyptians shall know that I am the Lord,.... Acknowledge him to
be Jehovah, the self-existent, eternal, and immutable Being, the one
only living and true God, who is wise and powerful, faithful, just, and
true; that is, those Egyptians that were left behind in Egypt, hearing
what was done at the Red sea; for as for those that came with Pharaoh,
they all perished to a man:

when I have gotten me honour upon Pharaoh, upon his chariots, and upon
his horsemen; by casting them into the sea, and drowning them there,
thereby showing himself to be mightier than he.

[Exodus 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 14:19</span></span>

And the Angel of God which went before the camp of Israel,.... The Jews
say (y) this was Michael, the great prince, who became a wall of fire
between Israel and the Egyptians; and if they understood by him the
uncreated angel, the eternal Word, the Son of God, who is always in
Scripture meant by Michael, they are right: for certainly this Angel of
the Lord is the same with Jehovah, who is said to go before them in a
pillar of cloud and fire, [Exo 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021),

removed, and went behind them; but because removing from place to place,
and going forwards or backwards, cannot be properly said of a divine
Person, who is omnipresent, and fills every place and space; this is to
be understood of the emblem of him, the pillar of cloud, as the next
clause explains it:

and the pillar of the cloud went from before their face, and stood
behind them; the Targum of Jonathan adds,"because of the Egyptians, who
cast arrows and stones, and the cloud received them;''and so Jarchi;
whereby the Israelites were protected and preserved from receiving any
hurt by them: so Christ is the protection of his people from all their
enemies, sin, Satan, and the world, that sin cannot damn them, nor Satan
destroy them, nor the world overcome them; for his salvation is as walls
and bulwarks to them, and he is indeed a wall of fire about them.

\(y\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 42.

[Exodus 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 14:20</span></span>

And it came between the camp of the Egyptians and the camp of
Israel,.... That is, the pillar of cloud, and the Angel of God, or
Jehovah, in it, whereby the camp of Israel was secured from being
annoyed by the camp of the Egyptians; and was an emblem of the gracious
interposition of Christ between his spiritual Israel, whom he has
redeemed by his blood, and their spiritual enemies, the Egyptians, the
men of the world that hate them, from whose rage and malice Christ is
their protection and safeguard:

and it was a cloud and darkness to them; to the Egyptians; it cast a
shade upon them, and made the darkness of the night still greater to
them, so that they could not see their way, and knew not where they
were:

but it gave light by night to these; to the Israelites, so that they
could see their way, and walk on in the midst of the sea, as on dry
land; and such a light and guide they needed; for it was now the twenty
first day of the month, seven days after the full of the moon, when the
passover began, and therefore could have no benefit from the moon. The
Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem say, that half the cloud was light,
and half darkness; and it seems plain from the account, that that side
of it which was towards the Egyptians was dark, and that which was
towards the Israelites was light, and so an hinderance to the one and a
benefit to the other: thus Christ is set for the rising of some, and the
fall of others; and his Gospel is to some the savour of death unto
death, and to others the savour of life unto life; to the one it is a
hidden Gospel, and lies in darkness and obscurity, and to others a great
and glorious light:

so that one came not near the other all the night; an emblem of that
division and separation which the grace of God, the blood of Christ, and
the light of the Gospel, make between the true Israel of God, and the
men of the world; and which will continue throughout time, and to all
eternity, so that they will never come near to each other; see [Luk
16:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026).

[Exodus 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 14:21</span></span>

And Moses stretched out his hand over the sea,.... With his rod in it,
as he was directed to, [Exo 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#016).
What the poet says (z) of Bacchus is more true of Moses, whose rod had
been lift up upon the rivers Egypt, and now upon the Red sea:

and the Lord caused the sea to go back by a strong east wind all that
night; and the direction of the Red sea being nearly, if not altogether,
north and south, it was in a proper situation to be wrought upon and
divided by an easterly wind; though the Septuagint version renders it a
strong south wind. No wind of itself, without the exertion and
continuance of almighty power, in a miraculous way, could have so thrown
the waves of the sea on heaps, and retained them so long, that such a
vast number of people should pass through it as on dry land; though this
was an instrument Jehovah made use of, and that both to divide the
waters of the sea, and to dry and harden the bottom of it, and make it
fit for travelling, as follows:

and made the sea dry land; or made the bottom of it dry, so that it
could be trod and walked upon with ease, without sinking in, sticking
fast, or slipping about, which was very extraordinary:

and the waters were divided; or "after the waters were divided" (a); for
they were first divided before the sea could be made dry. The Targum of
Jonathan says, the waters were divided into twelve parts, answerable to
the twelve tribes of Israel, and the same is observed by other Jewish
writers (b), grounded upon a passage in [Psa
136:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#013) and suppose that each tribe
took its particular path.

\(z\) "Tu flectis amnes, tu mare barbarum--" Horat. Carmin. l. 2. Ode
19. (a) "quum diffidisset se aqua illius", Piscator; so seems to be used
in ch. xvi. 20. (b) Pirke Eliezer, c. 42. Targum Jon. & Hieros. in Deut.
i. 1. Jarchi, Kimchi, and Arama in Psal. cxxxvi. 13.

[Exodus 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 14:22</span></span>

And the children of Israel went into the midst of the sea upon the dry
ground,.... Some Jewish writers say (c), that the tribe of Judah went in
first, and then the other tribes followed; but it is most likely, what
Josephus says (d), that Moses first entered in, and then the Israelites,
encouraged by his example, went in after him; and a very adventurous
action it was, and nothing but strong faith in the almighty power and
promise of God could have engaged them in it, to which the apostle
ascribes it, [Heb 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#029). It is the
opinion of Aben Ezra, and some other Jewish writers, that the Israelites
did not pass through the Red sea to the opposite shore, only went some
way into it, and took a compass in a semicircle, and came out on the
same shore again, and which has been espoused by some Christian writers;
and chiefly because they were in the wilderness of Etham before, and
from whence they went into it, and when they came out of it, it was
still the wilderness of Etham they came into, and went three days'
journey into it seeking water; see [Exo
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#020). Though it is possible the
wilderness on the opposite shore might bear the same name, because of
its likeness to it; and if it was the same wilderness that went round
the Arabic gulf, or Red sea, and reached on to the other side of it, and
so the wilderness of Etham lay on both sides, the difficulty is removed;
for it seems most agreeable to the expressions of Scripture, that the
Israelites passed through it from shore to shore. Others, in order to
lessen the miracle, would have it that Moses, well knowing the country,
and observing the tide, took the advantage of low water, and led the
Israelites through it; and this story is told by the Egyptian priests of
Memphis, as Artapanus (e) relates; but were the Egyptians less knowing
of their country, and of the tide of the Red sea? and could Moses be
sure of the exact time when they would come up to him, and the tide
would serve him? Besides, the Egyptian priests at Heliopolis own the
miracle, and relate it much as Moses has done; which must proceed from a
conviction of the truth of it. And the above historian reports that the
king (of Egypt) with a great army, and consecrated animals, pursued the
Jews because of the substance they had borrowed of the Egyptians, which
they took with them; but Moses being bid by a divine voice (or the voice
of God, of Jehovah) to smite the sea with a rod, and hearkening to it,
he touched the water with the rod, and so it divided, and his forces
passed through a dry path, and the Egyptians attempting the same and
pursuing, fire or lightning flashed out against them; and the sea
shutting up the path again, partly by fire, and partly by the flow of
the water, they all perished: and that this affair was miraculous, and
could not be owing to any advantage taken from the tide, the following
things have been observed; it is owned that the Red sea ebbs and flows
like other seas that have a communication with the ocean, that is, the
waters rise towards the shore during six hours, and having continued
about a quarter of an hour at high water, ebb down again during another
six hours; and it is observed by those who have examined it, that the
greatest distance it falls from the place of high water is about three
hundred yards; and that during the time of low water, one may safely
travel it, as some have actually done; so that those three hundred
paces, which the sea leaves uncovered during the time of low water, can
continue so but for the space of half an hour at most; for during the
first six hours, the sea retires only by degrees, and in less than half
an hour it begins again to flow towards the shore. The most therefore
that can be allowed, both of time and space of passable ground, in a
moderate computation, is about two hundred paces, during six hours, or
one hundred and fifty paces, during eight hours. Now it is further
observed, that it is plain that a multitude consisting of upwards of two
millions and a half of men, women, children, and slaves, encumbered
besides with great quantities of cattle, household stuff, and the spoils
of the Egyptians, could never perform such a march within so short a
time; we may say within even double that space, though we should allow
them also double the breadth of ground to do it on. This argument, it is
added, will hold good against those who suppose they only coasted along
some part of the sea, and those who maintain that they crossed the small
arm or point of it which is toward the further end, near the isthmus of
Suez; seeing that six or eight hours could not have sufficed for the
passage of so immense a multitude, allow them what breadth of room you
will; much less for Pharaoh to have entered it with his whole host (f):
and for the confirmation of the Mosaic account of this affair, and as
miraculous, may be observed the testimony of Diodorus Siculus, who
reports (g) that it is a tradition among the Ichthyophagi, who inhabit
near the Red sea, or Arabic gulf, which they have received from the
report of their ancestors, and is still preserved with them, that upon a
great recess of the sea, every place of the gulf became dry, the sea
falling to the opposite parts, the bottom appeared green, and returning
back with a mighty force, was restored to its place again; which can
have reference to nothing else but to this transaction in the time of
Moses. And Strabo (h) relates a very wonderful thing, and such as rarely
happens, that on the shore between Tyre and Ptolemais, when they of
Ptolemais had a battle with the Emperor Sarpedon at that place, and
there being put to flight, a flow of the sea like an inundation covered
those that fled, and some were carried into the sea and perished, and
others were left dead in hollow places; after a reflux followed, and
discovered and showed the bodies of those that lay among the dead
fishes. Now learned men have observed (i), that what is here said of the
sea of Tyre is to be understood of the Red sea, and that Sarpedon is not
a proper name, but the same with , "Sarphadon", the prince of
deliverance, or of the delivered, as Moses was:

and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand and on their
left; some of the Jewish Rabbins from [Exo
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#008) have supposed that the waters
were frozen as they were drove back by the east wind, and so stood up
firm while the Israelites passed through, and then another wind thawed
them, which brought them upon the Egyptians; but no doubt this was done
by the wonderful interposition of divine power, and perhaps the ministry
of angels was made use of, to detain and continue them in this position,
until the end was answered. Adrichomius says (k), the breadth of the sea
was six miles at the passage of the Israelites; but a late traveller (l)
tells us, that the channel between Sdur (or Shur, on the opposite side)
and Gibbel Gewoubee, and Attackah (which he supposes was the place of
their passage), was nine or ten miles over. Thevenot says (m), that
during the space of five days he kept along the coast of the Red sea, in
going to Mount Sinai, he could not observe it to be anywhere above eight
or nine miles over. A later traveller (n) tells us, that from the
fountains of Moses may be plainly seen a wonderful aperture (Pihahiroth;
see [Exo 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002)) in the mountains on the
other side of the Red sea, through and from which the children of Israel
entered into it, when Pharaoh and his host were drowned; which aperture
is situated west-southwest from these fountains of Moses, and the
breadth of the sea hereabouts, where the children of Israel passed it,
is about four or five hours' journey. The Arabic geographer (o) calls
the place Jethren, where Pharaoh and his host were drowned; and
represents it as a dangerous place to sail in, and where many ships are
lost, and that this rough place is about the space of six miles. A
countryman (p) of ours, who had been in these parts, guesses that the
breadth of the place (called by the Mahometans, Kilt el Pharown, the
well or pit of Pharaoh) where the Israelites are said to pass through is
about six or seven leagues; the difference between these writers may be
accounted for by the different places where they suppose this passage
was.

\(c\) Pirke Elizer, c. 42. (d) Antiqu. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 2. (e) Apud
Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 27. p. 436. (f) Universal History,
vol. 3. p. 392, 393. marg. (g) Bibliothec. l. 3. p. 174. (h) Geograph.
l. 16. p. 521, 522. (i) Vid. Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 1. p. 167.
(k) Theatrum Terrae, p. 123, 124. (l) Dr. Shaw's Travels, p. 314. Edit.
2. (m) Travels into the Levant, B. 2. ch. 33. p. 175. (n) A Journal from
Grand Cairo, &c. in 1722. p. 13. Edit. 2. (o) Climat. 3. par. 3. (p)
Pitts's Account of the Mahometans, p. 77.

[Exodus 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 14:23</span></span>

And the Egyptians pursued,.... The Israelites going forwards towards the
sea as they were ordered, and going into it:

and went in after them into the midst of the sea; which if fearful of,
they might conclude it was as safe for them to go in as for the
Israelites; but perhaps through the darkness of the night, and the
eagerness of their pursuit, they might not perceive where they were, nor
the danger they were exposed unto:

even all Pharaoh's horses, his chariots, and his horsemen: which is
observed to show, that as all that did go in perished, not one was
saved, as after related, so all he brought with him, the whole of his
army, went in, so that all that went out of Egypt were destroyed.

[Exodus 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 14:24</span></span>

And it came to pass, that in the morning watch,.... The Romans divided
the night into four watches, so the Hebrews; though some say into three
only. The first began at six o'clock, and lasted till nine, the second
was from thence to twelve, the third from thence to three in the
morning, and the last from three to six, which is here called the
morning watch; so that this was some time between three and six o'clock
in the morning:

the Lord looked unto the host of the Egyptians, through the pillar of
fire and of the cloud; the Angel of the Lord, and who was Jehovah
himself, who was in it, he looked to the army of the Egyptians; not to
know whereabout they were, he being the omniscient God; nor in a
friendly manner, but as an enemy, with indignation and wrath. The Targum
of Jonathan is,"he looked through the pillar of fire, to cast upon them
coals of fire, and through the pillar of cloud, to cast upon them
hailstones.''The Jerusalem Targum is,"pitch, fire, and hailstones;''and
Josephus (q) speaks of storms and tempests, of thunder and lightning,
and of thunderbolts out of the clouds; and Artapanus (r) of fire or
lightning flashing out against them, by which many perished. Perhaps the
psalmist may have reference to this in [Psa
106:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#010).

and troubled the host of the Egyptians; the thunder and lightning no
doubt frightened the horses, so that they broke their ranks, and
horsemen and chariots might run foul on one another, and the hailstones
scatter and destroy many; however, the whole must be terrible and
distressing to them, especially it being in the night season.

\(q\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 2.) (r) Apud Euseb. ut
supra. (Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 27. p. 436.)

[Exodus 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 14:25</span></span>

And took off their chariot wheels,.... The Targum of Jonathan renders it
"cut" or "sawed them off"; perhaps they might be broken off by the
hailstones. Milton (s) seems to have a notion of Pharaoh's chariot
wheels being broken, when he says, "and craze" (i.e. break) "their
chariot wheels"; or, as Jarchi suggests, he burnt them, through the
force of the fire or lightning:

that they drave them heavily; the wheels being off, the chariots must be
dragged along by the horses by mere force, which must be heavy work; or,
"and made them to go, or led them heavily", or "with heaviness" (t); and
so to be ascribed to the Lord, who looked at the Egyptians, took off the
wheels of their chariots, and stopped them in the fury of their career,
that they could not pursue with the swiftness they had:

so that the Egyptians said, let us flee from the face of Israel; for by
this battery and flashes of fire on them, they concluded that Israel,
who they thought were fleeing before them, had turned and were facing
them, and the Lord at the head of them; and therefore it was high time
for them to flee, as follows:

for the Lord fighteth for them against the Egyptians; for they rightly
took the thunder and lightning, the fire and hailstones, to be the
artillery of heaven turned against them, and in favour of the
Israelites. Jarchi interprets it, the Lord fights for them in Egypt,
even in Egypt itself; but so he had done many a time before, of which
they were not insensible.

\(s\) Paradise Lost, B. 12. ver. 210. (t) "et deduxit eos graviter",
Vatablus; "et duxit eos cum gravitate", Drusius; so Ainsworth.

[Exodus 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 14:26</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... Out of the pillar of fire and of the
cloud, when the Egyptians were in all the confusion before described,
and about to make the best of their way back again:

Stretch out thine hand over the sea; with his rod in it, by which all
the wonders were wrought, and particularly by which the sea had been
divided, and now it must be used to a different purpose:

that the waters may come again upon the Egyptians, upon their chariots,
and upon their horsemen; the waters which stood upright as a wall, on
the right and left, might be no longer kept in such a position, but fall
down upon the Egyptians, their chariots and horsemen, being higher than
they.

[Exodus 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 14:27</span></span>

And Moses stretched forth his hand over the sea,.... Or towards it, as
he was ordered, the rod being in his hand, as before observed:

and the sea returned to his strength when the morning appeared; being no
longer detained by a superior power, contrary to the nature of it, to
stand still as an heap, and firm as a wall, its waves came down and
rolled with their usual force and strength, or it returned to its usual
course:

at the appearance of the morning in its strength; when the morning
looked forth in its first light and brightness, when it was broad day:

and the Egyptians fled against it; against the waves that came rolling
down upon them: or "at meeting it" (u), for as they turned their backs
on the Israelites and fled, the waters of the sea met them, as well as
fell on each side of them, or rather over them, and followed after them,
and closed and shut them up on all sides; so that it was in vain for
them to flee, for let them go which way they would, the sea was against
them:

and the Lord overthrew the Egyptians in the midst of the sea; or shook
them "off" or "out" (w); out of their chariots, blew them out with the
wind; for as there was a wind made use of to divide the waters of the
sea, and make the bottom of it dry, there was another to cause the
waters to return to their former place; see [Exo
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#010) or the waves of the sea dashed
them out of their chariots, or through the force of them they were
overturned in it.

\(u\) "in occursum ejus", Pagninus, Montanus, Drusius; "obviam mare",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (w) Sept. "et excussit", Pagninus,
Montanus, Drusius; "sic excussit", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Exodus 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 14:28</span></span>

And the waters returned,.... To their place, and so in the above
tradition related by Diodorus Siculus, it is said that the sea returning
with a mighty force was restored to its place again; See Gill on [Exo
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022).

and covered the chariots and the horsemen; the wall they made being much
higher than a man on horseback, when they fell down, covered even those
who had the advantage of horses and chariots; and much more must the
infantry be covered by them, who may be meant in the next clause:

and all the host of Pharaoh that came into the sea after them; the foot,
that went into the sea after the chariots and horsemen, or the whole
army, including the cavalry and infantry, which went into the sea after
the children of Israel. Who this Pharaoh was is not agreed; according to
Berosus (x) his name was Cenchres, or Chenchres, whom Acherres
succeeded; according to Bishop Usher (y) it was Amenophis; but our
English poet (z) calls him Busiris; though Strabo (a) says there was no
king or governor of that name. Diodorus Siculus (b) indeed speaks of two
so called; yet he elsewhere (c) says, not that there was any king of the
name, only the sepulchre of Osiris was so called:

there remained not so much as one of them; wherefore it must be a
falsehood which is related by some, that Pharaoh himself was preserved,
and afterwards reigned in Nineveh (d), since not one was saved; see [Psa
106:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#011) and so Artapanus (e) the
Heathen says, they all perished, and among these are said (f) to be
Jannes and Jambres, the magicians of Egypt mentioned in [Ti2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#008) but this is contradicted by those
(g) who ascribe the making of the golden calf to them.

\(x\) Antiqu. l. 5. fol. 88. 2. & 90. 2. (y) Annal. Vet. Test. p. 19.
(z) "-------whose waves o'erthrew Busiris, and his Memphian chivalry."
Milton's Paradise Lost, B. 1. v. 306, 307. (a) Geograph. l. 17. p. 552.
(b) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 42. (c) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 79. (d) Dibre
Hayamim, fol. 13. 2. (e) Ut supra. (Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9.
c. 27. p. 436.) (f) Midrash in Exod. xv. 10. & Arab. MS. apud Gregory's
Notes & Observ. p. 6. (g) Shalshalet, fol. 7. 1.

[Exodus 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 14:29</span></span>

But the children of Israel walked upon dry land in the midst of the
sea,.... The bottom of it becoming so through the strong east wind,
which blew all night until they came to the opposite shore, where they
landed on "terra firma"; and so Noldius renders the phrase "through the
sea"; that is, from shore to shore:

and the waters were a wall to them on their right hand and on their
left; See Gill on [Exo 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#022).

[Exodus 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 14:30</span></span>

Thus the Lord saved Israel that day out of the hand of the
Egyptians,.... For though it was now six or seven days since they had
leave to go out of Egypt, and actually did depart, yet they could not be
said properly to be saved, or to be in safety, till this day, when all
the Egyptians their enemies were destroyed, that pursued after them; and
this was the twenty first day of the month, and the seventh and last day
of the passover, and was an holy convocation to the Lord; See Gill on
[Exo 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#016).

and Israel saw the Egyptians dead on the sea shore; all along, as a late
traveller (h) observes, as we may presume, from Sdur (or Shur) to
Corondel, and at Corondel especially, from the assistance and
termination of the current there. The word for "dead" (i) is in the
singular number, and joined with a plural may denote that they saw
everyone of the Egyptians dead, since they were all destroyed, and not
one remained of them, as in [Exo
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028). Aben Ezra thinks the sense of
the words is, not that the Egyptians were seen dead upon the sea shore,
but that the Israelites standing upon the sea shore saw the dead bodies
of the Egyptians, that is, floating on the waters of the sea; but rather
the meaning is, that their dead bodies were by the force of the waters
cast upon the shore, and there beheld and plundered by the Israelites.
Josephus (k) observes, that the day following (that night the Egyptians
were drowned) the arms of the Egyptians being cast on the shore where
the Hebrews encamped, through the force of the sea and wind, Moses
gathered them up and armed the Hebrews with them; and this will account
for it how they came to have arms, since it is highly probable they came
out of Egypt unarmed; and how they could fight battles as they did in
the wilderness, and when they came into the land of Canaan.

\(h\) Shaw's Travels, p. 314. Ed. 2. (i) Mortuum, Montanus, Drusius. (k)
Antiqu. l. 2. c. 16. sect. 6.

[Exodus 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 14:31</span></span>

And Israel saw the great work,.... Or "hand" (l); the hand of the Lord,
the mighty power of God, and took notice of it, and seriously considered
the greatness of it:

which the Lord did upon the Egyptians; which mighty hand he laid upon
them, and which great power he exercised on them, and which great work,
the effect thereof, he wrought in destroying them in such a manner, by
causing the waters, which divided for them and their safety, to return
upon the Egyptians to their utter destruction:

and the people feared the Lord; had an awe of his power and greatness
upon their minds, and a sense of his goodness to them upon their hearts,
which influenced their fear of him, and caused them to fear him with a
filial and godly fear:

and believed the Lord and his servant Moses; they believed the Lord to
be the only Jehovah, the supreme Being, the one only living and true
God, faithful to his word, able to do all things, and wise to do them in
the fittest season, for his own glory and his people's good; and they
believed his promises, and the fulfilment of them; and that as he had
now saved them out of the hands of the Egyptians, he would bring them to
the land of Canaan, which he had promised their fathers to give unto
them; and they believed Moses was sent of God to be their deliverer out
of Egypt, and to be their leader to the promised land; see [Psa
106:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#012) and who were now by the apostle
said to be baptized unto Moses in the cloud and in the sea, [Co1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001) and of their passage through the
Red sea under the direction of Moses being an emblem of baptism; see
Gill on [Co1 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#001).

\(l\) Sept. Manum, Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 15](exo015)

</div>
