<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo029)  [Next](exo031.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 30:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 30

This chapter treats of the altar of incense, its form and use, [Exo
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001.md) of the ransom of the Israelites,
with the half shekel when numbered, [Exo
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#011.md) of the laver for the priests to
wash their hands and feet at before service, [Exo
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#017.md) of the anointing oil, the
ingredients of it, and what was to be done with it, [Exo
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#022.md), and of the perfume, the
composition and use of it, [Exo 30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034.md).

[Exodus 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 30:1</span></span>

And thou shalt make an altar to burn incense upon,.... The Targums of
Onkelos and Jonathan call it incense of spices, properly enough, for it
was made of various spices; of which see [Exo
30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034.md) and this was necessary on a
natural and civil account, to remove those ill smells from the
sanctuary, occasioned by the number of beasts continually slain in it;
but chiefly on a religions account, to denote the acceptableness of the
service of the sanctuary to God:

of shittim wood shall thou make it: of the same that the altar of burnt
offering was made, which was covered with brass, but this with gold, as
after related; of this sort of wood; see Gill on [Exo
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005.md) as this altar was a type of
Christ, the shittim wood may respect his human nature; which wood,
though it sprung out of the earth, was not common, but choice and
excellent, and very strong durable, and incorruptible; and so Christ,
though he was man made of an earthly woman in his human nature, yet was
chosen out of the people, is the chiefest among ten thousand, and
excellent as the cedars, the man of God's right hand, whom he made
strong for himself; and though he died in it, he saw no corruption, he
now lives, and will live for evermore; in which nature he acts the part
of a Mediator, and intercedes for his people, and offers up their
prayers, perfumed with the much incense of his mediation, to which this
altar has a special respect.

[Exodus 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 30:2</span></span>

A cubit shall be the length thereof, and a cubit the breadth thereof,
four square shall it be,.... It was one Jewish square cubit, which is in
surface, according to Bishop Cumberland, three English square feet, and
about forty seven square inches; which may denote the solidity,
perfection, and extensiveness of Christ's priesthood, it being
unchangeable, firm, and lasting; and which passes not from one to
another, and the which makes something perfect, which the law and
priesthood of Aaron could not, even perfects for ever them that are
sanctified; and is very extensive; the virtue of it reaches to all the
elect of God, from the beginning of the world to the end of it; not his
sacrifice only, but his intercession, which is principally respected;
that is made for all the people of God, in all places, and in all ages,
and for all things for them, both for this life, and that which is to
come:

and two cubits shall be the height thereof; so that it was as high again
as it was long and broad: Christ, our interceding high priest, is made
higher than the heavens:

the horns thereof shall be of the same; of the same wood the altar
itself was made: these were a sort of spires that rose up at the four
corners of the altar; and the Targum of Jonathan paraphrases the
words,"and of it its horns shall be erect;''which were chiefly for
decoration and ornament; and may denote the honour and glory of Christ,
as well as his power and ability to save, to the uttermost, all that
come to God by him, or lay hold upon him, since he ever lives to make
intercession.

[Exodus 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 30:3</span></span>

And thou shalt overlay it with pure gold,.... Hence this altar is
sometimes called the golden altar, [Num
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#011.md) this may figure the deity of
Christ, whose head is as the most fine gold, and is in the divine
nature, in the form of God, and is the brightness of his glory, and
possessed of the same perfections; or rather the glorification of his
human nature in heaven, where he is highly exalted, and the preciousness
of his intercession, which is always powerful and prevalent, and the
duration of it:

the top thereof, and the sides thereof, round about, and the horns
thereof: all and each of them were covered with gold; this altar had a
top, when the altar of burnt offering had none, but its hollow place was
filled up with earth at every encampment; so Jarchi observes: this was
not a grate, as the Vulgate Latin version renders it, for here were
neither blood nor ashes to be let through; but it was a flat covering
like the roof of a house, as the word signifies, on which was set a
golden dish, with live coals and incense burning on them; and which,
when burnt, was carried away: and the sides are the four sides of the
frame, it being a square, or the two sides and two ends of it; and the
horns, the four horns at each corner, all were covered with plates of
gold; so that this altar was a richer and more excellent one than that
of burnt offering; and may signify the superior excellency of Christ's
state of exaltation to that of his humiliation: in the latter, which the
altar of burnt offering respected, he was made of no reputation, and
became obedient to the death of the cross, yea, was made sin, and a
curse for his people; but in the former, which the altar of incense
respected, he was raised from the dead, and had glory given him; he was
raised for the justification of his people, and was himself justified in
the Spirit, ascended on high, was received into glory, sat down at the
right hand of God, making continual intercession for his saints:

and thou shall make unto it a crown of gold round about; which was
partly to keep from slipping what was put upon it, but chiefly for
ornament; and plainly points at the exaltation of Christ in our nature
in heaven, as our interceding high priest, where he is a priest upon his
throne; and is crowned with glory and honour.

[Exodus 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 30:4</span></span>

And two golden rings shalt thou make to it under the crown of it,....
The crown was on the top of the altar, at the edge of it all around; and
just underneath it were two rings of gold, two on each side:

by the two corners thereof, upon the two sides of it shall thou make
them; at each corner a ring, and at each side; the use of them follows:

and they shall be for places for the staves to bear it withal; these
rings were for the staves to be put into when the altar was to be
carried from place to place, as it was in the wilderness, during the
travels of Israel there; and this signifies that Christ never leaves his
people; when they are in the wilderness he is with them, interceding for
them, providing all things necessary for their food, safety, and
protection, [Rev 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014.md).

[Exodus 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 30:5</span></span>

And thou shalt make the staves of shittim wood,.... Of the same wood the
altar itself was made:

and overlay them with gold; as that was; these rings and staves may be
an emblem of the precious ordinances of Christ, in which he grants his
presence; and where he is held forth in different ages and places as the
interceding high priest of his people, their advocate with the Father,
pleading continually his propitiatory sacrifice in their favour.

[Exodus 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 30:6</span></span>

Thou shalt put it before the vail,.... That divides between the holy and
the most holy place; not within the vail in the holy of holies, but
before it at the holy place, for there the altar of incense stood:
Josephus (o) says, between the candlestick and the table, i.e. of
shewbread, stood the altar of incense; now the candlestick and shewbread
were in the holy place; and with this account the Talmudists (p) agree,
who say, that the table was in the north, distant from the wall two
cubits and a half, and the candlestick on the south, distant from the
wall two cubits and a half, and the altar was in the middle, and stood
between them: and Maimonides (q) gives the like account of its
situation, which is here further described:

that is by the ark of the testimony; which vail was by it, before which
the altar was placed; the ark of the testimony was the chest or coffer
in which the law was put, and which was the testimony of the will of
God, from whence it had this name; and it stood in the most holy place;
and not by it in the same place, but over against it, in the holy place
stood the altar of incense:

before the mercy seat, that is over the testimony; the mercy seat that
was over the ark, a lid or cover to it, where the testimony was; and
towards this, before the face of it, was the altar of incense, where the
priest officiating, looked directly towards it; having that in view for
the acceptance of the people's prayers to God through Christ, which they
were making while he was burning the incense:

where I will meet thee; as he had before promised, [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022.md).

\(o\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 8. (p) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 33. 2. (q)
Hilchot Beth. Habechirah, c. 1. sect. 7.

[Exodus 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 30:7</span></span>

And Aaron shall burn thereon sweet incense every morning,.... This in
later times was done by a common priest, who obtained this service by
lots as we find in the times of Zacharias, [Luk
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#009.md) the incense was fetched out of the
house of Abtines, where it was made, and burning coals were taken off of
the altar of burnt offering in a vessel, and the incense was spread upon
them and burnt: the Jewish canons about this matter run thus (r); he
that was worthy of, or allotted to, the incense, took a vessel that held
three kabs, and a bowl in the midst of it, full and heaped up with
incense, and took a silver censer, and went up to the top of the altar,
and moved the coals to and fro, and took them and went down and poured
them into a golden censer: and again (s), he that was worthy of, or
allotted to, a censer, gathered the coals upon the top of the altar, and
spread them with the edges of the censer, and bowing himself went out;
and he that was worthy of, or allotted to, the incense, took the bowl
out of the midst of the vessel, and gave it to his friend or neighbour:
and he that burns the incense may not burn until the president says to
him, burn; and if he was an high priest, the president says, lord high
priest, burn; the people depart, and he burns the incense, and bows and
goes away: the burning of the sweet incense was typical of the mediation
and intercession of Christ; the burning coals typified his sufferings,
which were painful to his body, and in which he endured the wrath of God
in his soul, and both must be very distressing to him: the incense put
upon these shows that Christ's mediation and intercession proceeds upon
his sufferings and death, his bloodshed, satisfaction, and sacrifice;
which mediation of his, like the sweet incense, is frequent, is pure and
holy, though made for transgressors, and there is none like unto it;
there is but one Mediator between God and man: likewise this was typical
of the prayers of the saints; and at the same time that the incense was
burnt the people were at prayer, which was set before the Lord as
incense, see [Psa 141:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#003.md), these go
upwards to God, and come up with acceptance to him, from off the golden
altar, being offered up to him by Christ, with his much incense, through
his blood and righteousness, and are pure, holy, fervent, and fragrant,
and called odours, [Rev 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008.md).

when he dresseth the lamps, he shall burn incense upon it; which he did
every morning he went into the holy place, where the candlestick with
its lamps was; these he trimmed and dressed, snuffed those that were
ready to go out, lighted those that were gone out, supplied them with
oil and wicks, and cleared the snuff dishes, and the like: now near to
the candlestick stood the altar of incense, so that when the priest
looked after the one, he did the service of the other; and hence we
learn, that our intercessor and lamplighter is one and the same; he that
was seen amidst the golden candlesticks dressing the lamps of them,
appears at the golden altar with a golden censer, to offer up the
prayers of his saints, [Rev 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013.md) and
we learn also, that the light of the word and prayer should go together,
as they do in faithful ministers and conscientious Christians, who give
themselves up unto and employ themselves therein; the one to and in the
ministry of the word and prayer, and the other to and in the reading and
hearing of the word and prayer.

\(r\) Misn. Tamid, c. 5. sect. 4, 5. (s) Ibid. c. 6. sect. 2, 3.

[Exodus 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 30:8</span></span>

And when Aaron lighteth the lamps at even, he shall burn incense upon
it,.... In the evening the priest went into the holy place to light the
lamps that were gone out; see Gill on [Exo
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020.md) at the same time he burnt
incense on the altar; and as the daily sacrifice was offered up morning
and evening, so the incense was burnt every morning and evening, and
much about the same time: the Jews say (t), that the incense of the
morning was offered between the blood (i.e. the sprinkling of the blood
of the daily sacrifice) and the members, or the laying of the pieces on
the altar; and the incense of the evening was between the pieces and the
drink offering: and with this Philo agrees (u), who says, twice every
day most fragrant odours were offered, at the sun rising and setting,
before the morning and after the evening sacrifice:

a perpetual incense before the Lord throughout your generations; thus
Christ's mediation and intercession is constant and continual; as his
sacrifice continually takes away the sin of the world, in which it was
the antitype of the daily sacrifice; so his blood continually speaks for
peace and pardon, and every blessing of grace for his people, in which
it is the antitype of the morning and evening incense; for he ever lives
to make intercession; and so the prayers of the saints are directed to
God both morning and evening, and they cease not praying as long as they
live.

\(t\) Misn. Yoma, c. 3. sect. 4. (u) De Victimis, p. 836.

[Exodus 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 30:9</span></span>

Ye shall offer no strange incense thereon,.... Which had not the same,
but was made of other materials, or had more or fewer; whatever was not
exactly the same was not to be offered; and so to make use of other
mediators than Christ, whether angels or men, or to put up prayer to God
for the sake of our own righteousness, pleading the merits of our works,
and not the blood, righteousness, and sacrifice of Christ, is to offer
strange incense, unacceptable to God, and which will be of no avail to
men:

nor burnt sacrifice, nor meat offering; these were to be offered and
burnt upon the altar of burnt offering:

neither shall ye pour drink offering thereon; as upon the other altar;
everything in God's worship and service was to be done in the proper
place and order; these offerings and sacrifices, though they were by
divine appointment, yet must be offered on that altar which was peculiar
for them.

[Exodus 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 30:10</span></span>

And Aaron shall make an atonement upon the horns of it once in a
year,.... On the day of atonement, as the Targum of Jonathan, and so
Jarchi and Aben Ezra explain it; and the atonement here referred to
seems to be an atonement for the altar itself, see [Lev
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#018.md) and as the altar of burnt
offering was first expiated and then used, [Exo
29:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#036.md) so it seems the altar of incense
had not only an atonement made on it, but for it: and this was done

with the blood of the sin offering of atonement; by sprinkling the blood
of that offering upon the horns of it, as we learn from the afore
mentioned place; and this shows that Christ's mediation and intercession
is founded upon the virtue of his blood, and the efficacy of his atoning
sacrifice, see [Jo1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#001.md).

once in the year shall he make atonement upon it, throughout your
generations; which proves the insufficiency of all legal sacrifices of
themselves to take away sin, since every year, as the apostle observes,
there was a remembrance of it, [Heb
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#003.md).

it is most holy unto the Lord; either the atonement made on the day of
atonement, which was a most holy part of service, and pointed at the
great atonement made by the most Holy One, the Son of God; or this altar
thus expiated, and devoted to sacred use, was reckoned a most sacred one
to the Lord, and so was to have nothing offered upon it but what he
ordered; with which Jarchi agrees in his note,"the altar is sanctified
to these things only, and not to any other service.''

[Exodus 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 30:11</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Continued his discourse; or, there
being some intermission, reassumed it:

saying; as follows.

[Exodus 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 30:12</span></span>

When thou takest the sum of the children of Israel, after their
number,.... An account of them, how many they are; which was sometimes
done, and was proper to be done, especially in time of war; though the
present case seems to be for the sake of raising money for the
tabernacle and the service of it:

then shall they give every man a ransom for his soul unto the Lord, when
thou numberest them; which was not done yearly, nor was it perpetual; we
have but two instances of it after this until the times of David, [Num
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#002.md) yet it seems to have been a yearly
tax or tribute, in the times of Christ; see Gill on [Mat
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#024.md), [Mat
21:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#012.md); and in the Misnah is a whole
treatise called "Shekalim", in which an account is given of the time and
manner of collecting this ransom money, and for what uses, and who were
obliged to pay it, and who not; on the first of Adar (or February) they
proclaimed concerning the payment of it, on the fifteenth the tables
were set for that purpose, and on the twenty fifth the proper persons
sat in the sanctuary to receive it (w): this was typical of the ransom
of souls by Christ, who are not all the world, for they are ransomed out
of it, but Israelites, the whole mystical Israel of God, and are a
numbered people; their names are written in the book of life, they are
told into the hands of Christ, are exactly known by God and Christ; and
these are many and even numberless to men:

that there be no plague amongst them when thou numberest them; as there
was when David numbered them; which some have thought was owing to the
non-payment of the ransom money after mentioned; the Septuagint version
is, "no fall", the ransom of souls by Christ preserves them from a total
and final fall by sin into everlasting ruin and destruction; or, "no
death" as the Targum of Onkelos, for redemption by Christ secures from
the second death, and even from a corporeal death as a penal evil.

\(w\) Misn. Shekalim, c. 1. sect. 1, 3.

[Exodus 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 30:13</span></span>

This they shall give, everyone that passeth among them that are
numbered,.... And their number, according to Jarchi, was known by what
was paid; for he says the sum was taken not by heads, but everyone gave
the half shekel, and by counting them the number was known, as follows:

half a shekel after the shekel of the sanctuary; that is, after the
standard of a shekel kept in the sanctuary as a rule for all; and so
Jarchi paraphrases it,"according to the weight of a shekel, which I have
fixed for thee to weigh, the shekel of the sanctuary.''It was about
fourteen pence: a shekel is twenty gerahs; a gerah being the twentieth
part of a shekel, it was not quite three halfpence of our money:

an half shekel shall be the offering of the Lord; which was to be
offered to him for the ransom of souls, whose lives were forfeited by
sin; and of the redemption of which this was an acknowledgment; and was
typical of the ransom price of souls by Christ, which is not silver or
gold, but his precious blood, his life, himself, which is given as an
offering and sacrifice to God, in the room and stead of his people; and
which is given to God, against whom sin is committed, the lawgiver,
whose law is broken, the Judge, whose justice must be satisfied, and the
creditor, to whom the price must be paid.

[Exodus 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 30:14</span></span>

Every one that passeth among them that are numbered, from twenty years
old and above,.... Even Levites, Israelites, proselytes, and servants
freed, but not women, bond servants, or children (x):

shall give an offering to the Lord; the half shekel before mentioned.

\(x\) Misn. Shekalim, c. 1. sect. 1, 3.

[Exodus 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 30:15</span></span>

The rich shall not give more, and the poor shall not give less than half
a shekel,.... Which shows that the Israelites were alike in the esteem
of God, their worldly circumstances making no difference; their souls
being alike, the same ransom price was given for them; and that they
were all to have an equal share in the service and sanctuary of God, and
the price was set so low, that the poorest man might be able to pay it:
and even Maimonides (y) says, if he lived on alms, he was to beg it of
others, or sell his clothes from off his back to pay it. This shows the
equality of the redeemed and ransomed of the Lord; for though some sins
and sinners are greater than others, and some are redeemed from more
sins than others, yet all sins being infinite, as committed against an
infinite God, but one price is paid for all, and that is the precious
blood of Christ, the Son of God, an infinite and divine Person; hence
all the ransomed ones have the same faith, righteousness, salvation, and
eternal life:

when they give an offering unto the Lord, to make atonement for your
souls; which have sinned, are liable to death for it, are the more
excellent part of men, and require a great price for the redemption and
ransom of them; and hence it is so great a blessing to be ransomed,
because it is the ransom of the soul: and such is the efficacy of
Christ's ransom, that it is a full atonement for the souls of men, and
their sins, and completely delivers from sin, Satan, the law, death, and
hell.

\(y\) Hilchot Shekalim, c. 1. sect. 1.

[Exodus 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 30:16</span></span>

And thou shall take the atonement money of the children of Israel,....
The half shekel, the ransom of their souls:

and shall appoint it for the service of the tabernacle of the
congregation; for the building of the tabernacle, for the repairs of it,
and for the sacrifices offered in it; particularly we find that this
first collection this way was appropriated to the silver sockets of the
sanctuary, and the vail, for the silver hooks, and for the pillars, [Exo
38:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#027.md),

that it may be a memorial unto the children of Israel before the Lord,
to make an atonement for your souls; to put them in mind that they were
sinners, that their lives were forfeited, that a ransom price was given
and accepted of God, that hereby atonement, in a typical sense, was made
for them; and this was before the Lord, as a token of their gratitude to
him, and of their acknowledgment of the favour.

[Exodus 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 30:17</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Again, at another time, and upon
another subject:

saying, as follows.

[Exodus 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 30:18</span></span>

Thou shalt also make a laver of brass, and his foot also of brass, to
wash withal,.... For Aaron, and his sons, and the priests in succession,
to wash at before their entrance on their ministry; and denotes in
general the necessity of purity, in order to minister in the priestly
office; and which was in its perfection in Christ, who being holy and
harmless, was an high priest becoming us, and suitable to us, qualified
to offer himself without spot to God, and to take away sin; of which
purity his baptism in water might be a symbol, which he submitted to
before he entered publicly on the execution of his office as a prophet
and priest; and as this may respect the ministers of the Gospel, it
shows that they should be pure and holy in their lives and
conversations, and be examples in purity of conversation to others: and
as this may chiefly respect all the saints who are priests unto God; it
may be either typical of the laver of regeneration, in which grace,
comparable to water, is given, and in which a clean heart is created;
and which has an influence on purity of life and conversation, and
secures from death: or rather of the blood of Christ, the laver and
fountain to wash in for sin and uncleanness; which is large and
capacious for all the priests of the Lord, and stands open and uncovered
for all to come unto; and as this was made of brass, and that brass the
looking glasses of the women, [Exo
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#008.md) as it may respect the laver of
regeneration, may denote the durableness of that grace, which is an
immortal seed, a well of living water, springing up to everlasting life,
and was a clear evidence of election of God, and redemption by Christ;
and as it may be an emblem of the blood of Christ, it signifies the
duration and continued virtue of that blood to cleanse from all sin; and
that such who are washed in it, and cleansed by it, are not only beheld
as clean and pure by the Lord, but in their own sight also, God having
caused their iniquities to pass from them, and justified them from them
by his blood:

and thou shalt put it between the tabernacle of the congregation and the
altar; that is, the altar of burnt offering, which was by the door of
the tabernacle; and between that and the tabernacle or tent of the
congregation stood the laver for the priests to wash in, just as they
entered into the tabernacle, [Exo
40:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#029.md) it stood inclining to one of the
sides, as Aben Ezra says; a little on the south side, as Jarchi
observes:

and thou shall put water therein; or order it to be put in for the use
next mentioned.

[Exodus 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 30:19</span></span>

For Aaron and his sons shall wash their hands and their feet thereat.
Not in it, but at it; the laver had mouths or spouts, as Ben Melech
says, from whence the water flowed when the priests washed their hands
and feet at it; and so Bartenora says (z) they did not wash out of the
laver, but from water flowing out of it; it is said "out of it", not in
it; it seems at first there were but two of these spouts; for it is said
(a) Ben Katin made twelve spouts or cocks, which had but two before; so
that twelve priests could wash their hands and feet at one time, and
which they could do at once, presently, by putting the right hand on the
top of the right foot, and the left hand upon the left foot, as both
Jarchi and Ben Melech relate: and now the hands being the instruments of
action, and the feet of walking, this shows that the actions of good
men, the priests of the Lord, and their walk and conversation, are not
without sin, and that these need washing in the laver of Christ's blood,
to which there must be daily application, see [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001.md). Our Lord seems to have reference
to this ceremony, [Joh 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#010.md) the
Egyptian priests washed twice every day in cold water, and twice every
night (b).

\(z\) In Misn. Zebachim, c. 2. sect. 1. (a) Misn. Yoma. c. 3. sect. 10.
(b) Herodot. Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 37.

[Exodus 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 30:20</span></span>

When they go into the tabernacle of the congregation, they shall wash
with water,.... The laver standing near the door of the tabernacle, they
washed at it as soon as they entered; and no man, we are told (c),
entered into the court before he washed, even though he was clean;
though he had contracted no filthiness, and even though he had washed
his hands and feet at home, he was obliged to do it when he went into
the tabernacle, before he attempted to perform any service. This
intimates to us the necessity as of pure hearts, so of pure hands, in
order to compass the altar of God, to attend public worship, and
particularly prayer, in which holy hands should be lifted up, [Ti1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#008.md),

that they die not: sin exposes to death, eternal death; that is the
wages of it, and it is only the blood of Christ, and being washed in
that, that can secure from it:

or when they come near to the altar to minister; to the altar of burnt
offering to minister there, by laying on the wood and the pieces in
order, and burning them on it, as follows:

to burn offering made by fire to the Lord; no man was fit for this
service, or might be admitted to it, until he was washed; and it was
usual among other nations to wash before they entered on religious
service (d); even in the East Indies, the priests do not sacrifice to
their idols before they wash in water that is about the temple (e);
which seems to be a satanical imitation of this practice among the Jews.

\(c\) Misn. Yoma, c. 3. sect. 3. (d) Vid. Outram de Sacrificiis, l. 1.
c. 6. sect. 14. (e) Vartoman. Navigat. l. 5. c. 23.

[Exodus 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 30:21</span></span>

So they shall wash their hands and their feet, that they die not,.... By
the immediate hand of God, who would so greatly resent such a neglect of
his command; and by how much easier it was to perform it, by so much the
more were they inexcusable, and to be treated with greater severity; and
this is repeated, that they might carefully observe it, lest they
perish:

and it shall be a statute for ever to them, even to him and to his seed,
throughout their generations; to be observed by Aaron and his
descendants in all ages, as long as their priesthood lasted, until the
Messiah should come, and wash all his people, his priests, with his own
blood, from all their sins, [Rev 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005.md).

[Exodus 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 30:22</span></span>

Moreover, the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Some little time afterwards,
while he was yet with him on the mount:

saying; as follows.

[Exodus 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 30:23</span></span>

Take thou also unto thee principal spices,.... To make the anointing oil
with, and are as follow:

of pure myrrh five hundred shekels; it is strange that Saadiah, and so
Maimonides (f), should take this for musk, which comes from a beast, and
is confuted by Aben Ezra from [Sol 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001.md)
from whence it plainly appears to be what comes from a tree; and the
word "mor", here used, gives the tree the name of myrrh almost in all
languages. And it is justly mentioned first among the chief of spices;
since, as Pliny (g) says, none is preferred unto the stacte or liquor
that flows from it, that which is pure myrrh, unmixed, unadulterated; or
"myrrh of freedom" (h), which flows freely, either of itself, or, when
cut, which is the best; and this was fitly used as a principal
ingredient in the anointing oil, since oil was made out of it itself,
called oil of myrrh, [Est 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#012.md) and as
a shekel is generally supposed to weigh half an ounce, the quantity of
this to be taken was two hundred and fifty ounces:

and of sweet cinnamon half so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels;
or one hundred twenty five ounces: it is here called sweet cinnamon, to
distinguish it from that which was not sweet; so Jarchi observes,"there
is one sort that has a good smell and taste, another that has not, but
is as wood (common wood), therefore it was necessary to say sweet
cinnamon.''So Pliny (i) speaks of two sorts of it, one whiter, and
another blacker; sometimes the white is preferred, and sometimes the
black is commended. The cinnamon tree grows in great plenty in the
island of Zeilon in India (Ceylon or called Srilanka today, Editor), as
Vartomanus (k) relates, who says it is not much unlike a bay tree,
especially the leaves; it beareth berries as does the bay tree, but less
and white; it is doubtless no other than the bark of a tree, and
gathered in this manner; every third year they cut the branches of the
tree--when it is first gathered it is not yet so sweet, but a month
after, when it waxeth dry; and with this Pliny (l) agrees, who says it
is not odorous while it is green. Pancirollus (m) reckons cinnamon among
the things that are lost; and says, that we have no knowledge of the
true cinnamon; and reports from Galen, that in his time it was so
scarce, that it was rarely found but in the cabinets of emperors. Pliny
(n) makes mention of it, as used in ointments:

and of sweet calamus two hundred and fifty shekels; or one hundred and
twenty five ounces; and this is called sweet, because there is a calamus
that is not sweet, as Jarchi; this is the same with the sweet cane from
a far country, [Jer 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020.md) from India,
as is generally thought; but rather perhaps from Sheba, or some part of
Arabia; it must be nearer at hand than India, from whence the Israelites
had these spices; and Moses is bid to take them, as if they were near
indeed; and Pliny speaks of myrrh, and of sweet calamus, as growing in
many places of Arabia, and of cinnamon in Syria (o); and Dionysius
Periegetes (p) mentions calamus along with frankincense, myrrh, and
cassia, and calls it sweet smelling calamus; and so Strabo (q) speaks of
cassia and cinnamon as in Arabia Felix; and Diodorus Siculus (r) makes
mention of all these in Arabia, and of cassia that follows.

\(f\) Cele Hamikdash, c. 1. sect. 3. (g) Nat. Hist. l. 12, 15. (h)
"myrrhae libertatis", Montanus, Vatablus; "myrrhae sponte fluentis",
Tigurine version. (i) Ibid. c. 19. (k) Navigat. l. 6. c. 4. (l) Ut
supra. (Nat. Hist. l. 12, 15.) (m) Rer. Memorab. sive Deperd. par. 1.
tit. 9. p. 28. (n) Ib. l. 15. c. 7. (o) Nat. Hist. l. 12. c. 15, 22, 28.
(p) Orb. Descript. l. 937. (q) Geograph. l. 16. p. 538. (r) Bibliothec.
l. 2. p. 132.

[Exodus 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 30:24</span></span>

And of cassia five hundred shekels,.... Or two hundred and fifty ounces:

after the shekel of the sanctuary; according to the standard weight kept
there. This "cassia" was not the "cassia solutiva", which is of a
purgative nature, and now in use in physic, but the "cassia odorata", or
the sweet smelling "cassia": which, Pancirollus (s) says, some take to
be the nard, out of which a most sweet oil is pressed; and Servius (t)
says, that cassia is an herb of a most sweet smell. Pliny (u) speaks of
it along with cinnamon; and Galen says, when cinnamon was wanting, it
was usual to put in its stead a double quantity of cassia (w); Leo
Africanus speaks of trees in Africa bearing cassia, and which chiefly
grew in Egypt (x):

and of oil olive an hin; containing twelve logs: according to Godwin
(y), it was of our measure three quarts; but, as Bishop Cumberland has
more exactly calculated it, it held a wine gallon, a quart, and a little
more: this was the purest and best of oil, and most fit and proper to be
a part of this holy anointing oil.

\(s\) Ut supra, (Rer. Memorab. sive Deperd. par. 1.) tit. 11. p. 30. (t)
In Virgil. Bucol. Eclog. 2. (u) Ut supra, (Nat. Hist. l. 12.) c. 19. (w)
Apud Dalechamp in Plin. ib. (x) Descriptio Africae, l. 9. p. 752. (y)
Moses & Aaron, l. 6. c. 9.

[Exodus 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 30:25</span></span>

And thou shalt make it an oil of holy ointment,.... All the above spices
and oil being put together, an ointment was to be made out of them, not
thick, as ointments usually are, but a liquid to be poured, and
therefore called an "oil of ointment", and "holy", because devoted only
to sacred uses:

an ointment compound after the art of the apothecary: or confectioner;
the spices bruised, and pounded, and mixed together, and boiled or
distilled, and so an oil or ointment extracted from them:

it shall be an holy anointing oil; for the uses next mentioned: it
signified the Holy Spirit of God, and his graces, that oil of gladness
with which Christ and his people are anointed; and is that anointing
which teacheth all things, see [Psa
45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007.md) [Jo1
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#020.md) comparable to these several
spices, and oil olive, for their sweet smell, cheering and reviving
nature, and supplying quality, and for their valuableness and
preciousness, and of which there was a certain weight and measure; for
though Christ received this unction without measure, yet there is a
certain measure of grace and gifts bestowed upon his people, and by
which they are made holy and fit for their master's use.

[Exodus 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 30:26</span></span>

And thou shall anoint the tabernacle of the congregation therewith,....
It cannot be thought the whole of it should be anointed all over, but
only a part of it for the whole; and this was either typical of the
human nature of Christ, the true tabernacle God pitched, and not man,
and which was anointed with the Holy Ghost; or of the church and people
of God, who are an holy tabernacle or temple of the Lord, and who
receive the unction from the Holy One:

and the ark of the testimony; the chest where the law was, and stood in
the most holy place of the tabernacle; and was a type of the Messiah,
the anointed One, in whose heart the law was, and who is the fulfilling
end of it for righteousness.

[Exodus 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 30:27</span></span>

And the table, and all his vessels,.... The shewbread table, with all
things appertaining to it, rings, staves, dishes, spoons, bowls, &c. all
were anointed; which had respect to Christ, and the communion of his
people with him, feeding on him, that food which endures for ever, whom
God the Father has sealed and sanctified:

and the candlestick and his vessels; an emblem of the church, and of the
light of the word held forth in it, which being accompanied with the
grace of the Spirit of God, is the savour of life unto life:

and the altar of incense; on which the odours, the prayers of the
saints, come up before God through the mediation of Christ.

[Exodus 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 30:28</span></span>

And the altar of burnt offering, with all its vessels,.... Pans,
shovels, basins, &c. and this altar particularly was sprinkled with it
seven times, [Lev 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#010.md),

and the laver, and his foot; the laver of brass for the priests to wash
their hands and feet in, and the foot or base of it on which it stood,
see [Exo 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#018.md).

[Exodus 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 30:29</span></span>

And thou shalt sanctify them, that they may be most holy,.... By
anointing them, and so be set apart for sacred uses only; as by the
grace of the Holy Spirit, the people of God, the vessels of mercy, are
really sanctified, and made meet for the master's use; and therefore it
is called the sanctification of the Spirit, which is true holiness, in
opposition to typical or ceremonial holiness, here intended; and if this
holy anointing oil made those things most holy that were anointed with
it, how much more must the grace of the Spirit those who partake of it;
and though it is at present imperfect, it will be perfected, and become
complete holiness, without which no man can see the Lord:

whatsoever toucheth them shall be holy; as is said of the most holy
altar; see Gill on [Exo 29:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#037.md). The
Targum of Jonathan interprets it of persons that approach these holy
places, and things so anointed and sanctified, paraphrasing the words
thus;"whosoever cometh unto them of the priests shall be holy, but of
the rest of the tribes shall be burnt with flaming fire before the
Lord.''

[Exodus 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 30:30</span></span>

And thou shall anoint Aaron and his sons,.... Them alone, and not
others, as Aben Ezra, who were typical of Christ anointed with the
Spirit of God without measure, to his various offices of prophet, priest
and King; and also of all the saints, who are anointed priests to God,
to offer up spiritual sacrifices acceptable to God through Christ:

and consecrate them, that they may minister unto me in the priest's
office; by anointing them, and by other rites mentioned in the preceding
chapter; whereby they were set apart for that office, and were qualified
for it, and had authority to exercise it.

[Exodus 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 30:31</span></span>

And thou shall speak unto the children of Israel,.... When he was come
down from the mount, and gave the instructions about the making and
using of this oil:

saying, this shall be an holy anointing oil unto me throughout your
generations; Abarbinel, and other Jewish writers, conclude from hence,
that this same oil, which was made by Moses, lasted throughout the
generations to the times of Josiah, when it was hid with other things;
but this, notion is justly exploded by Aben Ezra; it is not probable,
that so small a quantity that was now made, which is supposed by some to
be no more than a gallon and a half of wine measure, should suffice so
long: it does not seem to be more than what was sufficient for present
use; for the anointing of so many persons, and things as were anointed,
and much less to be sufficient for the anointing of priests and kings in
after times, until that period. This cannot be supposed without a
miraculous interposition, to which the Talmudists (z) fly, and observe,
that there were many miracles in this affair; but there is no need to
have recourse to them, since, for aught that is said, it might be made
again in like manner for sacred uses, which is meant by the phrase "unto
me"; though it might not be made for any other use, private or profane.

\(z\) Massachet Cerithot, fol. 5. 2. & Horayot, fol. 11. 2.

[Exodus 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 30:32</span></span>

Upon man's flesh shall it not be poured,.... That is, not upon common
men, or on men's flesh in common, as was usual at feasts and
entertainments in the eastern countries, see [Psa
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#005.md) but this was not to be used on
such occasions, otherwise it was poured on the flesh of some men, as
Aaron and his sons, on whose head it was poured and ran down to the
beard:

neither shall ye make any other like it, after the composition of it;
for private uses:

it is holy, and it shall be holy unto you; it was set apart for sacred
use by the Lord, and so it was to be reckoned by them, and not to be
used in any way, or for any other purpose than he had directed: all
which shows, that the grace of the Spirit belongs to the Lord's people,
his priests; other men are carnal, and have no lot or part in this
matter, and are not to be admitted to holy ordinances, as if they were
holy persons; nor is fellowship in holy things to be allowed them; nor
is counterfeit grace of any avail, which, though it may bear a likeness
to true grace, is not that, nor to be so accounted, nor rested on, as
feigned faith, the hypocrite's hope, dissembled love, and pretended
humility.

[Exodus 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 30:33</span></span>

Whosoever compoundeth any like it,.... For his own use, or for any other
than what God appointed it for: or

whosoever putteth any of it upon a stranger; meaning not a Gentile, an
alien from the commonwealth of israel; though Japhet interprets it of
such a stranger who was not of the children of Israel; this Aben Ezra
says is not right, but he says it means one that is not of the seed of
Aaron; and so the Targum of Jonathan,"upon a profane person (or a common
person, a laic) that is not of the sons of Aaron:''though the kings of
Israel seem to be an exception to this, which might be by a special
order from the Lord; yet it is a question whether it was with this, or
with common oil, that they were anointed: indeed, the oil with which
Solomon was anointed was taken out of the tabernacle, [Kg1
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#039.md).

shall even be cut off from his people; either by death, by the immediate
hand of God inflicting some disease upon him, or by excommunication from
the congregation of Israel, or by not favouring him with any posterity,
to keep up his name in the nation.

[Exodus 30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 30:34</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... In a continued discourse, or some time
after the former, though more probably at the same time; since it
concerns the incense to be offered on the altar of incense, about which
directions are given in the former part of the chapter:

take unto thee sweet spices: which are as follow, "stacte", "onycha",
and "galbanum"; the former of these has its name from dropping; and of
the same signification is the Hebrew word "Nataph", here used.
Pancirollus says (a), myrrh is a drop or tear distilling from a tree in
Arabia Felix; and stacte is a drop of myrrh, which is extracted from it,
and yields a most precious liquor: and so Pliny (b) relates, that myrrh
trees sweat out of their own accord, before they are cut, what is called
stacte, to which nothing is preferable: though some naturalists, as
Theophrastus and Dioscorides (c) speak of this as flowing from it when
it is cut; however, all agree it is a liquor that drops from myrrh;
though the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem interpret it "balsam" or
"rosin"; as does Jarchi on the place, and Maimonides (d): the second of
these, "onycha", has its name from being of the colour of a man's nail,
as the onyx stone is, and is the same with the "unguis odorata" or
"blatta byzantia". Jarchi says it is the root of a spice, smooth and
shining like a man's nail. It is by some"understood of "laudanum" or
"balellium"; but the greatest part of commentators explain it by the
"onyx", or the odoriferous shell, which is a shell like to that of the
shell fish called "purpura": the onyx is fished for in watery places of
the Indies, where grows the "spica nardi", which is the food of this
fish, and what makes its shell so aromatic: they go to gather these
shells when the heat has dried up the marshes. The best onyx is found in
the Red sea, and is white and large, the Babylonian is black and
smaller; this is what Dioscorides says of it (e).''And the best being
found in the Red sea, it may be reasonably supposed it was what Moses
was bid to take. In all India, it is the principal thing in all
perfumes, as the aloe is in pills (f); the Targum of Jonathan interprets
it by "costus"; and the Jerusalem Targum by spike of myrrh, meaning
perhaps spikenard. The last of these, "galbanum", what now goes by that
name, is of a very ill smell, and therefore cannot be thought to be one
of these sweet spices; but another is meant, and which, by its name
"Chelbanah", was of a fat and unctuous nature; though Jarchi says,
galbanum, whose smell is ill, is put among the spices; and Maimonides
(g) and Kimchi (h) describe it like black honey, and of an offensive
smell; but it must be something odoriferous, and therefore most likely
to be the galbanum Pliny (i) speaks of as growing on Mount Areanus in
Syria, which he mentions along with several sorts of balsams, and as a
sort of frankincense; and the Vulgate Latin version, to distinguish it,
calls it "galbanum" of a "good smell":

these sweet spices with pure frankincense; for which Sabaea in Arabia
Felix was very famous, and was called the thuriferous country, as Pliny
(k) says; who observes that there were in it two times of gathering the
frankincense, the one in autumn, that which was white, and the purest,
the other in the spring, which was reddish, and not to be compared with
the former:

of each shall there be a like weight; just as much of one as of the
other: in the Hebrew text it is, "alone by alone"; and the sense may be,
that each spice was beaten alone, and after that mixed, as Aben Ezra, or
weighed alone, and then put together.

\(a\) Rer. Memorab. & Deperd. par. 1. tit. 12. p. 32. (b) Nat. Hist. l.
12. c. 15. (c) Apud Dalechamp. in Plin. ib. (d) Cele Hamikdash, c. 2.
sect. 4. (e) Calmet's Dictionary on the word "Onycha". (f) Vid.
Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 243. (g) Cele Hamikdash, c. 2.
sect. 4. (h) Sepher Shorash. Rad. (i) Nat. Hist. l. 12. c. 15. (k) Ib.
c. 14.

[Exodus 30:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 30:35</span></span>

And thou shalt make it a perfume,.... By mixing the above spices
together:

a confection after the art of the apothecary; in the manner they beat,
compound, and mix several ingredients together:

tempered together; or "salted" (l), with salt of Sodom, as Aben Ezra
interprets it; and Maimonides (m) says, there was a fourth part of a kab
of salt of Sodom put into it: and whether this incense or perfume
respects the intercession of Christ or the prayers of his people, they
are both savoury and acceptable to God, the latter on account of the
former; in all sacrifices salt was used, and every spiritual sacrifice
of ours should be seasoned with grace:

pure and holy; such should be the prayers of the saints, and such most
certainly is the mediation of Christ, which is his much incense.

\(l\) "salitum", Montanus, Drusius. Junius & Tremellius, & Piscator. (m)
Cele Hamikdash, c. 2. sect. 3.

[Exodus 30:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">exo 30:36</span></span>

And thou shall beat some of it very small,.... Or every one of the
spices; for this does not seem to respect any different usage of some
part of the incense from the rest; but it was all to be beat very small,
that it might mix together the better, and be easier spread upon the
coals, and the smoke thereof go up the sooner:

and put of it before the testimony in the tabernacle of the
congregation; that is, upon the altar of incense, which was placed
there, [Exo 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#006.md) and here it was to be
put in order to be burnt, not to be kept, either to be looked at, or
smelled to:

where I will meet with thee; See Gill on [Exo
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#006.md).

it shall be unto you most holy; reckoned by them most sacred, and not to
be put to any private or profane uses.

[Exodus 30:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">exo 30:37</span></span>

And as for the perfume which thou shalt make,.... As above directed:

ye shall not make to yourselves according to the composition thereof;
that is, for their own use, for the scenting of their rooms, or to snuff
up, or smell to, as in the next verse:

it shall be unto thee holy for the Lord; separated entirely for his
service, to be burned upon his altar, and to be no otherwise used.

[Exodus 30:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">exo 30:38</span></span>

Whosoever shall make like unto that, to smell thereto,.... A man might
make a perfume of the same ingredients, and of the same weight, and
exactly like it, but not to burn for his own delight and pleasure; but
if he made it and sold it to the congregation, as Jarchi observes, he
was not guilty; but if it was for his own private use and pleasure, then
he

shall even be cut off from his people; See Gill on [Exo
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#033.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 31](exo031.md)

</div>
