<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Exodus Index](exo.md)  
  [Previous](exo031)  [Next](exo033.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Exodus Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md)

[Exodus](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">exo 32:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EXODUS 32

This chapter gives an account of the idolatry of the Israelites making
and worshipping a golden calf, [Exo
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md) the information of it God gave to
Moses, bidding him at the same time not to make any suit in their
favour, that he might consume them, and make a large nation out Moses's
family, [Exo 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007.md) the intercession of
Moses for them, in which he succeeded, [Exo
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011.md) his descent from the mount with
the two tables in his hands, accompanied by Joshua, when he was an
eyewitness of their idolatry, which raised his indignation, that he cast
the two tables out of his hands and broke them, took the calf and burnt
it, and ground it to powder, and made the children of Israel drink of
it, [Exo 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#015.md) the examination of
Aaron about the fact, who excused himself, [Exo
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#021.md) the orders given to the Levites,
who joined themselves to Moses, to slay every man his brother, which
they did to the number of 3000 men, [Exo
32:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#025.md) another intercession for them by
Moses, which gained a respite of them for a time, for they are
threatened to be visited still for their sin, and they were plagued for
it, [Exo 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030.md).

[Exodus 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">exo 32:7</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses, go, get thee down,.... In [Deu
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#012.md) it is added, "quickly", and so
the Septuagint version here: this was said after the Lord had finished
his discourse with him, and had given him the two tables of stone, and
he was about to depart, but the above affair happening he hastens his
departure; indeed the idolatry began the day before, and he could have
acquainted him with it, if it had been his pleasure, but he suffered the
people to go the greatest length before a stop was put to their impiety:

for thy people which thou broughtest out of the land of Egypt have
corrupted themselves; their works, as the Targum of Jonathan supplies
it, their ways and their manners; their minds, the imaginations of their
hearts, were first corrupted, and this led on to a corruption of
actions, by which they corrupted and defiled themselves yet more and
more, and made themselves abominable in the sight of God, as corrupt
persons and things must needs be; and what can be a greater corruption
and abomination than idolatry? the Lord calls these people not his
people, being displeased with them, though they had been, and were, and
still continued; for, notwithstanding this idolatry, he did not cast
them off from being his people, or write a "Loammi" on them; but he
calls them Moses's people, as having broken the law delivered to them by
him, they had promised to obey, and so were liable to the condemnation
and curse of it; and because they had been committed to his care and
charge, and he had been the instrument of their deliverance, and
therefore it was great ingratitude to him to act the part they had done,
as well as impiety to God; wherefore, though it was the Lord that
brought them out of Egypt, it is ascribed to Moses as the instrument, to
make the evil appear the greater. Jarchi very wrongly makes these people
to be the mixed multitude he supposes Moses had proselyted, and
therefore called his people.

[Exodus 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">exo 32:8</span></span>

They have turned aside quickly out of the way which I commanded
them,.... The Targum of Jonathan adds, by way of explanation,"on Sinai,
saying, ye shall not make to yourselves an image, or figure, or any
similitude.''This was the command God had given to them; this the way he
had directed them to walk in; from this they turned aside, by making the
golden calf as an image or representation of God; and this they had done
very quickly, since it was but about six weeks ago that this command was
given; wherefore if Moses had delayed coming down from the mount, they
had made haste to commit iniquity; and, perhaps, this observation is
made of their quick defection, in opposition to their complaint of
Moses's long absence:

they have made them a molten calf; for though it was made by Aaron, or
by his direction to the founder or goldsmith, yet it was at their
request and earnest solicitation; they would not be easy without it:

and have worshipped it; by bowing the knee to it, kissing it or their
hands at the approach of it, see [Hos
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#002.md).

and have sacrificed thereunto burnt offerings and peace offerings:

and said, these be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of the
land of Egypt; the very words they used, [Exo
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004.md) and which were taken particular
notice of by the Lord with resentment.

[Exodus 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">exo 32:9</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses, I have seen this people,.... He had
observed their ways and works, their carriage and behaviour; he had seen
them before this time; he knew from all eternity what they would be,
that their neck would be as an iron sinew, and their brow brass; but now
he saw that in fact which he before saw as future, and they proved to be
the people he knew they would be; besides, this is said to give Moses
the true character of them, which might be depended upon, since it was
founded upon divine knowledge and observation:

and, behold, it is a stiffnecked people; obstinate and self-willed,
resolute in their own ways, and will not be reclaimed, inflexible and
not subjected to the yoke of the divine law; a metaphor taken from such
creatures as will not submit their necks or suffer the yoke or bridle to
be put upon them, but draw back and slip away; or, as Aben Ezra thinks,
to a man that goes on his way upon a run, and will not turn his neck to
him that calls him, so disobedient and irreclaimable were these people.

[Exodus 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">exo 32:10</span></span>

Now, therefore, let me alone,.... And not solicit him with prayers and
supplications in favour of these people, but leave him to take his own
way with them, without troubling him with any suit on their behalf; and
so the Targum of Jonathan,"and now leave off thy prayer, and do not cry
for them before me;''as the Prophet Jeremiah was often bid not to pray
for this people in his time, which was a token of God's great
displeasure with them, as well as shows the prevalence of prayer with
him; that he knows not how, as it were, humanly speaking, to deny the
requests of his children; and even though made not on their own account,
but on the account of a sinful and disobedient people:

that my wrath may wax hot against them, and that I may consume them:
which suggests that they were deserving of the wrath of God to the
uttermost, and to be destroyed from off the face of the earth, and even
to be punished with an everlasting destruction:

and I will make of thee a great nation; increase his family to such a
degree, as to make them as great a nation or greater than the people of
Israel were, see [Deu 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#014.md) or the
meaning is, he would set him over a great nation, make him king over a
people as large or larger than they, which is a sense mentioned by
Fagius and Vatablus; and, indeed, as Bishop Patrick observes, if this
people had been destroyed, there would have been no danger of the
promise not being made good, which was made to Abraham, Isaac, and
Jacob, concerning the multiplication of their seed, urged by Moses, [Exo
32:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#013.md) seeing that would have stood
firm, if a large nation was made out of the family of Moses, who
descended from them: this was a very great temptation to Moses, and had
he been a selfish man, and sought the advancement of his own family, and
careless of, and indifferent to the people of Israel, he would have
accepted of it; it is a noble testimony in his favour, and proves him
not to be the designing man he is represented by the deists.

[Exodus 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">exo 32:11</span></span>

And Moses besought the Lord his God,.... As the Lord was the God of
Moses, his covenant God, and he had an interest in him, he made use of
it in favour of the people of Israel:

and said, why doth thy wrath wax hot against thy people? so as to think
or speak of consuming them utterly; otherwise he knew there was reason
for his being angry and wroth with them; but though they were deserving
of his hot wrath and displeasure, and even to be dealt with in the
manner proposed, yet he entreats he would consider they were his people;
his special people, whom he had chose above all people, and had redeemed
them from the house of bondage, had given them laws, and made a covenant
with them, and many promises unto them, and therefore hoped he would not
consume them in his hot displeasure; God had called them the people of
Moses, and Moses retorts it, and calls them the people of God, and makes
use of their relation to him as an argument with him in their favour;
and which also shows that Moses did not understand that the Lord by
calling them his people disowned them as his:

which thou hast brought out of the land of Egypt with great power, and
with a mighty hand? this the Lord had ascribed to Moses, and observes it
is an aggravation of their ingratitude to Moses, and here Moses retorts,
and ascribes it to God, and to his mighty power; as for himself he was
only a weak feeble instrument, the Lord was the efficient cause of their
deliverance, in which he had shown the exceeding greatness of his power;
and he argues from hence, that seeing he had exerted his mighty arm in
bringing them from thence, that he would not now lift it up against them
and destroy them.

[Exodus 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">exo 32:12</span></span>

Wherefore should the Egyptians speak and say,.... Those that remained,
as the Targum of Jonathan, who were not drowned in the Red sea: a good
man will be concerned for the honour and glory of God among the enemies
of his people, that their mouths may not be opened to blaspheme the Lord
and speak ill of his ways, see [Jos
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#009.md) and this is sometimes an argument
with God himself, not to do that to his people they deserve, lest it
should give occasion to the enemy to speak reproachfully, insult, and
triumph, [Deu 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#026.md).

for mischief did he bring them out, to slay them in the mountains, and
to consume them from the face of the earth; that he brought them out of
Egypt, not with a good but ill design; not to bring them into the land
of Canaan, as they promised themselves, but to destroy them in the
mountains; not to erect them into a great kingdom and nation, which
should make a considerable figure in the world, but to cut them off from
being a people at all: the mountains where they now were, were Sinai and
Horeb, and there might be others thereabout, among which they were
encamped: the Targum of Jonathan is,"among the mountains of Tabor, and
Hermon, and Sirion, and Sinai:"

turn from thy fierce wrath, and repent of this evil against thy people;
not that there is any turning or shadow of turning with God, or any
change of his mind, or any such passions and affections in him as here
expressed; but this is said after the manner of men concerning him, when
he alters the course of his dealings with men according to his
unalterable will, and does not do the evil threatened by him, and which
the sins of men deserve.

[Exodus 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">exo 32:13</span></span>

Remember Abraham, Isaac, and Israel, thy servants,.... The covenant he
made with them, the promise he had made unto them, with an oath annexed
to it:

to whom thou swarest by thine own self; which he did, because he could
swear by no greater; and for the confirmation of his covenant and
promise, see [Gen 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016.md).

and saidst unto them; for what was said to Abraham was repeated and
confirmed to Isaac and Jacob:

I will multiply your seed as the stars of heaven; multitudes of which
are out of sight, and cannot be seen with the naked eye, nor numbered:

and all this land that I have spoken of; the land of Canaan, then
inhabited by several nations:

will I give unto your seed, and they shall inherit it for ever; as long
as they are a people, a body politic, and especially while obedient to
the divine will; but should they be now cut off, this promise would
become of no effect: this is the great argument Moses makes use of, and
the most forcible one.

[Exodus 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">exo 32:14</span></span>

And the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto his
people. He did not do what he threatened to do, and seemed to have in
his thoughts and designs, but did what Moses desired he would, [Exo
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#012.md) not that any of God's thoughts
or the determinations of his mind are alterable; for the thoughts of his
heart are to all generations; but he changes the outward dispensations
of his providence, or his methods of acting with men, which he has been
taking or threatened to take; and this being similar to what they do
when they repent of anything, who alter their course, hence repentance
is ascribed to God, though, properly speaking, it does not belong to
him, see [Jer 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#008.md). Aben Ezra thinks
that the above prayer of Moses, which was so prevalent with God, does
not stand in its proper place, but should come after [Exo
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031.md) for, to what purpose, says he,
should Moses say to the Israelites, [Exo
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030.md) "peradventure I shall make an
atonement for your sin": if he was appeased by his prayer before?

[Exodus 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">exo 32:15</span></span>

And Moses turned, and went down from the mount,.... He turned himself
from God, with whom he had been conversing forty days; his back was to
the ascent of the mount, and he turned himself in order to go down; or
"he looked" (g), as a man considers what is to be done, as Aben Ezra
observes, and he saw that he was obliged to go down in haste:

and the two tables of the testimony were in his hand; or hands, as in
[Exo 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#019.md) for they were, perhaps, as
much as he could carry in both hands, being of stone, as in [Exo
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo031.htm#018.md) on which was written the law,
the "testimony" of the will of God with respect to what was to be done
or not done:

the letters were written on both their sides, on the one side and on the
other were they written; some think that the engraving of the letters
was such, that it went through the stones, and in a miraculous manner
the letters and lines were in a regular order, and might be read on the
other sides; to which Jarchi seems to incline, saying, the letters might
be read, and it was a work of wonders; others think that the letters
were written both within and without, like Ezekiel's book of woes; that
the same that was within side was written without, that so, when held
up, they might be read by those that stood before and those that stood
behind; but rather so it was that the whole was written within, some of
the commands on the right, and some on the left, and so the tables might
be clapped together as a book is folded.

\(g\) "et aspexit", Pagninus.

[Exodus 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">exo 32:16</span></span>

And the tables were the work of God,.... And not of angels or men; the
stones were made and formed by God into the shape they were:

and the writing was the writing of God, graven upon the tables; the
letters in which the law was written were of his framing, devising, and
engraving; and this was to show that this law was his own, and contained
his mind and will; and to give the greater dignity and authority to it,
and to deter men from breaking it.

[Exodus 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">exo 32:17</span></span>

And when Joshua heard the noise of the people, as they shouted,....
Dancing about the calf: when Moses went up into the mount, Joshua went
with him, and tarried in a lower part of the mount all the forty days
until he returned, see [Exo 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#013.md)
though not so low as the bottom of the mount where the people were, nor
so near it as to know what they did there, for of their affairs he seems
to be entirely ignorant; nor so high as where Moses was, or, however,
not in the cloud where he conversed with God, for of what passed between
them he had no knowledge, until declared by Moses:

he said unto Moses, there is a noise of war in the camp; such a noise as
soldiers make in an onset for battle; he supposed that some enemy was
come upon and had attacked the people, and that this noise was the noise
of the enemy, or of the Israelites, or both, just beginning the battle;
or on the finishing of it on the account of victory on one side or the
other; and as he was the general of the army, it must give him a concern
that he should be absent at such a time.

[Exodus 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">exo 32:18</span></span>

And he said,.... Not Joshua, as Saadiah Gaon thinks, but Moses, in
answer to what Joshua had said:

it is not the voice of them that shout for mastery; that have got the
better of it, and have obtained the victory, and shout on that account;
or, "not the voice of a cry of strength", or "of a strong cry" (h); that
is, of men who have got the victory, and are in high spirits, and shout
with a strong voice; and so the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan,"not the
voice of strong men that overcome in battle:"

neither is it the voice of them that cry for being overcome; which is
not a voice of shouting, but of howling; or, "not the voice of the cry
of weakness", or "of a weak cry" (i); who being unable to stand their
ground are conquered, and make a bitter outcry on falling into the
enemy's hands, or being wounded shriek terribly, and so the above
Targums,"not the voice of the weak who are overcome by the enemy in
battle:"

but the noise of them that sing do I hear; as at a merry entertainment,
either on a civil or religious account: Moses, who knew what the
children of Israel had done, and what they were about, could better
judge of the nature of the sound he heard than Joshua could, who knew
nothing of what was transacting,

\(h\) "vox eorum qui respondeant fortiter", Tigurine version; "vox
clamoris fortis", Drusius. (i) "vox eorum qui respondeant infirmiter",
Tigurine version; "vox clamoris debilis", Drusius.

[Exodus 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">exo 32:19</span></span>

And it came to pass, as soon, as he came nigh unto the camp,.... To the
bottom of the mountain, and pretty near where the people were encamped:

that he saw the calf, and the dancing; the golden image of the calf, and
the people dancing about it, in honour of it, and as glad they had got a
symbol and representation of God to go before them; and so the Egyptians
did before the golden ox; as Philo says, before observed:

and Moses's anger waxed hot: he fell into a passion of indignation at
the sight of such execrable idolatry, though he was so meek a man, and
though he had himself expostulated with the Lord why his wrath should
wax hot against this people; but, when he saw it with his own eyes he
could not contain himself, but his spirit was raised to a very great
pitch of anger, and could not forbear showing it in some way or another,
and particularly in the following manner:

and he cast the tables out of his hands, and brake them beneath the
mount; of Sinai; at the foot of it: he brought the tables, though he
knew what they had done, and no doubt showed them to them, told them
what they were, and enlarged on the wonderful condescension and goodness
of God in giving them such laws, and writing them with his own hand,
engraving them himself on such tables of stone; and then broke them to
pieces, to denote that they had broken these laws, and deserved to be
broke in pieces and destroyed themselves; and this he did before their
eyes, that they might be the more affected with it, and be the more
sensible of their loss; and this was not the mere effect of passion, at
least a sinful one, but was under the influence and direction of God
himself; since we never read he was blamed for this action, though
afterwards ordered to make two tables like them: the Jews say (k), this
was done on the seventeenth day of Tammuz, which answers to part of June
and part of July, and is observed by them as a fast on account of it.

\(k\) Misn. Taanith, c. 4. sect. 7.

[Exodus 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">exo 32:20</span></span>

And he took the calf which they had made, and burnt it in the fire,....
Melted it down into a mass of gold, whereby it lost its form, and had no
more the appearance of a calf:

and ground it to powder; but how this was done is not easy to say,
whether by beating the mass of gold into thin plates, and then filing
them small; for this art has remained unknown; the chemists have boasted
of it as only possessed of it; but it seems Moses, learned in all the
learning of the Egyptians, had it: however, it is now certain by various
experiments, that gold, though a very thick and heavy body, consists of
parts which are separable from one another, and to be divided into
infinite subtler parts: the famous Dr. Halley has shown that one grain
of gold may be divided into 10,000 parts, and yet visible; and Dr. Keil
has demonstrated that a cubic thumb's breadth of gold is divisible into
47,619,047 parts, which do not escape the sight: according to the
computation of the said Dr. Halley, leaf gold, with which silver threads
are gilded, is not thicker than the 124,500 part of a thumb's breadth;
so that a cube of the hundredth part of a thumb's breadth of the said
subtle parts may contain 243,000,000 (l):

and strawed it upon the water; of the brook that descended out of the
mount, [Deu 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#021.md) now called the
fountain of St. Catharine; which Dr. Shaw (m) says, after it has
supplied the demands of the convent (now built on this mount) is
received without into a large basin, which running over, forms a little
rill: and another traveller (n) speaks of a fountain about the middle of
Mount Sinai, which, though small, was found in it running water very
wholesome and refreshing: but if this was a brook of running water, it
seems more likely that water was taken out of it and put into a proper
vessel or vessels, on which the powder of the golden calf was strewed;
or otherwise it would have been carried away with the stream, and could
not have been taken up and given to the people to drink, as is next
said; and this shows that it must be reduced to a very small light
powder indeed, to float upon the top of the water and not sink to the
bottom, as mere filings of gold would necessarily do:

and made the children of Israel drink of it; not the whole body of them,
or every individual, but the more principal persons, and such who had
been the most active in encouraging the making of the calf, and the
worshipping of it: this was done not only that they might entirely lose
their gold and have no manner of profit by it, but that the idol, which
is nothing in the world, might be brought to nothing indeed, and that
there might be no remains of it to be abused to superstitious uses, as
well as to show them their folly in worshipping that which could not
save itself; and by drinking it, whereby it passed through them and
became an excrement, to express the utmost abhorrence and detestation of
it; as also to show that they deserved the curse of God to enter into
them, as oil into their bowels, as that water did, and be utterly
destroyed: the Jewish writers, as Jarchi and Aben Ezra, suppose this
water, with the powder of the golden calf in it, had the same effect and
was for the same use as the water of jealousy, that it made the bellies
of those that drank it to swell: and the Targum of Jonathan observes,
that whoever gave any golden vessel towards the making of the calf,
there was a sign appeared in his countenance: and Aben Ezra suggests the
same, but neither of them say what it was: but an ancient Latin poet,
quoted by Selden (o), reports from the Hebrew writers, that whoever were
guilty of this idolatry, as soon as they drank of the water their beards
became yellow as gold, whereby the Levites knew who were guilty, and
slew them; but as this is quite fabulous, so I have not met with it in
any Jewish writer, only an author of theirs, of great antiquity and
credit with them, says (p), that whoever kissed the calf with his whole
heart, his lips became golden.

\(l\) Vid. Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 247. (m) Travels, p.
242. Ed. 2. (n) Baumgarten. peregrinatio, l. 1. c. 24. p. 61, 62. (o) De
Diis Syris Syntagma, 1. c. 4. p. 156. (p) Pirke Eliezer, c. 45.

[Exodus 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">exo 32:21</span></span>

And Moses said unto Aaron,.... Having destroyed the calf, and thereby
expressed his abhorrence of their idolatry, he examines the principal
persons concerned, and inquires into the cause and reason of it, how it
came about; and begins with Aaron, though his own brother, with whom
along with Hur he had committed the government of the people during his
absence; and therefore was justly accountable for such a transaction,
which could not have been without his knowledge and consent: no mention
is made of Hur, whether he was dead or no is not certain; the Jewish
writers say he was, and that he was killed for reproving the Israelites
for their wickedness; and it looks as if he was dead, since he was not
in the examination, and we hear of him no more afterwards:

what did this people unto thee, that thou hast brought so great a sin
upon them? as idolatry is, than which no sin can be greater, it being
not only a breach of the first table of the law, but directly against
God, against the very being of God, and his honour and glory; it is a
denial of him, and setting up an idol in his room, and giving to that
the glory that is only due to his name; and Aaron being the chief
magistrate, whose business it was to see that the laws of God were
observed, and to restrain the people from sin, and to have been a terror
to evil doers; yet falling in with them, and conniving at them, he is
charged with bringing sin upon them, or them into that; and is asked
what the people had done to him, that he should do this to them, what
offence they had given him, what injury they had done him, that he bore
them a grudge for it, and took this method to be revenged? for it is
suggested, had they used him ever so ill, he could not have requited it
in a stronger manner than by leading them into such a sin, the
consequence of which must be ruin and destruction, see [Gen
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#009.md) or else Moses inquires of Aaron
what methods the people had made use of to prevail upon him to suffer
them to do such a piece of wickedness; whether it was by persuasion and
artful insinuations, or by threatening to take away his life if he did
not comply, or in what manner they had wrought upon his weak side, to
induce him to take such a step.

[Exodus 32:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">exo 32:22</span></span>

And Aaron said, let not the anger of my lord wax hot,.... He addresses
him in a very respectful manner, though his younger brother, being in a
superior office, the chief ruler of the people, king in Jeshurun; and he
perceived a violent emotion rising in him, great indignation in his
countenance, and an high resentment of what was done, and therefore he
entreats his patience to hear him, in a few words, what he had to say,
and he begins with the well known character of the people:

thou knowest the people, that they are set on mischief; or are "in
wickedness" (q); wholly in it, and under the power and influence of it,
given up to it, and bent upon it; and there was no restraining them from
it; and he appeals to the knowledge of Moses himself for the truth of
this, of which their several murmurings against him, since they came out
of Egypt, were a proof; see [Jo1 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#019.md).

\(q\) "in malo", Montanus, Drusius, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Exodus 32:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">exo 32:23</span></span>

For they said unto me, make us gods, which shall go before us,.... Which
was true, [Exo 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md) but then he should
have told them, that gods were not to be made; that what were made with
hands were no gods, and could not go before them; that the making of any
image, similitude, or representation of God, was forbidden by him, as
they had lately heard from his own mouth; he should have dissuaded from
such idolatry, by showing them the evil nature of the sin, and the ruin
they exposed themselves to by it:

for as for this Moses, the man that brought us up out of the land of
Egypt, we wot not what is become of him; their words he truly recites,
and perhaps might choose the rather to mention them, because they
carried in them some reflection on Moses for staying so long in the
mount; and as if that contributed much to this affair, and which put the
people on forming such a scheme, they concluding he must be dead through
famine; or, as the Targum of Jonathan, be burnt with flaming fire from
the Lord.

[Exodus 32:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">exo 32:24</span></span>

And I said unto them, whosoever hath any gold, let them break it
off,.... That is, any ear rings of gold, let them loose or take them off
their ears:

so they gave it me; of their own accord, as if unasked by him, though he
had bid them bring it to him, [Exo
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002.md),

then I cast it into the fire; to melt it, but says nothing of the mould
the melted gold was poured into:

and there came out this calf; he speaks of it as if the gold became in
the form of a calf without any design, or without using any methods to
put it in this form; but that it was a matter of chance, or rather
something preternatural and miraculous; he speaks of it as if it was
alive, and came out of itself: and indeed the Jews represent it as done
by magic art, and by the operation of Satan, and speak of it as coming
out alive, bellowing and dancing; and the Targum of Jonathan is,"and I
cast it into the fire, and Satan entered into the midst of it, and out
of it came the likeness of this calf.''Aaron says not a word of his
fashioning it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten calf;
but Moses learned this elsewhere, and has recorded it. What Moses
thought of this apology is not said; it could not be satisfactory to
him: and it is certain the conduct of Aaron in this affair was
displeasing to God; and it seemed as if he would have destroyed him, had
not Moses prayed for him, [Deu 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#020.md).

[Exodus 32:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">exo 32:25</span></span>

And when Moses saw that the people were naked,.... Not in their bodies,
being stripped of their ear rings; for parting with them was not
sufficient to denominate them naked in a corporeal sense; nor as being
without their armour, which was laid aside while they were eating, and
drinking, and dancing about the calf, and so might be thought a proper
opportunity for the Levites to fall upon them, by the order of Moses,
and slay them: but it can hardly be thought that all the people bore
arms, and that Moses took the advantage of their being without them: but
rather they were naked in their souls, through their sin, and the shame
of their nakedness appeared; their sin was made manifest, and they were
discovered to be what they were; and they were now deprived of the
divine protection; the cloud was departing from them, the symbol of the
divine Presence, God being provoked by their sins; unless it is to be
understood of their ceasing from work, and keeping holy day in honour of
the calf, and so were loitering about, and not attending to the business
of their callings, in which sense the word sometimes seems to be used,
see [Exo 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#004.md).

for Aaron had made them naked unto their shame amongst their enemies; to
part with their ear rings, or lay aside their armour while feasting,
could not be so much to their shame among their enemies; but to sin
against God, in the manner they did, was to their shame, which Aaron was
a means of by not doing all he could to hinder it, and by doing what he
did to encourage it; and now he made them naked to their shame by
exposing it, saying they were a people set on mischief, and given up to
sin and wickedness; and what they had now done served to expose them to
shame even among their enemies, both now and hereafter; when they should
hear of their shameful revolt from God, after so many great and good
things done for them, and of the change of their gods, and of their
fickleness about them, which was not usual with the Gentiles: though the
last word may be rendered, "among those that rise up from you"; that
should spring from them, come up in their room, and succeed them, their
posterity, as in [Num 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#014.md) and so
Onkelos renders it, "to your generations", and is so to be understood,
as Abendana observes; and then the sense is, that this sin of making and
worshipping the golden calf, and keeping a holy day, would be to their
shame and disgrace, among their posterity, in all succeeding ages. (If
is quite possible the people were physically naked, having taken off all
their clothes to indulge in the idolatrous worship of the calf and
sexual immorality that usually is associated with such wicked practices.
Editor.)

[Exodus 32:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">exo 32:26</span></span>

Then Moses stood in the gate of the camp,.... In one of the gates of it;
for it doubtless had more than one to go in and out of, as is clear from
[Exo 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027.md) it being probably
entrenched all around; here Moses set himself, it being the usual place,
as in cities, where the people were summoned together on important
occasions, and justice and judgment were administered:

and said, who is on the Lord's side? let him come unto me; who is for
the worship of the true God, and him only, and against the worship of a
gold calf, or any other idol, and is zealous for the glory of God, and
the honour of his name:

and all the sons of Levi gathered themselves together unto him; that is,
all those that had not given in to the idolatry of the calf; all is put
for many. Jarchi infers from hence, that this tribe was wholly free from
that sin; but the contrary is most evident, for it appears from the
context that many of them were slain for it; yea, as, on the one hand,
they were only of the tribe of Levi, who joined themselves to Moses,
though there was no doubt many in all the tribes that were not in the
idolatry; so, on the other hand, there were none slain, or very few, but
of the tribe of Levi, as will appear in the exposition of the following
verses, the being principally concerned with Aaron in making the calf;
and therefore those of the same tribe that joined them not were the more
zealous and studious to purge themselves from the imputation of the
crime, by going over to Moses at once, and showing themselves to be on
the Lord's side.

[Exodus 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">exo 32:27</span></span>

And he said unto them, thus saith the Lord God of Israel,.... The
following orders are given by Moses, not of himself the chief
magistrate, and as the effect of heat and passion, but there were from
the Lord, who was Israel's God and King; he had them expressly from him,
or by an impulse on his spirit, or in such a way and manner that he knew
it was of God, and this was his will:

put every man his sword by his side; girt there, ready to be drawn upon
order:

and go in and out from gate to gate throughout the camp; not into the
tents, where good men might be bemoaning the sin committed, but
throughout the streets, where many were loitering, it being a holy day
with the idolaters:

and slay every man his brother, and every man his companion, and every
man his neighbour; who were idolaters; none were to be spared on account
of relation, friendship, and acquaintance.

[Exodus 32:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">exo 32:28</span></span>

And the children of Levi did according to the word of Moses,.... They
girded their swords by their sides, went through the camp, and slew
their brethren, companions and neighbours, who were keeping holy day in
honour of the idol:

and there fell of the people that day about three thousand men; the
Vulgate Latin version reads 23,000, very wrongly; now these being
chiefly, if not altogether, of the tribe of Levi, the brethren,
companions, and neighbours of the Levites, that were the slayers,
together with the after plagues that came upon them, [Exo
32:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#035.md) account for the deficiency of
males in this tribe, some few months after, when it was numbered; and
the number of them from one month old and upwards amounted but to
22,000, which was but a very small one in proportion to the other
tribes, who generally, one with another, numbered 40,000 each, and none
so few as 30,000 (r); of this tribe Aaron was, and therefore used with
severity, because of his concern in this sin; and even though it was the
tribe of Moses, it was not spared.

\(r\) See the Bishop of Clogber's Chronology of the Hebrew Bible, p.
360, 362.

[Exodus 32:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">exo 32:29</span></span>

For Moses had said,.... To the Levites, when he first gave them their
orders:

consecrate yourselves today to the Lord; devote yourselves to his
service, by obeying his orders, slaying those, or the heads of them, who
have cast so much contempt upon him as to worship the golden calf in his
room; and which would be as acceptable to him as the offerings were, by
which Aaron and his sons were consecrated to the Lord; and as these
Levites were consecrated to his service this day, on this account:

even every man upon his son, and upon his brother; not sparing the
nearest relation found in this idolatry, and for which the tribe of Levi
is commended and blessed in the blessing of Moses, [Deu
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008.md) and as it follows:

that he may bestow a blessing upon you this day; which was their being
taken into the service of God to minister to the priests in the
sanctuary, to bear the vessels of the Lord, and for their maintenance to
have the tithes of the people: this day was, according to the Jewish
writers (s), the seventeenth of Tammuz, or June, on which day the Jews
keep a fast upon this account.

\(s\) Sedar Olam Rabba, c. 6. p. 18. Pirke Eliezer, c. 46.

[Exodus 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">exo 32:30</span></span>

And it came to pass on the morrow,.... The eighteenth day of Tammuz it
was, the same writers say, that Moses implored the mercy of God for
Israel. Jarchi on [Exo 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011.md) says it
was on the seventeenth day the tables were broke, on the eighteenth the
calf was burnt, and on the nineteenth that Moses went up to intercede
for them:

that Moses said unto the people, ye have sinned a great sin; the sin of
idolatry, see [Exo 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#021.md) from whence
it appears, that all that were guilty of it were not slain, perhaps only
some of one tribe; and there was great reason to fear, that as wrath was
gone forth it would not stop here, but others would fall a sacrifice to
the divine displeasure; wherefore it is proposed by Moses to make
application to the Lord on their behalf, that they might obtain mercy:

and I will go up unto the Lord: on the top of Mount Sinai:

peradventure I shall make atonement for your sin; not by any sacrifice
offered, but by his prayers prevail with God to forgive their sin, and
not punish any more for it: he had by his first prayer obtained of the
Lord not to consume them off of the face of the earth, and utterly
destroy them as a nation; but that he did not hinder but that resentment
might be shown in a lesser degree, or by parts; as not 3000 men had been
cut off, chiefly out of one tribe, if not altogether, the rest of the
tribes might expect to be visited, according to the number of their
delinquents.

[Exodus 32:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">exo 32:31</span></span>

And Moses returned unto the Lord,.... On the mount where he was in the
cloud:

and said, oh, this people have sinned a great sin; which to following
words explain; he confesses the same to God he had charged the people
with in [Exo 32:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#030.md),

and have made them gods of gold; the golden calf, which they themselves
called "Elohim", gods.

[Exodus 32:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">exo 32:32</span></span>

Yet now, if thou will forgive their sin,.... Of thy free grace, good
will, and pleasure; it will redound to thy glory, men will praise thy
name on account of it; these people will have great reason to be
thankful, and will lie under great obligations to thee, to fear, serve,
and glorify thee; and in particular it will be regarded by me as the
highest favour that can be asked or granted:

and if not, blot me, I pray thee, out of the book which thou hast
written; not the book of the law, as Jarchi, written with the finger of
God, the name of Moses was not written there; nor the book of the just,
as the Targum of Jonathan, the list and catalogue of good men, that
belonged to the visible church, called in after time "the writing of the
house of Israel", [Eze 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#009.md) but rather
the book of life, either of this temporal life, and then it means no
more than that he wished to die, even immediately by the hand of God,
which seems to be countenanced by [Num
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#015.md) or else of eternal life, and is
no other than the book of life of the Lamb, or God's predestination or
choice of men in Christ to everlasting life, which is particular,
personal, sure, and certain; and Moses asks for this, not as a thing
either desirable or possible, but to express his great affection for
this people, and his great concern for the glory of God; and rather than
either should suffer, he chose, if it was possible, to be deprived of
that eternal happiness he hoped for, and should enjoy.

[Exodus 32:33](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">exo 32:33</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Moses,.... In answer to his request:

whosoever hath sinned against me, him will I blot out of my book; not
that anyone that is really in the book of life is ever blotted out, or
that anyone predestinated or ordained to eternal life ever perish: but
some persons may think themselves, and they may seem to be written in
that book, or to be among the number of God's elect, but are not, and
turn out obstinate impenitent sinners, and live and die in impenitence
and unbelief; when it will appear that their names were never written in
it, which, is the same thing as to be blotted out of it, see [Psa
69:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#028.md). Now by this answer the Lord
does not absolutely refuse the request of Moses with respect to the
people, though he does with regard to himself, and the blotting his name
out of his book; and it is plain, by what follows, he meant to show
mercy to the people, since he bids Moses go and lead them on towards
Canaan, and promises an angel to go before them; though he reserves to
himself a liberty to chastise this people for this sin, as he should
have opportunity, along with others.

[Exodus 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">exo 32:34</span></span>

Therefore now go, lead the people unto the place of which I have spoken
unto thee,.... That is, to the land of Canaan, which he had promised to
their fathers and to them, and had directed Moses to bring them to:

behold, mine angel shall go before thee: and not I, as Jarchi interprets
it; not the Angel of the covenant, and of his presence, as in [Exo
23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020.md) but a created angel, which,
though a favour, was a lessening of the mercy before promised and
granted; and which gave the people a great deal of concern, though Moses
by his supplications got the former blessing restored, [Exo
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#002.md),

nevertheless, in the day when I visit, I will visit their sin upon them;
that is, when he should visit them in a way of correction for other
sins, he would visit them in like manner for this sin, the worship of
the golden calf; and so Jarchi well explains it,"when I visit upon them
their iniquities, I will visit upon them a little of this iniquity, with
the rest of iniquities; and there is no punishment (adds he) comes upon
Israel, in which there is not something of the punishment of the sin of
the calf;''and the Jews have a saying (t), that"there is not a
generation in which there is not an ounce of the sin of the calf.''

\(t\) T. Hieros. Taanith, fol. 68. 3.

[Exodus 32:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">exo 32:35</span></span>

And the Lord plagued the people,.... That is, continued so to do at
certain times, with the pestilence, or other calamities; for this seems
not to refer, as some think, to the slaughter of the 3000 men: the
reason follows:

because they made the calf which Aaron made; that is, they provided him
with materials to make it; they urged and solicited him to do it, and
would not be easy without it, so that the making of it is ascribed to
them; or they served it, as Onkelos; or bowed unto it, as Jonathan; with
which agree the Syriac, Arabic, and Samaritan versions, which render it,
they served, or worshipped, or sacrificed to the calf which Aaron made.

[Exodus 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">exo 32:1</span></span>

And when the people saw that Moses delayed to come down out of the
mount,.... The time, according to the Targum of Jonathan, being elapsed,
which he had fixed for his descent, and through a misreckoning, as
Jarchi suggests; they taking the day of his going up to be one of the
forty days, at the end of which he was to return, whereas he meant forty
complete days; but it is not probable that Moses knew himself how long
he should stay, and much less that he acquainted them before hand of it;
but he staying longer than they supposed he would, they grew uneasy and
impatient, and wanted to set out in their journey to Canaan, and to have
some symbol and representation of deity to go before them:

the people gathered themselves together unto Aaron; who with Hur was
left to judge them in the absence of Moses: it was very likely that they
had had conferences with him before upon this head, but now they got
together in a tumultuous manner, and determined to carry their point
against all that he should say to the contrary:

and said unto him, up; put us off no longer, make no more delay, but
arise at once, and set about what has been once and again advised to and
importuned:

make us gods which shall go before us; not that they were so very stupid
to think, that anything that could be made with hands was really God, or
even could have life and breath, and the power of self-motion, or of
walking before them; but that something should be made as a symbol and
representation of the divine Being, carried before them; for as for the
cloud which had hitherto gone before them, from their coming out of
Egypt, that had not moved from its place for forty days or more, and
seemed to them to be fixed on the mount, and would not depart from it;
and therefore they wanted something in the room of it as a token of the
divine Presence with them:

for as for this Moses; of whom they speak with great contempt, though he
had been the deliverer of them, and had wrought so many miracles in
their favour, and had been the instrument of so much good unto them:

the man that brought us up out of the land of Egypt; this they own, but
do not seem to be very thankful for it:

we wot not what is become of him; they could scarcely believe that he
was alive, that it was possible to live so long a time without eating
and drinking; or they supposed he was burnt on the mount of flaming fire
from before the Lord, as the Targum of Jonathan expresses it.

[Exodus 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">exo 32:2</span></span>

And Aaron said unto them,.... Perceiving that they were not to be
dissuaded from their evil counsel, and diverted from their purpose, but
were determined at all events to have an image made to represent God
unto them in a visible manner:

break off the golden earrings which are in the ears of your wives, of
your sons, and of your daughters; these were some of the jewels in gold
they had borrowed of the Egyptians; and it seems that, in those times
and countries, men, as well as women, used to wear earrings, and so
Pliny (w) says, in the eastern countries men used to wear gold in their
ears; and this may be confirmed from the instance of the Ishmaelites and
Midianites, [Jdg 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#024.md). Aaron did not
ask the men for theirs, but for those of their wives and children; it
may be, because he might suppose they were more fond of them, and would
not so easily part with them, hoping by this means to have put them off
of their design:

and bring them unto me; to make a god of, as they desired, that is, the
representation of one.

\(w\) Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 37.

[Exodus 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">exo 32:3</span></span>

And all the people brake off the golden earrings, which were in their
ears,.... The men took off their earrings, and persuaded their wives and
children, or obliged them to part with theirs; though the Targum of
Jonathan says the women refused to give their ornaments to their
husbands, therefore all the people immediately broke off all the golden
ornaments which were in their ears (x), so intent were they upon
idolatry. This is to be understood not of every individual, but of the
greatest part of the people; so apostle explains it of some of them,
[Co1 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#007.md). Idolaters spare no cost nor
pains to support their worship, and will strip themselves, their wives,
and children, of their ornaments, to deck their idols; which may shame
the worshippers of the true God, who are oftentimes too backward to
contribute towards the maintenance of his worship and service:

and brought them unto Aaron: presently, the selfsame day; they soon
forgot the commands enjoined them to have no other gods, save one, and
to make no graven image to bow down to it, and their own words, [Exo
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#007.md).

\(x\) So Pirke Eliezer, c. 45.

[Exodus 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">exo 32:4</span></span>

And he received them at their hand,.... For the use they delivered them
to him:

and fashioned it with a graving tool, after he had made it a molten
calf; that is, after he had melted the gold, and cast it into a mould,
which gave it the figure of a calf, and with his tool wrought it into a
more agreeable form, he took off the roughness of it, and polished it;
or if it was in imitation of the Egyptian Apis or Osiris, he might with
his graving tool engrave such marks and figures as were upon that; to
cause the greater resemblance, so Selden (y) thinks; see Gill on [Jer
46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020.md) or else the sense may be, that
he drew the figure of a calf with his tool, or made it in "a mould" (z),
into which he poured in the melted gold:

and made it a molten calf; the Targum of Jonathan gives another sense of
the former clause, "he bound it up in a napkin"; in a linen cloth or
bag, i.e. the gold of the ear rings, and then put it into the melting
pot, and so cast it into a mould, and made a calf of it. Jarchi takes
notice of this sense, and it is espoused by Bochart (a), who produces
two passages of Scripture for the confirmation of it, [Jdg
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#024.md) and illustrates it by [Isa
46:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#006.md). What inclined Aaron to make it
in the form of a calf, is not easy to say; whether in imitation of the
cherubim, one of the faces of which was that of an ox, as Moncaeus
thought; or whether in imitation of the Osiris of the Egyptians, who was
worshipped in a living ox, and sometimes in the image of one, even a
golden one. Plutarch is express for it, and says (b), that the ox was an
image of Osiris, and that it was a golden one; and so says Philo the Jew
(c), the Israelites, emulous of Egyptian figments, made a golden ox; or
whether he did this to make them ashamed of their idolatry, thinking
they would never be guilty of worshipping the form of an ox eating
grass, or because an ox was an emblem of power and majesty:

and they said, these be thy gods, O Israel, which brought thee up out of
the land of Egypt; they own they were, brought up out of that land by
the divine Being; and they could not be so stupid as to believe, that
this calf, which was only a mass of gold, figured and decorated, was
inanimate, had no life nor breath, and was just made, after their coming
out of Egypt, was what brought them from hence; but that this was a
representation of God, who had done this for them; yet some Jewish
writers are so foolish as to suppose, that through art it had the breath
of life in it, and came out of the mould a living calf, Satan, or
Samael, entering into it, and lowed in it (d).

\(y\) De Diis Syris Syntagm. 1. c. 4. p. 138. (z) "formavit illud
modulo", Piscator; so some in Ben Melech, and in Vatablus; and so the
Vulgate Latin, "formant opere fusorio"; see Fagius in loc. (a)
Hierozoic. p. 1. l. 2. c. 39. col. 334, 335. (b) De Isid. & Osir. (c) De
Vita Mosis, l. 3. p. 677. (d) Pirke Eliezer, c. 45.

[Exodus 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">exo 32:5</span></span>

And when Aaron saw it,.... In what form it was, and what a figure it
made, and how acceptable it was to the Israelites. The Targums of
Jonathan and Jerusalem paraphrase it,"and Aaron saw Hur slain before
him;''for reproving them for their idolatry, as the Midrash (e), quoted
by Jarchi, says: and Aaron fearing they would take away his life if he
opposed them:

he built an altar before it; that sacrifice might be offered on it to
it:

and Aaron made proclamation, and said, tomorrow is a feast to the Lord;
that is, he gave orders to have it published throughout the camp, there
would be solemn sacrifices offered up to the Lord, as represented by
this calf, and a feast thereon, which was a public invitation of them to
the solemnity: though some think this was a protracting time, and
putting the people off till the morrow, who would have been for offering
sacrifice immediately, hoping that Moses would come down from the mount
before that time, and prevent their idolatry.

\(e\) So Pirke Eliezer, c. 45.

[Exodus 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">exo 32:6</span></span>

And they rose up early in the morning,.... Being eager of, and intent
upon their idol worship:

and offered burnt offerings; upon the altar Aaron had made, where they
were wholly consumed:

and brought peace offerings: which were to make a feast to the Lord, and
of which they partook:

and the people sat down to eat and to drink; as at a feast:

and rose up to play; to dance and sing, as was wont to be done by the
Egyptians in the worship of their Apis or Ox; and Philo the Jew says
(f), of the Israelites, that having made a golden ox, in imitation of
the Egyptian Typho, he should have said Osiris, for Typho was hated by
the Egyptians, being the enemy of Osiris; they sung and danced: the
Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem interpret it of idolatry; some
understand this of their lewdness and uncleanness, committing
fornication as in the worship of Peor, taking the word in the same sense
as used by Potiphar's wife, [Gen
39:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#014.md).

\(f\) Ut supra, (De Vita Mosis, l. 3. p. 677.) & de Temulentia, p. 254.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Exodus Chapter 33](exo033.md)

</div>
