<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze003)  [Next](eze005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 4

This chapter contains a prophecy of the siege of Jerusalem, and of the
famine that attended it. The siege is described by a portrait of the
city of Jerusalem on a tile, laid before the prophet, [Eze
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001); by each of the actions,
representing a siege of it, as building a fort, casting a mount, and
setting a camp and battering rams against it, and an iron pan for a
wall, between the prophet, the besieger, and the city, [Eze
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#002); by his gesture, lying first on
his left side for the space of three hundred ninety days, and then on
his right side for the space of forty days, pointing at the time when
the city should be taken, [Eze 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#004);
and by setting his face to the siege, and uncovering his arm, and
prophesying, [Eze 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#007); and by bands
being laid on him, so that he could not turn from one side to the other,
till the siege was ended, [Eze 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#008);
the famine is signified by bread the prophet was to make of various
sorts of grain and seeds, baked with men's dung, and eaten by weight,
with water drank by measure, which is applied unto the people; it is
suggested that this would be fulfilled by the children of Israel's
eating defiled bread among the Gentiles, [Eze
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009); but upon the prophet's concern
about eating anything forbidden by the law, which he had never done,
cow's dung is allowed instead of men's, to prepare the bread with, [Eze
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#014); and the chapter is concluded
with a resolution to bring a severe famine on them, to their great
astonishment, and with which they should be consumed for their iniquity,
[Eze 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016).

[Ezekiel 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 4:1</span></span>

Thou also, son of man, take thee a tile,.... Or "brick" (z). The Targum
renders it, a "stone"; but a tile or brick, especially one that is not
dried and burned, but green, is more fit to cut in it the figure of a
city. Some think that this was ordered because cities are built of
brick; or to show the weakness of the city of Jerusalem, how easily it
might be demolished; and Jerom thinks there was some design to lead the
Jews to reflect upon their making bricks in Egypt, and their hard
service there; though perhaps the truer reason may be, because the
Babylonians had been used to write upon tiles. Epigenes (a) says they
had celestial observations of a long course of years, written on tiles;
hence the prophet is bid to describe Jerusalem on one, which was to be
destroyed by the king of Babylon;

and lay it before thee: as persons do, who are about to draw a picture,
make a portrait, or engrave the form of anything they intend:

and portray upon it the city; even Jerusalem; or engrave upon it, by
making incisions on it, and so describing the form and figure of the
city of Jerusalem.

\(z\) "laterem", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Polanus.
Piscator. (a) Apud Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 7. c. 56.

[Ezekiel 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 4:2</span></span>

And lay siege against it,.... In his own person, as in [Eze
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#003); or draw the form of a siege, or
figure of an army besieging a city; or rather of the instruments and
means used in a siege, as follows:

and build a fort against it: Kimchi interprets it a wooden tower, built
over against the city, to subdue it; Jarchi takes it to be an instrument
by which stones were cast into the city; and so the Arabic version
renders it, "machines to cast stones"; the Targum, a fortress; so
Nebuchadnezzar in reality did what was here only done in type, [Kg2
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001); where the same word is used as
here:

and cast a mount about it; a heap of earth cast up, in order to look
into the city, cast in darts, and mount the walls; what the French call
"bastion", as Jarchi observes:

set the camp also against it; place the army in their tents about it:

and set battering rams against it round about; a warlike instrument,
that had an iron head, and horns like a ram, with which in a siege the
walls of a city were battered and beaten down. Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben
Melech, interpret the word of princes and generals of the army, who
watched at the several corners of the city, that none might go in and
out; so the Targum seems to understand it (b). The Arabic version is,
"mounts to cast darts"; See Gill on [Eze
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze021.htm#022).

\(b\) So R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 50. 9.

[Ezekiel 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 4:3</span></span>

Moreover take thou unto thee an iron pan,.... Which Kimchi thinks, for
its metal, represented the hardness of the hearts of the people of
Israel; and, for its colour, the blackness of their sins: though others
are of opinion, this being a pan in which things are fried, it may
signify the miseries of the Jews in captivity; the roasting of Ahab and
Zedekiah in the fire, and particularly the burning of the city: others,
the wrath of God against them, and his resolution to destroy them: but
rather, since the use of it was as follows,

and set it for a wall of iron between thee and the city, it seems to
represent all such things as are made use of by besiegers to screen them
from the besieged; such as are now used are trenches, parapets,
bastions, &c. for the prophet in this type is the besieger, representing
the Chaldean army secure from the annoyance of those within the walls of
the city:

and set thy face against it; with a firm resolution to besiege and take
the city; which denotes both the settled wrath of God against this
people, and the determined purpose of the king of Babylon not to move
from it until he had taken it:

and it shall be besieged, and thou shalt lay siege against it; as an
emblem of the army of the Chaldeans besieging it, which is confirmed by
the next clause:

this shall be a sign to the house of Israel; of the city of Jerusalem
being besieged by the Babylonians; this was a sign representing it, and
giving them assurance of it.

[Ezekiel 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 4:4</span></span>

Lie thou also upon thy left side,.... Some think this was not in
reality, but in vision, as Kimchi observes; and so Maimonides (c); and
in like manner they understand his eating and drinking by measures and
preparing food, as he is directed in a following part of this chapter:
but others are of opinion that all this was really done. The reasons
given on both sides are not despicable. It is urged against the reality
of the fact, that the prophet, without a miracle, could never have lain
so long on one side; and besides, this seems to be contradicted by a
later account, of his sitting in his house before the expiration of
those days; since from the fifth day of the fourth month of the fifth
year, in which he began to prophesy, [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001), (and this order was seven days
after that at least, [Eze 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015)), to
the fifth day of the sixth month of the sixth year, when we find him
sitting, [Eze 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#001); were but four
hundred and thirteen days; and if seven are taken out from thence, there
are but four hundred and six; whereas the whole time of his lying for
Israel and Judah were four hundred and thirty; and it is further
observed, that it does not seem decent that the prophet should be
obliged really to eat such bread as he was ordered to make. On the other
hand it is observed, that the order of portraying the siege of Jerusalem
on a the, and setting an iron pan for a wall, seem to direct to the
doing of real facts, and to that this order is subjoined, without any
mark of distinction; besides, the prophet was to have this portrait in
view, while he was lying on his side, and uncover his arms, which seem
to denote real facts: and was to prophesy, not by words, for he was to
be dumb, [Eze 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#026); but by facts; and
he was to do all this in the sight of his people; and if the order to
make a cake of bread was not to be really performed in the manner
directed, there would have been no occasion of deprecating it. The
learned Witsius (d), who has collected the arguments on both sides, is
inclined to the latter; and observes from others, that some persons have
lain longer on one side than the prophet, without a miracle:
particularly a certain paralytic nobleman, who lay sixteen years in such
a manner: and as for the computation of time, Cocceius is of opinion
that the forty days for Judah are included in the three hundred and
ninety for Israel; and which indeed seem to be the whole number, [Eze
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009); and which at once solves the
difficulty; and besides, the force of the objection may be taken off by
observing, that the fifth year might be intercalated, and consist of
thirteen months, which was common with the Jews to have a "Veadar", or
intercalated month: nor is it dishonourable nor unusual for the Lord to
call his dear servants sometimes to hard and disagreeable service, as
both these cases seem to be, when he has ends of his own glory, and the
good of others, to be answered thereby. And the lying on the left side
for the sins of the house of Israel was, as Jarchi thinks, because that
Samaria, which was the head of the ten tribes, lay to the left of
Jerusalem: see [Eze 16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046); or rather,
because the left hand is not so honourable as the right; it may show
that the Lord had not such an esteem for Israel us for Judah;

and lay the iniquity of the house of Israel upon it; not to atone for
it, but to show what was the cause of their captivity; far herein the
prophet was no type of Christ, but represented the people of Israel; who
had been grievously sinning against God, during the term of time
hereafter mentioned, and now would be punished for it; for by "iniquity"
is meant the punishment of it, which is often the sense of the word
used; see [Gen 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#013);

according to the number of the days that thou shalt lie upon it thou
shalt bear their iniquity: which are particularly declared in [Eze
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#005).

\(c\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 2. c. 46. (d) Miscel. Sacr. tom. 1. l. 1. c.
12. sect. 14, 15, &c.

[Ezekiel 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 4:5</span></span>

For I have laid upon thee the years of their iniquity,.... Or the
iniquity which for so many years they have been guilty of; that is, the
punishment of it:

according to the number of the days; a day for a year;

three hundred and ninety days; which signify three hundred and ninety
years; and so many years there were from the revolt of the ten tribes
from Rehoboam, and the setting up the calves at Dan and Bethel, to the
destruction of Jerusalem; which may be reckoned thus: the apostasy was
in the fourth year of Rehoboam, so that there remained thirteen years of
his reign, for he reigned seventeen years; Abijah his successor reigned
three years; Asa, forty one; Jehoshaphat, twenty five; Joram, eight;
Ahaziah, one; Athaliah, seven; Joash, forty; Amaziah, twenty nine:
Uzziah, fifty two; Jotham, sixteen; Ahaz, sixteen; Hezekiah, twenty
nine; Manasseh, fifty five; Amos, two; Josiah, thirty one; Jehoahaz,
three months; Jehoiakim, eleven years; Jeconiah, three months and ten
days; and Zedekiah, eleven years; in all three hundred and ninety years.
Though Grotius reckons them from the fall of Solomon to the carrying
captive of the ten tribes by Shalmaneser. According to Jerom, both the
three hundred and ninety days, and the forty days, were figurative of
the captivities of Israel and Judah. The captivity of Israel, or the ten
tribes, began under Pekah king of Israel, [Kg1
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#029); when many places in the kingdom
were wasted; from whence, to the fortieth year of Ahasuerus, when the
Jews were entirely set at liberty, were three hundred and ninety years
(e); and the captivity of Judah began in the first year of Jeconiah,
which, to the first of Cyrus, were forty years. The Jewish writers make
these years to be the time of the idolatry of these people in their
chronicle (f) they say, from hence we learn that Israel provoked the
Lord to anger, from the time they entered into the land until they went
out of it, three hundred and ninety years. Which, according to Jarchi
and Kimchi, are, to be reckoned partly in the times of the judges, and
partly in the times of the kings of Israel; in the times of the former,
a hundred and eleven years: from Micah, till the ark was carried captive
in the days of Eli, forty years; and from the time of Jeroboam to
Hoshea, two hundred and forty; which make three hundred and ninety one:
but the last of Hoshea is not of the number, since it was in the ninth
year of his reign the city of Samaria was taken. So Jarchi. Kimchi's
reckoning is different. Abarbinel is of opinion that these years
describe the four hundred and thirty years of Israel's bondage in Egypt;
though, he says, they may be understood of the time of the division of
the kingdom under Rehoboam, from whence, to the destruction of
Jerusalem, were three hundred and ninety years; which sense is best, and
is what is first given;

so shalt thou bear the iniquity of the house of Israel; as many days as
answer to these years; by the house of Israel is meant not merely the
ten tribes, who had been carried captive long before this time, but such
of them also as were mixed with the tribes of Judah and Benjamin.

\(e\) Vid. Lyra in loc. (f) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 26. p. 73.

[Ezekiel 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 4:6</span></span>

And when thou hast accomplished them,.... The three hundred and ninety
days, by lying so long on the left side, bearing the sins of the house
of Israel in this way; or, as Cocceius renders the words, "and thou
shall accomplish them, and thou shalt lie", &c. (g), that is, thou shalt
so accomplish these days, that thou mayest lie through forty days on the
right hand, and then make bare thine arm, and prophesy against
Jerusalem; for he thinks the forty days are part of the three hundred
and ninety, as before observed: and so Piscator's note is, "when thou
shalt accomplish", &c. namely, when there shall remain yet forty days,
as appears by comparing [Eze 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009) with
this verse and [Eze 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#005); so Polanus
interprets the passage: then

lie again on thy right side; that is, for Judah; which tribe, as Jarchi
observes, lay to the south, and so to the right of Jerusalem; see [Eze
16:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#046); or rather the prophet lay on
the right side for Judah, because more honourable, and in greater esteem
with the Lord; nor were their sins so many, or continued in so long as
those of the ten tribes; and therefore they, and the punishment of them,
are borne a less time by the prophet, as follows:

and thou shall bear the iniquity of the house of Judah forty days: which
some think answers to the forty years of Manasseh's evil reign; others
reckon from the thirteenth of Josiah to the end of Zedekiah, and others
from the eighteenth of Josiah to the destruction of Jerusalem, which was
five years after the carrying of Zedekiah captive:

I have appointed thee each day for a year; which is not only the key for
the understanding of the forty days, but also the three hundred and
ninety.

\(g\) "et absolves hos, et decumbes", Cocceius, Starckius; "et
consummabis haec, et jacebis", Montanus.

[Ezekiel 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 4:7</span></span>

Therefore thou shalt set thy face toward the siege at Jerusalem,.... All
the while he was lying either on the left side or the right, his face
was to be directed to the siege of Jerusalem, portrayed upon the tile,
and to all the preparations made for that purpose, to show that all had
reference to that and that it wound certainly be; for, as the prophet
represented the Chaldean army the directing and setting his face to the
siege shows their resolution and inflexibleness, that they were
determined upon taking the city, and nothing should divert them from it:

and thine arm shall be uncovered; which was usual in fighting in those
times and countries; for, wearing long garments, they were obliged to
turn them up on the arm, or lay them aside, that they might more
expeditiously handle their weapons, and engage with the enemy: in this
form the soldiers in Trajan's column are figured fighting; and it is
related that the Africans used to fight with their arms uncovered (h);
thus Scanderbeg in later times used to fight the Turks. The design of
the phrase is to show how ready, diligent, and expeditious, the
Chaldeans would be in carrying on the siege. The Targum renders it,

"thou shalt strengthen thine arm;''

and so do the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions:

and thou shall prophesy against it: meaning not so much by words, if at
all, but by these actions, gestures, and habit; for they all foretold
what would certainly come to pass.

\(h\) Vid. Lydium de Re Militari, l. 4. c. 3. p. 160.

[Ezekiel 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 4:8</span></span>

And, behold, I will lay hands upon thee,.... Representing either the
besieged, signifying that they should be taken and bound as he was; or
rather the besiegers, the Chaldean army, which should be so held by the
power and providence of God, that they should not break up the siege
until they had taken the city, and fulfilled the whole will and pleasure
of God; for these bands were an emblem of the firm and unalterable
decree of God, respecting the siege and taking of Jerusalem; and so the
Targum paraphrases it,

"and, lo, the decree of my word is upon thee, as a band of ropes;''

and to this sense Jarchi interprets it; and which is confirmed by what
follows:

and thou shall not turn thee from one side to another till thou hast
ended the days of thy siege; showing that the Chaldean army should not
depart from Jerusalem until it was taken; for though, upon the report of
the Egyptian army coming against them, they went forth to meet it; yet
they returned to Jerusalem, and never left the siege till the city fell
into their hands, according to the purpose and appointment of God.
Kimchi that the word for siege is in the plural number, and signifies
both the "siege" of Samaria and the siege of Jerusalem; but the former
was over many years before this time: by this it appears that the siege
of Jerusalem should last three hundred and ninety days; indeed, from the
beginning to the end of it, were seventeen months, [Kg2
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001); but the siege being raised by
the army of the king of Egypt for some time, [Jer
37:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#005), may reduce it to thirteen
months, or thereabout; for three hundred and ninety days are not only
intended to signify the years of Israel's sin and wickedness, but also
to show how long the city would be besieged; and so long the prophet in
this symbolical way was besieging it.

[Ezekiel 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 4:9</span></span>

Take thou also unto thee wheat, and barley, and beans, and lentiles, and
millet, and fitches,.... The first of these was commonly used to make
bread of; in case of want and poverty, barley was used; but, for the
rest, they were for cattle, and never used for the food of men but in a
time of great scarcity; wherefore this was designed to denote the famine
that should attend the siege of Jerusalem; see [Kg2
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#003);

and put them in one vessel; that is, the flour of them, when ground, in
order to be mixed and kneaded together, and make one dough thereof;
which mixed bread was a sign of a sore famine: the Septuagint call it an
earthen vessel; a kneading trough seems to be designed:

and make thee bread thereof, according to the number of the days that
thou shalt lie upon thy side; the left side, on which he was to lie
three hundred and ninety days: and so as much bread was to be made as
would suffice for that time; or so many loaves were to be made as there
were days, a loaf for a day:

three hundred and ninety days shalt thou eat thereof; no mention is made
of the forty days, perhaps they are understood, a part being put for the
whole; or they were included in the three hundred and ninety days. The
Septuagint and Arabic versions read only a hundred and ninety days.

[Ezekiel 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 4:10</span></span>

And thy meat which thou shall eat shall be by weight, twenty shekels a
day,.... To eat bread by weight was a sign of a grievous famine; see
[Lev 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026); a shekel, according to
Josephus (i), weighed four Attic drachms, or half an ounce, wherefore
twenty shekels weighed ten ounces; so that the bread the prophet had to
eat was but ten ounces a day:

from time to time shall thou eat it; at the certain time of eating, or
but once a day; from a set time in one day to the same in another; as
from morning to morning, or from noon to noon, or from evening to
evening; see [Jer 37:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#021).

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 8. sect. 2.

[Ezekiel 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 4:11</span></span>

Thou shall drink also water by measure,.... Not wine, but water; and
this not as much as he would, but a certain measure; which shows great
want of it, and expresses a very distressed condition see [Lam
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#004);

the sixth part of an hin; a hin held twelve logs, or seventy two egg
shells, or about three quarts of our measure; and the sixth part of one
were two logs, or twelve egg shells, and about a pint of our measure; so
that it was but a pint of water a day that the prophet was allowed, as a
token of the great scarcity of it in the siege of Jerusalem:

from time to time shalt thou drink: as before.

[Ezekiel 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 4:12</span></span>

And thou shalt eat it as barley cakes,.... That is, the bread made of
wheat, barley, beans, lentiles, millet, and fitches, was to be made in
the form of barley cakes, and to be baked as they; not in an oven, but
under ashes; and these ashes not of wood, or straw, or turf, but as
follows:

and thou shalt bake it with dung that cometh out of men, in their sight:
the prophet was to take human dung, and dry it, and then cover the cakes
or loaves of his mixed bread with it, and burn it over them, and with it
bake it; which must be a very disagreeable task to him, and make the
food very nauseous, both to himself and to the Jews, in whose sight it
was done; and this shows scarcity of fuel, and the severity of the
famine; that they had not fuel to bake with, or could not stay till it
was baked in an oven, and therefore took this method; as well as points
at what they were to eat when carried captive, as follows:

[Ezekiel 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 4:13</span></span>

And the Lord said, even thus shall the children of Israel,.... Not the
ten tribes only, or those who were among the other two, but all the Jews
in captivity:

eat the defiled bread among the Gentiles, whither I will drive them; so
called, not because mixed, but baked in the above manner; which was a
symbol of the defilements which they should contract upon various
accounts, by dwelling among the Gentiles; so that this foretells their
captivity; their pollution among the nations of the world; and that they
should not be the holy people to the Lord they had been, and had boasted
of. The Jews (k) cite this passage to prove that he that eats bread
without drying his hands is as if he ate defiled bread.

\(k\) T. Bab. Sota, fol, 4. 2.

[Ezekiel 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 4:14</span></span>

Then said I, ah, Lord God!.... The interjection "ah" is expressive of
sighing and groaning, as Jarchi; or of deprecation, as the Targum, which
paraphrases it,

""and I said", receive my prayer, O Lord God:''

behold, my soul hath not been polluted; not meaning that his soul had
not been polluted with sin, or with an evil thought, as Kimchi
interprets it; but by his soul he means the inward part of his body, his
stomach and belly; which had not been defiled by taking in meats which
were unclean by the law, as follows:

for from my youth up, even till now, have I not eaten of that which
dieth of itself, or is torn in pieces; these were forbidden to be eaten
by the law; and such that did were defiled, and obliged to bathing in
water, [Lev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015); and from those the
priests more especially were careful to abstain, as Kimchi observes; and
such an one was the prophet; see [Act
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#014);

neither came there abominable flesh into my mouth; corrupt or,
putrefied, or whatsoever was unclean by law, as swine's flesh, or any
other. The argument is, that since he had never eaten of anything
forbidden by the law of God, he could by no means think of eating that
which was abhorrent to nature; as bread baked with men's dung was.

[Ezekiel 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 4:15</span></span>

Then he said to me,.... The Lord hearkened to the prophet's prayer and
argument, and makes some abatement and alteration in the charge he gave
him:

lo, I have given thee cow's dung for man's dung: that is, allowed him to
make use of the one instead of the other, in baking his mingled bread:

thou shalt prepare thy bread therewith; having gathered cow's dung, and
dried it, he was to burn it, and bake his bread with it, which is meant
by preparing it. In some parts of our nation, where fuel is scarce,
cow's dung is made use of; it is gathered and plastered on the walls of
houses, and, being dried in clots, is taken and burnt.

[Ezekiel 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 4:16</span></span>

Moreover he said unto me, son of man,.... What follows opens the design,
and shows what was intended by the symbol of the miscellany bread, baked
with cow dung, the prophet was to eat by measure, as, well as drink
water by measure: namely, the sore famine that should be in Jerusalem at
the time of the siege:

behold, I will break the staff of bread in Jerusalem: that is, take away
bread, which is the staff of life, the support of it, and which
strengthens man's heart; and also the nourishing virtue and efficacy
from what they had. The sense is, that the Lord would both deprive them
of a sufficiency of bread, the nourishment of man; and not suffer the
little they had to be nourishing to them; what they ate would not
satisfy them, nor do them much good; see [Lev
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#026);

and they shall eat bread by weight, and with care; that they might not
eat too much at a time, but have something for tomorrow; and to cause
their little stock to last the longer, not knowing how long the siege
would be:

and they shall drink water by measure, and with astonishment; that such
a judgment should fall upon them, who thought themselves the people of
God, and the favourites of heaven.

[Ezekiel 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 4:17</span></span>

That they may want bread and water,.... Or, "because they shall want"
(l) &c. therefore they shall eat the one, and drink the other, by
weight; or they shall do this till there shall be none to eat and drink:

and be astonished one with another; when they shall find they cannot
relieve one another; and not knowing what method to take for the support
of nature:

and consume away for their iniquity; their flesh upon them black through
famine, putrid and noisome; and they wasting, pining, and consuming;
reduced to skin and bones; and disagreeable to look upon; and all
because of their sins and iniquities.

\(l\) "eo quod", Munster, Vatablus; "propterea", Tigurine version.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 5](eze005)

</div>
