<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze002)  [Next](eze004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 3

This chapter contains a further account of the prophet's call and
mission; of his preparation of him for is work; of, the persons to whom
he was sent; of what happened to him upon this; of the nature of his
office, and the work of it; and of what followed upon the renewal of his
call. His further preparation for prophesying is in [Eze
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001); where he is bid to eat the roll
showed him, which he did, and found it in his mouth as honey for
sweetness; and then he receives fresh orders to go to the people of
Israel, and prophesy to them, [Eze
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#004); and, that he might not be
discouraged, an account is given beforehand of the people to whom he was
sent; of their language, behaviour, and disposition; by which he could
not expect success, [Eze 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#005); and, for
his further encouragement, strength, boldness, resolution, firmness, and
presence of mind, are promised him, [Eze
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#008); also a revelation of mere things
to him; all which he should hear, receive, and speak, whether the people
would attend to them or not; which ought to be no discouragement to him,
since it was not regarded by the Lord, [Eze
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#010); then follows an account of his
being lifted up by the Spirit from the earth, when he heard a voice,
which is described by the manner and matter of it; and a noise, both of
the living creature's wings, and of the wheels he had seen in a former
vision, [Eze 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#012); and next of his
being carried away by the same Spirit; and of the condition he was in,
in his own spirit, as he went; and of the strength he received from the
Lord; and of the place to which he, was carried; and his state and
circumstances, and time of continuance there, [Eze
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#014); where, after a time mentioned,
he has a fresh call to his office, under the character of a watchman,
whose business was to hear Christ's words, and warn the house of Israel
from him; and who are distinguished into wicked and righteous; and whom
the prophet was to warn at his own peril, [Eze
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#016); and the chapter is concluded
with a narration of various events which befell the prophet; he is bid
by the Lord to go into the plain, which he did, and there saw the glory
of the Lord, as he had before seen it at the river Chebar; which so
affected him, that he fell upon his face, [Eze
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#022); the spirit entered into him, let
him on his feet, and spake with him; ordered him what he should do
himself, that he should shut himself up in his house, [Eze
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#024); informed him what the people
would do to him; bind him with bands, that he should not come forth,
[Eze 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#025); and what Christ would do to
him; strike him dumb in judgment to the people, that he might not be a
reprover of them, [Eze 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#026); but he is
told that, when the Lord spoke to him; his mouth should be opened, and
he should declare what was said to him, [Eze
3:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#027).

[Ezekiel 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 3:1</span></span>

Moreover he said unto me,.... The same glorious Person who had been
speaking all along in the preceding chapter; and who was seen by the
prophet on a sapphire throne, and described in [Eze
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026); the first fifteen verses of this
chapter are by Junius and Tremellius made a part of the second:

son of man, eat that thou findest; not anything, but what he found in
the hand sent unto him; wherefore the Targum is,

"son of man, receive what is given thee;''

which was the roll, as follows:

eat this roll; not literally, but figuratively, as John is bid to eat
the little book, [Rev 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#009); that is,
read it, meditate upon the things contained therein; and digest them,
that he might be able to impart them, and make them known to others: it
is explained in [Eze 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#010); by hearing
and receiving the words of the prophecy; and so the Targum,

"receive what is written in this roll;''

this is to eat it; as great readers of books are called "helluones
librorum", eaters of books, gluttons at them; read them greedily, deeply
meditate upon what is in them, and thoroughly digest them; so it becomes
all good men to eat the word, to mix it with faith, to receive it in the
love of it, and constantly meditate on it, [Psa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001); and especially ministers of the
Gospel, [Th1 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015);

and go, speak unto the house of Israel; or, as the Targum,

"go, and prophesy to the house of Israel;''

for by eating the roll, in the sense given, he was fit for it; and when
ministers of the word have read, and thought of, and digested the truths
of the Gospel themselves, then they are prepared to go and enter upon
their work, and feed others with knowledge and understanding.

[Ezekiel 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 3:2</span></span>

So I opened my mouth,.... To take in the roll, and eat it; he was not
disobedient to the heavenly vision; he did all that he could towards
eating it, but was not sufficient of himself; and therefore it follows:

and he caused me to eat that roll; he, the Lord, put it into his mouth,
caused him to eat it, and tilled him with it, according to his promise,
[Psa 81:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010). The efficacy and
sufficiency to think of good things, to meditate upon them, receive and
digest them, are of God; it is he that makes men prophets, and able
ministers. The Targum is,

"and I inclined my soul, and he taught me (or made me wise "with") what
was written in this roll.''

[Ezekiel 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 3:3</span></span>

And he said unto me, son of man, cause thy belly to eat,.... Or "devour"
(f), and consume; that is, concoct and digest; do not cast it out of thy
mouth, as soon as thou hast tasted of it; but let it go down into the
stomach, and there digest it; and from thence into the belly, that so,
upon the whole, virtue may be received, and nourishment come by it:

and fill thy bowels with this roll that I give thee; eat to satiety; so
the Targum,

"son of man, thou shalt satiate thy soul, and fill thy belly, if thou
receivest what is written in this roll, which I give thee:''

this was sufficient to qualify the prophet for prophesying, and furnish
him with materials enough; and these fit and proper for the discharge of
his office; and so such who study the word of God with application
become scribes well instructed in the kingdom of heaven; and being
filled themselves, are able to bring forth things to the comfort and
satisfaction of others:

then did I eat it, and it was in my mouth, as honey for sweetness; that
is, as the roll was spread before him, he looked into it, and read it,
and meditated upon it, and laid it up in his memory, in order to deliver
it out when commanded; and though it contained things very distressing,
and which would occasion lamentation, and mourning, and woe; yet,
considering that these were the will of God, and in righteous judgment
to men, he could not but acquiesce in and approve of them. All the words
that come out of the mouth of God are as sweet as, honey, yea, sweeter
than that, [Psa 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010); and so the
Targum interprets it of the words of the Lord,

"and I took it, and his words were in my mouth as sweet honey;''

and especially the Gospel, and the truths of it, are like honey; they
are gathered by laborious ministers, as honey by the industrious bee,
out of the various flowers of the Scriptures, with which being laden,
they bring into the hive of the church, and dispose of for general
usefulness; these are like honey for healthfulness, for nourishment, and
for sweetness to the taste; that which makes the Gospel so are the
exceeding great and precious promises in it: its doctrines of grace, and
those of peace and reconciliation, of pardon, righteousness, eternal
life and salvation, by Jesus Christ; and, above all, Christ himself, who
is the sum and substance of it; and all its truths being quickening;
comforting, and refreshing: but thou the Gospel is, only sweet when it
is eaten; not merely heard, assented to, and superficially tasted of,
but eaten and fed upon by faith; and so, it is sweet, not to
unregenerate persons, whose taste is not changed; nor to nominal and
notional professors, who have only a superficial taste of it; but to
true believers in Christ, spiritual men, who judge and discern all
things; see [Rev 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#009).

\(f\) "devoret, consumat", Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 3:4</span></span>

And he said unto me, son of man, go,.... After he had eaten the roll;
for then was he qualified to prophesy:

get thee unto the house of Israel; to whom he was to prophesy:

and speak with my words unto them: not with his own words; nor with the
words of men, the enticing words of man's wisdom; but with the words of
Christ; with the taught words of the Holy Ghost; with what is written in
the roll; the words of this prophecy are meant. So the Targum,

"and thou shalt prophesy the words of my prophecy unto them;''

in like manner John after he had eaten the little book, is told that he
must prophesy before many people, nations, tongues, and kings, [Rev
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#009); though Ezekiel was only sent to
one nation, as follows:

[Ezekiel 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 3:5</span></span>

For thou art not sent to a people of a strange speech,.... "Deep of lip"
(g), or "speech"; difficult to be got at and understood:

and of a hard language: or "heavy of tongue" (h) of a barbarous and
unknown language, whom he could not understand, nor they him; and so
would have been barbarians to one another; and consequently it could not
be thought his prophesying among them, could have been of any use. This
may be considered, either by way of encouragement to the prophet to go
on his errand to such a people; since as he could understand them, and
they him he might hope to meet with success; or, however he could
deliver his message so as to be understood: or as an aggravation of the
impiety perverseness and stupidity of the Israelites; that though the
prophet spoke to them in their own language, yet they would not hear nor
receive his words:

but to the house of Israel; who were a people of the same speech and
language with the prophet; all spoke and understood the language of
Canaan; nor were the things he delivered such as they were altogether
strangers to being the same, for substance, which Moses, and the other
prophets, had ever taught.

\(g\) "profundi labii", Vatablus; "profundorum labio", Polanus,
Cocceius; "profundi sermonis", Starkius. (h) "graves linguae", Montanus;
"gravium lingua", Polanus.

[Ezekiel 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 3:6</span></span>

Not to many people of a strange speech and of an hard language,.... The
prophet was sent, not to different nations, of different languages; but
to one nation of the same language; indeed several of his prophecies
concern other nations, as the Ammonites, Moabites, Edomites, Tyrians,
Philistines, Egyptians, and Assyrians; but then these had a relation to
the, people of Israel, and were chiefly on their account; and therefore
he was not sent to those nations to deliver his prophecies unto them,
but to the people of Israel only; and so had no difficulty on his part
concerning their language, which he would have had, had he been sent to
the barbarous nations;

whose words, thou canst not understand: the prophet being, only used to
the language of the Jews and not having the gift of speaking with and
understanding divers tongues; as the apostles of Christ had, when they
were sent to many people of different languages, and which is here
tacitly intimates:

surely, had I sent thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee;
which is an aggravation of the obstinacy and disobedience of the people
of Israel; that had the barbarous nations been favoured with the same
means of instruction they were they would have been obedient; see [Mat
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021); for though they could not
understand the prophet's language, nor he theirs; yet, as Kimchi
observes, they would have sought for an interpreter to have explained
the prophecy to them. The thing is very strongly affirmed, "surely",
verily, "of a truth"; as the same Jewish writer interprets ; and both he
and Jarchi take it to be the form of an oath. Some render the words, "if
I had not sent thee to them, they would have hearkened unto thee" (i);
and the sense is, either that if the Lord had not sent him to the
Israelites, but to the peopled a strange speech, they, the people, would
have hearkened to him: or, if the Lord had not sent the prophet, but he
had gone of himself, as the false prophets in their own name, the
Israelites would have hearkened to him; such was their perverseness and
rebellion: others render the words, "if not", or had it not been for
their strange speech and hard language, "I would have sent thee to them"
(k), the barbarous nation, and "they would have hearkened unto thee";
but the first sense seems best; which is confirmed by the Targum,
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and the Oriental versions.

\(i\) "si non ad eos misissem te", Vatablus; "si non misero te",
Montanus; "si non mitterem", Pagninus. (k) "Si non misissem te ad eos",
Calvin.

[Ezekiel 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 3:7</span></span>

But the house of Israel would not hearken unto thee,.... "They are not
willing" (l); they have no desire, no inclination, to hear and hearken;
but the reverse; they were capable of hearing and understanding his
speech and language, and though he was sent unto them by the Lord: and
indeed the reason why they did not hearken to him was not because they
rejected him and his words, but because they rejected the Lord and his
words; they were the words of the Lord, and his reproofs; and therefore
they would not hearken to them as follows:

for they will not hearken unto me; and which is an argument why the
prophet should bear with patience their disregard to him and his words,
and their neglect and contempt of them; for, seeing they would not hear
the Lord, how could he exact they should hear him? and therefore he
should not be uneasy at it; see [Joh
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#020);

for all the house of Israel are impudent and hardhearted; or, "strong of
front, and hard of heart" (m); they had a whore's forehead, an impudent
face, that could not blush and be ashamed; and hearts of stone, like a
rock, and harder than the nether millstone, on which no impressions,
could be made by all the admonitions and reproofs given them; see [Eze
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#004); and this was the case of all of
them in general, excepting some very few; which shows the sad degeneracy
of this people.

\(l\) "non cupient", Montanus; "non volunt", Cocceius; "non illi
volentes", Starckius. (m) "obfirmati fronte et duri corde", Polanus,
Starckius; "obfirmati frontis et duri cordis", Piscator.

[Ezekiel 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 3:8</span></span>

Behold, I have made the, face strong against their faces,.... Not that
the prophet should have the same sort of impudence and confidence they
had; but that God would "give" (n) him such a face, as it is in the
Hebrew text, such spirit and courage, that he should neither be ashamed
of the words of the Lord, nor afraid to speak them to this people; so
that he should be a match for them; they should not be able to outface
him, or look him out of countenance; he should behave with an undaunted
spirit, and with great intrepidity, amidst all opposition made to him:
the Lord fits his ministers for the people he sends them to, and gives
them courage and strength proportionate to the opposition they meet
with; as their day is, their strength is; and all that invincible
courage, boldness, and strength, with which they are endowed, it is all
from the Lord, and a gift of his:

and thy forehead strong against their foreheads; which is the same thing
in different words.

\(n\) "dedi faciem tuam", V. L. Vatablus, Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 3:9</span></span>

As an adamant harder than flint have I made thy forehead,.... Or, "than
a rock" (o); the "adamant" has its name in Greek, because it cannot be
conquered or subdued, neither by the hammer, nor by fire; the one cannot
break, nor this other consume it; land it is called "shamir" in Hebrew,
from its preserving itself from both; it will cut iron in pieces, which
is harder than stone, and therefore must be harder than that. Bochart
takes it to be the same with "smiris", a hard stone, which jewellers use
to polish their gems with; see [Jer
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001). The design of the simile is to
set forth the courage and fortitude of mind the prophet was endowed
with, in order to face an impudent and hardhearted people;

fear them not, neither be dismayed at their looks, though they be a
rebellious house; See Gill on [Eze
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#006).

\(o\) "rupe", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus, Piscator; "prae rupe",
Cocceius; "ex rupe", Starckius; "prae petra", Montanus.

[Ezekiel 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 3:10</span></span>

Moreover he said unto me, son of man,.... The same glorious Person as
before continued speaking to him, and added, as follows:

all my words that I shall speak unto thee; not only what he had spoken
to him, but what he should hereafter; for he did not tell all at once
what he should say, but gradually, revealing his mind to him by little
and little; but then he was to receive all that he should say, and
reject nothing, nor shun to declare the whole counsel of God:

receive in thine heart, and hear with thine ears; what the Lord says
should not only be diligently attended to, and heard with eagerness, but
should be received, in the love of it, into the heart, and laid, up in
the mind and memory, in order to be delivered out to others at a proper
time.

[Ezekiel 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 3:11</span></span>

And go, get thee to them of the captivity,.... Not in the times of
Hoshea king of Israel, by Shalmaneser king of Assyria, for these were
placed in the cities of the Medes, [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006); but in the times of Jeconiah
king of Judah, [Eze 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002);

unto the children of thy people; the Jews, which were in the land of
Chaldea:

and speak unto them, and tell them: the words the Lord spoke to him:

thus saith the Lord God; whether they will hear, or whether they will
forbear: See Gill on [Eze 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005).

[Ezekiel 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 3:12</span></span>

Then the spirit took me up,.... Not the wind, nor an angel, but the
Spirit of God; who took up the prophet from the ground, from the place
where he was, among the captives by the river Chebar, and had seen the
glorious vision described in the first chapter; and had had his call and
mission, as expressed in the second chapter, and hitherto in this; and
was carried by him to another company of captives, who were at another
place by the same river, as appears by comparing [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001), with [Eze
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015); for this was not done in a
visionary way, as Kimchi thinks, but in reality; not in spirit, but in
body; just as the Spirit caught away Philip from the eunuch, [Act
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#039);

and I heard behind me a voice of a great rushing; of the living
creatures and wheels, as is afterwards explained:

saying, blessed be the glory of the Lord out of his place; either out of
heaven, the place where his glory is manifested; so the Targum, out of
the place of his Shechinah or majesty; or out of the temple, from
between the cherubim over the mercy seat, from whence he was about to
remove, [Eze 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004). These words may be
considered either as a doxology of the church, and people of God,
ascribing glory, blessing, and praise unto him; not only on account of
the perfections of his nature, but because of his works of nature,
providence, and grace, and even for his righteous judgments on men.
Maimonides (p), by his place, understands the essence of God. Or as a
lamentation for the departure of the blessed and glorious majesty of God
from the temple, which seemed to be threatened; for the words may be
rendered, "the blessed glory of the Lord out of his place" (q); that is,
it is just ready to go out of his place.

\(p\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 1. c. 8. p. 12. (q) "benedictam gloriam
Jehovae e loco ipsius, migrantem", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus.

[Ezekiel 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 3:13</span></span>

I heard also the noise of the wings of the living creatures,.... Which
they clapped, when they uttered the preceding words; See Gill on [Eze
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024);

that touched one another; or "kissed, a woman her sister" (r); denoting
their affection and agreement in the doxology or ascription of glory to
God; see [Eze 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#009);

and the noise of the wheels over against them: the living creatures; for
the wheels were by the living creatures, and went over against them, as
they went, [Eze 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015); ministers and
churches join together in this doxology:

and a noise of a great rushing; which is repeated for the confirmation
of the thing, and to express the greatness of the noise made by the
living creatures and wheels, like that of thunder or an earthquake; it
is said to be like the noise of great waters, [Eze
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#024).

\(r\) "attingentium more osculantium, vira ad sororem suam", Vatablus;
"osculantium", Polanus, Starckius. So Ben Melech.

[Ezekiel 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 3:14</span></span>

So the spirit lifted me up, and took me away,.... Lifted him up from the
earth, and carried him through the air:

and I went in bitterness; full of trouble and sorrow, that the Lord was
departing from the temple; that his people had been guilty, of such
crimes they had, and were such an impudent, and hardhearted people they
were; and that such judgments were coming upon them he had seers written
in the roll, full of lamentations, mourning, and woe:

in the heat of my spirit; the Targum and Vulgate Latin render it, "in
the indignation of my spirit"; his spirit was hot and angry, he was
froward and unwilling to go on the errand, to prophesy sad and dismal
things to his people:

but the hand of the Lord was strong upon me; the Spirit of the Lord
powerfully wrought upon him, and obliged him to go; and the hand of the
Lord strengthened him, and removed his frowardness and perverseness of
spirit. The Targum is,

"and prophecy from before the Lord was strong upon me;''

so Kimchi interprets it of the hand of prophecy; the Spirit of the Lord,
as a spirit of prophecy, came upon him, with great impulse upon his
spirit, and he could not refuse going to his people, to declare it to
them.

[Ezekiel 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 3:15</span></span>

Then I came to them of the captivity at Telabib,.... For it seems the
captive Jews were disposed of at different places, and there were some
at this place; for this was the name of a place, as Jarchi and Kimchi
observe; as were Telmelah, and Telharsa, [Ezr
2:59](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#059); it signifies "a heap of new
fruit", and so the Vulgate Latin version renders it: not that there were
such at this time here; and the captives were beating out the ripe ears
of corn, as "abib" signifies; whence the month Abib has its name, and
which was the first month with the Jews; whereas it was in the fourth
month when Ezekiel was here, and there could no ears of new corn, [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001); according to Junius, this Telabib
was a tract in Mesopotamia, reaching from Mount Masius to the river
Euphrates, and lay between two rivers, Chebar and Saocoras; and he
thinks the captive Jews were placed here, partly that they might be
secured safe from getting away, or returning from their captivity; and
partly that they might secure and defend the place from enemies, it
being through inundations uninhabited, and so exposed unto them:

that dwelt by the river of Chebar; See Gill on [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001);

and I sat where they sat; there is a double reading here; the "Cetib" or
writing is which Junius takes to be the name of a river the prophet
calls Haesher, the same with Saocoras, connecting it with the preceding
clause, "that dwelt by the river of Chebar and Haesher"; the "Keri" or
marginal reading is "and I sat" or "dwelt"; but both signify the same
thing, Since is from which in Chaldee signifies to dwell (s); and the
"Keri" is confirmed by the Targum, which we follow. The sense is, that
he placed himself among the captives,

and remained there astonished among them seven days: at the change of
place and company; at the sad condition his people were in; and, above
all, at the dreadful things he had to deliver to them. The Targum
renders it, "silent"; through grief and trouble. So many days Job's
friends kept silence, when they came to visit him, and saw his distress,
[Job 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#013). Or he might be waiting all
this time for orders and instructions to prophesy; or to prepare the
people to attend with more reverence and earnestness, to hear what he
had to say when he should break silence. The Septuagint render it the
reverse, "conversing in the midst of them".

\(s\) Vid. Hillerum de Arcano Kethib & Keri, l. 2. p. 329.

[Ezekiel 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 3:16</span></span>

And it came to pass at the end of seven days,.... Some think it was on
the sabbath day he had the following declaration made to him, and
instructions given him; but this is not certain; nor does it follow, or
to be concluded, from such a way of speaking:

that the word of the Lord came unto me, saying; the Targum is,

"the word of prophecy from before the Lord.''

[Ezekiel 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 3:17</span></span>

Son of man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel,....
Not in a civil sense, a watchman of a town or city, or of the whole
country, but in an ecclesiastical sense. So the Targum renders it by "a
teacher"; whose business it was to instruct the people in divine things,
to warn them of their evil ways, and of the danger they exposed them to;
such were the prophets of old, and such are the ministers of the New
Testament: the office is the same with that of bishops or overseers; and
lies in watching over the souls of men, as shepherds over their flocks,
that they go into right pastures, and not astray, and so preserves them
from beasts of prey; and as watchmen of cities, to give the time of
night, and, notice of approaching danger; to the discharge of which
office are necessary quick sight, diligence in looking out, sobriety and
vigilance, courage, constancy, and faithfulness: and they are "sons of
men" that are put into this office, and not angels; sons of fallen Adam,
sinful men; men subject to infirmity, weak, frail, mortal men, and
oftentimes of a mean and low extraction, and greatly unworthy of so high
an honour; but Christ counts them faithful, and puts them into this
office; they are not made and constituted watchmen or ministers by
themselves or by others, but by him; and they are given by him as such
to the church of God: "son of man, I have given thee a watchman" (t),
&c. they become watchmen through gifts bestowed upon them, qualifying
them for this office; and they themselves are gifts to the churches over
whom they are placed, signified by "the house of Israel"; for a church
is a house of Christ's building, and where he dwells, and a family named
of him, which he takes care of, and consists of Israelites indeed;

therefore hear the word at my mouth; for, as the prophets of old, so the
ministers of the Gospel are first to hear what Christ says; and then
deliver out his doctrine, called the doctrine of Christ, and the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus. So the Targum,

"and thou shalt receive the word from my Word;''

the word of prophecy, or the word of the Gospel, from Christ the
essential Word;

and give them warning from me; in his name and stead, and as from his
mouth, to take care of sinning against him, dishonouring his name, and
wounding their own souls; that they live soberly, righteously, and
godly, and adorn the doctrine of God their Saviour; that they avoid all
appearances of evil, and shun the company of wicked men; the house of
Israel, or church of God, are to be warned to be careful who they take
into their communion, and to exclude such that are bad in principle and
practice; to beware of innovations in worship, and of false teachers and
false doctrines; and that they do not forsake the word, worship, and
ordinances of God's house, but fill up their places, and perform all
duties incumbent on them. The Targum is,

"and thou shalt warn them from sinning before me.''

\(t\) "speculatorem dedi", V. L. Polanus, Cocceius, Starckius. So Junius
& Tremellius, Piscator.

[Ezekiel 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 3:18</span></span>

When I say unto the wicked, thou shalt surely die,.... Not only a
corporeal but an eternal death for this is what the law threatens with,
and there the Lord says this; and this is the wages, end, and issue of
sin, if grace prevent not:

and thou givest him not warning; of the evil nature of sin, and of the
danger it exposes to:

nor speakest to warn the wicked from his wicked way; to abstain from it,
and live another course of life:

to save his life; for such warning, caution, exhortation, and doctrine,
may be a means of converting a sinner from the evil of his way, and of
saving a soul from death, [Ti1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016);

the same wicked man shall die in his iniquity; with the pollution and
guilt of sin upon him, and so be punished for it; see [Joh
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#024);

but his blood will I require at thine hands; thou shalt be answerable
for him; his death shall be laid to thy charge, and thou shalt be
chastised for thy negligence; see [Act
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#026).

[Ezekiel 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 3:19</span></span>

Yet if thou warn the wicked,.... Of his sin and danger; lay before him
his evil, and show him the sad consequences of going on in a course of
sin, and warn him to flee from wrath to come:

and he turn not from his wickedness, and from his wicked way; does not
repent of it, nor abstain from it:

he shall die in his iniquity; and for it, and that very righteously:

but thou hast delivered thy soul; thou hast done the duty of thine
office; thou art clear from the charge of negligence and sloth, and from
being answerable for the death of the sinner; and shalt save thyself,
though not the wicked man; see [Ti1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016).

[Ezekiel 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 3:20</span></span>

Again, when a righteous man doth turn from his righteousness,.... This
is to be understood not of one that is truly righteous, or is justified
by the righteousness of Christ; for such can never turn from that
righteousness, or be in an unjustified state; seeing that is the
righteousness of God, and an everlasting one; but of one that is
denominated righteous, from "his" own righteousness, from a
righteousness "which he hath done", as is afterwards expressed; one that
is outwardly righteous before men, that is outwardly reformed, that has
a righteousness of his own, consisting of a little negative holiness,
and a few moral performances; from such righteousness a man may
apostatize, and go into a vicious course of life:

and commit iniquity; live in sin, make a trade of it; lead a life, the
whole series and course of which is nothing else but sin; in this sense,
one that is born of God, and has the righteousness of Christ revealed
from faith to faith unto him, and lives by faith upon it, cannot commit
sin, [Jo1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#009);

and I lay a stumbling block before him; the Targum renders it, "the
stumbling block of sins"; which designs either an occasion of sinning,
which God permits, leaving him to his own lusts, and suffering him to
fall thereby; and by this means he is discovered to be what he is, not a
truly righteous man, but only one in appearance; that looked like a
righteous person, but secretly a sinner, and now the Lord by such means
exposes him openly; so Jarchi and other Jewish Rabbins; but Kimchi's
father interprets the stumbling block of prosperity in this world (u):
or rather the punishment of sin is meant, as Kimchi himself observes;
and the Septuagint renders it "torment"; since this follows up on his
turning from righteousness, and committing sin; and seems to be
explained by the next clause:

he shall die; the second death:

because thou hast not given him warning: of the dreadful evil of
apostasy, and the sad estate of apostates, and the danger they are in,
their last estate being worse than the first:

he shall die in his sin; of apostasy, and for it, being never to be
recovered and brought to repentance:

and his righteousness which he hath done shall not be remembered;
according to the "Keri" or marginal reading it is, "his
righteousnesses"; all his works of righteousness which he hath done; and
which reading is followed by the Targum, Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and
the eastern versions; these shall not be remembered, neither in this
world nor in that to come; no account shall be taken of them, nor shall
they be reckoned as a righteousness unto him:

but his blood will I require at thine hand; See Gill on [Eze
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#018).

\(u\) Vid. T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 86. 2.

[Ezekiel 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 3:21</span></span>

Nevertheless, if thou warn the righteous man,.... Every righteous man,
that is so in a judgment of charity, whether truly righteous or not,
which the event shows; who should be warned not to trust in their own
righteousness, but to depend on the righteousness of Christ; that they
be careful to maintain good works, to avoid sin, and live holy lives and
conversations, as follows:

that the righteous sin not; not that there is any just man that does
good, and sins not; the best of men are often sinning in thought, word,
or deed; but he is to be warned that he does not continue in sin, and
lead a sinful coups of life; which is contrary to his character, and to
his faith in Christ for righteousness, which is attended with good
works:

and he doth not sin; the warning and exhortation given him having so
good an effect, through the power of divine grace, as to be a means of
preserving him from a vain conversation:

he shall surely live; spiritually and comfortably now, and eternally
hereafter:

because he is warned; that being a means, and with the divine blessing
taking effect:

also thou hast delivered thy soul; See Gill on [Eze
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#019).

[Ezekiel 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 3:22</span></span>

And the hand of the Lord was there upon me,.... At Telabib, [Eze
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#015). The Targum interprets "the hand
of the Lord" of the spirit of prophecy, which remained upon him there;
but it seems to design a fresh impulse of the Spirit, a powerful emotion
of the split upon his spirit, stirring up to attention to what might be
said unto him:

and he said unto me; the same glorious Person, the Lord Christ,
described in [Eze 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026);

arise, go forth into the plain; or "the valley" (w); the Arabic version
renders it, "the desert"; a solitary place, free from noise and hurry,
and from the company and conversation of men; and so more fit for
retirement and contemplation, and for attention to divine orders. What
plain this was is not certain; Kimchi thinks it was the plain in which
Babel was built, and where the Lord showed the prophet what he had in
his providence done in this place formerly, in confounding the languages
of men, and causing their devices to cease;

and I will there talk with thee; when alone, sedate, and composed; so
God sometimes brings his people into a low and humble state and
condition, into the valley of humility, and there grants them communion
with himself; see [Hos 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#014); perhaps
the allusion to a custom among the Jews of revealing secrets to others
in fields and deserts, and such like solitary places; see [Gen
31:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#004) (x).

\(w\) "in istam convallem", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus, "in vallem",
Vatablus, Coeceius; "in vallem, quasi fissum locum", Starckius. (x) Vid.
Menasseh Ben Israel, Spes Israelis, p. 110.

[Ezekiel 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 3:23</span></span>

Then I arose and went forth into the plain,.... He was obedient to the
heavenly vision, which was owing to the hand of the Lord being upon him;
the power of the Spirit and grace of God influences and engages to
obedience; he went forth where he was ordered, though he knew not what
would be said to him, or what he should see there:

and, behold, the glory of the Lord stood there; the glorious Person
described in [Eze 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026);

as the glory which I saw by the river of Chebar; [Eze
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001); which vision was repeated for
greater certainty, and to confirm the prophecies delivered to him, and
to encourage him in the performance of his office:

and I fell on my face; as he did before, when he first saw this glorious
object, [Eze 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#028).

[Ezekiel 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 3:24</span></span>

Then the spirit entered into me,.... Again; the Spirit of God, that was
in the wheels and living creatures: see [Eze
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#002);

and set me upon my feet; as he had done before, when in the same
prostrate condition, [Eze 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#002);

and spake with me; either the Spirit that entered into him, and set him
upright; or rather the Lord Christ, the glory of the Lord that stood
where he was, and appeared to him:

and said unto me, go, shut thyself within thine house: this was not said
ironically, but in earnest; and the reason either was, because the
people were not fit for reproof and correction, as Jarchi thinks, being
a rebellious people; or that the prophet might receive further
instructions, and have all the words of his prophecy delivered to him,
before he began to prophesy. Some think this shutting up was an emblem
of the siege of Jerusalem. It may seem strange that the prophet should
be bid to go into the plain, where the Lord promised to talk with him;
and this is all that is said to him, to go home, and shut himself up in
his house: but it should be observed, that this was not the only thing
for which he went into the plain: he was to have, and had, a fresh view
of the glory of the Lord, and of the vision he had before, for the
further confirmation of him; besides, this moving him from place to
place, before he prophesied, might be partly to try his faith, and
partly to preserve him from the violence of the people; who, had he
delivered his message at once, might have been so provoked, as to have
fallen upon him, and destroyed him; as well as to prepare them to
receive his prophecies with more respect and reverence, when they saw he
did not rashly, and at once, deliver them out to them.

[Ezekiel 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 3:25</span></span>

But thou, O son of man, behold, they shall put bands upon thee,.... Or,
"bands shall be put upon thee"; either visionally, or really; not by
angels, but by the Jews, who, taking the prophet for a madman by his
motions and gestures; would bind him, and keep him within doors: or
figuratively this may be understood of the sins of the people, their
rebellion and obstinacy, which hindered the prophet from prophesying
among them as yet; and so this is observed to conciliate his mind to the
divine order, to shut up himself for a while in his own house, and be
silent: or else by these bonds may be meant the divine order itself,
which restrained him from doing his office as yet. So the Targum,

"behold, I have appointed the words of my mouth upon thee, as a band of
ropes with which they bind;''

and shall bind thee with them; which some think is emblematical of the
Jews being bound by the Chaldeans:

and thou shall not go out among them; to converse with them, or prophesy
unto them. The Septuagint version renders it, "shall not go out from the
midst of them"; as if he should be taken out of his own house by the
Jews, and be bound by them, and kept among them, and not able to get
away from them; but it is to be understood of his being bound in his own
house, and not able to go out of that to them; and may signify, that in
like manner the Jews should not be able to go out of Jerusalem when
besieged by the Chaldeans.

[Ezekiel 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 3:26</span></span>

And I will make thy tongue cleave to the roof of thy mouth,

that thou shall be dumb,.... Which is to be understood not literally, as
if he was really struck dumb, as Zechariah was; see [Eze
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009); but that such silence should be
charged upon him by the Lord, that he should be as if his tongue cleaved
to the roof of his mouth, as Kimchi interprets it, and as if he was a
dumb man: and so the Septuagint version renders it, "I will bind thy
tongue"; lay an embargo upon it, that is, it shall be silent; and this
sense is confirmed by what follows:

and shall not be to them a reprover; which was in judgment to them, and
a giving them up to their own hearts' lusts; for, though reproofs were
disagreeable to them, and they chose to be without them, yet they were
necessary for them, and might have been useful to them; but they
provoking the Lord, he takes away his word from them, and commands his
prophet to be silent, and let them alone, to go on in their sins without
control; which was a sore judgment upon them:

for they are a rebellious house; See Gill on [Eze
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005).

[Ezekiel 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 3:27</span></span>

But when I speak with thee,.... Either when I have made an end of
speaking to thee, when I have told thee all my mind, and have given thee
all the instructions and prophecies thou art to deliver out; or when I
shall speak to thee again, and give thee orders to speak:

I will open thy mouth; loose thy tongue, cause thee to break silence,
and thou shall speak freely and fully all that I command thee; fulness
of matter, and freedom of speech, are both from the Lord; liberty and
opportunity of speaking are at his pleasure; and when he speaks his
servants must prophesy, [Amo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#008);

and thou shalt say unto them, thus saith the Lord God; so and so,
whatsoever he is pleased to order to be spoken; not that the following
words are what were to be said to the people; but they are said to the
prophet for his own use, that he might not be uneasy at the
unfruitfulness and failure of his ministry:

he that heareth, let him hear; if any will hearken to what is sent to
them, as few of them will, it is very well:

and he that forbeareth, let him forbear; or, "he that ceaseth, let him
cease" (y); he that ceaseth from hearing, let him do so, do not mind it,
or be discouraged at it:

for they are a rebellious house; See Gill on [Eze
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005). The Targum is,

"he that receiveth, let him receive instruction; and he that ceaseth,
let him cease from sinning, for it is a rebellious people.''

\(y\) "et qui cessat cesset", Pagninus, Tigurine version, Starckius;
"qui desistere volet desistat", Piscator; "qui desistit audire,
desistet". So some in Vatablus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 4](eze004)

</div>
