<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze034)  [Next](eze036.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 35:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 35

This chapter is a prophecy of the destruction of Edom, which is
threatened, [Eze 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#001.md), the cause of
it, their hatred and slaughter of the Israelites, [Eze
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#005.md), their claim of the lands of
Israel and Judah for possession, [Eze
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#010.md), their blasphemies against the
people of God, and the Lord himself, [Eze
35:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#012.md), the aggravation of their ruin,
which was irretrievable; that when it was well with others, it should go
ill with them; by way of just retaliation, [Eze
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#014.md).

[Ezekiel 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 35:1</span></span>

Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me,.... After the prophecy
concerning the shepherds of Israel, and the goats of the flock, and of
their oppressions of the sheep and lambs, the weak of the flock; and
concerning the Messiah, and the blessings of grace promised the church
in the latter day; came another concerning the destruction of her
enemies, under the name of Seir or Edom:

saying: as follows:

[Ezekiel 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 35:2</span></span>

Son of man set thy face against Mount Seir,.... Which had its name from
Seir the Horite, who first possessed it; and was succeeded in it by Esau
and his posterity, the Edomites; see [Gen
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008.md), [Deu
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#012.md), so that the country of Edom or
Idumea is here intended, and the inhabitants of it; who are put for the
enemies of the church and people of God in general, as these were the
enemies of Israel and Judah; and particularly for Rome, which, as it was
spiritually called Egypt and Sodom, so it may be called Edom, as it
often is by the Jews: now the prophet is bid to turn his face towards
this mountain or country, and look sternly at it, and severely threaten
it. The Targum is,

"take up a prophecy against it;''

which is expressed in the next clause:

and prophesy against it; foretell things contrary to it, which relate to
its destruction, as follows:

[Ezekiel 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 35:3</span></span>

And say unto it, thus saith the Lord God,.... The prophet was not upon
the spot, and could not direct his speech immediately to the Edomites;
but he might send this prophecy to their ambassadors at Babylon; or in a
letter to them in their own land, in the name of the Lord:

behold, O Mount Seir, I am against thee: not the face of the prophet
only, but the face of God himself was against them; and a terrible thing
it is for any to have God to be against them, whether a nation, or a
particular person. The Targum is,

"behold, I send my fury upon thee:''

and I will stretch out mine hand against thee; which was able to reach
them wherever they were: and which, being stretched out, cannot be
turned back; and, where it lights, falls heavy indeed; namely, his
mighty hand of power and wrath. The Targum is,

"and I will lift up the stroke of my power upon thee;''

that is, lift up his hand and strike powerfully; the consequence of
which must be as follows:

and I will make thee most desolate; their land, cities, towns, and
villages, all should be utterly laid waste; see [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016.md), so it follows:

[Ezekiel 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 35:4</span></span>

I will lay thy cities waste,.... Such as Dedan, Teman, Bozrah, and other
cities of Idumea mentioned in Scripture; and figuratively may design all
within the jurisdiction of Rome, the several cities of the antichristian
states, called "the cities of the nations"; which will fall at the
pouring out of the vials, [Rev 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019.md),

and thou shalt be desolate; thoroughly and entirely, and remain so:

and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; that has done all this; that the
hand of God was in it; and that this is a punishment inflicted by him,
for their sins after mentioned; but not that they should know the Lord
spiritually and savingly, and so as to yield obedience to him, and own
and acknowledge him to be their God; though this may be the case of a
remnant among them; see [Rev 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013.md).

[Ezekiel 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 35:5</span></span>

Because thou hast had a perpetual hatred,.... There was an old grudge
and enmity subsisting in the posterity of Esau against the posterity of
Jacob, because the latter supplanted the former, and got the birthright
and blessing from him; and which was discovered in all ages, and at all
opportunities, and on all occasions which offered; and such has been the
hatred of the church of Rome against the true professors and followers
of Christ, as their bloody persecution of them in all ages have shown:

and hast shed the blood of the children of Israel by the force of the
sword in the time of their calamity: when Jerusalem was taken by the
Chaldeans, the Edomites not only rejoiced at it, and took part of the
spoil, but stood in the crossways, and slew those that made their
escape; or drove them back upon the sword of the enemy; or delivered
them into their hands; which was barbarous and inhuman usage of their
neighbours and brethren; see [Oba
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#010.md). The Targum is,

"and thou didst deliver the children of Israel into the hands of those
that slay with the sword, in the time of their destruction:''

in the time that their iniquity had an end; when either the measure of
that was full; or when they received for it full correction and
chastisement; at the consummation of that.

[Ezekiel 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 35:6</span></span>

Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord God,.... The form of an oath; the
Lord swears by himself, because he could swear by no greater; and which
he never does but in matters of importance, and for the confirmation of
them, as the following is:

I will prepare thee unto blood; prepare them for war, which will issue
in slaughter and blood, such as the battle at Armageddon, [Rev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014.md), or, "I will make thee blood"
(w); nothing else but blood; a mere "Aceldama", a field of blood; turn
thee into blood, as the sea, rivers, and fountains will be, at the
pouring out the second and third vials, [Rev
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#003.md),

and blood shall pursue thee; the guilt and vengeance of blood; or the
avengers of the blood of the saints; the angels that shall pour out the
vials of wrath on Rome; the ten kings that shall hate the whore. So the
Targum;

"they that slay with the sword shall pursue thee;''

or the shedders of blood, as Ben Melech:

saith thou hast not hated blood; Jarchi reads it; "hast hated blood":
which he interprets of the blood of the sacrifices; as others, mentioned
by him, of the blood of circumcision; and others, of his brother, who
was his flesh and blood, and hated by him; but it is a figurative
phrase, by which less is expressed than is intended. The sense is, thou
hast loved blood; thou hast delighted in shedding blood; hast thirsted
after it, and drank plentifully of it, and even been drunk with it, as
the whore of Rome is said to be, [Rev
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005.md),

even blood shall pursue thee; this is repeated for the confirmation of
it; and this was measure for measure; a just retaliation; having shed
blood, it was but right that blood should pursue, and be given, [Rev
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#005.md).

\(w\) "in sanguinem redigam te", Munster; "in sanguinem faciam te",
Grotius; "sanguinem faciam te", Coceeius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 35:7</span></span>

Thus will I make Mount Seir most desolate,.... By shedding the blood of
the inhabitants of it; and as Rome will be, when it will be utterly
burnt with fire, as that city will, and the flesh of the whore also, and
made desolate; and when all the vials shall be poured out on the
antichristian states under her jurisdiction, [Rev
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001.md),

and cut off from it him that passeth out and him that returneth: every
traveller that passeth to and fro; it shall no more be frequented by
merchants; nor will there be any merchandise any more in it, [Rev
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#011.md).

[Ezekiel 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 35:8</span></span>

And I will fill his mountains with his slain men,.... Not only Mount
Seir, but all the rest of the mountains, in Idumea; where they shall
flee for refuge, and the enemy shall pursue them, and slay them; and
where their carcasses will fall in such numbers, as to cover the
mountains with them; compare with this [Rev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018.md),

in thy hills, and in thy valleys, and in all thy rivers, shall they fall
that are slain with the sword: expressive of the greatness and
universality of the slaughter, that it should be a general one
everywhere; hence rivers and fountains are said to become blood, through
the number of the slain, [Rev 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#003.md).

[Ezekiel 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 35:9</span></span>

I will make thee perpetual desolations, and thy cities shall not
return,.... To their former dignity and glory; should not be built and
inhabited again, but lie waste for ever: this agrees with what is
prophesied of Edom, [Mal 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004.md) and will
be true of Rome or Babylon when destroyed; it will never rise more, but
be like a millstone in the midst of the sea, [Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021.md),

and ye shall know that I am the Lord; See Gill on [Eze
35:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#004.md).

[Ezekiel 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 35:10</span></span>

Because thou hast said, these two nations and these two countries shall
be mine, and we will possess it,.... Meaning either Idumea he was now
possessed of, and Israel he hoped to be, upon the people of it being
carried captive; or rather the two nations of Israel and Judah, and
their countries; which he pleased himself with would fall into his
hands, as next heir to them; the posterity of his brother being
dispossessed of them. This may denote the claim that Rome makes upon
each of the Protestant nations and countries; and which she will think
all her own, and that she is in the possession of them, upon the slaying
of the witnesses; and when she will say, "I sit a queen, and am no
widow", [Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007.md).

Whereas the Lord was there; and heard their words, as Kimchi; and knew
their thoughts, as Jarchi; so the Targum,

"and before the Lord the thoughts of the heart were manifest.''

The land of Judea was Immanuel's land; and as the Lord had been in it,
and granted his gracious presence in the tabernacle and temple, so he
still continued his powerful presence in it, to protect and keep it for
his people; who should return to it after their captivity, and inhabit
it until the Messiah came, who was to be born in it. Or it may be
rendered, "though the Lord was" or "dwelt there" (x); denoting the great
impiety and daring wickedness of the Edomites, to think and talk of
possessing a country that was the Lord's, and where he was: and this
holds good of the true reformed churches of Christ; the Lord is there,
and therefore, though they may be brought very low, and antichrist may
triumph over them, and imagine he has got them under his power again,
where they shall continue; yet on a sudden his destruction will come,
and their deliverance. Or, "where the Lord was" (y); but he has now
departed, and will never return more, the temple being destroyed; so
they said, encouraging themselves.

\(x\) "licet Dominus ibi habitaverit", Piscator. So Syr. (y) "Ubi
Jehovah fuit", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus; "et Jehovah ibi fuit",
Starckius.

[Ezekiel 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 35:11</span></span>

Therefore, as I live, saith the Lord,.... An oath, as before in [Eze
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#006.md),

I will do according to thine anger, and according to thine envy which
thou hast used out of thy hatred against them: as thou hast been angry
with them, and hated them, and done mischief to them, so will I be angry
with thee, and hate thee, and inflict punishment on thee; I will
retaliate all the anger, envy, and hatred showed unto my people, and
punish thee according to thy just demerits. So the Romish antichrist
shall be dealt with; he who has led into captivity shall go into it, and
he that has killed with the sword shall be killed by it. Babylon shall
be rewarded double, as she has rewarded, others, [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010.md).

And I will make myself known among them, when I have judged thee; the
Targum is,

"and I will reveal myself to do good unto them, when I shall have taken
vengeance on thee:''

after the destruction of antichrist, the knowledge of God, and of
Christ, will be spread among Jews and Gentiles, even all the world over,
so universally, so clearly and distinctly, as never was before, [Dan
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004.md).

[Ezekiel 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 35:12</span></span>

And thou shall know that I am the Lord,.... By the judgments executed
upon Edom, and so upon antichrist; for God is known by the judgments he
executes, both by good and bad men, [Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016.md),

and that I have heard all thy blasphemies which thou hast spoken against
the mountains of Israel; the people of Israel and Judah literally, and
the churches and people of God figuratively: so antichrist is said to
open his mouth in blasphemies, and to blaspheme the tabernacle of God,
and them that dwell in heaven; that is, the church of God, and the
saints of the most High; which are heard and observed by the Lord, and
resented by him, and for which he will punish, [Rev
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#006.md),

saying, they are laid desolate, they are given up to consume; or, "for
food" (z); to possess and live upon; the inhabitants of them being
carried captive or slain, so that there were none to enjoy the fruits of
them; and therefore the Edomites concluded that the Israelites were
forsaken of God, and that he would no more regard them, and that their
land was theirs, which gave them great joy; see [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010.md).

\(z\) , Sept.; "in cibum", Vatablus, Cocceius, Starckius, So Syr.

[Ezekiel 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 35:13</span></span>

Thus with your mouth ye have boasted against me,.... Or, "magnified
against me" (a); spoke great swelling words of vanity, or had a mouth
opened to speak great things and blasphemy against God, as antichrist is
said to do, [Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005.md), what is spoken
against the Lord's people is taken by him as spoken against himself:

and have multiplied your words against me; not in prayer, by
deprecations or supplications, as the word (b) used sometimes signifies;
but in reproaches and calumnies, vilifying expressions and hard
speeches, against his people, in great numbers; which is all one as if
they were directed against him:

I have heard them; these the Lord takes notice of, and will call to an
account for, either here or hereafter; see [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015.md).

\(a\) "magnificastis contra me", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus,
Cocceius, Starckius. (b) ab "orare suppliciter".

[Ezekiel 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 35:14</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, when the whole earth rejoiceth,.... When it
shall go well with the world in general, and the inhabitants of it; when
they shall enjoy great peace and prosperity. Jarchi has a very good note
upon this clause,

"when I shall take my kingdom; for then the earth will rejoice, as it is
said, the Lord reigns, let the earth rejoice;''

so when Christ takes to himself his great power, and reigns, his church
and people will rejoice, [Rev 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#016.md),
as well as at the destruction of antichrist, as follows:

I will make thee desolate; for so some render it, "the whole earth
rejoiceth when I make thee desolate"; or, "so shall all the earth
rejoice in the desolation which I shall make for thee" (c); see [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020.md) and which agrees with what
follows:

\(c\) "Sic laetabitur omnis terra in desolatione quam faciam tibi",
Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 35:15</span></span>

As thou didst rejoice at the inheritance of the house of Israel, because
it was desolate,.... So Edom rejoiced at the destruction of Jerusalem,
[Oba 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#012.md), and so the followers of the
man of sin will rejoice at the slaying of the witnesses, [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010.md), which is resented by the Lord,
and therefore adds,

so will I do unto thee; make thee desolate, as is explained in the next
clause:

thou shall be desolate, O Mount Seir, and all Idumea, even all of it;
not that mount only, but all the land of Edom, called Idumea; the
destruction shall be general, as it was, and irretrievable; and so not
Rome only, but all the antichristian states, will be destroyed, when God
comes forth in his wrath against them:

and they shall know that I am the Lord; the Lord God omniscient and
omnipotent; who, having foretold all this, shall accomplish it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 36](eze036.md)

</div>
