<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze010)  [Next](eze012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 11:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 11

This chapter contains an account of the sins of the princes of Judah; a
prophecy of their destruction; some comfortable, promises respecting
those of the captivity; and the chapter is closed with the finishing of
the vision of the Lord's removing from Jerusalem; and the whole being
ended, the prophet related it to the men of the captivity. In [Eze
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001.md); the prophet, is shown five and
twenty men, among whom were two he knew, and are mentioned by name, and
were princes of the people; and he is told that these men devised
mischief, and gave bad advice to the people, [Eze
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#002.md); wherefore he is bid to prophesy
against them, [Eze 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#004.md); which he
accordingly did, the Spirit of the Lord falling upon him, [Eze
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#005.md); declaring that their secret
evils were known, as well as their public ones; and that, seeing they
had multiplied their slain, and had feared the sword, the sword should
come upon them; some should fall by it, and others should be carried
captive; the consequence of which would be, that God would be known, and
his justice acknowledged, it being what their sins deserved, [Eze
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#006.md); upon this prophecy being
delivered out, one of the princes before named died immediately; which
filled the prophet with great concern, and put him upon expostulating
with God, [Eze 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#013.md); wherefore, for
his comfort, he is told, that though the inhabitants of Jerusalem had
insulted their brethren that were carried captive, and looked upon the
land of Israel as their own possession, that God would be a little
sanctuary to them; that he would gather them out of all lands, and give
them the land of Israel; that they should come thither, and remove all
idolatry from it, and should have regenerating and renewing grace given
them, to walk in the statutes and ordinances of the Lord, by which they
should appear to be his people, and he to be their God, [Eze
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014.md); but as for such that continued
in their abominable idolatries, these should receive a just recompence
of reward, [Eze 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#021.md); after which
follows an account of the entire removal of the glory of the Lord from
the city of Jerusalem, [Eze 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022.md); and
the prophet being, in vision, brought again to Chaldea, reports the
whole he had seen to them of the captivity, [Eze
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#024.md).

[Ezekiel 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 11:1</span></span>

Moreover, the spirit lifted me up,.... From the inner court of the
temple, where the prophet was, according to the last account of him,
[Eze 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016.md); it was the same Spirit that
took him by the lock of his head, and lifted him up, as in [Eze
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003.md); and perhaps in the same manner:

and brought me unto the east gate of the Lord's house, which looketh
eastward; where were the cherubim, and the wheels, and the glory of God
above them, [Eze 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019.md);

and behold at the door of the gate five and twenty men; not the same as
in [Eze 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#016.md); for they were in a
different place, between the porch and the altar; and about different
service, they were worshipping there; and seem to be men of a different
order, priests; whereas these were at the door of the eastern gate,
sitting as a court of judicature, and were civil magistrates; though
Jarchi and Kimchi take them to be the same. Some say Jerusalem was
divided into twenty four parishes, districts, or wards, and everyone had
its own head, ruler, and governor; and that there was one who was the
president over them all, like the mayor and aldermen of a city;

among whom I saw Jaazaniah the son of Azur; not the same that is
mentioned in [Eze 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#011.md); he was the son
of Shaphan, this of Azur; he was one of the seventy of the ancients of
Israel, this one of the twenty five heads or rulers of the people; he
seems to have been a prince; by having a censer in his hand, this was a
priest: the Septuagint and Arabic versions call him Jechoniah:

and Pelatiah the son of Benaiah; these two are mentioned by name, as
being principal men, and well known by the prophet; and the latter is
observed more especially for what befell him, hereafter related:

princes of the people; men who were entrusted with power and authority
to exercise the laws of the nation; and who should have been reformers
of the people, and ought to have given them good advice, and set them
good examples; whereas they were the reverse, as follows:

[Ezekiel 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 11:2</span></span>

Then said he unto me, son of man,.... That is, the Lord, or, the Spirit
of the Lord, that lifted him up:

these are the men that devise mischief; or "vanity" (d); this is to be
understood not of the two only that are named, though it may of them
chiefly; but of all the twenty five, who formed schemes for the holding
out of the siege, and for the security of the city, and of themselves in
it, which was all folly and vanity:

and give wicked counsel in this city; either in ecclesiastical affairs,
to forsake the worship of God, and cleave to the idols of the nations;
or in civil things, as follows:

\(d\) "vanitatem", Calvin, Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius; "vanum",
Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 11:3</span></span>

Which say it is not near, let us build houses,.... Meaning that the
destruction of the city was not near, as the prophet had foretold, [Eze
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#003.md); and therefore encourage the
people to build houses, and rest themselves secure, as being safe from
all danger, and having nothing to fear from the Chaldean army; and so
putting away the evil day far from them, which was just at hand: though
the words may be rendered, "it is not proper to build houses near" (e);
near the city of Jerusalem, in the suburbs of it, since they would be
liable to be destroyed by the enemy; but this would not be condemned as
wicked counsel, but must be judged very prudent and advisable: and the
same may be objected to another rendering of the word, which might be
offered, "not in the midst to build houses"; or it is not proper to
build houses in the midst of the city, in order to receive the multitude
that flock out of the country, through fear of the enemy, to Jerusalem
for safety; since by this means, as the number of the inhabitants would
be increased, so provisions in time would become scarce, and a famine
must ensue, which would oblige to deliver up the city into the hands of
the besiegers; wherefore the first sense seems best. The Septuagint and
Arabic versions render them, "are not the houses lately built?" and so
not easily demolished, and are like to continue long, and we in them;

this city is the cauldron, and we be the flesh; referring to, and
laughing at, what one of the prophets, namely Jeremiah, had said of
them, comparing them to a boiling pot, [Jer
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013.md); and it is as if they should say,
be it so, that this city is as a cauldron or boiling pot, then we are
the flesh in it; and as flesh is not taken out of a pot until it is
boiled, no more shall we be removed from hence till we die; we shall
live and die in this city; and as it is difficult and dangerous to take
hot boiling meat out of a cauldron, so it, is unlikely we should be
taken out of this city, and carried captive; what a cauldron or brasen
pot is to the flesh, it holds and keeps it from falling into the fire;
that the walls of Jerusalem are to us, our safety and preservation; nor
need we fear captivity.

\(e\) "non in propinque aedificandae domus", Junius & Tremellius,
Cocceius, Polanus; "non in propinquo aedificare domos", Montanus,
Piscator, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 11:4</span></span>

Therefore prophesy against them,.... Evil things against them, things
that are disagreeable to them; since they flatter themselves with good
things, and cry peace and safety, let them know that destruction is
coming upon them: or, "concerning them" (f); what will befall them, and
that it will be otherwise with them than they imagine:

prophesy, O son of man; this is repeated, not only to stir up the
prophet to the performance of his work and office, not fearing the
faces, and revilings, and mockings of men; but to show the indignation
of the Lord at their scoffs and jeers, and the certain accomplishment of
what should be predicted.

\(f\) "de eis", V. L. "super eos", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Ezekiel 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 11:5</span></span>

And the spirit of the Lord fell upon me,.... In an extraordinary manner,
and afresh, and enlightened his mind, and showed him things that should
come to pass; and filled him with boldness and courage to declare them.
The Targum interprets it of the spirit of prophecy:

and said unto me, speak; what I shall show and put into thy mouth, that
speak out; be not afraid, but boldly declare all that I give thee in
commission to say:

thus saith the Lord, thus have ye said, O house of Israel; as in [Eze
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#003.md); which perhaps was said in
secret, and spoken privately, but known by the Lord; and it was not only
the princes that said it, but the whole body of the people joined in
with it, and agreed to it; though it is very probable they were
influenced by the former:

for I know the things that come into your mind, everyone of them; not
only their scoffing words, but the thoughts of their hearts; not one of
them escaped the knowledge of God; the consideration of which should
command an awe on men, and engage them to a watchfulness over their
thoughts, words, and actions.

[Ezekiel 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 11:6</span></span>

Ye have multiplied your slain in this city,.... Had killed many of the
prophets of the Lord that had been sent unto them, and had shed much
innocent blood; and not only had unjustly condemned many to die, and had
put them to death without a cause; but also the death of all those that
were slain while the city was besieging, and when it was taken, were
owing to their advice and counsel, in encouraging them to hold out, and
not deliver up the city; fancying they should be able to defend it,
contrary to the declarations of the Lord by the prophet; wherefore their
death is laid to such advisers, and they are called their slain:

and ye have filled the streets thereof with the slain; such numbers of
innocent persons being put to death, as in the times of Manasseh, [Kg2
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#016.md); or so many dying of the famine,
pestilence, and sword, during the siege, and at the taking of Jerusalem.

[Ezekiel 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 11:7</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God,.... Applying the parabolical
expressions they had derided, and explaining them, in a different sense
from what they had put upon them:

your slain whom ye have laid in the midst of it, they are the flesh; the
prophets they had killed; the persons, who had died innocently for
crimes laid to their charge they had not been guilty of; and such who
had fallen by one judgment or another since the siege, they were the
persons intended by "the flesh", and not such as were alive; and
therefore could promise themselves nothing from this proverb they had
taken up, and scoffed at:

and this city is the cauldron; that holds the slain, and in which they
will lie and continue, and not the living:

but I will bring you forth out of the midst of it: where they promised
themselves safety, and a long continuance; yet should not abide, but be
carried captive.

[Ezekiel 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 11:8</span></span>

Ye have feared the sword,.... Of the Chaldeans; and therefore they sent
to the Egyptians for help. The Targum is,

"ye have been afraid of them that kill with the sword;''

and not afraid of the Lord; see [Mat
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028.md);

and I will bring a sword upon you, saith the Lord God; or those that
kill with the sword, as the Targum; meaning the Chaldeans, who were sent
by the Lord, and, when they took the city, put many to death by the
sword, and carried captive others.

[Ezekiel 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 11:9</span></span>

And I will bring you out of the midst thereof,.... Jerusalem, the
cauldron, as they said it was, and where they thought they should be
safe; this is repeated, to express the certainty of it, and to excite
their attention to it, and remove their vain confidence:

and deliver you into the hands of strangers; the Chaldeans:

and will execute judgments among you; punishments for sin, such as
famine, pestilence, sword, and captivity.

[Ezekiel 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 11:10</span></span>

Ye shall fall by the sword,.... Of the Chaldeans; not in the city of
Jerusalem, but out of it, when it was broken up, and they fled:

I will judge you in the border of Israel; that is, inflict punishment on
them, particularly by the sword; which was done at Riblah in the land of
Hamath, where the sons of Zedekiah were slain, and all the princes of
Judah, [Jer 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#009.md); and this was on the
border of the land of Israel, [Num
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#008.md);

and ye shall know that I am the Lord; who knows things, and foretells
them before they are; and am able to accomplish all that is threatened;
and am just and righteous in all my ways and works; and who am known by
the judgments executed by me.

[Ezekiel 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 11:11</span></span>

This city shall not be your cauldron,.... It was one, as in [Eze
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#007.md); but not theirs; it was the
cauldron for the slain, for the dead, but not the living:

neither shall ye be the flesh in the midst of it; or, "and ye shall be"
(g) or, "but ye shall be"; the negative is understood, and rightly
supplied by us; though the Targum renders it without it,

"but ye shall be in the midst of it, as flesh that is boiled in the
midst of a pot:''

but I will judge you in the border of Israel; this is repeated, that
they might take notice of it, and to assure them that so it would be.

\(g\) "et vos critis", Montanus, Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 11:12</span></span>

And ye shall know that I am the Lord,.... See Gill on [Eze
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#010.md);

for ye have not walked in my statutes, neither executed my judgments;
which is the reason why the Lord would judge them on the border of
Israel, and deliver them up into the hands of strangers; nor can he be
thought to act the severe and cruel part to them, when this their
disobedience is observed; since they had his statutes and his judgments
made known to them, which were not known to other nations, and yet they
regarded them not; wherefore it was but righteous in him to inflict his
judgments upon them; and which is the more aggravated by what follows,
and which still more clearly shows the justice of the divine proceedings
against them:

but have done after the manners of the Heathens that are round about
you; or, "the judgments of the Heathens" (h); regarded them, and acted
according to them, when they slighted and disobeyed the judgments of the
Lord; instead of worshipping of him according to his revealed will, they
served the idols of the nations round about them, and gave into all
their superstitious rites and ceremonies.

\(h\) "juxta judicia genitium", Pagninus, Montanus; "secundum jura
gentium", Junius & Tremellius; Piscator; "secundum judicia gentium",
Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 11:13</span></span>

And it came to pass when I prophesied,.... Or, "as I prophesied" (i);
that is, while he was prophesying, or declaring the above things from
the mouth of the Lord, concerning the slaughter of the Jews by the
sword, and the captivity of the rest:

that Pelatiah the son of Benaiah died; one of the princes of the people,
and was among the five and twenty men the prophet saw at the door of the
east gate of the temple, [Eze 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#001.md);
this man dropped down dead on a sudden, just as Ananias and Sapphira at
the feet of Peter, [Act 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#005.md). It was in
a vision Ezekiel saw this, and in the temple; but no doubt at the same
time this prince died at his own house, whose death was notified to the
prophet in this way;

then fell I down upon my face; as greatly surprised at the event, and
filled with concern at what would be the issue of this providence;
looking upon it as a pledge and earnest, a token and forerunner, of the
utter destruction of the people:

and cried with a loud voice; expressing the vehemency of his affection,
and the earnestness of his supplication:

and said, ah, Lord God! wilt thou make a full end of the remnant of
Israel? or, "art thou making?" (k) the ten tribes had been carried
captive many years ago, and a large number of the other two tribes in
Jeconiah's captivity, so that there were but a remnant left in the land;
and, upon the sudden and awful death of this prince, the prophet feared
the Lord was going to make an utter end of them at once; which he
deprecates.

\(i\) "me prophetante", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus. (k) "tu faciem",
Montanus, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 11:14</span></span>

Again the word of the Lord came unto me, saying,.... In answer to his
prayer. The Targum calls it,

"the word of prophecy from the Lord;''

this was by way of comfort to the captives in Babylon, as the former was
by way of threatening to the inhabitants of Jerusalem.

[Ezekiel 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 11:15</span></span>

Son of man, thy brethren, even thy brethren, the men of thy kindred,....
Or, "of thy redemption" (l); to whom the right of redemption of his
lands and possessions belonged, as it did to those that were next akin.
The Septuagint, by a mistake of the word, render it, "the men of thy
captivity"; and so the Syriac and Arabic versions, following them. It is
true those were his fellow captives who are here meant; some of them
that were carried captive were his brethren by blood, and all by nation
and religion; and these phrases, and the repetition, of them, are
designed not only to excite the prophet's attention to, and to assure
them of what is after declared; but to take off his concern for the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, who had used his brethren ill, and to turn his
thoughts and affections towards his friends in Chaldea. Kimchi thinks
that these three expressions refer to three captivities; the captivity
of the children of Gad and Reuben; the captivity of Samaria, or the ten
tribes; and the captivity of Jehoiachin. It follows,

and all the house of Israel wholly are they; or,

"all the house of Israel, all of them,''

as the Targum; that is, all the whole house of Israel. The Septuagint
render it, "all the house of Israel is made an end of"; the Syriac
version, "shall be blotted out"; and the Arabic version, "shall be cut
off"; all wrong; since these words are not a threatening to the ten
tribes, or those of the Jews in captivity, for all that follows is in
favour of them; but only point at the persons the prophet is turned
unto, and who are the subject of the following discourse. A colon, or at
least a semicolon, should be here put; since the accent "athnach" is
upon the last word;

unto whom the inhabitants of Jerusalem have said, get ye far from the
Lord; Kimchi interprets it, from the land of the Lord, the holy land;
they being carried captive into a foreign country. The Targum is,

"from the fear of the Lord;''

the worship of the Lord; they being at a distance from the temple, and
the service of it. These words are an insult of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem upon the captives, suggesting that they were great sinners,
and for their sins were taken away from their own land, and carried to
Babylon; and that they deserved to be excommunicated from the house and
people of God, and were so; and indeed this is a kind of a form of
excommunication of them:

unto us is this land given in possession; you have forfeited your right
to it, and are disinherited; we are sole heirs, and in the possession of
it, and shall ever continue in it. The Syriac version reads this and the
preceding clause as if they were the word of the Israelites to the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, thus;

"because they said to them, O inhabitants of Jerusalem, depart from the
Lord, for unto us is given this land for an inheritance.''

The Arabic version indeed makes them to be the words of the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, but render the last clause thus; "to you" (that is, "the
Israelites") "is given the land for an inheritance".

\(l\) "viri redemptionis tua", Montanus, Heb. "viri redempturae tuae",
Piscator.

[Ezekiel 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 11:16</span></span>

Therefore say, thus saith the Lord God,.... Since they were so insulted
and ill treated by their brethren the Jews:

although I have cast them afar off among the Heathen; both the ten
tribes, even all the house of Israel, who were carried into Assyria, and
placed in the cities of the Medes, in Halath and Habor, by the river
Gozan, [Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006.md); and those of the
Jews in Jeconiah's captivity, among whom were Ezekiel, and his brethren,
and his kindred:

and although I have scattered them among the countries; and therefore,
what with the distance of the place where they were, and the dispersion
of them among the people where they resided, their case might seem to be
desperate; and that there was no probability, and scarce any
possibility, of their being preserved as a people, and of their
restoration to their own land:

yet will I be to them a little sanctuary in the countries where they
shall come; their dwelling place, as he has been to his people in all
generations their protection from all their enemies, in whom, and by
whose power, they should be safe; and whose presence they should enjoy,
though deprived of public ordinances, of temple worship and service;
though they were at a distance from the great sanctuary, the temple, the
inhabitants of Jerusalem boasted of, yet the Lord would make up the want
of that to them with himself. The Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi (m)
interpret this of the synagogues, which were second to the temple, the
Israelites had in foreign countries, where they prayed to the Lord, and
worshipped him, and enjoyed his presence. It may be rendered, "the
sanctuary of a few" (n); they being but few, especially that were truly
godly, that were carried captive: or, "a sanctuary for a little while"
(o); that is, during seventy years, and then they should be returned, as
follows. The Targum is,

"I have given them synagogues, second to my sanctuary, and they are as
few in the provinces where they are carried captive.''

\(m\) Ex T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 29. 1. (n) "ad sanctuarium paucitatis",
Calvin; "in sanctuarium paucorum", Cocceius. So Ben Melech says the word
is a substantive in some copies. (o) Paulisper, Junius & Tremellius,
Polanus, Castalio.

[Ezekiel 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 11:17</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God, I will even gather you from the
people,.... The Babylonians, Medes, and Persians, where they had been
carried captive:

and assemble you out of the countries where ye have been scattered; that
is, out of Chaldea and Media, out of which they should come in a body,
and not singly, or in small numbers, as they did when Cyrus issued out
his proclamation:

and I will give you the land of Israel; not only the Jews of the two
tribes of Judah and Benjamin, but many of the ten tribes came out of
Babylon with Zerubbabel, and settled in the land of Israel; and hither
they came also in later times, even those that settled in other
countries; at their several festivals, and about such time more
especially that the Messiah was expected, and continued there; and this
will have a fuller completion at the restoration of the Jews in the
latter days.

[Ezekiel 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 11:18</span></span>

And they shall come thither,.... That those of the captivity shall come
to the land of Israel, they or their posterity:

and they shall take away all the detestable things thereof; the idols of
the nations, that had been there introduced, detestable to God and all
good men:

and all the abominations thereof from thence; idols, as before, even all
of them, so that idolatry should be wholly rooted out; this had its
accomplishment under Zerubbabel, Ezra, Haggai, &c. when the worship of
God was restored, and there was a reformation of many abuses in
religion; and again in the times of the Maccabees; and will have a
greater fulfilment at the time of the conversion of the Jews; when
everything that is detestable and abominable among that people will be
removed; of which conversion the following words are a prophecy.

[Ezekiel 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 11:19</span></span>

And I will give them one heart,.... In opposition to a divided heart,
[Hos 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#002.md); divided between the true
God and idols, wavering and halting between two opinions, sometimes
serving God, and sometimes Baal; a heart to pursue one way of worship,
and to serve the Lord with one shoulder or consent, [Jer
32:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#040.md); a heart sincere to God and man,
in opposition to a double or hypocritical one, [Psa
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002.md); a heart single to the honour and
glory of God, and firmly attached to his word and worship: also concord,
harmony, an unity of affections to one another, so as to be of one heart
and one soul, as the first Christians were, who were Jews, [Act
4:32](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#032.md); and an unity of judgment, an
oneness of principle and practice, as there ought to be, [Co1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#010.md); and all this is the gift of God,
and flows from his grace and favour. The Septuagint and Arabic versions
render it, "another heart"; different from what they had before;

and I will put a new spirit within you; meaning either the Holy Spirit
of God, the author of, regeneration and renovation: this is represented
by the ancient Jews (p) as the same with the Spirit of the Messiah that
moved upon the face of the waters, [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002.md); or the spirit of man, the seat of
this renewing work; or rather the work itself, called "a new man", "a
new creature", [Eph 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#024.md); and this is
a new frame and disposition of mind, in which are new principles of
light and life, grace and holiness; a new understanding of themselves
and state, of God and of Christ, of divine things and Gospel truths; new
affections for God, and all that is good; new desires after grace and
righteousness, after God and communion with him, after his word and
ordinances, and conformity to Christ; new purposes and resolutions to
serve the Lord, and glorify him; new delights and joys, and in short all
things become new. Instead of "within you", the Septuagint, and all the
Oriental versions, read, "in them"; and to this the Targum agrees;

and I will take the stony heart out of their flesh; a heart hardened by
sin, and confirmed in it; destitute of spiritual life, senseless and
stupid as to spiritual things; stubborn and inflexible, on which no
impressions are made by corrections, admonitions, and instructions of
superiors; and so an impenitent one: this God only can remove; men
cannot soften their own hearts; nor can ministers work upon them; nor
will judgments themselves bring men to repentance: it is the work of God
only; who does it by his word, with which he breaks the rock in pieces;
by the discoveries of his love, with which he melts the heart that is
harder than the nether millstone; by giving repentance to them, by
working faith in them, to look to a crucified Christ and mourn, and all
this by "his" Spirit: this is said to be taken "out of their flesh"; not
their body, but their nature corrupted by sin, [Joh
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#006.md); which shows that this hardness is
natural to men, and rooted in them, and that it requires omnipotence to
remove it;

and will give them an heart of flesh; a sensible and penitent one; a
soft and tender one; a sanctified and spiritual one; one flexible and
obsequious to the will of God; on which impressions are made; on which
the laws of God are written; into which the doctrines of the Gospel are
transcribed, Christ is formed, and the fear of God is implanted, with
every other grace, all which are the gifts of God, and owing to his
efficacious grace. The Targum of the whole is,

"and I will give them a fearing heart, and a spirit of fear I will put
in their bowels (or in the midst of them); and I will break the heart of
wickedness, which is as hard as a stone, out of their flesh, and I will
give them a heart fearing before me to do my will.''

\(p\) Zokar in Gen. fol. 107. 3.

[Ezekiel 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 11:20</span></span>

That they may walk in my statutes,.... Have their conversation ordered
according to the will and word of God; to which there is neither will
nor power, till God gives a new heart and spirit, or works in them both
to will and to do:

and keep mine ordinances, and do them; all things appertaining to
religion and worship, both in public and private:

and they shall be my people, and I will be their God; it will appear by
walking in the statutes of the Lord, and by keeping his ordinances, that
they are his people, made willing in the day of his power to serve him;
and by having covenant blessings bestowed on them, the grace of God
wrought in them, his fear upon them, and new hearts and spirits given
them, that he is their covenant God and Father; by this means, what
under the prevalence of idolatry was hid, will now be made manifest.

[Ezekiel 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 11:21</span></span>

But as for them,.... Who remained in Jerusalem, and were not carried
captive, but continued in their, own land, and worshipped idols, the
same as in [Eze 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#015.md);

whose heart walketh after the heart of their detestable things and their
abominations; not images of gold and silver, which cannot be said to
have a heart; but devils and evil spirits worshipped in them, who are
well pleased and delighted with the worship given them; so that the
hearts of the devils worshipped, and the hearts of the idolatrous
worshippers, were alike and agreed; wherefore their hearts were very
different from those before mentioned; so far from having one heart,
that their hearts were double and divided, partly after God, and partly
after their idols; and so far from walking in the statutes of the Lord,
that they were walking after the will of their idols, and in the worship
of them; which were abominable and detestable to God, and all good men.
The Targum is,

"and after the worship of their idols, and of their abominations, their
heart wanders.''

I will recompense their ways upon their own heads, saith the Lord God,
that is, punish them according to their deserts, by the sword, famine,
pestilence, and captivity.

[Ezekiel 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 11:22</span></span>

Then did the cherubim lift up their wings,.... In order to remove, as in
[Eze 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019.md);

and the wheels beside them; which were lifted up also along with the
cherubim:

and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above; both cherubim
and wheels.

[Ezekiel 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 11:23</span></span>

And the glory of the Lord went up from the midst of the city,.... Of
Jerusalem, whither it was removed from the door of the east gate of the
temple, [Eze 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019.md); though no mention
is made of such removal; and now, having left the temple, it leaves the
city:

and stood upon the mountain, which is on the east side of the city;
either waiting for the repentance of the inhabitants of it, leaving them
with reluctance; or in order to bring down his judgments upon it, and
behold its destruction and ruin: this mountain was the mountain of
Olives, as the Targum interprets it: and so Jarchi and Kimchi; see [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005.md). Christ stood on this mountain
and wept over Jerusalem, and from hence he ascended to heaven. This
Jarchi calls the third remove of the Shechinah or glory of the God of
Israel. The Rabbins say (q) it removed ten times, and reckon them thus,

"from the mercy seat to the cherub; from the cherub to the cherub; from
the cherub to the threshold; from the threshold to the court; from the
court to the altar; from the altar to the roof; from the roof to the
wall; from the wall to the city; from the city to the mountain; from the
mountain to the wilderness; and from the wilderness it ascended and sat
in its own place, according to [Hos
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#015.md).''

\(q\) T. Bab. Roshhashana, fol. 31. 1.

[Ezekiel 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 11:24</span></span>

Afterwards the spirit took me up,.... From the east gate of the temple,
whither he had brought him; when he had been shown, and everything had
been told him, necessary for the reproof of the Jews in Jerusalem, and
for the comfort of the captives:

and brought me in vision by the spirit of God into Chaldea, to them of
the captivity; all this was done in vision; so it appeared to the
prophet, under the influence of the divine Spirit of God, as if he was
carried to Jerusalem, and there saw and heard all he did, and then was
brought back again to Chaldea; whereas this was only mental, not
corporeal; he was all the while in Chaldea, though things were so
represented to his mind as if he had been removed from place to place:

so the vision that I had seen went up from me; he returned to himself,
and became as another man, or as he was before; and found himself in his
own house, and among the elders of Judah This shows that the vision was
from heaven, and therefore it is said to go up from him; and that
prophecy was not of the will of men, but of God; and that the prophets
were not always under the influence of a prophetic spirit; but this came
and went, and was only with them at certain times.

[Ezekiel 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 11:25</span></span>

Then I spake unto them of the captivity,.... The elders of Judah, and
others with them, at Telabib, where the prophet had a house:

all the things the Lord had showed me; all the visions contained in the
preceding chapters, from the beginning of the fourth chapter to the end
of this: as the portraying Jerusalem on a tile, and lying on his side
for a long time, as an emblem of the siege of that city; the barley
cakes, denoting a famine; the sharp knife with which he cut off his
hair, signifying the destruction of its inhabitants; how he was brought
to Jerusalem, what idolatries he saw in the temple; the vision of the
six men with slaughter weapons, and of another with a writer's inkhorn
by his side; and also the vision of the cherubim and wheels, and the
glory of the God of Israel, and their departure from the city and
temple, together with what was threatened to the Jews in Jerusalem, and
was promised to them in Chaldea; all which the prophet faithfully
related, and kept back nothing that the Lord had made known unto him by
words or signs.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 12](eze012.md)

</div>
