<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze008)  [Next](eze010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 9

In this chapter is contained a vision, representing the destruction of
the idolatrous Jews, and the preservation of the godly that were among
them, in which different persons were employed; they that were concerned
in the destruction of the idolaters are described by their office; they
had charge over the city; by their form and appearance, men; by their
number, six; by the quarter from whence they came, the way of the higher
gate northward; and by the weapons they had in their hands, slaughter
ones; and by their place and posture, standing beside the brasen altar,
[Eze 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001.md); among these were one clothed
in linen, with a writer's inkhorn by his side; to whom the glorious God
of Israel, who was removed from the cherub to the threshold of the
house, gave orders to go through the city of Jerusalem, and mark those
that mourned over the abominations of it, [Eze
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#003.md); and the rest he ordered to go
through the city, and slay all of every age, and sex, and state, except
those that had the mark; beginning at the sanctuary, and filling the
courts with the slain; which orders were obeyed, [Eze
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#005.md); upon which the prophet
expostulates with the Lord, and intercedes for the people; but is not
heard, because of the abounding of iniquity among them; their frequent
shedding of blood; their perversion of justice; and their abominable
infidelity and atheism; for which reasons he was determined to show them
no mercy, [Eze 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008.md); and the chapter is
closed with a report made by the man clothed with linen, that he had
done as was commanded him, [Eze 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#011.md).

[Ezekiel 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 9:1</span></span>

He cried also in mine ears with a loud voice,.... That is, the glory of
the Lord God of Israel, whom the prophet saw in the temple, and who
directed him from place to place, and showed him all the abominations
committed there: this loud voice of the Lord was not so much to excite
the attention of the prophet, as to call together the ministers of his
vengeance; and to show the greatness of his indignation, and the
vehemence of his wrath, which was stirred up by the sins of the people:

saying, cause them that have the charge over the city to draw near; or,

"who were appointed over the city,''

as the Targum; that is, the city of Jerusalem; by whom are meant either
the ministering angels, who had been the guardians of it, but now were
to be employed another way; or the princes of the Chaldean army, who had
a charge against the city to destroy it; see [Isa
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#006.md). The Syriac version is, "draw
near, ye avengers of the city"; and the Septuagint and Arabic versions
are "the vengeance of the city draws nigh":

even every man with his destroying weapon in his hand; weapons of war,
as bows and arrows, sword and spear; see [Jer
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022.md).

[Ezekiel 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 9:2</span></span>

And, behold, six men,.... Either angels the form of men; or the generals
of Nebuchadnezzar's army, as Kimchi interprets it; whose names are,
Nergalsharezer, Samgarnebo, Sarsechim, Rabsaris, Nergalsharezer, Rabmag,
[Jer 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#003.md); these six executioners of
God's vengeance are, in the Talmud (n), called

"wrath, anger, fury, destruction, breach, and consumption:''

came from the way of the higher gate, Kimchi observes, from the Rabbins,
that this is the eastern gate called the higher or upper gate, because
it was above the court of the Israelites. Maimonides (o) says, the upper
gate is the gate Nicanor; and why is it called the upper gate? because
it was above the court of the women; see [Kg2
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#035.md);

which lieth toward the north: where were the image of jealousy, and the
women weeping for Tammuz, and other idolatrous practices were committed;
which were the cause of the coming of these destroyers: moreover, the
Chaldean army with its generals came out of the north; for Babylon lay
north or northeast of Jerusalem; and so this gate, as Kimchi says, was
northeast; and he adds, and Babylon was northeast of the land of Israel;
see [Jer 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#013.md);

and every man a slaughter weapon in his hand; as ordered, [Eze
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001.md), a different word is here used; it
signifies a hammer, with which rocks are broken in pieces, as the above
mentioned Jewish writer observes. The Septuagint render it an axe or
hatchet:

and one man among them; not one of the six, but who made a seventh. The
Jews say this was Gabriel (p); but this was not a created angel, as
they; nor the Holy Spirit as Cocceius; but the Son of God, in a human
form; he was among the six, at the head of them, as their leader and
commander; he was but one, they six; one Saviour, and six destroyers:

was clothed with linen; not in the habit of a warrior, but of a priest;
who, as such, had made atonement for the sins of his people, and
intercession for them; and this may also denote the purity of his human
nature, and his unspotted righteousness, the fine linen, clean and
white, which is the righteousness of the saints: and

with a writer's inkhorn by his side; or "at his loins" (q); nor a
slaughter weapon, as the rest; but a writer's inkhorn; hence Kimchi
takes him to be the king of Babylon's scribe; but a greater is here
meant; even he who took down the names of God's elect in the book of
life; and who takes an account, and keeps a book of the words, and even
thoughts, of his people and also of their sighs, groans, and tears; see
[Mal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016.md); but now his business was to
mark his people, and distinguish them from others, in a providential
way; and keep and preserve them from the general ruin and destruction
that was coming upon Jerusalem: or, "a girdle on his lions", as the
Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions render it; and so was prepared
and fit for business; which sense of the word is approved of by Castel
(r); and he asks, what has an inkhorn to do at a man's loins? but it
should be observed, that it was the custom of the eastern people to
carry inkhorns at their sides, and particularly in their girdles, as the
Turks do now; who not only fix their knives and poniards in them, as Dr.
Shaw (s) relates; but the "hojias", that is, the writers and
secretaries, hang their inkhorns in them; and by whom it is observed,
that that part of these inkhorns which passes between the girdle and the
tunic, and holds their pens, is long and flat; but the vessel for the
ink, which rests upon the girdle, is square, with a lid to clasp over
it:

and they went in; to the temple, all seven:

and stood beside the brasen altar; the altar of burnt offering, so
called to distinguish it from the altar of incense, which was of gold;
here they stood not to offer sacrifice, but waiting for their orders, to
take vengeance for the sins committed in the temple, and at this altar;
near to which stood the image of jealousy, [Eze
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#005.md).

\(n\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 55. 1. (o) Hilchot Cele Hamikdash, c. 7.
sect. 6. (p) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 77. 1. & Gloss. in ib. (q) "in lumbis
suis", Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (r) Lexic. Polyglott. col. 3393. (s)
Travels, p. 227. Ed. 2.

[Ezekiel 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 9:3</span></span>

And the glory of the God of Israel was gone up from the cherub,

whereupon he was,.... That is, the glorious God of Israel; or the
glorious Shechinah, and divine Majesty, which dwelt between the cherubim
over the mercy seat in the most holy place, removed from thence, as a
token of his being about to depart from the temple, which in a short
time would be destroyed. The Targum is,

"the glory of the God of Israel departed in the cherub on which he
dwelt, in the house of the holy of holies;''

the cherubim removed with him, and were his chariot in which he rode;
see [Eze 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#018.md);

to the threshold of the house; of the holy of holies, as Jarchi
interprets it; and so was nearer to the brasen altar, where the seven
men stood, to give them their orders; of which an account follows:

and he called to the man clothed with linen, which had the writer's
inkhorn by his side; he, being the principal person, is called first;
and his business being to preserve the Lord's people shows that this was
the first care of God.

[Ezekiel 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 9:4</span></span>

And the Lord said unto him,.... This shows that a divine Person is meant
by the glory of the God of Israel:

go through the midst of the city; that is, as it is next explained,

through the midst of Jerusalem; the city the six men had the charge over
or against, [Eze 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#001.md);

and set a mark upon the foreheads; not the Hebrew letter as some say,
because in the form of a cross, and so signifying salvation by the cross
of Christ; for this letter has no such form, neither in the characters
used by the Jews, nor by the Samaritans, at least in the present
character; though Origen and Jerom on the place say that the letter
"tau" had the form of a cross in the letters the Samaritans used in
their time; and this is defended by Walton (t), who observes, that
Azariah in his Hebrew alphabet gives a double figure, one like that
which is in present use, and another in the form of a cross, called St.
Andrew's cross, and as it appears in some shekels; and in the Vatican
alphabet, which Angelus E Roccha published, the last letter has the form
of a cross; as have the Ethiopic and Coptic alphabets, which, it is
certain, sprung from the ancient Hebrew; and so Montfaucon says (u), in
some Samaritan coins, the letter "thau" has the form of a cross; which,
if Scaliger had met with, he says he would never have opposed the
testimonies of Origen and Jerom; though, after all, it seems to be no
other than the form of the Greek "x"; and so the Talmudists say (w) the
high priest, was anointed on his forehead in the same form: some think
this letter was the mark, because it is the first letter of the word
"the law"; as if it pointed out such who were obedient to it; or of the
word "thou shall live". It is a Rabbinical fancy, mentioned by Kimchi
(x), that Gabriel had orders to write the letter in ink upon the
foreheads of the righteous, and in blood upon the foreheads of the
wicked; in the one it signified "thou shall live", and in the other
"thou shall die"; but, as Calvin observes, rather, if this letter could
be thought to be meant, the reason of it was, because it is the last
letter of the alphabet; and so may signify, that the Lord's people
marked with it are the last among men, or the faith of the world; or
that such who persevere to the end shall be saved: but the word
signifies, not a letter, but a mark or sign; and so it is interpreted in
the Septuagint version, and by the Targum, Jarchi, Kimchi, and others;
and denotes the distinction the Lord had made by his grace between them
and others; and now by his power and providence in the protection of
them; for the, Lord knows them that are his, and will preserve them. The
allusion is either to the marking of servants in their foreheads, by
which they were known who they belonged to, [Rev
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003.md); or to the sprinkling of the posts
of the Israelites' houses with blood, when the firstborn of Egypt were
destroyed, [Exo 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#022.md);

of the men that sigh and that cry for all the abominations that be done
in the midst thereof; the abominations were those abominable idolatries
mentioned in the preceding chapter, and those dreadful immoralities
hinted at in [Eze 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#009.md); all which were
grieving and distressing to godly minds, because they were contrary to
the nature and will of God; transgressions, of his righteous law; and on
account of which his name was dishonoured, and his ways blasphemed and
evil spoken of; for these they sighed and groaned in private, and
mourned and lamented in public; bearing their testimony against them
with bitter expressions of grief and sorrow, by groans, words, and
tears; and such as these are taken notice of by the Lord; he comforts
those that mourn in Zion, and preserves them.

\(t\) Supplementum de Sicl. Formis, p. 37. 3. Prolegom. 3. de lingua
Hebr. sect. 36. (u) Palaeograph. Graec. l. 2. c. 3. (w) T. Bab. Ceritot,
c. 1. fol. 5. 2. (x) Vid. T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 55. 1.

[Ezekiel 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 9:5</span></span>

And, to the others he said in mine hearing,.... To the other six men
that had the slaughter weapons in their hands:

go ye after him through the city; that is, after the man clothed with
linen; for he was sent out first to take care of the righteous, and
preserve them; and the rest were not suffered to stir till he was gone;
and then they are bid to go after him. The Syriac version is,

"to them that were with him he said to them before me, go through the
city after me;''

as if these were the words of the man clothed with linen to the other
six; and so the Arabic version; of it the other is the true reading, and
gives the right sense, as the following words show:

and smite; the inhabitants of the city:

let not your eye spare, neither have ye pity; not that the Chaldeans
were inclined to mercy and pity, for they were a cruel and barbarous
people; but this is said to show the resentment of God against the sins
of the Jews; and that it was his will they should act the severe part
they did.

[Ezekiel 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 9:6</span></span>

Slay utterly old and young, both maids, and little children,

and women,.... All, of them objects of compassion, because of their age
and sex; and yet none to be spared; and which orders were exactly
obeyed; see [Ch2 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#017.md);

but come not near any man on whom is the mark; these were not to be
slain; and though some were carried captive, as Daniel, and others; yet
it was for their good and God's glory; see [Rev
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#003.md);

and begin at my sanctuary; the temple, the house of God, and the priests
and Levites that dwelt there. The Septuagint version is, "begin at my
saints"; those who professed themselves to be the saints of the Lord,
and were separated and devoted to his service; and so the Rabbins say
(y), do not read "at my sanctuary"; but "at those that sanctify me", or
"my sanctified ones"; which they interpret of those that keep the whole
law, from "aleph" to "tau"; see [Pe1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#017.md);

then they began at the ancient men which were before the house; the
seventy elders of Israel, who offered incense to the idols portrayed
upon the walls of the chambers of the temple, [Eze
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#010.md); these they slew first.

\(y\) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 4. 1.

[Ezekiel 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 9:7</span></span>

And he said unto them, defile the house,.... The temple; do not be
afraid of slaying any person in it, for fear of defiling it; they have
defiled it with their abominations, and now do you defile it with their
blood:

and fill the courts with the slain; the court of the priests, and the
court of the Israelites, and the court of the women, and all the
chambers where the priests and Levites were, and had their images
portrayed:

go ye forth; from the brasen altar by which they stood, and out of the
temple, after they had done their business there, and had slain all they
should:

and they went forth, and slew in the city; they went out of the temple,
and slew in the city all but those that had the mark.

[Ezekiel 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 9:8</span></span>

And it came to pass, while they were slaying them,.... That were in the
city:

and I was left; in the temple; and the only one that was left there, the
rest were slain; for there were none marked in the temple, only in the
city, [Eze 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004.md);

that I fell upon my face; as a supplicant, with great humility:

and cried, and said; being greatly distressed with this awful
providence:

ah, Lord God! wilt thou destroy all the residue of Israel; the ten
tribes had been carried captive before; there only remained the two
tribes of Judah and Benjamin, and these were now threatened with an
utter destruction:

in thy pouring out of thy fury upon Jerusalem? shown in the destruction
of men, both in the city and temple, by famine, pestilence, and sword.

[Ezekiel 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 9:9</span></span>

Then he said unto me,.... In order to satisfy the prophet, and make him
easy, and show the equity and justice of the divine proceedings:

the iniquity of the house of Israel and Judah is exceeding great; it
cannot be well conceived or expressed how great it is; it abounded and
superabounded: this is the answer in general, but in particular it
follows:

and the land is full of blood; of murders, as the Targum interprets it;
of shedding of innocent blood; and even of all atrocious and capital
crimes:

and the city full of perverseness; or of perversion of judgment, as the
Targum; the city of Jerusalem, where was the highest court of
judicature, where the sanhedrim of seventy one sat to do justice and
judgment, have nothing but perversion and injustice:

for they say, the Lord hath forsaken the earth, and the Lord seeth not;
does not concern himself with human affairs, and takes no notice of what
is done below; and, having imbibed such atheistical principles, were
hardened in sin, and gave themselves over to all iniquity; having no
restraints upon them from the consideration of the providence of God,
and his government of the world: or else the sense is, that the Lord had
withheld his mercy and favours from them; and therefore they showed no
regard to him, and looked upon all their evils and calamities as
fortuitous events, and not as ordered by him as punishments for their
sins.

[Ezekiel 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 9:10</span></span>

And as for me also,.... As they have not spared the poor and the needy,
the widow and the fatherless, but have perverted their judgment, and
shed innocent blood:

mine eye shall not spare, neither will I have pity, but I will
recompence their way upon their head; deal with them by the law of
retaliation, and reward them according to their deserts; see [Eze
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#004.md).

[Ezekiel 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 9:11</span></span>

And, behold, the man clothed with linen, which had the inkhorn by his
side,.... [Eze 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#002.md); to whom the orders
were given to mark the mourners in the city, [Eze
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze009.htm#004.md). The Syriac version is, "then I
saw the man", &c. which must direct him to observe and call to mind the
distinguishing goodness of God to his own people:

reported the matter, saying, I have done as thou hast commanded me;
meaning that the righteous were marked, and had been preserved, while
the others were slain. Christ, as man and Mediator, sustains the
character of a servant; as such he has commands enjoined him, which he
has obeyed; he has done all he was to do; he has fulfilled the whole
will of God, and wrought out the complete salvation of his people; a
report of which he made when here on earth, [Joh
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md); and will do again at the last
day; when all his people will be gathered in, and he shall deliver the
kingdom to the Father, and present them all to him, having been kept by
his power, saying, "lo, I and the children thou hast given me", [Isa
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#018.md); when all will be done as was
commanded, and he undertook, and the report made accordingly. Ben Melech
observes, that the "Keri", or marginal reading is,

"according to all which thou hast commanded me;''

as if he should say, there is nothing wanting of all that was commanded.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 10](eze010.md)

</div>
