<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze045)  [Next](eze047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 46:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 46

This chapter treats of the shutting of the eastern gate of the inner
court on working days, and opening it on sabbaths and new moons, for the
prince and people to worship in, [Eze
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001), gives a further account of the
sacrifices of both at these seasons, and of their different ways of
going in and out, [Eze 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#004), delivers
some rules about the prince's disposing of his gifts to his sons and
servants, [Eze 46:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#016) and describes the
places for the priest's baking and boiling the sacrifices, [Eze
46:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019)

[Ezekiel 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 46:1</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God,.... Which is premised, to raise the greater
attention to what is about to be said: the gate of the inner court that
looketh towards the east; the eastern gate of the inner court; the court
of the priests, where stood the altar of burnt offerings, and where they
offered the sacrifices for atonement; and seems, in the mystical sense,
to design the ministry of the Gospel, which is a ministry of
reconciliation; which holds forth Christ as the altar saints have a
right to eat of; and who is the sacrifice for sin, and has made
reconciliation for it; and, where this is preached, he, the angel
descending from the east, comes; here appears the rising sun, the sun of
righteousness, who arises on those that fear his name, and love his
Gospel, with healing in his wings: this gate

shall be shut the six working days; which seems to be the same with the
gate of the outward sanctuary, [Eze
44:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001) said to be always shut, and never
opened; but by what follows here it appears that that must be understood
with some exception and limitation: the six working days are the six
days of the week in which men should labour, and do all the work and
business of their callings, that they may thereby provide for themselves
and families, and have wherewith to give to the poor; during which time
the public ministry of the word is intermitted, that men may not be
taken off of their necessary and lawful employments; and that the
ministers of the word may have sufficient time to prepare in their
studies for their ministerial service:

but on the sabbath it shall be opened; by which is meant, not the Jewish
sabbath now abrogated in the times this vision refers to; but the Lord's
day, called by this Jewish name: and this being opposed to the six
working days, shows that it ought to be kept by abstinence from all
civil, corporeal, and servile works, as well as from dead works or sins,
and in the exercise of all religious duties, private and public; and
particularly in attendance on the ministry of the word, the gate now
opened; and which is sometimes expressed by opening the door of faith,
and is called an open door; and may be said to be so when ministers have
an opportunity without, and great freedom within themselves, to preach
it; and when the doors of men's hearts are opened to attend to it, and
many souls are gathered to Christ, and into his churches, by it; see
[Act 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#027),

and in the day of the new moon it shall be opened; on stated monthly
days, in which the churches of Christ meet together for religious
service: the new moon, which is an emblem of new light, and an increase
of it, is very suitable to express the Gospel dispensation; in which, as
Cocceius observes, there are some particular seasons that may be called
so; as the coming of Christ into the world; his resurrection from the
dead; the pouring forth of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost; the
destruction of the temple, and temple service; the peace and prosperity
of the Christian churches in the times of Constantine; the morning star
of the reformation; and the call of God's people out of Babylon at the
destruction of it; at all which times there has been, or will be, an
opening of this eastern gate, or a free, and glorious ministration of
the Gospel. Some think these six working days design this life, which is
the time of working, after which there will be none but an eternal
sabbath or rest; and that, for the present, saints live and walk by
faith, and not by sight; divine and heavenly things are greatly shut up,
and out of sight; but then it will be new moon, as well as sabbath, and
all things will be seen clearly; but the former sense I think is best,
which yet I leave to the judgment of others. This Kimchi says is a new
thing, that will be in time to come.

[Ezekiel 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 46:2</span></span>

And the prince shall enter by the way of the porch of that gate
without,.... That is, by the way of the porch of the eastern gate, even
the outermost gate of the porch; for, as every gate had a porch, so
every porch had two gates, one at one end, and the other at the other;
now this was the outermost gate of the porch, which looked to the
outward court, and not that which led into the inner:

and shall stand by the post of the gate; this denotes the presence of
Christ, the Prince with his people waiting at Wisdom's gate, and
watching at the posts of her door. The allusion seems to be to the
king's pillar in the temple, where he used to stand, [Ch2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2023.htm#013). Some understand this of
Christ's incarnation, of his entrance into the world, and his standing
before his Father, and praying for his people, as he did in the garden,
and a little before his death, as recorded [Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001).

and the priests shall prepare his burnt offerings, and his peace
offerings; that is, shall offer them. The meaning is, that the ministers
shall preach Christ and him crucified, who, by his sacrifice, has made
atonement for sin, and peace for his people; though some interpret this
of the concern the priests had in the crucifixion and death of Christ:

and he shall worship at the threshold of the gate; of the other gate
that led into the inner court, and where he could see all that was done
in it: or bow (i); which it is observed he did, when he fell prostrate
in the garden, and when he expired on the cross, and was at the
threshold of the gate of heaven launching into eternity: worship and
adoration, or bowing, be ascribed to Christ as man; see [Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022),

then shall he go forth; out of this world to his Father, and be seen no
more, until the restitution of all things; though this and the preceding
may be understood of Christ's mystical worshipping; or of his people,
who are one with him; and of their departure from public worship, when
it is over:

but the gate shall not be shut until the evening; of the sabbath, or new
moon; or the evening of the world, the second coming of Christ; the
Gospel ministry and ordinances will continue till then, and no longer;
and this is owing to his powerful and prevalent intercession in heaven,
whither he is gone then the door will be shut, and not before, [Mat
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#010).

\(i\) "incurvaverit se", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus; "incurvato se",
Piscator.

[Ezekiel 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 46:3</span></span>

Likewise the people of the land shall worship at the door of this gate
before the Lord,.... Publicly, and in a spiritual manner; attending the
ministration of the word and ordinances with constancy and fervency;
praying to God, praising his name, and hearing his word with attention;
and performing all the duties of religious worship. The allusion is to
the people of Israel meeting at the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation, [Exo 29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042), "in the
sabbaths, and in the new moons"; at their stated weekly and monthly
meetings; see [Isa 66:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#023).

[Ezekiel 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 46:4</span></span>

And the burnt offering the prince shall offer unto the Lord in the
sabbath day,.... In [Eze 45:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#017), it is
said to be the prince's part to give and prepare sacrifices in the
feasts, new moons, sabbaths, and all solemnities; and there follows an
account of them, for New Year's Day, and for the feasts of passover and
tabernacles; and here an account is given of those for the sabbaths and
new moons; which is very properly reserved for this place, to follow the
account of the opening of the eastern gate at those seasons: and the
burnt offering for the sabbath shall be

six lambs without blemish, and a ram without blemish; according to the
law of Moses, only two lambs were the burnt offering for this day,
besides the continual one, [Num 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#009),
here Jarchi confesses his ignorance; and Kimchi says it is a new thing;
and indeed it is, and is a proof of the ceremonial law being now
abolished. These seven denote the perfect sacrifice of Christ, by which
he has perfected for ever them that are sanctified; and being without
blemish, the purity and holiness of it; and as the people of God on the
six working days commit much sin, and contract much guilt, the sacrifice
of Christ is signified by six lambs, which it is necessary they should
hear of, and it should be set before them in the ministry of the word on
Lord's days, which is meant by the offering of it; that they may by
faith apply it to themselves, to the removal of sin from their
consciences, and take the comfort of it; as the one ram may denote the
one sacrifice of Christ, though typified by many; and who, like the ram,
is the leader and guide of the flock: now, more creatures being offered
for this burnt offering than under the law, denotes the clearer
knowledge of the sacrifice of Christ under the Gospel, and the more
extensive efficacy of it, to the removal of the guilt of sin from the
Lord's people.

[Ezekiel 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 46:5</span></span>

And the meat offering shall be an ephah for a ram,.... See Gill on [Eze
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#024),

and the meat offering for the lambs as he shall be able to give; or, and
"the gift of his hand" (k); it was fixed and stinted under the law, [Num
28:9](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#009), but now should be free and
voluntary, and according to the ability of the giver; that is, the
preacher of the word, who officiates for the prince, and in his name,
and sets before the people the meat, or rather bread offering, Christ
the bread of life, freely, and according to the ability and measure of
the gift of grace bestowed upon him:

and an hin of oil to an ephah; which was also a larger quantity than
under the law, denoting the larger measure of the gifts and graces of
the Spirit, signified by oil, given unto the ministers of the word, and
the people also; See Gill on [Eze
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#024).

\(k\) "donum manus ejus", Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 46:6</span></span>

And in the day of the new moon it shall be a young bullock without
blemish,.... This is also different from the law of Moses, which
required two young bullocks and a ram, and seven lambs, [Num
28:11](../../../bib/kjv/num028.htm#011), whereas here only one bullock:

and six lambs, and a ram; they shall be without blemish; and here Kimchi
acknowledges again that this is a new thing to be done in future time.
Some have observed, that the seven lambs under the law showed that
perfection might be hoped for and expected; but, there being but six
now, that this is not yet attained, nor will be till the saints get to
heaven; though perfection is come by the priesthood of Christ, whose
sacrifice is a perfect and complete one, and by which his people are
perfected, and they are complete in him, yet they have no perfection in
themselves.

[Ezekiel 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 46:7</span></span>

And he shall prepare a meat offering, an ephah for a bullock, and an
ephah for a ram,.... See Gill on [Eze
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#024),

and for the lambs according as his hand shall attain unto, and an hin of
oil to an ephah; See Gill on [Eze
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#005).

[Ezekiel 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 46:8</span></span>

And when the prince shall enter, he shall go in by the way of the porch
of that gate,.... See Gill on [Eze
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#002);

and he shall go forth by the way thereof; the same way he came in, he
shall go out; not so the people; and, to introduce the manner of their
going in and out, this is repeated concerning the prince.

[Ezekiel 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 46:9</span></span>

But when the people of the land shall come before the Lord in the solemn
feasts,.... To worship the Lord, to pray and praise; to honour the Lord,
and keep the solemn feast of love, the Lord's supper:

he that entereth in by the way of the north gate to worship shall go out
by the way of the south gate; and he that entereth in by the way of the
south gate shall go forth by the way of the north gate; that so such as
were coming in, and going out, might not meet, and stop and hinder one
another in going out and coming in: no mention is made of entering in by
the east gate, which was only for the prince, [Eze
44:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#001), and there was no entering in, or
going out, on the west:

he shall not return by the way of the gate he came in, but shall go
forth over against it; signifying, that those that come to the house of
God to worship, and join in communion with the saints, should not return
to their former ways and practices; to their former rites, customs, and
ceremonies in religion, used by them; and to their former principles and
errors in doctrines; and to their former sinful courses of life; but go
straight on and thorough stitch with it in their profession of Christ
and his Gospel, and in the practice of spiritual and evangelic worship;
see [Luk 9:62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062).

[Ezekiel 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 46:10</span></span>

And the prince in the midst of them,.... Christ in the midst of his
people while worshipping; this situation of him agrees with all the
descriptions of him; as the Angel in the midst of the bush on fire, and
not consumed; as among the myrtle trees in the bottom; as walking in the
midst of his golden candlesticks; as the tree of life in the midst of
the paradise of God; and as King, Priest, and Prophet, in his house; and
with all the declarations and promises of his grace; and which is true
in fact: and the phrase is expressive of his presence, not merely of his
essential, powerful, and providential presence, common to all, but of
his gracious presence with his people; he is in the midst of them, to
assist them in every service; to protect them from every enemy; to
sympathize with them in all their troubles; to deliver out of them; to
supply them with all needful grace; and to rule over them, and defend
them: and his being here shows that he is to be seen of all, to be come
at and enjoyed by them; than which nothing is more desirable, and
nothing more encouraging in the worship of God:

when they go in, shall go in; and when they go forth, shall go forth;
when they go to the throne of grace, for grace and mercy to help in time
of need, he goes with them; their access is through him; he introduces
their persons, presents their petitions, is their advocate and
intercessor for them, and for his sake they are heard and accepted: when
they go into the house of God, and to the ordinances of it; when they go
in and out to find pasture, he goes in with them, and before them, as
the shepherd of the flock, and leads them into green pastures; he
teaches them how to go in and out, and to behave themselves in the
church of God; he is their guide, by way of instruction, both by his
word and by his Spirit: when they go out from public service to their
own houses, he goes with them, and by his Spirit brings to their
remembrance what they have heard; and when they go forth into the world
again, and the business of it, he goes forth with them, to preserve them
from the evil of the world, and to keep them from falling; and when they
go forth out of the world at death, he is with them through the dark
valley; he sees them safe over Jordan's river, and introduces them into
the heavenly Canaan, into his kingdom and glory, where they are for ever
with him.

[Ezekiel 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 46:11</span></span>

And in the feasts, and in the solemnities,.... Or, "appointed times"
(l); for public worship, for the ministration of the word and
ordinances, which are feasts and solemn seasons; See Gill on [Eze
45:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#015). Kimchi observes a difference
between these two; and that though all feasts are called solemnities, or
fixed seasons, [Lev 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#004), yet there
are some solemnities that are not feasts, [Gen
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014),

the meat offering shall be an ephah to a bullock, and to the lambs as he
is able to give, and an hin of oil to an ephah; the same to be done on
all feasts and solemnities as on the sabbath day; See Gill on [Eze
46:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#005).

\(l\) "et statis temporibus", Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 46:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 46:12</span></span>

Now when the prince shall prepare a voluntary burnt offering, or peace
offerings voluntarily unto the Lord,.... That is, on week days, distinct
from sabbath days, new moons, feasts, and solemnities, of which before;
and seems to have respect to week day lectures, in distinction from the
weekly and monthly stated times, for the ministry of the word and
administration of the Lord's supper; in which lectures the principal
thing insisted on must be the atoning sacrifice of Christ, and peace and
reconciliation made by his blood; for the Gospel, which is to be
preached in season and out of season, is the ministry of reconciliation,
or the word preaching peace by Jesus Christ; and which should at all
times be held forth, to the faith of God's people; which is meant by the
preparation of these offerings: and being voluntary ones show not only
that Christ's sacrifice was a willing one, and offered without any
reluctance, with all readiness and cheerfulness; but also that week day
lectures are voluntary things, which men are not under necessary
obligation to attend unto, either ministers or people, but is a matter
of free choice, as their circumstances will admit; and yet are
acceptable to God, and agreeable to the will of Christ, the Prince, said
to prepare these free will offerings:

one shall then open him the gate that looketh toward the east: the place
where he stood and worshipped on the sabbath day; on the evening of
which it was shut, and remained so the six days of the week, [Eze
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#001) only when it was the prince's
pleasure to offer a sacrifice, or to have the word preached, it was
opened by one of the porters of the gates; or there was an open exercise
of the ministry of the word, by one of the preachers of it:

and he shall prepare his burnt offerings, and his peace offerings, as he
did on the sabbath day; the same doctrine, respecting the sacrifice and
satisfaction of Christ, must be delivered at such times, as on Lord's
days:

then he shall go forth; and after his going forth one shall shut the
gate; on the sabbath day, or the Lord's day, it was not to be shut till
the evening, because that day is wholly to be devoted to the service of
God; men are not to find their own ways, nor do their own work, nor seek
their own pleasure; but on week days, when the lecture is over, the gate
is shut immediately, and persons may return to their worldly business
directly.

[Ezekiel 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 46:13</span></span>

Thou shalt daily prepare a burnt offering unto the Lord,.... Called the
daily sacrifice, [Dan 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#011) typical of
Christ's sacrifice, which has a continual daily virtue in it, to take
away the sins of his people; and which ought to be looked unto faith,
and pleaded by them for that purpose every day [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029),

of a lamb of the first year without a blemish; a type of Christ the Lamb
of God, without spot and blemish, strong and able, and so fit and proper
to be a sacrifice for the sins of others:

thou shalt prepare it every morning; or, "morning by morning" (m); this
seems to be said not to the prince, but rather to the prophet, and
indeed to every believer; who should, every morning he rises, look to
Christ as the atoning sacrifice for sin, whose blood continually
cleanses from it, and who is always in the midst of the throne as a lamb
that had been slain, and ever lives to make intercession; and as the
mercies of the Lord's people are renewed every morning, they should
renew their thankfulness to God as often, and bring this lamb with them,
through whose sacrifice their sacrifices of praise become acceptable. No
mention is made of the evening sacrifice; see [Exo
29:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#038), which some think is included in
the morning burnt offering. Kimchi thinks that in future time this was
not to be offered, only the morning sacrifice; but the true reason is,
Christ has appeared once in the evening of the world, and offered up
himself; yea, it was literally in the evening, or decline of the day,
when he suffered, or between the two evenings, whereby he answered the
type of the passover lamb; hence no evening sacrifice is mentioned,
Christ's being offered up.

\(m\) "in mane, in mane", Montanus, Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 46:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 46:14</span></span>

And thou shalt prepare a meat offering for morning,.... That is, for the
daily burnt offering to go along with it; prayer and thanksgiving for
our temporal and spiritual food, which should be done every morning:

the sixth part of an ephah, and the third part of an hin of oil, to
temper with the fine flour; to mix with it, and moisten it: under the
law, only a tenth part of an ephah of fine flour, and a fourth part of a
hin of oil, were ordered to make this meat offering of, [Exo
29:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#040), wherefore Kimchi observes, this
is a new thing in time to come: the reason of it is this; to show us,
that as the blessings of grace abound under the Gospel dispensation, we
should abound in our thanksgiving to God:

a meat offering, continually, by a perpetual ordinance unto the Lord;
these sorts of sacrifices are never to cease; and so the Jews (n)
themselves say,

"in future time, or in the days of the Messiah, all sacrifices shall
cease; but the sacrifice of praise shall not cease.''

\(n\) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 9. fol. 153. 1.

[Ezekiel 46:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 46:15</span></span>

Thus shall they prepare,.... This shows that not a single person is
meant in the preceding verses, but all the Lord's people; who are all
priests unto God, and who are to offer up daily spiritual sacrifices
unto him:

the lamb, and the meat offering, and the oil every morning, for a
continual burnt offering; which is repeated for the confirmation of it,
and to excite a careful and constant attention to it.

[Ezekiel 46:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 46:16</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God,.... Having finished the account of the
sacrifices of the prince and people, the monthly, weekly, and daily
ones; here his gifts are treated of, which are two fold; some given to
his sons, others to his servants:

if the prince give a gift to any of his sons; Christ, the Prince, has
sons; he that is the Prince, of peace is the everlasting Father; he has
children given unto him, whom he preserves; a seed promised him in
covenant, which shall always endure; a family he is master of, and cares
for; for whose sake he became incarnate, suffered, and died: they are
sons by adopting grace, and in their adoption he has a great concern;
they are predestinated to it by him; they receive it through him; he
gives them power to become the sons of God, and they are manifestatively
so through faith in him; they appear to be his sons, or are evidenced as
such by their regeneration, which also is of him: it is by his Spirit
they are regenerated; it is his grace that is implanted in them; it is
he himself that is formed in them, and his image that is stamped upon
them; it is owing to his word and Gospel as the means and to his
resurrection as the virtual cause of it; it is in his church they are
born, yea, of her, to whom he stands in the relation of a husband, and
so they are sons brought forth to him by her; and these are princes by
birth, have a free and princely spirit, and are brought up and provided
for as such: now to these Christ gives gifts; gifts of special grace,
all sorts of grace; sanctifying grace, faith, hope, love, repentance,
&c.; justifying grace, the gift of righteousness; pardoning grace;
adopting grace; all supplies of grace; spiritual strength, peace, joy
and comfort; and persevering grace, to hold out to the end: and he also
gives glory or eternal life; this is with him, in his hands; he has a
power to give and he does give it, to all his sons; all which, being
once given, ever continue.

The inheritance thereof shall be his sons', it shall be their possession
by inheritance; that is, it shall ever remain with them, shall never be
taken away from them; these are gifts and calling without repentance,
irreversible blessings, which are for ever: sanctifying grace is a well
of living water, springing up unto eternal life; faith, hope, and love,
always abide; Christ's justifying righteousness is an everlasting one;
pardon of sin is of all sin, past, present, and to come, and is never
made void or called in; once children of God, and always such; and the
inheritance of heaven is incorruptible, never fading, and eternal; and
all this flows from the unchangeable love of God and Christ to these
sons of the prince.

[Ezekiel 46:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 46:17</span></span>

But if he give a gift of his inheritance to one of his servants,.... Who
are not his sons, but his hired servants, and who serve him in a
mercenary way; such are unregenerate ministers of the word, who preach
Christ in pretence, and not in reality, for by ends, to serve
themselves, and not him, or to advance his glory; and all carnal
professors, who have only an outside of religion, a form of godliness
without the power of it: to these Christ gives gifts, the gifts of
nature, wealth, and riches, to some, to whom he gives not grace; these
are his left hand blessings, which are given to the men of the world,
who have their portion in this life: to others external means, the word
and ordinances, but not internal special grace; yea, to some, gifts for
the ministry, so as to be able to prophesy or preach in his name, which
are meant by the talents, and pounds in the parable; some of which were
given to slothful and unprofitable servants; see [Mat
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#020).

Then it shall be his to the year of liberty; the servant's to whom it is
given, as long as the prince pleases; who when they make no use, or an
ill use of them, takes them away in lifetime, and gives them to those
that have more, and employ them to better purpose, [Zac
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#017), or however at death, which is a
time of liberty from civil bondage, the servant is free from his master;
and when good men are freed from the oppression of others, and from sin,
Satan, and the world, and are delivered into the glorious liberty of the
children of God; this is a year of liberty indeed to them; and then all
external gifts to others, as riches, are held no longer; the word and
ordinances no more enjoyed; prophesying, speaking with tongues, and all
mere natural knowledge, cease, and vanish away, [Co1
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#008), the allusion is to the year of
jubilee, when liberty was proclaimed throughout the land, and every man
returned to his possession, and to his family, [Lev
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#010), and so the Targum, Jarchi, and
Kimchi, interpret it of the year of jubilee; a type of the heavenly
glory, and of the joy of the Lord, which Christ's faithful servants
enter into; and when there will be a manifest difference between them
and slothful servants, and the gifts of the one and of the other, and of
their use of them, as well as between sons and servants:

after it shall return to the prince; signifying that such gifts are not
durable; they are revertible to the donor of them; who will call these
servants to an account for them at death or judgment, if not in time of
life:

but his inheritance shall be his sons' for them; the prince's
inheritance shall be theirs; for being sons they are heirs, heirs of
God, and joint heirs with Christ: or that which is given them for an
inheritance shall always continue; it shall never be taken from them or
returned; but it shall be their own, for themselves, and enjoy it for
ever; which is a confirmation of what is said in the preceding verse.

[Ezekiel 46:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 46:18</span></span>

Moreover the prince shall not take of the people's inheritance by
oppression, to thrust them out of their possession,.... Christ, the
Prince, will never do this; he will never take any part of his people's
inheritance from them, or thrust them out of the possession of any
benefit or blessing of grace; they have chosen that good part which
shall never be taken from them, [Luk
10:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#042), this is said, not as a
direction to the prince, as a law enjoined him, or a caution to him
against oppression; but as expressing his clemency, grace, and goodness
to his subjects, and their safety and security under him:

but he shall give his sons inheritance out of his own possession;
whatever Christ gives his sons, whether present grace, or future glory,
it is out of his own possession; for all that the Father has are his;
all the blessings of goodness are with him; all the fulness of grace is
in him; the eternal inheritance is reserved with him in heaven; and it
is all his own he gives, and not another's:

that my people be not scattered every man from his possession; or, "that
therefore my people may not be scattered every" "men from his
possession" (o); because what is given them, and they are in possession
of, was Christ's own, and not another's; and which he had a right to
dispose of, and therefore they need not fear being dispossessed by
another claimant.

\(o\) "ideo ne dispergantur populus meus", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 46:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 46:19</span></span>

After he brought me through the entry, which was at the side of the
gate,.... The north gate of the inner court, where the prophet was last,
[Eze 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#004), through an entry, by the
side of that, he was brought by the man his guide:

into the holy chambers of the priests; see [Eze
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#013),

and, behold, there was a place in the two sides westward; or, "on their
sides westward" (p); on the west side of the chambers; the Targum is at
the west end of them: the use of this place follows,

\(p\) "in lateribus ejus vel eorum, in extremo", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 46:20</span></span>

Then said he unto me,.... Declaring what this place was, and what it was
for:

this is the place where the priests shall boil the trespass offering,
and the sin offering; this was the priests' kitchen, in which they
prepared the sacrifices that were to be eaten; and which were typical of
Christ, who was made sin, and became a sacrifice for the sins of his
people, whether presumptuous ones, or sins of ignorance; the doctrine of
whose sacrifice and satisfaction is a principal part of the Gospel
ministry; and which should be delivered, not in a raw, crude, and
indigested manner; but the Scriptures should be diligently searched
into, to get a clear and distinct understanding of it; and these should
be constantly meditated on, and thoroughly studied: ministers should
examine their doctrine by the word of God before they deliver it; and
take heed unto it that it is right, according to the oracles of God, and
the proportion of faith; and take care to deliver it in the best manner,
not in a cold lukewarm way, but with fervency of spirit; all which may
be meant by the boiling of these sacrifices; it seems to design the
laborious and diligent employ of Gospel ministers in their studies,
preparatory to their public work in the house of God; and suggests that
they should not come thither unprepared, and deliver out unpremeditated
matter; or set before the Lord's people undigested food; or offer that
in the sanctuary of the Lord which cost them no pains or trouble: this
place, and so the boiling places in [Eze
46:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#024), are to be understood of the
closets, studies, and places of retirement, where the ministers of the
word employ their time and thoughts in preparing for their public
ministry; for these were without the sanctuary, on the side of the
priests' chambers, and in the corners of the outward court:

where they shall bake the meat offering; or "bread offering" (q); made
of fine flour and oil; typical of Christ the bread of God, the food of
believers, who is set forth as such to them in the ministry of the
Gospel: the baking of this signifies the same as the boiling of the
other before; see [Lev 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001),

that they bear them not out in the utter court, to sanctify the people;
that they might not be carried through the outer court, where the common
people were; lest they should think it was lawful for them to eat of
them as Kimchi observes, when they belonged to the priests only; or lest
they should touch them, and become holy thereby, and so for the future
be employed in sacred service, and obliged to quit the duties of their
calling, which would, introduce confusion in the commonwealth; see [Hag
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#012), the Targum is,

"lest they be mixed with the people.''

The design seems to be to show, that the doctrine of peace, pardon,
atonement, and satisfaction for sin, is only to be preached as belonging
to such that truly repent of sin, and believe in Christ; and
particularly that the ordinance of the Lord's supper, in which the
sacrifice of Christ is held forth and commemorated, is to be
administered, not to men in common, but to holy and regenerate persons;
to do otherwise would be to cast pearls before swine, and give that
which is holy to dogs.

\(q\) "the minchah."

[Ezekiel 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 46:21</span></span>

Then he brought me forth into the utter court,.... From the holy
chambers of the priests, and from viewing the place where they boiled
the sacrifices, and baked the meat offering:

and caused me to pass by the four corners of the court; in each of the
four corners of the outward court there was another court; signifying
that there will be courts or churches in the several parts of the world
in the latter day.

[Ezekiel 46:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 46:22</span></span>

In the four corners of the court there were courts joined,.... To the
side walls of the outward court, which met in right angles: or, "were
made with chimneys" (r), as some render it; that the smoke of the fire
of the kitchens in them, and the steam of the boiled flesh, might ascend
through them. So the Jewish writers, as Jarchi and Kimchi, from the
Misnah (s), generally interpret the word, that these courts were made so
as to let out the smoke, and were not roofed or floored over (t); and in
which treatise and also by Maimonides (u); the uses of them in the
second temple are observed: for in answer to the question, what do they
serve for? it is said, at the southeast was the chamber of the
Nazarites, where they boiled their peace offerings, and shaved their
hair, and put them under the pot; at the northeast was the wood chamber,
where the priests that had blemishes wormed the wood; and any wood, in
which a worm was found, was rejected from the altar: at the northwest
was the chamber of the lepers: of that which was at the southwest, saith
R. Eliezer Ben Jacob, I have forgot (some render it found) of what use
it is; but Abba Saul says, there they put the wine and oil, wherefore it
was called the oil chamber. These four chambers, according to the same
treatise, were in the four corners of the court of the women, and
consisted of forty cubits long, but were not roofed; and so, they say,
they will be in future time, according to this passage of Scripture.
These places, as Dr. Lightfoot (w) observes, are called by the prophet
"courts", and in everyone of them places to boil the sacrifices in; and
yet they are allotted to other uses in the Misnah, and which seem to
require that they should be roofed; all which may consist together, he
says: for, grant everyone of these spaces to be built within, with
chambers round about, there might be very fair chambers, and yet a good
handsome open court in the middle; at either end chambers of ten cubits
broad, and yet an open space of twenty cubits between; and on either
side chambers of seven or eight cubits broad, and yet an open space of
fourteen or sixteen cubits between: thus therefore, adds he, it seems to
be, that there were fair chambers round about, which were roofed over as
other buildings; and in the middle was an open court, round about which
were boiling ranges, whose chimneys went up in the inner walls of the
chambers, or the walls to the open place: thus the inner court served
for boiling places, and the rooms round about for other uses; see the
two following verses. The measure of the courts were,

of forty cubits long, and thirty broad; an oblong quadrangle:

these four corners were of one measure; the courts that were in these
four corners were, of the same measure, as to length and breadth;
denoting the equality of Gospel churches, being of the same faith, order
and discipline, power and authority.

\(r\) "atria caminata", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus, Cocceius;
"fumosa", Tigurine version, Castalio; "fumigata", Starckius. (s) Middot,
c. 2. sect. 5. (t) Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. (u) Hilchot Beth
Habechira, c. 5. sect. 8. (w) Prospect of the Temple, c. 18. p. 1092,
1093.

[Ezekiel 46:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 46:23</span></span>

And there was a row of building round about in them,.... Within the
courts, not on the outside of them: these were either chambers to eat
the sacrifices in when boiled; or they were sheds which covered the
cooks, and the meat they were boiling, from the rain, &c.: the Targum
renders it,

"and walls were made to them round about;''

to the court: and so Jarchi and Kimchi interpret this row of building of
a stone wall:

round about them four; the four courts at the four corners:

and it was made with boiling places under the rows round about; under
these rows of building, chambers or sheds; or under these stone walls
were furnaces, and coppers, and caldrons, set on them, for the boiling
of the sacrifices.

[Ezekiel 46:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze046.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 46:24</span></span>

Then said he unto me, these are the places of them that boil,.... The
kitchens, in which those whose business it was to boil the sacrifices
did it; and who they were are next declared:

where the ministers of the house shall boil the sacrifice of the people;
these seem to be the Levites, as distinct from the priests before
mentioned; though in this prophecy they are both used of the same
persons; see [Eze 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015), the sacrifice
of the people were the peace offerings, which the people might eat of,
but were first to be boiled; typical of peace and reconciliation made by
Christ, held forth in the ministry of the word, called from thence the
word of reconciliation: of the boiling of sacrifices; see Gill on [Eze
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze044.htm#015). The Targum is,

"the holy sacrifices of the people;''

see [Rom 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#001).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 47](eze047)

</div>
