<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze004)  [Next](eze006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 5

This chapter is of the same argument with the former; and contains a
type of Jerusalem's destruction; an explanation of that type; what were
the reasons of God's judgments on that city; and the nature, rise, and
end of them. The type is in [Eze 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001.md);
the explanation of that type is in [Eze
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#005.md); the reasons of the severe
judgments threatened are changing the statutes of the Lord, and not
walking in them, and defiling the sanctuary with their abominations,
[Eze 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#006.md); an account of the judgments
of God, answerable to each of the parts in the type, [Eze
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012.md); the ends of these judgments are,
with respect to God, the accomplishment of his anger, and the
satisfaction of his justice; with respect to the Jews, bringing them to
an acknowledgment that he had spoken in his zeal; and, with respect to
the nations, their instruction and astonishment, [Eze
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013.md); and the chapter is concluded
with an assurance that these judgments would be sent, [Eze
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#016.md).

[Ezekiel 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 5:5</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, this is Jerusalem,.... A type or sign of it; it
may refer to both the former and latter type. It is the city of
Jerusalem that is designed by the city portrayed upon the tile; and the
same is signified by the head of the prophet that was to be shaved; that
being not only the chief city of Judea, but of the whole world, as
follows:

I have set it in the midst of the nations; as the chief of them; and
distinguished it from them by peculiar favours and blessings, natural
and spiritual; being seated in a land flowing with milk and honey; and
having the house and worship of God in it; and where were the symbols of
his presence, and his word and ordinances; and therefore should have
excelled them in true religion, devotion, and holiness, and set an
example to them. The Jews generally understand this of the natural
situation of Jerusalem. Jarchi interprets it of the middle of the world;
as if it was mathematically placed in the centre of the earth. Kimchi
says it was in the midst of the continent; and so its air was better
than others; and these sort of writers (n) often speak of the land of
Israel being in the navel or centre of the earth; they say (o) that the
sanhedrim sat in the middle of the world; and therefore is compared to
the navel, [Sol 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#002.md); because it sat in
the temple, which was in the middle of the world; but the former sense
is best; though Jerom gives in to the latter:

and countries that are round about her: this is a proposition of itself;
fire former clause being distinguished from it by the accent "athnach";
and should be rendered thus, "and the countries are", or "were, round
about her" (p); on the east was Asia, on the west Europe on the south
Africa and Libya, and on the north Babylon, Scythia, Armenia, Persia,
and Pontus; and was mere conspicuous, eminent, and honourable than them
all, having greater privileges, prerogatives, and excellencies; and
therefore should have exceeded them in its regard to the laws and
statutes of God, which she did not; hence this is said, in order to
upbraid her for her ingratitude, as appears by the following words.

\(n\) Kimchi in Ezek. xxxviii. 12. (o) T. Bab. Sanhedrin. fol. 37. 1. &
Gloss. in ib. (p) "et circa eam erant terrae", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 5:6</span></span>

And she hath changed my judgments into wickedness more than the
nations,.... So they changed their glory for that which did not profit;
and the glory of the incorruptible God into an image made like to
corruptible man; and the truth of God into a lie, [Jer
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011); or, "for wickedness" (q.md); for
judgments and laws that were not good, and which to observe was
wickedness. The word rendered "changed" signifies to "rebel against" or
to "transgress": and the may be, she, that is, Jerusalem, has "rebelled"
against my judgments, and "transgressed" (r) them in a wicked manner,
even to a greater degree than the nations of the world. The Targum and
Jarchi interpret it changed as we do:

and my statutes more than the countries that are round about her.
"Judgments" and "statutes", are the same laws and ordinances of worship,
being just and righteous, and firm and unalterable; unless it should
rather be thought that "judgments" belong to the moral law, being given
forth by the Lord as a judge, and founded upon judgment and
righteousness; and "statutes" to the ceremonial law, being of positive
institution and appointment, and to last so long as it was the pleasure
of the lawgiver:

for they have refused my judgments and my statutes; they refused to
comply with them, and to yield an obedience to them, and that with
loathing, disdain, and contempt, as the word (s) signifies,

they have not walked in them; they did not make them the role of their
walk and conversation; they showed no regard to them; they went out of
the way of them, into crooked paths, with the workers of iniquity.

\(q\) "ut improbe ageret", Cocceius. (r) "transgressa est, vel rebellis
fuit", Calvin; "refractaria (s) "Verbum" "significat spernere,
reprobare, rejicere, idque ex contemptu et fastidio", Polanus.

[Ezekiel 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 5:7</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God,.... Having observed their sins, and
which are still enlarged upon, the Lord proceeds to denounce his
judgments against them:

because ye multiplied more than the nations that are round about you;
not in numbers, nor in wealth and riches, or in blessings and
privileges, and therefore grew wanton and forgetful; though this was
true: but in sins and wickedness, which abounded among them, and in
which they exceeded the nations round about them; and so the Targum
paraphrases it,

"because that ye have sinned more than the people that are round about
you:''

and have not walked in my statutes, neither have kept my judgments;
which as repeated to show the certainty of fact, and how much the Lord
resented it:

neither have done according to the judgments of the nations that are
round about you. The Syriac version leaves out the negative particle and
renders the words thus, "but ye have done the judgments of the nations
which are round about you"; and it may be observed, that it is omitted
in parallel text, [Eze 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#012.md); and this
is what the Jews are often reproved for, that they followed the laws and
customs of the Gentiles, and worshipped their gods; and the opposition
to the preceding clause seems to require this sense; but the retaining
the negative particle is confirmed by the Targum, Masora, and the
Septuagint and Arabic versions; and also by the Talmud (t), which
reconciles the passage with the parallel text before mentioned, thus,

"according to those things which are right among them (the Gentiles) ye
have not done; but according to what are corrupt among them ye have
done;''

and the meaning is, either that they did not walk according to the law
and light of nature, which the Gentiles had, and attended to, [Rom
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014.md); or that they did not follow them
in their conduct and behaviour; they were not so zealous for the true
God as the Heathens were for their idols; they were not so tenacious of
the laws and worship the true God of Israel as the Gentiles were of
their superstitious rites and ceremonies; the Gentiles did not change
their gods, and manner of worship, but retained what, they received from
their ancestors time immemorial; but the Jews changed their glory for
that which did not profit, [Jer 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011.md).

\(t\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 39, 9.

[Ezekiel 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 5:8</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God, behold, even I, am against thee,....
Or, "behold, I am against thee, even I" (u); who am the Lord God
omnipotent, great King, and a dreadful one; and a terrible thing it is
for a people to have the mighty God against them; or for any to fall
into the hands of the living God: this is repeated to show that it
certainly was so; and that the Lord was set upon it; and determined to
come forth against them in the way of his judgments, as follows:

and will execute judgments in the midst of thee, in the sight of the
nations; that is, inflict punishments upon them for their disregard to
his righteous judgments, which should take place in the midst of them,
and consume them all around; and should be so manifest as to be seen by
all the nations about them.

\(u\) "ecce ego ad te, etiam ego", Pagninus, Montanus; "ecce ego contra
te, etiam ego", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 5:9</span></span>

And I will do in thee that which I have not done,.... In any other
nation, or to any other people; not in the old world, when the flood was
brought upon the world of the ungodly; not in Sodom and Gomorrah, when
they were destroyed by fire from heaven; not in Egypt, when he inflicted
his plagues on Pharaoh and his people; nor among the Canaanites, when
they were drove out of their land for their abominations:

and whereunto I will not do any more the like; at least not of a long
time; and, besides, this may not only refer to the siege of Jerusalem by
the Chaldeans, but also by the Romans:

because of all thine abominations; the wickednesses of all sorts that
were committed among them, which were abominable to the Lord, and
particularly their idolatries; these were the causes why he would do, or
suffer to be done, things that were never seen, known or heard of
before; and are as follow:

[Ezekiel 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 5:10</span></span>

Therefore the fathers shall eat the sons in the midst of thee,.... Which
was long ago threatened by the Lord, and prophesied of by Moses, [Lev
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#027.md); and was fulfilled at several
times in the people of Israel, as at the siege of Samaria, [Kg2
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#028.md); at the siege of Jerusalem by
Nebuchadnezzar, [Lam 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#010.md); and at the
siege of the same city by Titus Vespasian, as Josephus (w) relates; for
though these instances only show that mothers ate their children, yet no
doubt the fathers took part with them; and if mothers, who are naturally
more tender, could do this, it is much more reasonable to suppose that
fathers did the same:

and the sons shall eat their fathers; this, though nowhere recorded, yet
doubtless was done; it being as reasonable to think that a son might eat
his father as a father his son, though both monstrously shocking:

and I will execute judgments in thee; punishments, such as pestilence,
famine, and sword, after mentioned:

and the whole remnant of thee will I scatter into all the winds; that
is, those that remain, and are not cut off, by the above judgments,
shall be carried captive into Babylon, or be dispersed in to Egypt,
Ammon, Moab, and other places: this had a full accomplishment in the
dispersion of the Jews into the several parts of the world, when they
were destroyed by the Romans.

\(w\) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 3. sect. 4. Ed. Hudson.

[Ezekiel 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 5:11</span></span>

Wherefore, as I live, saith the Lord God,.... This is a form of an oath,
and shows that what is after said should certainly be done; God would
not repent of it, nor revoke it:

surely, because thou hast defiled my sanctuary, with all thy detestable
things, and with all thine abominations: that is, with their idols and
idolatrous worship, which were detestable and abominable to the Lord; so
Manasseh not only built altars for Baal in the house of the Lord, but
set up in it a graven image of the grove, [Kg2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003.md);

therefore will I also diminish thee; as they lessened his glory by such
abominable actions, so he threatens that he would lessen their
privileges and blessings; as they took away from him the worship and
honour that were due to him, so he would take away from them their civil
and church state, his sanctuary, word, and ordinances, and deprive them
of everything that was valuable and excellent. The Targum paraphrases
it,

"I will cut off the strength of thine arm;''

weaken her power:

neither shall mine eye spare, neither will I have any pity; when in the
greatest misery and distress. The Targum is,

"my Word shall not spare, &c.''

[Ezekiel 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 5:12</span></span>

A third part of them shall die with the pestilence,.... This, with what
follows, explains the division of the hair into the three parts, and
what was done with them; and shows that the burning of one third part
denotes their being destroyed by the pestilence, mentioned along with
burning coals, [Hab 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#005.md); and by
famine, as follows:

and with famine shall they be consumed in the midst of thee; and though
there is no account of the former, yet there is of the latter; and no
doubt but the pestilence raged, as well as the famine, at the siege of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar:

and a third part shall fall by the sword round about thee; signified by
the third part of the hair, smitten with a knife; and intends such as
perished by the sword of the Chaldeans at the taking of the city, and
when they fled out of it; and so are properly said to fall round about
it:

and I will scatter a third part into all the winds; the greatest part of
which were carried into Babylon, and others into other parts; See Gill
on [Eze 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#002.md);

and I will draw out a sword after them; particularly after them that
went into Egypt. The Septuagint and Arabic versions read a "fourth part"
in each clause, as before; and make it out thus, "a fourth part of thee
shall be consumed with death (the pestilence); and a fourth part of thee
shall be consumed with famine in the midst of thee; and a fourth part of
thee I will scatter to every wind; and a fourth part of thee shall fall
by the sword round about thee; and I will draw out the sword after
them".

[Ezekiel 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 5:13</span></span>

Thus shall mine anger be accomplished,.... Finished, perfected,
consummated, by bringing the above judgments upon them, pestilence,
famine, and sword, and by scattering them to every wind: what had been
threatened long, and only some drops of it were let fall in times past,
now was poured forth to the uttermost:

and I will cause my fury to rest upon them; to continue and abide upon
them, and not move, at least for the space of threescore and ten years;
see [Zac 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012.md);

and I will be comforted; by taking vengeance on them; so satisfying his
justice, and easing him of his enemies; see [Isa
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#024.md); a speech after the manner of
men; who, when they have been affronted, and have avenged themselves,
are easy in their minds, and satisfied:

and they shall know that I the Lord have spoken it in my zeal; that is,
they shall find by experience that what the Lord had spoken by his
prophets, and had threatened to bring upon them, was said in earnest,
and arose from a jealousy for his own glory; this will be a clear case,
and out of question:

when I have accomplished my fury in them; by the utter destruction of
them; as follows:

[Ezekiel 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 5:14</span></span>

Moreover I will make thee waste,.... That is, their land; which, being
without inhabitants, lay untilled; and so became barren and unfruitful:

and a reproach among the nations that are round about thee, in the sight
of all that pass by; who, seeing it in this desolate condition, shall
throw out their taunts and jeers upon it, as in [Lam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015.md).

[Ezekiel 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 5:15</span></span>

So it shall be a reproach and a taunt,.... The subject of the reproaches
and taunts of the enemy; see [Jer
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#009.md); this is repeated for the greater
confirmation of it:

an instruction; or "discipline", or "correction" (x). The meaning is,
that the Gentiles, seeing the judgments of God upon the Jews, would
hereby learn righteousness, forsake their sins, amend their ways, and
fear, the Lord:

and an astonishment unto the nations that are round about thee; being
amazed that such judgments should fall upon a people that had been so
highly favoured of God; and at their stupidity, hardness, and
incorrigibleness under them:

when I shall execute judgments in thee in anger and in fury, and in
furious rebukes; a heap of words, not only denoting the certainty of
divine judgments, but the greatness and fierceness of divine wrath, in
the execution of them; that these were not fatherly chastisements,
rebukes in love, but the effects of vindictive justice:

I the Lord have spoken it; or those things, as the Arabic version; and
as sure as I have spoken, I will do. The Targum is,

"I the Lord have decreed in my word;''

and so in [Eze 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#013.md); where it is
added, and I will confirm or accomplish.

\(x\) "disciplina", Pagninus; "castigatio", Vatablus, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 5:16</span></span>

When I shall send upon them the evil arrows of famines,.... Either
famine itself, which is as an arrow; it is taken out of the quiver of
the Lord of hosts, and is shot by him; and moves swiftly when it has a
commission; and is very destructive: or arrows which bring on a famine,
such as drought, excessive rains, blasting, mildew, locusts, &c. or
arrows which the famine brings, as leanness, faintness, blackness, and
death; and, in either sense, are evil ones; and are sent of God for the
following end:

which shall be for their destruction, and which I will send to destroy
you; God's design in sending them was to destroy, and that was answered;
and a very destroying arrow famine is, and therefore called evil:

and I will increase the famine upon you; or "gather (y) it upon", or
"against you"; as if it was an army with bows and arrows:

and will break your staff of bread: take away the virtue from the little
they had, that that should not nourish and satisfy; See Gill on [Eze
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#016.md).

\(y\) "famen congregabo, super vos", V. L. Pagninus; "famen colligam
super vos", Montanus, Polanus, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 5:17</span></span>

So will I send upon you famine, and evil beasts,.... Famine is repeated
for the further confirmation of it; and "evil beasts" are added, by whom
are meant, not the Chaldeans, comparable to such; but literally lions,
wolves, hears, &c. which are threatened the Jews, in case of
disobedience, [Lev 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#022.md); and which
sometimes were sent, [Kg2 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024.md);

and they shall bereave thee; that is, of her children, whom the evil
beasts should destroy; they not being able to defend themselves against
them, as men can:

and pestilence and blood shall pass through thee, and I will bring the
sword upon thee; the pestilence, famine, sword, which is meant by blood,
and evil beasts, are the Lord's four sore judgments; see [Eze
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021.md).

I the Lord have spoken it: who was able to perform it, and did, both at
the destruction of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar and by Titus.

[Ezekiel 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 5:1</span></span>

And thou, son of man, take thee a sharp knife,.... Or, "sword" (m). The
word signifies any sharp instrument, by which anything is cut off, or
cut asunder; what is here meant is explained by the following:

take thee a barber's razor. The Septuagint and Arabic versions read this
in conjunction with the former, thus, "take thee a knife", or "sword,
sharper than a barber's razor"; and so the Syriac version, "take thee a
sword sharp as a barber's razor"; this sharp knife, sword, or razor,
signifies, as Jarchi interprets it, Nebuchadnezzar; and very rightly; so
the king of Assyria is called in [Isa
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020.md),

and cause it to pass upon thine head, and upon thy beard; the "head" was
a symbol of the city of Jerusalem, the metropolis of Judea; the "beard",
of the cities, towns, and villages about it; and the "hair" of both, of
the common people; compared to hair for their numbers, for their levity
and unsteadiness, and for their being the beauty and ornament of the
places where they lived; and the shaving of them denotes their disgrace
and destruction, and mourning on account thereof:

then take thee balances to weigh and divide the hair. The Syriac version
adds, "into three parts"; signifying, that several distinct punishments
would be inflicted on them, and these according to the righteous
judgment of God; balances being a symbol of justice.

\(m\) "gladium", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Polanus,
Starckius.

[Ezekiel 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 5:2</span></span>

Thou, shall burn with fire a third part in the midst of the city,.... Of
Jerusalem, as portrayed upon the tile, [Eze
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#001.md); or the prophet was now in
Chaldea. The burning of the third part of the hair with fire denotes
such who were destroyed by the pestilence and famine during the siege;
see [Lam 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#010.md); or it denotes the
burning of the city itself, when the siege was over; since it follows:

when the days of the siege are fulfilled; for, when it was taken, it was
burnt with fire, [Jer 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013.md);

and thou shall take a third part, and smite about it with a knife; which
designs those that fled out of the city whim it was broken up, and were
pursued after, and overtook by the Chaldean army, and cut off by the
sword, [Jer 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007.md);

and a third part thou shall scatter in the wind; which intends those
that fled, and were dispersed into several countries, as Moab, Ammon,
and especially Egypt, whither many went along with Johanan the son of
Kareah, [Jer 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#005.md);

and I will draw out a sword after them; and destroy them; which, as it
was threatened, [Jer 42:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#016.md); so it was
accomplished when Egypt was subdued by Nebuchadnezzar. The Septuagint
and Arabic versions, in every clause, read a "fourth part", instead of a
"third"; but wrongly.

[Ezekiel 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 5:3</span></span>

Thou shall also take thereof a few in number,.... These are they that
were left in the land of Judea by Nebuzaradan, for vinedressers and
husbandmen, and such as returned out of Egypt into the land of Judah,
[Jer 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#028.md);

and bind them in thy skirts; in the pockets of them; signifying both the
very small number of them, and their preservation. Jarchi and Kimchi
interpret these of those that were carried captive to Babylon, and lived
there, and were preserved, and returned again.

[Ezekiel 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 5:4</span></span>

Then take of them again,.... Of that small number preserved:

and cast them into the midst of the fire, and burn them in the fire:
this was fulfilled in Gedaliah and the Jews that were with him, over
whom the king of Babylon had made him governor, who were slain by
Ishmael, [Jer 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001.md);

for thereof shall a fire come forth into all the house of Israel; from
this barbarous murder of Gedaliah and his men, judgment came upon all
the house of Israel; a war commenced between Ishmael and Johanan the son
of Kareah; and afterwards Nebuzaradan carried captive great numbers of
them that were left in the land. The Syriac and Arabic versions render
it, "from these shall a fire come forth", &c. which Jarchi interprets of
these intimations given the prophet, from whence judgments should come
upon all the house of Israel. It may be understood of those that were
left in the land, and of such who returned from the captivity; for whose
sins, and those of their posterity, the wrath of God came forth upon all
the house of Israel, to the utter destruction of their nation, city, and
temple, by Titus Vespasian.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 6](eze006.md)

</div>
