<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze009)  [Next](eze011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 10

In this chapter is a vision, very much like that in the first chapter,
with some difference, and with a different view, the design of it being
to represent the wrath of God against Jerusalem, and his departure from
the city and temple. A throne much like that in [Eze
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026.md) is described, [Eze
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#001.md); orders are given from it to
scatter coals over the city, [Eze
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002.md); the situation of the cherubim
when these orders were given, [Eze
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#003.md); the removal of the glory of the
Lord from the cherub to the threshold of the house, and the consequences
of it; the house filled with smoke; the court with the brightness of the
Lord's glory; and the sound of the cherubim's wings heard to the outer
court, as the voice of God, [Eze 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004.md);
the orders of taking and scattering fire over the city executed, and the
manner in which they were, [Eze 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#006.md);
a description of the cherubim and the wheels, much like that in the
first chapter, [Eze 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#008.md); the
departure of the glory of God from the threshold to the east gate of the
Lord's house, with the motion of the cherubim and wheels along with him,
[Eze 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#018.md); and the chapter is
concluded with observing, that the cherubim are the same with the living
creatures seen in the vision of the first chapter, and had the same
form, likeness, and motion, [Eze
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#020.md).

[Ezekiel 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 10:1</span></span>

Then I looked, and, behold,.... After the vision of the destruction of
the greater part of the inhabitants of Jerusalem by the six men with
slaughter weapons, and of the preservation of a few by the man clothed
with linen; another vision is seen by the prophet, in some things like
to that he saw, of which there is an account in the first chapter;
though in some circumstances different, and exhibited with a different
view; partly to represent the destruction of Jerusalem by fire, and
partly the Lord's removal from it, before or at that time:

in the firmament that was above the head of the cherubim; the same with
the living creatures, [Eze 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022.md); where
the firmament or expanse of heaven is said to be over their heads, as
here; See Gill on [Eze 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#022.md),

there appeared over them as it were a sapphire stone, as the appearance
of the likeness of a throne; See Gill on [Eze
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026.md).

[Ezekiel 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 10:2</span></span>

And he spake unto the man clothed with linen,.... That is, the God of
Israel, or the glory of the Lord, that sat upon the throne before
described; he gave orders to the man clothed in linen, who appears in
another character, and represents the Chaldean or Roman army:

and said, go in between the wheels, even under the cherub; the singular
for the plural, the "cherubim"; the wheels were under these; the
churches are under their ministers, their pastors, guides, and
governors; or rather, since the wheels were by the cherubim, it should
be rendered, as by some, "unto the cherub", or "cherubim" (a):

and fill thine hand with coals of fire from between the cherubim, and
scatter them over the city; these "coals of fire" were an emblem of the
wrath of God against Jerusalem, and of the destruction of it by fire;
and these being fetched from between the cherubim, show that the cause
of this wrath and ruin was the ill treatment of the prophets of the
Lord; see [Ch2 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#015.md); as the
destruction of the same city afterwards by the Romans was owing, as to
the rejection and killing of the Messiah, so to the prosecution of his
apostles, [Th1 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#015.md);

and he went in my sight; in the sight of the prophet, as it appeared to
him in vision he saw him go in, as he was ordered, between the wheels,
and under the cherubim; but as yet he did not see him take the coals of
fire, and much less scatter them; these were afterwards done, as related
in the other part of the vision.

\(a\) "in locum cerubinorum, vel cheruborum", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; "ad cherubim", Tigurine version; which is approved by Noldius,
p. 84. No. 398.

[Ezekiel 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 10:3</span></span>

Now the cherubim stood on the right side of the house,.... According to
the Targum, it was the south side of the house; and so Jarchi interprets
it opposite to the north, where the gross idolatries were committed,
[Eze 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003.md); standing at the greatest
distance from them, and bearing their testimony against them:

when the man went in; they stood as it were in a levee, through which
the man passed, waiting upon him; paying a respect to him; assenting to
what he did; and approving of it: this circumstance is mentioned,
because they were not always in this position, only at this time; nor
did they continue so; we afterwards hear of their motion:

and the cloud filled the inner court; the court of the priests, not as a
token of God's presence, as at the dedication of the temple; but rather
of judicial blindness and darkness, which the people of the Jews were
left unto.

[Ezekiel 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 10:4</span></span>

Then the glory of the Lord went up from the cherub,.... Or, "cherubim";
those that were upon the mercy seat, between which the Shechinah or
glorious majesty of God dwelt, in the most holy place: this is a token
and intimation of the Lord's leaving of the temple; and a little before
the destruction of Jerusalem by the Romans, to which this vision
chiefly, if not together, refers, a voice was heard in the temple,

"let us go hence (b):''

and stood over the threshold of the house; either of the holy of holies,
from whence he was removing; or rather of the holy place, the court of
the priests, the inward court, and so open to the outward court, and
view of the people in it:

and the house was filled with the cloud; the temple, being forsaken of
God, was filled with darkness; as an emblem of that blindness which is
come upon the Jews, and will continue on them till the fulness of the
Gentiles brought in:

and the court was full of the brightness of the Lord's glory; either the
inward court, as the glory of the Lord passed through it, from the holy
of holies; or rather the outward court, of which mention is made in [Eze
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004.md); the glory of the Lord being on
the threshold Of the house, which looked towards that, and so
enlightened it. This outward court signifies the Gentiles; who, when the
Lord removed from the Jewish nation and people, were favoured with the
glorious light of the Gospel, and ordinances of Christ; whereby they
were enlightened, and filled with the knowledge of the Lord; with the
knowledge of him, who is the brightness of his father's glory, and the
express image of his person; so through the fall of the Jews salvation
came to the Gentiles, [Rom 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#011.md).

\(b\) Josephus de Bello Judaeorum, l. 6. c. 5, sect. 3.

[Ezekiel 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 10:5</span></span>

And the sound of the cherubim's wings was heard even to the outer
court,.... Or outward court. The sound of the Gospel, which is a joyful
sound; a sound of love, grace, and mercy; of life, liberty, peace,
pardon, righteousness, and salvation by Christ; the sound of this in the
swift ministry of the apostles, signified by the "cherubim's wings",
went into all the earth, and throughout the whole Gentile world; by
which many souls were quickened and enlightened; many churches were
formed; and the glory of the Lord, being revealed, was seen by all
flesh; and the whole world was filled with the brightness of the Lord's
glory, as it will be again, and more abundantly, in the latter day: and
this sound was

as the voice of the Almighty God when he speaketh; the Gospel is as
thunder, which is the voice of God; and the ministers of it are
"Boanergeses", "sons of thunder", [Mar
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar003.htm#017.md), it shakes the conscience; shows
men their danger; and points at the Saviour: it is not the word of man,
but in deed and in truth the word of God: it is the voice of Christ, who
is the Almighty; and it appears to be so, by its powerful effects, when
attended with a divine energy, in quickening dead sinners; enlightening
dark minds; unstopping deaf ears; softening hard hearts; and turning men
from darkness to light, and from the power of Satan to God; it is so
when God speaks in it, and by it; when it comes not in word only, but in
the Holy Ghost, and in power.

[Ezekiel 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 10:6</span></span>

And it came to pass, that when he had commanded the man clothed with
linen,.... After the orders were given by him that was upon the throne
to the man thus described:

saying, take fire from between the wheels, from between the cherubim; as
in [Eze 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002.md);

then he went in; immediately, into the place where the wheels and
cherubim were; even under the firmament of heaven, and the throne that
was in it:

and stood beside the wheels, or "wheel"; to see what it was, as Kimchi
thinks; or rather in order to go in between them, as he was bid to do,
[Eze 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#002.md).

[Ezekiel 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 10:7</span></span>

And one cherub stretched forth his hand from between the cherubim,....
One of the four living creatures, or cherubim, put out his hand from
among the rest:

unto the fire that was between the cherubim; so fire is said to go up
and down among them, [Eze 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#013.md); to
which the reference is here:

and took thereof, and put it into the hands of him that was clothed with
linen: denoting, as before observed, that it was for the ill usage of
the ministers of God's word that wrath came upon the people of the Jews,
and the destruction of their city by fire; so wrath will come upon
antichrist, and the antichristian states, for their usage of the
ministers and churches of Christ, and in consequence of the prayers, and
by the instigation of such persons; see [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009.md); so one of the four beasts or
living creatures, the same with the cherubim here, is said to give to
the seven angels seven golden vials, full of the wrath of God, [Rev
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007.md);

who took it, and went out; took the fire, and went out of the temple,
and scattered it upon the city of Jerusalem; so representing the
Chaldean, or rather the Roman army, burning it with fire; see [Mat
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#007.md); where they are called the armies
of the King of kings.

[Ezekiel 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 10:8</span></span>

And there appeared in the cherubim,.... The Septuagint version is, "I
saw the cherubim"; and so the Syriac version, "I saw in the cherubim";
what follows:

the form of a man's hand under their wings; one of them put forth his
hand, which was seen by the prophet, as declared in [Eze
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#007.md); but this was only the "form" of
one; which is observed to show that it is not to be taken literally, but
as seen in the vision of prophecy; and being under their wings denotes
secrecy and privacy: and the whole being applied to the ministers of the
word is expressive of their activity and diligence in the work of the
Lord, both in private and in public; and that they make no boast nor
show of their works and labours, and ascribe nothing to themselves, but
all to the grace of God that is with them, [Co1
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#010.md); See Gill on [Eze
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#008.md).

[Ezekiel 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 10:9</span></span>

And when I looked, behold, the four wheels by the cherubim,.... The
churches by the ministers: of these "wheels", and why the churches are
so called, and of their number "four", and their situation "by" the
cherubim; see Gill on [Eze 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015.md);

one wheel by one cherub, and another wheel by another cherub: a minister
to a church; every church has its own pastor, elder, or overseer, by it,
and over it:

and the appearance of the wheels was as the colour of a beryl stone; a
precious stone of a sea green; See Gill on [Eze
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016.md). The Targum renders it in
general, "a precious stone"; the Septuagint version, "a carbuncle"; and
the Vulgate Latin version, "a chrysolite".

[Ezekiel 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 10:10</span></span>

And as for their appearances, they four had one likeness,.... They were
exactly like one another; they were all composed of the same matter, had
all the colour of a beryl stone, were all in the same form of a wheel;
and in matter, form, and shape, entirely tallied and agreed one with
another, as true Gospel churches do: See Gill on [Eze
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016.md);

as if a wheel had been in the midst of a wheel: not included in one
another, but were formed in a cross or transverse way; See Gill on [Eze
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#016.md).

[Ezekiel 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 10:11</span></span>

When they went, they went upon their four sides,.... Which four sides
they had, by being made in the transverse way before mentioned; just as
the New Jerusalem church state is said to be foursquare, [Rev
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016.md); and this may denote the
uniformity of Gospel churches in every state and condition, prosperous
and adverse; and the constancy of their walk, conduct, and conversation:

they turned not as they went: neither to the right hand or the left, but
went on in the path of faith and duty, keeping close to the word of God,
and keeping up a conversation, discipline, and worship, according to it:

but to the place where the head looked they, followed it; meaning either
the rulers, guides, and governors of churches, pastors and elders; whose
faith and conversation are followed by the members: or rather Christ
himself, the head of the church, who is to be followed whithersoever he
goes or directs: unless by the head is meant the same as the spirit,
[Eze 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#020.md); the Spirit of God, by whom
the true members of Gospel churches are led, and after whom they walk.
The Targum is,

"the place to which the first turned (or looked), after it they went;''

that is, the first of the wheels; and so may signify that the primitive
churches are the pattern after which all the churches in after ages are
to go;

they turned not as they went; this is repeated partly for the
confirmation of it; and partly to excite attention to it, as being
worthy of observation; See Gill on [Eze
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#017.md).

[Ezekiel 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 10:12</span></span>

And their whole body, and their backs, and their hands, and their
wings,.... This is to be understood not of the wheels, to whom body or
flesh, backs, hands, and wings, do not belong, but of the cherubim; and
the sense is, that as the wheels were alike, and had one and the same
form and appearance, so had the cherubim; they were exactly alike in
their body, backs, hands, and wings; denoting the agreement between
Gospel ministers, in their doctrine, work, and conversation:

and the wheels were full of eyes round about; that is, the rings or
circles of the wheels, as in [Eze
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#018.md); signifying that churches
consisted of enlightened persons, who had a sight of their sin and
danger, and looked to Christ for salvation, and walked circumspectly,
and watched over one another:

even the wheels that they four had: the wheels that belonged to the four
living creatures or cherubim.

[Ezekiel 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 10:13</span></span>

As for the wheels, it was cried to them in my hearing,.... Or they were
called, as the prophet heard in the vision, by the following name:

O wheel, or, "the wheel": for though there are several particular
churches, yet they make up but one general assembly and Church of the
firstborn, written in heaven; and will be all together in their perfect
state, signified by the round form of the wheel; See Gill on [Eze
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015.md).

[Ezekiel 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 10:14</span></span>

And everyone had four faces,.... That is, everyone of the wheels, for of
these the words are continued; and which agrees with [Eze
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015.md); See Gill on [Eze
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015.md),

the first face was the face of a cherub; this being in the room of the
ox's face, [Eze 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010.md), shows that the
face of an ox and a cherub are the same; and that the living creatures
have the general name of cherubim, from the face of an ox; and are so
called from which in the Syriac and Chaldee languages signifies to
"plough", that creature being made use of in such service:

and the second face was the face of a man, and the third the face of a
lion, and the fourth the face of an eagle; how these are applicable to
Gospel churches, and the true members of them; see Gill on [Eze
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#015.md).

[Ezekiel 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 10:15</span></span>

And the cherubim were lifted up,.... From the earth; See Gill on [Eze
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019.md);

this is the living creature that I saw by the river Chebar: a river in
Chaldea, where the prophet was when he had the vision of the living
creatures recorded in the "first" chapter; and hence it is out of doubt
that the living creatures and the cherubim are the same.

[Ezekiel 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 10:16</span></span>

And when the cherubim went, the wheels went by them,.... Ministers being
guides to the churches in doctrine, worship, devotion, and conversation;
See Gill on [Eze 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019.md);

and when the cherubim lifted up their wings to mount up from the earth,

the same wheels also turned not from beside them; ministers and churches
go together; if the one remove, the other do also; they cannot long
subsist without each other; and, generally speaking, as are the light,
knowledge, zeal, affection, and devotion of the one, such are those of
the other; See Gill on [Eze 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#019.md).

[Ezekiel 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 10:17</span></span>

When they stood, these stood,.... When the one were inactive, lifeless,
and without motion, making no progress in knowledge, experience, and
practice, the other were so likewise; See Gill on [Eze
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#021.md);

and when they were lifted up, these lifted up themselves also; like
people, like priest, whether in things commendable or not, [Hos
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#009.md);

for the spirit of the living creature was in them; the same spirit that
was in the cherubim was in the wheels; and the same Spirit of God, who
is a "spirit of life" (c), as the words may be rendered, is in the
churches, as in the ministers; generally speaking, if the one are
lively, the other are also, and both move as they are acted by the
Spirit; and also their motion from place to place, which is spoken of in
[Eze 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#018.md), is directed by the Spirit;
see [Act 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006.md).

\(c\) , Sept. "spiritus vitae", V. L. Starckius.

[Ezekiel 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 10:18</span></span>

Then the glory of the Lord departed from off the threshold of the
house,.... Whither he had removed from the cherub or the cherubim,
between the mercy seat, [Eze 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#004.md);
taking another step towards a general departure from the temple and
city, of which this was another signal and warning:

and stood over the cherubim: not on the mercy seat from whence he came,
for hither he returned not; but over the cherubim or living creatures
seen in the vision, which were under the throne in the firmament of
heaven; an emblem, as we have seen, of Gospel ministers: and this may
denote the exaltation of Christ, who is the glory of the Lord, the
brightness of his Father's glory, above sheen; his protection of them,
and presence with them; for, let him move where he will, he will not
depart from his faithful ministers; he will be with them to the end of
the world.

[Ezekiel 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 10:19</span></span>

And the cherubim lifted up their wings,.... As birds do, when they are
about to remove and fly away; these being upon the motion, ready to
depart, as well as the glory of the Lord:

and mounted up from the earth in my sight: the land of Judea, where the
Gospel was first preached; but this being slighted and despised, the
apostles and first ministers of the Gospel took their flight from
thence, and turned to the Gentiles:

when they went out, the wheels also were beside them: wherever they went
in the Gentile world, their ministry was successful, souls were
converted, and churches formed; when the glory of the God of Israel
departed from the temple, and from the city of Jerusalem, and from the
land of Judea, the Gospel ministry and the Gospel church state were
removed likewise, and carried and fixed elsewhere:

and everyone stood at the door of the east gate of the Lord's house;
that is, the glory of the God of Israel, and the cherubim, and the
wheels, they stood together in one place, the eastern gate of the
temple, one of the outward gates: the gate of the court of the
Israelites, or outward court, which looked to the east; which shows that
they were just going, and leaving the house or temple desolate, no more
to return to it; see [Mat 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038.md); the
next remove was into the city, and then to a mountain on the east side
of it; see [Eze 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#023.md); it was in the
eastern part of the world that the Gospel was first preached, after it
was carried from Judea:

and the glory of the God of Israel was over them above; both over the
cherubim and the wheels; great gifts were bestowed upon the ministers,
and great grace was upon the churches; and the presence of God was with
both, and a glory on them, and on that glory a defence.

[Ezekiel 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 10:20</span></span>

This is the living creature that I saw under the God of Israel, by the
river of Chebar,.... This is repeated from [Eze
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#015.md); not only for the confirmation
of it; but with an addition, to show that the appearance of the man upon
the throne, [Eze 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#026.md), is no other
than the God of Israel; and inasmuch as Christ is there meant, for the
Father never appeared in a human form, it follows that Christ is the God
of Israel, under whose power, protection, and influence, the cherubim,
his ministers, are; and so this is a proof of the true and proper deity
of Christ:

and I knew that they were the cherubim; not by having seen the cherubim
on the mercy seat, and comparing these forms with them, which none but a
high priest could ever see; for, though Ezekiel was a priest, it does
not appear that he was a high priest; but by the forms of them he had
seen carved on the doors and walls of the temple, [Kg1
6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#029.md).

[Ezekiel 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 10:21</span></span>

Every one had four faces apiece,.... Every one of the four living
creatures, or cherubim, had four faces; which were the face of a man, of
a lion, of an ox, and of an eagle, [Eze
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010.md);

and everyone four wings: the Septuagint version reads eight wings; and
the Syriac version "six"; so many in all indeed they had; see Gill on
[Eze 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#023.md);

and the likeness of the hands of a man was under their wings; See Gill
on [Eze 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#008.md).

[Ezekiel 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze010.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 10:22</span></span>

And the likeness of their faces was the same faces,.... Or their faces
were like the same,

which I saw by the river of Chebar; which prove that the living
creatures and the cherubim must be the same:

their appearance and themselves; were exactly the same there was no
difference in their faces or in their bodies:

they went everyone straight forward; their motion as well as their form
were alike; they kept one even course, looking right on, and their eyes
right before them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 11](eze011.md)

</div>
