<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze)  
  [Previous](eze026)  [Next](eze028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#001)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 27:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 27

This chapter contains a lamentation on Tyre; setting forth her former
grandeur, riches, and commerce; her ruin and destruction; and the
concern of others on that account. The prophet is bid to take up his
lamentation concerning it, [Eze 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#001),
observing her situation and magnificence, of which she boasted, [Eze
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003), describing the excellency of her
shipping and naval stores, [Eze 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#005),
declaring who were her mariners, pilots, and caulkers, [Eze
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008), her military men, [Eze
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010) her several merchants, and the
things they traded in with her in her fairs and markets, [Eze
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012), then follows an account of her
destruction, [Eze 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026), the
lamentation of pilots and mariners because of it, [Eze
27:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#028), and of the kings and
inhabitants of the isles, and merchants of the people, [Eze
27:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#033).

[Ezekiel 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 27:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord came again unto me,.... Upon the same subject, the
destruction of Tyre:

saying; as follows:

[Ezekiel 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 27:2</span></span>

Now, thou son of man, take up a lamentation for Tyrus. Compose an elegy,
and sing it; make a mournful noise, and deliver out a funeral ditty;
such as the "praeficae", or mournful women, made at funerals, in which
they said all they could in praise of the dead, and made very doleful
lamentations for them: this the prophet was to do in a prophetic manner,
for the confirmation of what was prophesied of by him; and it may teach
us, that even wicked men are to be pitied, when in distress and
calamity.

[Ezekiel 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 27:3</span></span>

And say unto Tyrus, O thou that art situate at the entry of the sea,....
Of the Mediterranean sea; at the eastern part of it, not above half a
mile from the continent; and so fit for a seaport, and a harbour for
shipping; so mystical Tyre sits on many waters, [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001),

which art a merchant of the people for many isles; the inhabitants of
many isles brought the produce of them to her; who took them off their
hands, or sold them for them to others; these came from several quarters
to trade with her in her markets; and who supplied other isles and
countries with all sorts of commodities, for which they either resorted
to her, or she sent by ships unto them; so Rome is represented as the
seat of merchandise, [Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007),

thus saith the Lord God, O Tyrus, thou hast said; in thine heart, in the
pride of it, and with thy mouth, praising and commending thyself; which
is not right:

I am of perfect beauty: built on a good foundation, a rock; surrounded
with walls and towers; the streets arranged in order, and filled with
goodly houses; having a good harbour for shipping, and being a mart for
all manner of merchandise, Jerusalem being destroyed, Tyre assumes her
character, [Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002).

[Ezekiel 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 27:4</span></span>

Thy borders are in the midst of the seas, Fixed by the Lord himself, and
which could never be removed. Tyre stood about half a mile from the
continent, surrounded with the waters of the sea, till it was made a
peninsula by Alexander:

thy builders have perfected thy beauty. The Sidonians were the first
builders of the city, as Justin (q) says; who began and carried on the
building of it to the utmost of their knowledge and skill; and which was
afterwards perfected by other builders, who made it the most beautiful
city in all those parts; unless this is to be understood of her
shipbuilders, who brought the art of building ships in her to such a
perfection, as made her famous throughout the world; since they are
immediately spoken of without any other antecedent.

\(q\) Ex Trago, l. 18. c. 3.

[Ezekiel 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 27:5</span></span>

They have made all thy ship boards of fir trees of Senir,.... The same
with Sion and Hermon, which the Sidonians called Sirion, and the
Amorites Shenir, [Deu 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009) here, it
seems, grew the best of fir trees, of which the Tyrians made boards and
planks for shipping; of these the two sides of the ship, as the word (r)
here used in the dual number is thought to signify, or the fore and hind
decks, were made. The Targum is,

"with fir trees of Senir they built for thee all thy bridges;''

the planks from which they went from one ship to another; but these are
of too small consequence to be mentioned; rather the main of the ship is
intended, which was built of fir planks; but ours made of oak are much
preferable:

they have taken cedars from Lebanon, to make masts for thee; large poles
for the yards and sails to be fastened to, for receiving the wind
necessary in navigation; called the main mast, the foremast, the
mizzenmast, and the boltsprit; all these are only in large vessels;
whether the Tyrians had all of these is not certain; some they had, and
which were made of the cedars of Lebanon; which, being large tall trees,
were fit for this purpose. The Tyrians (s) are said to be the first
inventors of navigation.

\(r\) "tabulata duplicia", Munster; "duas tabulas", Vatablus. (s) "Prima
ratem ventis credere docta Tyros." Catullus.

[Ezekiel 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 27:6</span></span>

Of the oaks of Bashan have they made thine oars,.... To row the ships
with; for their ships probably were no other than galleys, which were
rowed with oars, as were the ships of first invention. Bashan was a
country in Judea where oaks grew; see [Isa
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#013). The country of Judea in general
was famous for oaks; it abounded with them in the times of Homer (t),
who speaks of Typho being buried in a country abounding with oaks, among
the rich or fat people of Judea; and he seems to design Bashan
particularly, of which Og was king, whom he calls Typho, and of whose
bed he makes mention in the same place; hence several places in Judea
had their names from the oaks which grew, there, as Elonmoreh,
Allonbachuth, Elonmeonenim, Elontabor, and Elonbethhanan, [Gen
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#006) and which one would have thought
were fitter to make their ships of; but of these only their oars were
made:

the company of the Ashurites have made thy benches of ivory, brought out
of the isles of Chittim; the benches for the towers to sit on, or for
others in the cabin and decks; but that these should be wholly of ivory
is not very probable; nor was ivory brought from the isles of Chittim,
but from other parts; nor is it easy to say who the company of the
Ashurites were; some say the Assyrians; but why they should be so called
is not plain. Jarchi makes to be but one word, which signifies box
trees, as it is used in [Isa 41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019) and
he supposes that these benches, or be they what they will, were made of
box trees covered or inlaid with ivory. So the Targum,

"the lintels of thy gates (the hatches) were planks of box tree inlaid
with ivory;''

which box, and not the ivory, was brought from the isles of Chittim;
either from Cyprus, where was a place called Citium; or from Macedonia,
from whence box was fetched; or from the province of Apulia, as the
Targum; where there might be plenty of it, as in Corsica, and other
places, where particularly the best box grows, as Pliny (u) says. Jerom
interprets Cittin of Italy; and Ben Gorion says (w) that Cittim are the
Romans.

\(t\) ', . Homer. Iliad. 2. Vid. Dickinson, Delphi Phoenicix. c. 2. p.
13, 16. (u) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 16. (w) Heb. Hist. l. 1. c. 1. p. 7.

[Ezekiel 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 27:7</span></span>

Fine linen with broidered work from Egypt,.... From whence came the
finest and whitest linen; and which they embroidered with needlework,
which looked very beautiful. Pliny (x) says there were four sorts of
linen in Egypt, called Tanitic, Pelusiac, Butic, and Tentyritic, from
the names and provinces where they were produced; of the second sort the
garments of the high priest among the Jews were made; for they say (y),
on the day of atonement he was in the morning clothed with Pelusiac
garments; that is, with garments made of linen which came from Pelusium,
a well known city in Egypt; and which Jarchi (z) says was the best, and
in the greatest esteem; and one of the Misnic commentators says (a) that
the linen from Pelusium is fine and beautiful, and comes from the land
of Raamses; and observes, that, in the Jerusalem Targum, Raamses is said
to be Pelusium; but though they are not one and the same place, yet they
are both in the same country, Egypt, and near one another; and with this
sort of linen the priests of Hercules were clothed, according to Silius
(b); and so the "shesh", or linen, of which the garments of the Jewish
priests in common were made, was linen from Egypt; and which their
Rabbins (c) say is the best, and is only found there. The Phoenicians,
of which Tyre was a principal city, took linen of Egypt, and traded with
other nations with it, as well as made use of it for themselves;
particularly with the Ethiopians, the inhabitants of the isle of Cernes,
now called the Canaries, who took of them Egyptian goods, as linen, &c.;
in lieu of which they had of them elephants' teeth, the skins of lions,
leopards, deer, and other creatures (d): now such fine linen as this

was that which thou spreadest forth to be thy sail: not content with
canvass or coarse linen, which would have done as well, they must have
the finest Egyptian linen, and this very curiously embroidered, to make
their sails of they spread upon their masts, to receive the wind; at
least this they spread "for a flag" (e), standard or ensign, as, the
word may be rendered; when they hoisted up their colours on any
occasion, they were such as these: "blue and purple, from the isles of
Elishah, was that which covered thee"; meaning not garments made of
cloth of these colours, which the master of the vessel or mariners wore;
but the tilts, or tents, or canopies erected on the decks, where they
sat sheltered from the rain, wind, or sun; these were made of stuff died
of a violet and purple colour, the best they could get; and which they
fetched from the isles of Elishah, or the Aegean sea, from Coa, Rhodia,
Nisyrus, and other places famous for purple, as Tyre itself afterwards
was. The Targum is,

"from the province of Italy;''

or of Apulia, as others (f); see [Rev
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#012).

\(x\) Nat. Hist. l. 19. c. 1. (y) Misn. Yoma, c. 3. sect. 7. (z) Gloss.
in T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 34. 2. (a) Bartenora in Misn. Yoma, ib. (b)
"----Velantur corpore lino, Et Pelusiaco praefulget stamine vertex." L.
3. de Bell. Punic. (c) Aben Ezra in Exod. xxv. 4. (d) Vid. Reinesium de
Lingua Punica, c. 2. sect. 13. (e) "in signum, sive vexillum",
Gussetius; so some in Bootius. (f) So R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 48.
1.

[Ezekiel 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 27:8</span></span>

The inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad were thy mariners,.... Zidon was a
city in Phoenicia, near to Tyre, and older than that, by whose
inhabitants it was built; see the notes on [Isa
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#002) and Arvad was an island in
Phoenicia, to the south of Zidon, not far from Tyre. Mr. Maundrell (g)
says it is about a league distant from the shore; and is now called by
the Turks Ruad. It seemed to the eye to be not above four to six hundred
yards long, and wholly filled up with tall buildings like castles: its
ancient inhabitants, he observes, were famous for navigation, and had a
command upon the continent as far as Gabale later mentioned, Dr. Shaw
(h) says it is at present called Rouwadde; and that the prospect of it
from the continent is wonderfully magnificent; promising at a distance a
continued train of fine buildings and impregnable fortifications; but
this is entirely owing to the height and rockiness of its situation; for
at present all the strength and beauty it can boast of lies in a weak
unfortified castle, with a few small cannon to defend it; so that the
prophecy of Jeremiah appears to be fulfilled,

Arpad is confounded, [Jer 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#023). This
is the Aradus of Strabo, and other writers; and which he says is distant
from the land, two and an half miles, and is about a mile in
circumference; and is said to be built by the Sidonians (k); the
inhabitants of it are the same with the Arvadite, [Gen
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#018), these places brought up
abundance of seafaring men, and which furnished Tyre with rowers, as the
word (l) signifies; which was the most slavish work in navigation:

thy wise men, O Tyrus, that were in thee, were thy pilots; such, as had
learnt the art of navigation; were well versed in geography; understood
the charts; knew the shores of different places; where were creeks and
promontories, rocks and sands; these were brought up among themselves,
and made pilots or governors, as the Targum renders it; who have their
names here from the "ropes" (m) the sails are fastened to; and which
they loosened or contracted, as they saw fit.

\(g\) Journey from Aleppo, &c. p. 19. Ed. 7. (h) Travels, p. 267. Ed. 2.
(k) Geograph. 1. 16. p. 518. (l) "remiges", V. L. Pagninus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus, Cocceius, Starckius. (m) a "funis, ita
dicuntur a contrahendis aut laxandis funibus veli", Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 27:9</span></span>

The ancients of Gebal,.... A promontory of the Phoenicians, the same
with the Gabale of Pliny (n), and with the land of the Giblites, [Jos
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#005). It was by the Greeks called
Byblus; and so the Septuagint here render the words, the elders of Bybli
or Byblus, a place once famous for the birth and temple of Adonis; it is
now called Gibyle. Mr. Maundrell (o) says it is pleasantly situated by
the seaside, and that at present it contains but a little extent of
ground, yet more than enough for the small number of its inhabitants; it
is compassed with a dry ditch, and a wall with square towers in it, at
about every forty yards' distance; on its south side it has an old
castle; within it is a church; besides which it has nothing remarkable;
though anciently it was a place of no mean extent, as well as beauty, as
may appear from the many heaps of ruins, and the fine pillars that are
scattered up and down in the gardens near the town. The old experienced
workmen of this place were employed by the Tyrians in mending and
refitting their ships, and in the caulking of them, as follows:

the wise men thereof were in thee thy caulkers; or, "the strengtheners
of thy breaches" (p), or "chinks"; the seams and commissures of the
planks; which they stopped with tow, oakum, or such like stuff; at least
this is what is used now, whatever might be by those wise men; and it
seems by this that it was reckoned a very great art and mystery, and
which only wise men were masters of, at least such the Tyrians employed.
The Targum renders it,

"providing thy necessaries;''

as if they were the ships' husbands:

all the ships of the sea with their mariners were in thee to occupy thy
merchandise; ships from all parts were in her harbours, which brought
goods into her, and carried goods out of her, by way of merchandise. So
the Targum,

"all that go down into the sea, and the ships; they were rowers, and
they brought merchandise into the midst of thee;''

the goods of merchants from divers places; and carried back commodities
again they traded for at Tyre; see [Rev
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019).

\(n\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 20. (o) Journey &c. p. 33, 34. (p) "roborantes
scissuram tuam", Montanus; "instaurantes fissuras tuas", Munster,
Tigurine version; "rimas tuas", Vatablus; "instauratores rupturaram
tuarum", Piscator.

[Ezekiel 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 27:10</span></span>

They of Persia, and of Lud, and of Phut, were in thine army, thy men of
war,.... As the Tryrians were a trading people, they hired foreign
troops into their service, to fill their garrisons, defend their city,
and fight for them in time of war; and these were of various nations,
and the most famous for military skill and valour; as the Persians, a
people well known, and famous for war in the times of Cyrus, and before,
and well skilled in shooting arrows; and they of Lud, or the Lydians, a
people in Greece, renowned for war before the times of Croesus their
king, as well as in his time; and they of Phut, the Lybians, a people in
Africa, skilful in drawing the bow, [Isa
66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019),

they hanged the shield and helmet in thee; in their garrisons and
towers, or places of armoury; which were defensive weapons, the one for
the body, the other for the head; this they did in times of peace, when
there was no occasion to use them, or when they were off their guard,
and not on duty; see [Sol 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004),

they set forth thy comeliness; it being an honour to the Tyrians to have
such soldiers in their service. The Targum is,

"they increased thy splendour;''

added to their glory.

[Ezekiel 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 27:11</span></span>

The men of Arvad, with thine army were upon thy walls round about,....
Placed there for the defence of the city, to watch against an enemy,
lest it should be surprised; here they were upon the patrol day and
night; see [Isa 62:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa062.htm#006), these were the
men of the same place before mentioned, [Eze
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008) which furnished Tyre both with
mariners and soldiers:

and the Gammadims were in thy towers: not the Medes, as Symmachus
renders it; nor the Cappadocians, as the Targum; much less were they
images of their tutelar gods, as Spencer thinks, of a cubit long; nor
"pygmies", as the Vulgate Latin version renders it; which to mention
would not be to the honour of their militia; though Kimchi and Ben
Melech call them dwarfs, men of a small stature, of a cubit high, from
whence they are supposed to have their name; so Schindler (q): rather
they were the inhabitants of some place in Phoenicia; either of Ancon;
which in Greek signifies a cubit, as Gamad does in Hebrew; or of
Gammade, the same which Pliny (r) corruptly calls Gamale. Hillerus (s)
thinks the word signifies "ambidexters", or left handed men, such as
Ehud:

they hanged their shields upon thy walls roundabout. Kimchi and Ben
Melech observe it was a custom in some places to hang such weapons upon
the tops of towers, and upon the walls of them; which might be done,
either that they might be ready to take up and make use of, whenever
occasion required; or to dismay their enemies, and to show them that
they were provided for them:

they have made thy beauty perfect; besides the beauty of her buildings
and shipping, there was the beauty of her militia; which was increased
by the soldiers from Persia, Lydia, and Lybia, and added to by the men
of Arvad, but completed by the Gammadim; and particularly being glided,
as probably they were, looked very glittering and beautiful in the rays
of the sun.

\(q\) Lexic. Pentaglott. col. 319, 320. (r) Nat. Hist. l. 2. c. 91. (s)
Onomast. Sacr. p. 159.

[Ezekiel 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 27:12</span></span>

Tarshish was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of all kind of
riches,.... Some understand this of the sea, which is sometimes called
Tarshish; so Jarchi and Kimchi interpret it here: and the Targum,

"from the sea, or they of the sea bring merchandise into the midst of
thee:''

that is, those who lived upon the coasts, or on the isles, of the
Mediterranean sea. The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions,
render it the Carthaginians, who were a colony of the Tyrians, and no
doubt traded with them; but it seems most likely, with others, to intend
Tartessus in Spain, a place not far from that where Cadiz now stands; a
country which abounded with riches, and with the following things:

with silver, iron, tin, and lead, they traded in thy fairs; Pliny (t)
says, that almost all Spain abounded in metals of lead, iron, brass,
silver, and gold; which takes in the several things here mentioned,
excepting tin; and that the Spaniards might have from our Cornwall,
which they might import into Tyre: though the Phoenicians carried on a
commerce with our isle of Britain themselves, whither they came for tin,
and disposed of other goods they brought with them. Gussetius (u)
observes, that the word does not signify the place of trade and traffic,
as it is commonly rendered; but respects the goods traded in, and the
manner of trafficking with them, by way of "exchange", as the word
should be rendered; and the sense is, that the things before mentioned
were what they gave in exchange, battered, and "left", with the Tyrians,
for other goods they took of them; and so it is to be understood in all
the following places where the word is used. So Ben Melech says it is
expressive of merchandise.

\(t\) Nat. Hist. l. 3. c. 3. (u) Ebr. Comment. p. 594, 595.

[Ezekiel 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 27:13</span></span>

Javan designs Greece, as the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions
render it; especially that part of it called Ionia, from Javan the son
of Japheth, [Gen 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002) and Tubal, and
Meshech, were also sons of Japheth; the former are the Iberi and
Albanians, as Jerom and others, among whom were a city called Thabilaca,
by Ptolemy (w); and the latter the Cappadocians, with whom is a city
called Mazaca (x).

They traded the persons of men and vessels of brass in thy markets; or,
"the souls of men" (y); they bought up men and women in the several
countries to which they belonged, or where they traded, and brought them
to Tyre, and sold them for slaves; and the Ionian and Grecian slaves
were had in great esteem: and the best brass, of which vessels were
made, was had from Corinth, Delus, and Aeginetus; according to Pliny
(z), Cappadocia was famous for it also: in the first of these
merchandises Tyrus was remarkably a type of antichrist, who is said to
deal in such wares, the souls of men, [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013). The word here rendered
"markets", Gussetius (a) also observes, does not design the place of
commerce, but the act of negotiation or trade; and so it is rendered by
many (b).

\(w\) Geograph. l. 5. c. 12. (x) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 1. c. 6. sect. 1.
(y) "animabus hominum", Pagninus, Vatablus, Cocceius, Starckius. (z)
Nat. Hist. l. 34. c. 2. (a) Ebr. Comment. p. 642. (b) , Sept.;
"negotiationem tuam", Tigurine version; "in commercio tuo", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus; "mercaturam tuam", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 27:14</span></span>

They of the house of Togarmah,.... The Targum is,

"they of the province or country of Germany.''

Jerom understands it of Phrygia, near to which was Cappadocia; and
perhaps is here meant, since it abounded with what these people are said
to trade with Tyre in:

these traded in thy fairs with horses, horsemen, and mules; for the
Cappadocians paid for their yearly tribute to the Persians fifteen
hundred horses, and two thousand mules, as Bochart (c) from Strabo
observes; and as they sold horses and mules to the Tyrians, so likewise
horsemen, men that were skilled in riding and taking care of horses; and
these were sold along with the horses, as servants for that purpose.

\(c\) Phaleg. c. 11. col. 178.

[Ezekiel 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 27:15</span></span>

The men of Dedan were thy merchants,.... Not Dedan in Idumea or Edom,
but in Arabia, from Dedan the son of Raamah, [Gen
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007),

many isles were the merchandise of thine hands; that is, many isles took
off their manufactures from them, in lieu of what they brought them,
which were as follow:

they brought thee for a present; that they might have the liberty of
trading in their fairs and markets; or rather for a reward, or as a
price, for the goods they had of them:

horns of ivory and ebony; Kimchi reads them as separate things; and
which the Targum confirms, "horns, ivory, and ebony"; elks' horns, or
horns of goats, as the Targum; and "ivory", or the teeth of elephants;
and "ebony", which is a wood of a very black colour, hard and heavy, and
of which many things are made. The Targum takes it for the name of a
fowl, and renders it peacocks; so Jarchi; see [Ch2
9:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#021), but Ben Melech much better
interprets it of a tree, called in Arabia "ebenus". Solinus makes it
peculiar to India (d); and so Virgil (e).

\(d\) Polyhistor. c. 65. (e) "----Sola India nigrum fert ebenum.----"
Virgil. Georgic. 1. 2.

[Ezekiel 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 27:16</span></span>

Syria was thy merchant by reason of the multitude of the wares of thy
making,.... Which they took off of their hands, and for them brought the
following things:

they occupied in thy fairs with emeralds; precious stones of a green
colour: Jarchi renders it "carbuncles", other precious stones of a
different colour; and so the word is translated by Pagninus, Montanus,
Grotius, the French, and Diodate; sometimes called "carchedonies", and
which the Apostle John calls the "chalcedony", [Rev
21:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#019), the same with rubies; and so
the word here used is rendered by Luther; and, by Abarbinel, precious
stones of great value; see [Pro 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#015),
from whence the Syrians had these to trade with at Tyre cannot be easily
said; the modern rubies, which are thought to be the true and genuine
carbuncles of the ancients, seldom exceed the weight of twenty carats;
yet some say the Emperor Rudolphus the second had a ruby as big as a
little hen's egg, bought at sixty thousand ducats, and supposed to be
worth more; and that Regulus Decan had one of thirty four carats, bought
at six minas of gold, that is, a hundred and ninety two pounds of gold;
and that the great Mogul had one, which cost a million four hundred and
twenty five thousand florins; and that there are some which exceed the
weight of fifty carats (f); but there were few, if any of these, that
came to the market of Tyre; however, no doubt, some valuable ones were
here sold.

Purple, and broidered work, and fine linen; cloth of purple colour,
raiment of needlework curiously embroidered, and linen of the best sort.
So the Targum,

"purple clothes, and wrought with a needle, and linen of different
colours;''

and of such they made their sails, tilts, and tents; see [Eze
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#007).

And coral, and agate; the first is a sea plant.

"This opinion is now so well established, that all other sentiments seem
almost precluded. P. Kircher supposes entire forests of it at the bottom
of the sea; and M. Tournefort, that able botanist, maintains, that it
evidently multiplies by seed, though neither its flower nor seed be
known. However, the count de Marsigli has discovered some parts therein,
which seem to serve the purpose of seeds and flower, it vegetates the
contrary way to all other plants; its foot adhering to the top of the
grotto, and its branches shooting downwards, there are properly but
three kinds of coral, red, white, and black; the white is the rarest and
most esteemed; but it is the red that is ordinarily used in medicine;
the places for fishing it are the Persian gulf, Red sea, coasts of
Africa towards the bastion of France, the isles of Majorca and Corsica,
and the coasts of Provence and Catalonia (g).''

Perhaps the Syrians might have theirs from the Red sea, or the
Mediterranean. The other, the "agate", is a precious stone, the same
with the "achates", first found in Sicily, as Isidore says (h), by a
river of the same name; is of a black colour, according to him, having
in the middle black and white circles joined and variegated; but they
are of different colours, and of different degrees of transparency. The
word is variously rendered; by some the ruby; by others the carbuncle;
by others the chalcedony; and by others crystal; it is hard to say what
is meant. Now the Phoenicians or Tyrians were so deeply engaged in trade
with the Syrians, that it became a common proverb, the Phonicians
against the Syrians (i); when like are set against like, as the
Egyptians against the Egyptians, [Isa
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#002).

\(f\) Vid. Braunium de Vestitu Sacerdot. Hebr. 1. 2. c. 11. p. 669. (g)
Chambers's Cyclopaedia in the word "Coral". (h) Origin, l. 16. c. 11.
(i) Vid. Reinesium de Lingua Punic. c. 2. sect. 12.

[Ezekiel 27:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 27:17</span></span>

Judah, and the land of Israel, they were thy merchants,.... The
inhabitants of Judah and Israel; the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin,
and the other ten tribes of Israel, they all merchandised with the
Tyrians, being near unto them:

they traded in thy market wheat of Minnith; the name of a place, [Jdg
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#033), where probably the best wheat
grew; so the Targum renders it; the Tyrians were supplied with wheat
from the land of Israel, in the times of Solomon, long before this, [Kg1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011) as they were in the times of
Herod, long after, [Act 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#020), it was
four miles from Esbus or Heshbon, in the way to Philadelphia, according
to Eusebius:

and Pannag; which some take to be the name of a place, where the best
wheat also was; which some say was Phoenicia, or the land of Canaan. The
Septuagint render it "ointments": and the Latin interpreter of the
Targum "balsam"; with which agrees Josephus ben Gorion (k), who says
that at Jericho grew the balsam tree, from whence came a precious oil,
which oil is "pannag": and Hillerus (l) translates it balsam: it
follows,

and honey, and oil: with which the land of Canaan abounded; for it was a
land of oil olive and honey, a land that flowed with milk and honey,
[Deu 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008) so that they had enough for
themselves, and to spare for their neighbours, and which they carried to
the market of Tyre:

and balm; or balsam, of which there was plenty at Gilead, and near
Jericho, however at the latter; we read of the balm of Gilead, [Jer
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022). The Septuagint and Vulgate Latin
versions render it "rosin"; and so the Targum; and this the Tyrians
might make use of in their ships (m). The balm, or balsam plant, was
peculiar to Judea, as Pliny (n); at least it was the place of it until
transplanted into other countries; and so says Solinus (o).

\(k\) Hist. 1. 4. c. 22. p. 379. (l) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 903. (m) Vid.
Scheffer. de Militia Navali, p. 43. 319. (n) Nat. Hist. l. 12. c. 25.
(o) Polyhistor. c. 48.

[Ezekiel 27:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 27:18</span></span>

Damascus was thy merchant in the multitude of the wares of thy
making,.... Of the many things manufactured at Tyre, the inhabitants of
Damascus, once the chief city of Syria, took some:

for the multitude of all riches: in lieu of the vast quantity of rich
things there made, they traded with them for them:

in the wine of Helbon, and white wool; Helbon very probably is the same
with the Chalybon of Ptolemy (p), which he places in Syria; a place
famous for wine, as Strabo (q) reports; the kings of Persia, he says,
through riches fell into luxury, so that they would have wheat brought
from Assos in Aeolia, and Chalybonian wine out of Syria, and water from
Eulaeus (the river Ulai in [Dan 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002)),
which was lightest of all; and so Athenaeus (r) says, the kings of the
Persians drink only Chalybonian wine; which, says Posidonius, was made
at Damascus in Syria, from whence the Persians transplant vines: Helbon
is thought to be the same with Aleppo; the grapes there are all white,
and make a strong wine, as Monsieur Thevenot (s) relates; and who also
observes, that the wines of Damascus are treacherous and strong: and the
wool they bought was such as it came off of the backs of the sheep, and
the purer and whiter sort of it; which was brought to Tyre, and by them
bought, and dyed purple, for which dye the Tyrians were famous.

\(p\) Geograph. l. 5. c. 15. (q) Ibid. l. 12. p. 505. (r) L. 1. c. 22.
(s) Travels, part 2. B. 1. c. 5. p. 25. & c. 7. p. 33.

[Ezekiel 27:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 27:19</span></span>

Dan also and Javan, going to and fro, occupied in thy fairs,.... Either
the inhabitants of the tribe of Dan in general; or of Laish, sometime
called Dan, and in later times Caesarea Philippi, which was in that
tribe: though Grotius thinks that Taprobane, or the isle of Zeilan, is
meant, where, and not in Dan, were the things after mentioned, in
plenty; and where also, according to Ptolemy (t), was a city called Dana
or Dagana: and Bochart takes Javan not to be Greece, but a people of a
country in Arabia, the metropolis of which was Uzal; and so he renders
it, as some of the Greek versions do, Javan of Uzal, or Asel, to
distinguish it from the other Javan, [Eze
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#013), where also, and not in Greece,
the sweet spices grew, which these are said to trade in:

bright iron, cassia, and calamus, were in thy market; brought from the
above places; polished iron or steel, and the sweet spices of cassia and
calamus, or the aromatic cane or reed, which came from afar, [Jer
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#020).

\(t\) Geograph. l. 7. c. 4.

[Ezekiel 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 27:20</span></span>

Dedan was thy merchant in precious cloths for chariots. Or, "cloths of
freedom" (u); such as freemen and even nobles wore; and yet so
extravagant were the Tyrians, that they bought these to line or cover
their chariots with; this is different from the Dedan in [Eze
27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015), and is either Dedan in Edom or
Idumea, [Jer 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#008), or in Arabia, the
inhabitants of which descended from Dedan, a grandson of Abraham, [Gen
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003), which agrees with the following.

\(u\) "pannis libertatis", Vatablus, Piscator; "ingenuorem", Junius &
Tremellius. So Ben Melech, and R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 30. 2.

[Ezekiel 27:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 27:21</span></span>

Arabia, and all the princes of Kedar,.... Arabia was a large country,
divided into three parts, Arabia Deserts, or the desert; Arabia Petraea,
or the rocky; and Arabia Felix, or the happy. Kedar was in Arabia
Petrea; its inhabitants were called Kedarenes, descended from Kedar, a
son of Ishmael, [Gen 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013), they were
chiefly shepherds, and dwelt in tents, to which the allusion is in [Sol
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005), these princes were the rich and
wealthy among them, who bought up the cattle of the meaner sort, and
brought them to Tyre. In Jerom's time Kedar was the country of the
Saracens. The Targum calls them the princes of Nebat, the same with
Nebajoth, the firstborn of Ishmael, and brother of Kedar, [Gen
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013).

They occupied with thee: or, "they were the merchants of thine hand
(w)"; that took off her manufactures from her, in lieu of "the lambs,
and rams, and goats", they brought to market, for her food and
sacrifices; keeping of sheep being their chief employment: "in these
were they thy merchants": they supplied them with their cattle, and took
their wares of them for them.

\(w\) "negotiatores manus tuae", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "mercatores
manna tuae", Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 27:22</span></span>

The merchants of Sheba and Raamah, they were thy merchants,.... This
Sheba was the son of Raamah, [Gen 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007)
who settled in Arabia Felix; where, according to Ptolemy (x), is a city
called Rhegma; and so Raamah is pronounced in the Septuagint version of
[Gen 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#007),

they occupied in thy fairs with chief of all spices; as with myrrh and
frankincense, with which they abounded: Pliny (y) says that the Arabians
paid annually to the kings of Persia a thousand talents of frankincense;
and that the Sabaeans (z) boiled their food, some with wood of
frankincense, and others with wood of myrrh:

and with all precious stones, and gold; as jaspers, emeralds,
carbuncles, and others, which Pliny (a) says are found in Arabia; and
mention is made of the gold of Sheba, [Psa
72:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#015) and Bochart thinks that Ophir,
from whence the famous gold of that name was fetched, was in Arabia
Felix; and it may be observed, that the queen of Sheba gave great
quantities of gold, of spices, and of precious stones, to Solomon; and
that he had much of these kinds yearly from the spice merchants, and
kings of Arabia, [Kg1 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#010); see Gill
on [Isa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#006).

\(x\) Geograph. l. 6. c. 7. (y) Nat. Hist. l. 12. c. 17. (z) "----Solis
est thurea virga Sabaeis". Virgil. Georgic. l. 2. (a) Nat. Hist. l. 37.

[Ezekiel 27:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 27:23</span></span>

Haran, and Canneh, and Eden,.... Haran was a city of Mesopotamia, the
same with Haran, where Abraham dwelt awhile, [Act
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#002), the Charrae of the Parthians,
famous for the defeat of Crassus. Canneh is thought to be the same with
Calneh, [Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010), afterwards called
Ctesiphon; and here, by the Targum, Netzibin, a place not far from
Tigris; and Eden also was between Tigris and Euphrates. All three places
seem to be in Mesopotamia, and not far from each other; the latter is
thought by some to be the place where the garden of Eden was.

The merchants of Sheba; this was another Sheba, distinct from that in
[Eze 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#022), this Sheba was the son of
Jokshan, a son of Abraham by Keturah, [Gen
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003), these were the Sabaeans, who
were not far from the former, and dwelt near the Persian sea.

Ashur and Chilmad were thy merchants; or dealt in "thy merchandise";
took goods of them. Ashur designs the Assyrians, who had their name from
Ashur, the builder of Nineveh, [Gen
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#011) and Chilmad is by the Targum
rendered Media; and by Grotius thought to be the Gaala of Media in
Ptolemy (b); and so Hillerus (c) takes it to be a city of Media.

\(b\) Geograph. l. 6. c. 2. (c) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 108.

[Ezekiel 27:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 27:24</span></span>

These were thy merchants in all sorts of things,.... Either all before
mentioned throughout the chapter, or rather those only in the preceding
verse; also these were merchants in various things after mentioned, and
which were the best and most perfect of the kind, as the word (d) used
signifies:

in blue cloths, and broidered work; these the Assyrians took of them, a
colour in which they much delighted; see [Eze
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#006),

and in chests of rich apparel bound with cords, and made of cedar, among
thy merchandise; rich apparel, such as scarlet cloaks, as the Targum,
and blue cloths as before; these were well packed up in chests made of
"cedar", which they had from Lebanon, and so fit to be put on board a
ship, and carried into any part of the world. The Targum adds,

"and sealed with a signet;''

as things well packed up and bound sometimes are, being of worth and
value. Some render it, "in chains"; or, "chains were among thy
merchandise" (e); such as chains of gold, wore about the neck; and take
the word to be of the sam meaning with that in [Sol
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010).

\(d\) "rebus perfectissimis", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus, Cocceius,
Starckius. (e) "et torquibus in negotiatione tua", Pagninus; "et torques
fuerunt in nundinis tuis", Vatablus. So R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol.
71. 2.

[Ezekiel 27:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 27:25</span></span>

The ships of Tarshish did sing of thee in market,.... The ships of the
sea in general; for Tarshish is used for the sea; these from all parts
came to Tyre with their several wares, the product of their country from
whence they came, and, finding a good market for them at Tyre, spoke
greatly in her praise, or, "were thy princes", or "thy chief ones, in
thy market" (f); these brought the principal things into it, and took
off the chief that were in it, which were of the produce of Tyre:

and thou wast replenished; with goods from all parts, with every thing
for their necessity, convenience, pleasure, and delight, and to carry on
a traffic with all nations:

and made very glorious in the midst of the seas; with great riches,
stately towers and buildings. Here ends the account of Tyre's greatness;
next follows her ruin and destruction.

\(f\) "principes", V. L. Montanus, Castalio, Starckius; "praecipuae",
Tigurine version, Grotius. So some in Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 27:26</span></span>

Thy rowers have brought thee into great waters,.... Here the city of
Tyre is compared to a vessel at sea, with great propriety, it being
built in the sea, and its trade chiefly there; and its rulers and
governors, or the inhabitants of it, to rowers; literally the men of
Zidon and Arvad were her rowers, [Eze
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008), the straits, difficulties, and
distresses these brought Tyre into, are compared to great waters; who,
by some unadvised step or another, provoked the king of Babylon to come
against them with his army, and lay siege unto them:

the east wind hath broken thee in the midst of the seas; a wind very
fatal to ships and mariners; see [Psa
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#007), by it are meant Nebuchadnezzar
and the Chaldean army; so called, because of their great force and fury;
and because Babylon, from whence they came, lay somewhat to the east of
Tyre. So the Targum,

"a king who is strong as the east wind hath broken thee in the midst of
the seas.''

[Ezekiel 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 27:27</span></span>

Thy riches,.... That vast mass of wealth Tyre had got by her trade and
merchandise, were all lost, at once, and came to nought, which had been
many years gathering; see [Rev 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017),

and thy fairs; to which there were such great resorts from all parts,
and where such a prodigious traffic was carried on, were now interrupted
by the siege, and put to an end upon the ruin of the city:

thy merchandise; the goods both imported and exported; the wares that
were brought in from foreign parts, and sold in her, and what was taken
from her in lieu of them; now nothing more of this kind; and what goods
were in her, whether her own or others, were all lost and destroyed:

thy mariners; who were the inhabitants of Zidon and Arvad, [Eze
27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008), these perished with her:

and thy pilots; who were the wisest, most skilful, and best learned in
the art of navigation, and who were of the city itself, these were no
more, [Eze 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#008),

thy calkers: the wise and ancient men of Gebal, [Eze
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#009),

and the occupiers of the merchandise; that traded in her markets and
fairs, mentioned from [Eze 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#012),

and all thy men of war that are in thee: to fight for her and defend
her; the Persians, Lydiaus, and Lybians, the men of Arvad, and the
Gammadims, [Eze 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#010),

and in all thy company, which is in the midst of thee; the great
concourse of people, whether natives or foreigners:

these all shall fall into the midst of the seas in the day of thy ruin:
the walls and banks being demolished, the sea broke in upon it, and
washed all away in it, and left it a bare rock; see [Eze
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#004).

[Ezekiel 27:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 27:28</span></span>

The suburbs shall shake at the sound of the cry of thy pilots. Or
governors, as the Targum; and so the Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental
versions: the allegory of a ship wrecked is still continued: the sense
is, that such should be the cry of the principal men of the city when it
should be taken, that the noise of it would be heard upon the continent,
and in the towns and villages belonging to Tyre, which would make the
inhabitants of them tremble: or,

at the sound of the cry of thy pilots the waves are moved, or "tremble"
(g); which beat very strong at the time of her fall into the sea.

\(g\) "commoti sunt fluctus jactni", Junius & Tremellius; "contremiscent
fluctus", Piscator.

[Ezekiel 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eze 27:29</span></span>

And all that handle the oar, the mariners, and all the pilots of the
sea,.... Inferior officers, and the common people; though this may be
literally understood of all sorts of seafaring people, differently
employed in ships; some at the oar; some at the sails; and others at the
helm; but all shall quit their posts,

and shall come down from their ships; either there being no further
business for them, an entire stop being put to trade, through the fall
of Tyre; or because of danger, and to save themselves, would leave the
ship, and betake to their boats, and make for land: hence it follows,

they shall stand upon the land; upon the continent, being safely
arrived; looking upon the shipwrecks, and bewailing the loss of Tyre, as
in the next verse.

[Ezekiel 27:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 27:30</span></span>

And shall cause their voice to be heard against thee,.... The rulers and
governors of the city, for having taken a false step in provoking the
enemy, and then holding out the siege no longer, as it was thought they
might and would: or rather "over thee", or, "for thee" (h); mourning
over the city, and lamenting its sad case; see [Rev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009),

and shall cry bitterly; with great weeping, howling, and shrieking:

and they shall cast dust upon their heads; a custom used in the eastern
countries, in time of mourning and sorrow; see [Rev
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019),

and they shall wallow themselves in ashes: or roll themselves in them,
another custom used in mourning; see [Jer
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#026).

\(h\) "de te", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus, "super te"; Piscator,
Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 27:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 27:31</span></span>

And they shall make themselves utterly bald for thee,.... Either by
shaving their heads, or tearing off their hair, as mourners in distress
have been used to do:

and gird them with sackcloth; about their loins, as was very customary
in such distressed cases:

and they shall weep for thee with bitterness of heart and bitter
wailing; not in show only, but in reality; not like the "preficae" or
mourning women, though the allusion may be to them, who only mourned
outwardly; but these from the very heart, and in great bitterness of
spirit this is expressive of the inward grief of their minds on this
melancholy occasion, as what follows declares the lamentation they
expressed vocally; see [Rev 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#019).

[Ezekiel 27:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 27:32</span></span>

And in their wailing they shall takes up a lamentation for thee,.... A
mournful song, such as was used at funerals, or in times of calamity;
and so the Vulgate Latin version renders it:

and lament over thee; saying the following ditty;

what city is like Tyrus, like the destroyed in the midst of the sea? as
there was none like it a few years ago for riches, splendour, and glory,
so now there is none like it for misery and ruin; see [Rev
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#018). The Targum is,

"who is as Tyre? there is none like unto her in the midst of the sea;''

she is not now Tyre the renowned, but Tyre the destroyed; destroyed in
the midst of the sea, from whence she had her riches and her glory: or,
"as one dumb or silent in the midst of the sea"; she, in whom was heard
the voice of joy and singing, is now mute, and nothing more of that kind
is heard in her see [Rev 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022).

[Ezekiel 27:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">eze 27:33</span></span>

When thy wares went forth out of the seas,.... When they were took out
of ships, which came to Tyre from all parts, and were landed on the
shore, and put up in warehouses, and exposed in markets and The Targum
is,

"when thy merchandise went out from among the nations;''

being brought from all parts thither:

thou filledst many people; by selling them in their markets commodities
they wanted, for which they came from all quarters; and by sending them
to others in ships, where they knew they stood in need of them, and
would fetch them a good price; and they had enough to answer the demands
of all, and to supply them to the full:

thou didst enrich the kings of the earth with the multitude of thy
riches and pithy merchandise; by taking off the goods of their subjects,
whereby they were able the better to pay their taxes, and support them
in their grandeur and dignity; as well as by furnishing them gold and
silver, and precious stones, which they gave for the produce of their
country; or by the toll and custom of the goods imported or exported.

[Ezekiel 27:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">eze 27:34</span></span>

In the time when thou shall be broken by the seas in the depths of the
waters..... By the Chaldean army, which came upon them like the waves of
the sea, [Eze 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#003) by which they were
overpowered and destroyed; just as a ship on the mighty waters is dashed
and broke to pieces by the waves thereof:

thy merchandise, and all thy company in the midst of thee, shall fall;
trade shall cease, and the mixed multitude of traders from all parts
shall be seen no more; the natives of the place shall perish; mariners
and soldiers, and persons of every rank and degree, age, and sex. The
Targum renders it,

"all thine armies.''

Abendana suggests that this respects the destruction of Tyre by
Alexander the great.

[Ezekiel 27:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">eze 27:35</span></span>

All the inhabitants of the isles shall be astonished at thee,.... Both
near and afar off; and not only the inhabitants of the isles, properly
so called, but all that dwelt on the continent by the seaside; who would
all be amazed when they heard of the ruin of Tyro, which they thought
inexpugnable, by reason of its natural and artificial strength:

and their kings shall be sore afraid; that it will be their turn next;
and as well knowing that they were less able to contend with so mighty a
monarch as the king of Babylon, or Alexander the great, than Tyre was;
see [Rev 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009),

they shall be troubled in their countenance; their inward passions of
grief and fear shall be seen in their countenances; which will wax pale,
be dejected, distorted, and furrowed.

[Ezekiel 27:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">eze 27:36</span></span>

The merchants among the people shall hiss at thee,.... As Tyre had done
at Jerusalem, [Eze 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#002) as she hoped
to make better markets upon the fall of Jerusalem, and therefore
rejoiced at it; so these merchants upon her fall will hope that her
trade will come into their hands, and therefore despise her, hiss, and
laugh at her in her abject state. The Targum is,

"shall be astonished at thee;''

struck with wonder, and even with a stupor at her fall: "and thou shalt
be a terror"; not only to thyself, but to kings and merchants, and to
all the inhabitants of the isles, and to all that trade by sea; who will
be struck with surprise and dread when they hear of thy destruction; see
[Rev 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009),

and never shall be any more; upon the same spot, and in the same
grandeur and glory: some understand this only of a long time, as seventy
years, when it was rebuilt; see [Isa
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#015), it may respect its last
destruction, since which it has not been, nor now is, or ever will be:
this will be true of mystical Babylon, the antitype of Tyre, [Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 28](eze028)

</div>
