<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze041)  [Next](eze043.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 42:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 42

In this chapter are a description of some chambers in the northern part
of the outward court, [Eze 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#001.md), an
account of the use made of them by the priests, [Eze
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#013.md), the measuring of the area, or
whole compass of ground, on which the whole building before measured
stood, with the wall that surrounded it, [Eze
41:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#015.md).

[Ezekiel 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 42:1</span></span>

Then he brought me forth into the utter court, the way toward the
north,.... After the dimensions of the gates and courts of this building
had been shown, and that of itself, the holy and most holy place, with
the ornaments thereof; the prophet is brought by his guide into the
outward court, which encompassed the building to the north part of it;
probably he came out of the north gate of the house into it. So the
Targum renders it,

"by the way of the gate which is open to the way of the north:''

and he brought me into the chamber that was over against the separate
place; or holy of holies; see [Eze
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#012.md), over against or before this, to
the north of it, were a chamber or chambers; the singular being put for
the plural; whither the prophet was brought to take a view of, being a
new and distinct building from all others he had seen before; unto one
of them, or to the place of them, as Jarchi, where they stood: there
were two rows of them opposite to each other, and a walk between them;
they are afterwards called the north and south chambers, [Eze
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#013.md),

and which was before the building toward the north; this chamber or
chambers were over against or before the whole fabric, to the north of
it. The Jews here confess their ignorance, there being nothing in the
first or second temple answerable to these. Lipman (s) expressly says
these chambers were not in the second temple; perhaps they may design
the Protestant reformed churches in the northern parts of the world; the
religion of Protestants is by the Papists called the northern heresy:
and if our northern churches are here pointed at and described, it is a
great honour that is done them, to have a particular apartment allotted
them in this wonderful building; compare [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002.md).

\(s\) Tzurath Beth Hamikdash, sect. 71.

[Ezekiel 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 42:2</span></span>

Before the length of an hundred cubits was the north door,.... That is,
the north door of the house opened to a space that lay between that and
the chambers, which was a hundred cubits long:

and the breadth was fifty cubits; or the sense is, that the prophet was
brought, as Noldius renders the words (t),

to a place whose length was an hundred cubits towards the north door; so
that they describe the length and breadth of these chambers, the whole
of them; and to this agrees the Arabic version: this account of them
makes them larger than Solomon's temple, [Kg1
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002.md), which may signify the largeness
of these churches; the number of men in them; and the abundance of
spiritual blessings and privileges, of light and knowledge, peace and
joy, possessed by them: but the measure being oblong, and not
foursquare, as the city of the New Jerusalem, [Rev
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016.md), shows they are not yet come to
stability and perfection.

\(t\) Concord. Ebr. Partic. p. 82.

[Ezekiel 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 42:3</span></span>

Over against the twenty cubits which were for the inner court,....
Starckius thinks that the breadth of the chambers being fifty cubits, is
here parted, and disposed of, and accounted for. The chambers were in
two rows over against each other; that row which looked to the south,
and so to the temple, was twenty cubits broad; and because it led to the
temple, its court is called the inner court:

and over against the pavement which was for the utter court: or that row
which was over against the pavement of the outward court, to the north,
was also twenty cubits broad, which make forty; and the walk of ten
cubits between them, [Eze 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#004.md),
account for the breadth of the fifty cubits:

was gallery against gallery in three stories; or, there was

post before post in three stories (u); each chamber had a post or
pillar, so Jarchi; which distinguished or divided one from another, and
ran up with the chambers three storey high; and as the chambers, so
these posts in both rows answered to one another. These may denote the
ministers of the Gospel, who are as pillars in the house of God, and
churches of Christ; and every distinct church has its pillar or pastor,
[Pro 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#001.md).

\(u\) "postis ante postem in triplici", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 42:4</span></span>

And before the chambers was a walk of ten cubits' breadth inward,....
That is, within side, or between the two rows of chambers, there was a
walk of this breadth, for those that lodged in the chambers to walk in
for their pleasure and profit, and to converse with one another. Such
who by these "chambers" understand places of retirement for private
devotion, or the duties of the closet, which fit and prepare for public
worship, as these chambers were near and in sight of the temple, so by
this walk then Christian conference and conversation is intended; and
shows, that the whole of religious time is not to be spent between the
church and the chamber; but some part of it should be allotted for
spiritual discourse, about gracious experiences, the truths of the
Gospel, and the duties of religion; but as chambers design churches,
this walk denotes the outward walk and conversation of the saints; which
should be according to the rule of God's word, as becomes the Gospel,
and worthy of the calling wherewith they are called. Starckius applies
this to the decalogue or ten commandments, which is a broad way, [Psa
119:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#032.md) and the moral law, as in the
hands of Christ, is a rule of walk and conversation to believers under
the Gospel: and besides, there "was a way of one cubit"; which led into
the chambers, and out of them into the broad walk: this is a narrow way,
as Christ is said to be, [Mat 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014.md) and
whoever profess faith in him, and in this way enter into a Gospel church
state, and into the kingdom of heaven, must be attended with much
affliction and persecution, and pass through many tribulations; and
there being both a broad walk and a narrow way, and these lying near one
another, and a passage from the one to the other, may denote that the
churches and people of God are sometimes in prosperity, and sometimes in
adversity; one while they walk at liberty, as in a large place; and at
other times in great straits and difficulties:

and their doors toward the north; that is, the doors of that row of
chambers nearest the temple; these opened to the north into the walk of
ten cubits; though one would think that the row opposite to them, their
doors must be to the south, into the broad walk between them; unless
this is to be understood of the doors that opened into the way of one
cubit, and were to the north in both rows; but then the way of one cubit
could not in both lead into the broad walk.

[Ezekiel 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 42:5</span></span>

Now the upper chambers were shorter,.... The chambers were in three
stories, as in the following verse, one above another; the middlemost
were shorter than the lowermost, and the upper shorter than either; just
the reverse of the chambers in [Eze
41:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#007.md), they were not so high from the
floor to the ceiling, nor so broad from side to side. The reason
follows:

for the galleries were higher than these; or, "ate out of these" (w),
"than the lower, and than the middlemost of the building"; the meaning
is, that the galleries or balconies in the middlemost and upper chambers
were taken, out of them, and so made them lesser than the lower ones,
and the upper ones lesser than either; or the posts or pillars, as the
word may be rendered, see [Eze 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#003.md),
which supported the chambers, took more out of the uppermost than the
others, and so made them shorter. This may signify the diversity of
gifts and grace, of light and knowledge, and of liberty and comfort, in
the churches; and that, as those that are uppermost have most light,
they are usually the least, and fewest members in them; who are the few
names in Sardis, [Rev 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004.md), and are
generally more straitened, afflicted, reproached, and persecuted.

\(w\) Keri, "comedebant ex ipsis", Mariana; "demordebant ab illis",
Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 42:6</span></span>

For they were in three stories,.... Not only the galleries or posts, but
the chambers; they were one over another; there were the lowermost,
middlemost, and uppermost; which, as before, may denote the difference
in churches, and the different states, conditions, and characters of
those that are in them; some being fathers, others young men, and others
little children: or their different offices and relations; some being
pastors, others deacons, and others private members: or their knowledge
of and profession of faith in the doctrine of the Trinity, the mystery
of God, and of the Father, and of Christ; and their being baptized in
the name of the three divine Persons; and their being built on Christ
the foundation, a habitation for God through the Spirit:

but had not pillars as the pillars of the courts; those which supported
the porticos and galleries in the courts of the temple, not pillars so
thick and strong as they: so the churches represented by these chambers,
though they have Gospel ministers, which are as pillars, and valuable
members, which are as such, that shall not go out; yet they have not
those external supports from great and rich men, but consist generally
of the poor of this world, as churches on a civil establishment have,
who are supported by the state:

therefore the building was straitened more than the lowest and the
middlemost from the ground; the upper part of it, or the uppermost
chambers, were more straitened, and had less room in them, than the
middlemost, and the middlemost than the lowest; suggesting, that the
more heavenly and spiritual men are, the farther they depart from the
men of the world and their conversation, from the sentiments and
practices of natural men, the more they are exposed to their scorn and
contempt, and are the more afflicted and straitened by them.

[Ezekiel 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 42:7</span></span>

And the wall that was without over against the chambers,.... This wall
separated and distinguished the chambers from the outward court, as well
as was a protection of them; and signifies the grace and power of God,
which separates his true churches from the world, and is the security of
them; See Gill on [Eze 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze011.htm#005.md).

this was towards the utter court, on the fore part of the chambers; or
front of them, which seems to be to the north of them; since their doors
were towards the north, [Eze 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#004.md),
though Cocceius makes it to be to the west, which better agrees with
what follows:

the length thereof was fifty cubits; which answers to the breadth of the
chambers, [Eze 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#002.md) and what is called
length here, with respect to the wall, is called the breadth with
respect to the chambers. The wall of divine protection is equal to the
length and breadth, and even the whole compass, of the churches of
Christ.

[Ezekiel 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 42:8</span></span>

For the length of the chambers that were in the utter court was fifty
cubits,.... Which was the reason why the wall was of the same length,
that it might be answerable to them; here length is put for breadth; see
[Eze 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#002.md), this measure was from the
north to south, as Lipman (x) observes:

and lo, before the temple were an hundred cubits; as the breadth of the
wall and chambers was fifty, so in length, as they were over against the
temple, they were an hundred cubits, as in [Eze
42:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#002.md), unless the account is to be
taken thus; that the row of chambers towards the north were fifty cubits
long, and the row towards the south over against the other was fifty
cubits, and so both made a hundred; to which sense is the Septuagint
version,

"for the length of the chambers that look to the outward court was fifty
cubits, and those (that is, those that looked to the temple, or were
before that) answered to them, the whole a hundred cubits;''

that is, both rows made a hundred cubits; but rather, as Lipman (y)
says, the chambers contained from east to west a hundred cubits.

\(x\) Tzurath Beth Hamikdash, sect. 71. (y) Ibid.

[Ezekiel 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 42:9</span></span>

And from under these chambers,.... Or, "from the lower part of these
chambers" (z); or, "from the lowest" of them there was a space, as may
be supplied, and as is by Cocceius and Starchius; and as there was a
wall to the west of them, so there was a void space to the east; and as
follows:

the entry on the east side: or, "he that brought me from the east" (a),
as the Keri; and coming eastward to these chambers, one must needs go
through this space:

as one goeth into them from the utter court; if a man went eastward into
those chambers from the outward court he must go through this space,
which lay to the east of the lowest chambers: or the sense is, that from
under the north chambers to the south was an entry on the east side,
which led from one to the other.

\(z\) "et ab ima, parte exedrarum", Vatablus; "et infra calles has
fuisse spatium", Cocceius, Starckius. (a) "is qui deducebat me ab
oriente", Junius & Tremellius; "quumque is qui introduxerat me ab
orientes", Piscator.

[Ezekiel 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 42:10</span></span>

The chambers were in the thickness of the wall of the court toward the
east,.... As there were chambers in the northern part of the outward
court, some which looked to the north, and others to the south, so
likewise some to the east; and these were built on the breadth, as it
may be rendered, of the court wall to the east; signifying there will be
churches raised in all the northern parts of the world:

over against the separate place, and over against the building; as the
other chambers were; See Gill on [Eze
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#001.md).

[Ezekiel 42:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 42:11</span></span>

And the way before them was like the appearance of the chambers which
were toward the north,.... The way before these eastern chambers was
exactly like to that of the northern chambers; which was either the way
of one cubit into them, or the walk of ten cubits before them, or both;
signifying that the way into Gospel churches is the same everywhere, and
the walk and conversation of the saints the same in all places:

as long as they, and as broad as they; which seems to confirm that both
the way and the walk are meant, which were the same in those eastern
chambers as in the northern; the way being as long, of one cubit, and
the walk as broad, of ten cubits:

and all their goings out were both according to their fashions, and
according to their doors; the form and fashion of them were alike; they
were built three stories high, were as long, and as broad, and the upper
shorter than the middlemost and lowest; the way of going into them, and
coming out of them, were just the same; their doors were in the same
position: in Gospel churches there are the same ordinances of baptism
and the Lord's supper; the same laws and rules; the same privileges and
immunities; the same graces in the members of them, like precious faith,
hope, and love; whatever difference there may be in temporal things,
there is none in spiritual ones; be they rich or poor, their communion
is equal, their benefits the same.

[Ezekiel 42:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 42:12</span></span>

And according to the doors of the chambers that were toward the
south,.... That is, the doors of these eastern chambers were exactly
like to the doors of the southern chambers, as well as to the northern
ones:

was a door in the head of the way; or beginning of the way; the door
opened into the way of one cubit, and that led into the walk of ten
cubits; and such a way and walk were before these eastern chambers as
were before the southern and northern ones:

even the way directly before the wall toward the east, as one entereth
into them: or, "also a way before the wall direct, a way to the east, as
one goes into them" (b); which seems to describe such a way from under
these eastern chambers as were from under the northern or southern
chambers, [Eze 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#009.md).

\(b\) "viae, inquam, quae erat ante maceriam rectam orientem versus, qua
venitar ad illas", Junius & Tremellius; Piscator; "via ante maceriam
recta, via orientis in introitu illarum", Cocceius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 42:13</span></span>

Then said he unto me,.... The divine Person that measured and described
these chambers, and brought the prophet to take a view of them, said to
him, as follows:

the north chambers, and the south chambers, which are before the
separate place, they be holy chambers; these are the two rows of
chambers before described, which were southward and northward to each
other, though both in the northern part of the outward court; these were
for holy persons to dwell in, and for holy things to be done in, as the
churches of Christ are; they consist of holy persons, men called with a
holy calling, and in them the holy word of God is preached, and holy
ordinances administered:

where the priests that approach unto the Lord shall eat the most holy
things; which is to be understood not of the ministers of the Gospel,
for whom a proper maintenance is to be provided, and who should live of
the Gospel they preach; but of all the saints, who are made priests to
God by Christ; and who approach unto the Lord by him, in his name and
righteousness, and by the faith of him, with true hearts, in a spiritual
manner; and which is profitable to themselves, and acceptable to God;
for whom spiritual provisions are made in his house: these have most
holy things to eat of, the holy word of God, the law part of which is
holy, just, and good; and the Gospel part is our most holy faith, which
is food for faith, savoury and salutary, milk for babes, and meat for
strong men; and which is found and eaten, and digested by them: also our
Lord Jesus Christ, who is the most holy, and is the sum and substance of
the word and ordinances, and the food of believers, the bread of life,
the hidden manna, the Lamb of God, and fatted calf; whose flesh and
blood are meat and drink indeed, and are eaten and fed upon by faith.

There shall they lay the most holy things; lay up the word of God in
their minds and memories, and remember the love of God, his sufferings
and death, and the benefits arising from them, particularly in the
ordinance of the supper:

and the meat offering; the "minchah", or bread offering, made of fine
flour, typical of Christ, the bread of life:

and the sin, offering, and the trespass offering; both typical of
Christ, made sin for his people; and who, by one sacrifice of himself,
has made atonement for it, and an end of it; See Gill on [Eze
40:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#039.md), these were called the most holy
things, and were laid up in the sanctuary for the priests and their
families to live upon, [Lev 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#017.md),

for the place is holy: the place of these chambers holy, as the temple
itself, where these most holy things and holy persons were.

[Ezekiel 42:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 42:14</span></span>

When the priests enter therein,.... Into the holy place, these holy
chambers, and approach unto God, and eat of the most holy things, and
minister therein to the Lord:

then shall they not go out of the holy place into the utter court;
denoting, not that the ministers of the word should not concern
themselves in secular employments, but give themselves up to the word
and prayer, though so to do is right; but the perseverance of the saints
in the house and worship of God, in grace and holiness, and in all the
duties of religion; these should not relinquish their profession, desert
their station and the service of God, and return to the world; but
continue as pillars in the temple of God, and go no more out, but abide
by the truths and ordinances of the Gospel:

but there they shall lay their garments wherein they minister, for they
are holy; these signify Christ's robe of righteousness and garments of
salvation, that fine linen, clean and white, which is the righteousness
of the saints; and fitly represented by the linen garments of the
priests, in which they ministered in their office, and were like them
holy, pure, and spotless; in these only saints appear before God, and
present their supplications to him, not for their own, but for Christ's
righteousness sake, making mention of that only; and herein they have
acceptance with God now, and shall be introduced into his presence
hereafter, and behold his face, clothed with these garments, and serve
him for ever:

and shall put on other garments, and shall approach to those things
which are for the people; these are the conversation garments of the
saints, which are not fit to appear in before God, being attended with
imperfection and sin; but very proper to appear in before men, among
whom their lights should shine, and their good works be seen, for the
adorning of the doctrine of Christ, the recommending of the Christian
religion, and the stopping of the mouths of gainsayers: for this
respects not the different habits of ministers, when they are in their
ministrations, and out of them; though the allusion is to the priests
under the law, who wore their priestly garments only in the temple, and
while ministering there, and never elsewhere, or when among the common
people on civil accounts: so Josephus says (c), the priests only wore
their holy garments when they ministered; at other times they appeared
in the habit of private persons; with which agrees what Maimonides (d)
says, their garments are not upon them when they are not ministering in
the priestly office, but then they are clothed as laymen; or when, as
the Targum here has it,

"they were mingled with the people.''

There were places in the temple where they put on and off their clothes,
and where they were laid up. So Adrichomius (e) says, speaking of the
temple,

"there were rooms, otherwise called treasuries, and priests' apartments,
which were houses on the side of it, like towers, long, broad, and high;
in which the priests, when they went into the sanctuary, put off their
common woollen garments, and put on their holy linen ones; and, when
they had performed their holy services, laid them up there again.''

And another writer, quoted by Solomon Ben Virga (f), observes, that

"here (that is, the temple) was a house for the priest whose office it
was to clothe the rest of the priests at the time of service; and he
gave to everyone of them four sorts of garments, as were commanded, and
fetched them out of the chests of the wardrobe; and on every chest,
which were at the walls of this house, that is, above everyone of them,
was the name of the garment, that there might be no mistake nor
confusion when they were wanted.''

And this agrees with what is said in the Misnah (g), that there was one
that was appointed over the priests' garments, and who might be properly
enough called the master of the wardrobe; on which one of the
commentators says (h), his business was

"to clothe the priests at the time of service, and to unclothe them
after service was done, and to keep the garments of the priesthood in
the chambers made for that purpose.''

Very wrongly, therefore, is the learned Selden (i) charged by Mr.
Shoringham (k), with a mistake, in denying that the priests wore their
holy garments at any other time but when they were at divine service.

\(c\) De Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 5. sect. 7. (d) Cele Hamikdash, c. 10.
sect. 4. (e) Theatrum Terrae Sanct. Jerusalem, No. 92. p. 161. (f)
Shebet Judah, fol. 43. 2. Ed. Gentii, p. 464. (g) Shekalim, c. 5. sect.
1. (h) Bartenora in ib. (i) De Success. in Pontif. Heb. l. 2. c. 7. Vid.
ib. de Synedriis, l. 3. c. 11. sect. 6. & Braunium, de Vestitu Sacerdot.
Hebr. l. 2. c. 25. (k) Ad Codicem Joma, c. 7. sect. 1. p. 78, 79.

[Ezekiel 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 42:15</span></span>

Now when he had made an end of measuring the inner house,.... The holy
place, and the holy of holies, with all the courts and chambers
belonging to them; even the whole building within the compass of the
outermost wall, and all that pertained unto it; the chambers last
mentioned, as well as the rest, the dimensions of, which are given in
this and the two preceding chapters:

he brought me forth toward the gate whose prospect is toward the east:
not to the east gate of the outward wall, but to the east gate which led
into the outward court; the gate he was first brought unto, and which
was first measured, [Eze 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#006.md), and
measured it round about; not the east gate, nor the outward wall that
went all round the house; though this was measured, and its dimensions
given, last of all; nor the house itself, which had been measured
already; or the figure of it, as the Septuagint and Arabic versions; but
all that space that was between this building and the wall that
surrounded it; the area or compass of ground on which the building
stood.

[Ezekiel 42:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 42:16</span></span>

He measured the east side,.... He began with that, being at the east
gate: the building was foursquare, and so was the wall about it, and had
each four equilateral sides, which were separately measured; here the
east side, from the two angles of it, the north and south points:

with the measuring reed; which consisted of six cubits, and which cubits
were larger than the common sort by a hand's breadth; so that a
measuring reed measured three yards and a half: and the whole measure of
the east side were

five hundred reeds: which make one thousand seven hundred and fifty
yards:

with the measuring reed round about; not round about the building, since
only one side, as yet, was measured; but round about that side, or from
angle to angle, or from one side to the other: having finished one side,
he went to another, until he had measured all round; but did not go four
times round it, only once.

[Ezekiel 42:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 42:17</span></span>

He measured the north side, five hundred reeds,.... From the two angles
of that side, east and west; and it was of the same dimension as the
east side, just five hundred reeds, or one thousand seven hundred and
fifty yards:

with a measuring reed round about; he measured with the same reed, from
point to point; and having measured this side, he went to another.

[Ezekiel 42:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 42:18</span></span>

He measured the south side, five hundred reeds,.... From the two angles
of that side, east and west; and it amounted to just the same number of
reeds, even five hundred reeds, or one thousand seven hundred and fifty
yards:

with the measuring reed; the same as before; here, and in the next
verse, the phrase "round about" is not used, but is to be understood;
and having been repeated, there was no need of mentioning it again.

[Ezekiel 42:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 42:19</span></span>

He turned about to the west side,.... And took the dimensions of that,
from angle to angle, the south and north points of it:

and measured five hundred reeds, with the measuring reed; and it was
exactly of the same measure with the other three sides.

[Ezekiel 42:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 42:20</span></span>

He measured it by the four sides,.... Which were equilateral, parallel
to each other, each measuring five hundred reeds; which in all made up
two thousand reeds, or seven thousand yards: this shows that no material
building can be designed; never was an edifice of such dimensions; this
seems rather to describe a city than a temple; and denotes the largeness
of the Gospel church state in the latter day, when the Jews will be
converted, and the fulness of the Gentiles brought in:

it had a wall round about: the same with that in [Eze
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005.md),

five hundred reeds long, and five hundred broad; it was foursquare, as
the building was, and exactly answered to that in its dimensions. The
Jews say (l) the mountain of the house was five hundred cubits by five
hundred; that is, a perfect square of five hundred cubits on every side,
two thousand cubits in the whole compass about. Josephus (m) says the
whole circuit was half a mile, every side containing the length of a two
hundred and twenty yards. Now, says Doctor Lightfoot (n), if any will
take up the full circuit of the wall that encompassed the holy ground,
according to our English measure, it will amount to half a mile and
about one hundred and sixty six yards; and whosoever will likewise
measure the square of Ezekiel, [Eze
42:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#020.md), will find it six times as large
as this, [Eze 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005.md), the whole
amounting to three miles and a half, and about one hundred and forty
yards, a compass incomparably larger than Mount Moriah divers times
over; and by this very thing is showed that that is spiritually and
mystically to be understood; wherefore these measures no doubt did, as
Mr. Lee (o) observes, signify the great fulness of the Gentiles, and
that compass of the church in Gospel days should be marvellously
extended. The use of it was,

to make a separation between the sanctuary and the profane place: the
church and the world; the world is profane, and lies in wickedness, and
the men of it ought not to be admitted into the church of God, and
partake of holy things in it; a difference must be made between the
precious and the vile; and greater care will be taken in the latter day
of the admission of members into Gospel churches, [Isa
52:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#001.md); see Gill on [Eze
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005.md).

\(l\) Misn. Middot, c. 2. sect. 1. (m) Antiqu. l. 15. c. 11. sect. 3.
Ed. Hudson. (n) Prospect of the Temple, c. 2. p. 1051. (o) Temple of
Solomon portrayed, &c. p. 241.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 43](eze043.md)

</div>
