<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze016)  [Next](eze018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 17:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 17

Under the simile of two eagles and a vine are represented the kings of
Babylon and Egypt, and the condition of the Jews, who are threatened
with ruin for their perfidy; and yet a promise is made of the raising up
of the house of Judah, and family of David, in the Messiah. The prophet
is bid to deliver a riddle or parable to the house of Israel, [Eze
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#001.md). The riddle or parable is
concerning two eagles and a vine, which is delivered, [Eze
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003.md); and the explanation of it is in
[Eze 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#011.md); and then the destruction
of the Jews is threatened for their treachery to the king of Babylon,
[Eze 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#016.md); and the chapter is closed
with a promise of the Messiah, and the prosperity of his kingdom, [Eze
17:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022.md).

[Ezekiel 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 17:1</span></span>

And the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. After the prophet had
been sent to charge the Jews with breaking the covenant with God, he is
sent to rebuke and threaten them for breaking covenant with men, even
with the king of Babylon; by whom they were in part carried into
captivity, and another part remained in the land, as will be hereafter
seen.

[Ezekiel 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 17:2</span></span>

Son of man, put forth a riddle,.... A dark saying, but a smart one:
"whet a whetting" (k), as in the Hebrew; something at first sight
difficult to be understood, yet amusing and entertaining; and, when
solved, very useful and instructive:

and speak a parable unto the house of Israel; or, "concerning the house
of Israel" (l); as the Targum and Syriac version; something relating to
them, and what would aptly describe and represent their case; for the
prophet was bid to take such a method, not to hide things from them, but
rather the more strongly to represent them to them; seeing hereby their
attention would be excited, and things would be more fixed in their
memories, and they would be put upon studying the meaning of them; and
when explained to them, and understood, which was quickly done, they
might be the more affected with them.

\(k\) , Heb. "acue acumen", Piscator. (l) "de domo Israelis", Junius &
Tremellius, Polanus.

[Ezekiel 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 17:3</span></span>

And say, thus saith the Lord God,.... The riddle is not the prophet's,
nor the parable his, but the Lord God's; and exceeding beautiful and apt
it is, to signify the things designed by it; the wisdom of God is
greatly displayed in it:

a great eagle; which is Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, as it is
explained, [Eze 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#012.md); who is compared
to an eagle for his power and authority, that being the king of birds,
and for his swiftness and voracity in conquering and subduing kingdoms;
see [Jer 48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040.md);

with great wings; so the Babylonish monarchy is signified by a lion with
eagle's wings, [Dan 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#004.md); and the two
parts of the Roman empire, into which it was divided at the death of
Theodosius, are called two wings of a great eagle, [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014.md); and so here it may denote the
large kingdoms and provinces which belonged to the Babylonian monarchy;
see [Est 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/est001.htm#001.md);

longwinged; or having a "long member" (m); meaning the body of the wing,
which was long; and so, as the wings spread, may signify the breadth of
his dominion, this the length of them, and both their extensiveness:

full of feathers; of cities, towns, people, armies, wealth, and riches:

which had divers colours; or an "embroidery" (n); like that of the
weaver, only needle work, consisting of various colours; and so it
alludes to such eagles as are called the golden eagle, and "asterias",
from their golden colour, and their being spotted like stars, and which
are said to be of the largest size, as Bochart, from Aelianus (o),
observes; and may signify people of divers languages, customs, manners,
and circumstances, subject to the government of the king of Babylon:

came unto Lebanon; the northern border of the land of Judea, and invaded
it; where were the mountain and forest of Lebanon, famous for the cedars
that grew there, from whence the whole land may here take its name, as
being more apt for the allegory used: or the city of Jerusalem, where
were the temple built of the cedars of Lebanon, as many of its palaces
and houses also were; whither the king of Babylon came, and took it, and
who came northward, as Babylon was:

and took the highest branch of the cedar; by the "cedar" is meant,
either the nation in general, or the royal family in particular; and by
the "highest branch" the then reigning king, Jeconiah with the princes
and nobles of the land, who were taken and carried captive by
Nebuchadnezzar; see [Kg2 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014.md).

\(m\) "longa corpore", Castalio; "longa membris", Munster, Grotius;
"longo membororum ductu", Pradus. (n) , Heb; "opus phrygionicum",
Piscator. (o) Aelian. Hist. Animal. l. 2. c. 39.

[Ezekiel 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 17:4</span></span>

He cropped off the top of his young twigs,.... By which are meant the
princes of the land, or the several branches of the royal family; the
top of which was King Jeconiah, who was but young and tender, being but
eighteen years of age when he began his reign, and this was within three
months after; and who was no more able to withstand the force of the
king of Babylon, than a tender twig so ravenous a bird as an eagle, [Kg2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008.md); whose superior power and
strength is signified by the cropping off of a tender twig:

and carried it into a land of traffic; not into the land of Canaan, as
the Septuagint, and some other versions, literally render it; but into
Babylon, which was become a place of great merchandise, through the
great concourse of people to it, and the large additions made to the
empire:

he set it in a city of merchants; meaning the city of Babylon, perhaps
in particular, as distinct from the country before mentioned: the word
for "merchants" signifies "apothecaries" or "druggists" (p); and may
design such merchants as traded in sweet spices and aromatic drugs. The
words may be rendered, "and brought it out of the land of Canaan" (q);
out of which Jeconiah and his nobles were carried by the king of
Babylon; so the particle sometimes signifies "from", or "out of", as in
[Kg1 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#030); and others (r.md), "and in a
city of merchants he set it"; in Babylon, famous for merchants; whom the
Jews, being captives, were obliged to attend in a servile manner.

\(p\) "aromatariorum", Junius & Tremellius, Polinus. So Stockius, p.
1017. (q) "tetra Chanaan", Texelius, Phoenix, l. 3. c. 4. sect. 6. p.
205. (r) Vid. Noldii Concord. Part. Ebr. p. 56.

[Ezekiel 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 17:5</span></span>

He took also of the seed of the land,.... Of the land of Judea, a native
of it, not a stranger; not one of another country, a Babylonian; not one
of his own nobles or princes, did Nebuchadnezzar, the eagle, take and
set upon the throne of Judea, but one of their own, even one of the
king's seed, of the blood royal, as it is explained, [Eze
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#013.md), Mattaniah, the uncle of
Jeconiah, whom the king of Babylon called Zedekiah, and made him king in
his room:

and planted it in a fruitful field; in the land of Judea, and in
Jerusalem the royal city:

he placed it by great waters; many people, [Rev
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015.md); over whom he ruled, and by whom
he was supported in his royal dignity:

and set it as a willow tree; which loves moist places, and grows up
thick: unless it should be rendered, "he set it with great
circumspection" (s); took a great deal of care and caution in placing
him upon the throne; he made a covenant with him, took an oath of him,
and hostages for the performance of it, [Eze
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#013.md). The Targum is,

"a planted vine he set it,''

to make it agree with what follows; but the word in the Chaldee and
Arabic languages signifies a kind of willow, as we render it, as Ben
Melech observes (t).

\(s\) "circumspectissime posuit illud, Junins & Tremellius, Polanus;
"cum magna circumspectione", Piscator; "circumspecte, Cocceius,
Starckius. (t) And so it does; see Castel, col. 3220, 3221. and in this
way Jarchi and Kimchi interpret the word, in which they are followed by
many; so R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 73. 1. nevertheless, the sense
of it here is disapproved of by Castel, who observes, what has a willow
to do with a vine? col. 3222. and commends the Greek version, which
renders it, "conspicuous", to be seen; and so others translate it, "in
superficie", V. L. Grotius; yet the "safsaf" of the Arabs is a tree by
which they understood the "abeile" or poplar tree; see Shaw's Travels,
p. 432. Ed. 2.

[Ezekiel 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 17:6</span></span>

And it grew,.... King Zedekiah reigned and prospered, and the kingdom
flourished under him:

and became a spreading vine of low stature; not so flourishing as it had
been heretofore, in former reigns; it did not rise up to a cedar, as it
had been, but was like a vine, which, though flourishing, does not rise
up high, but runs upon the ground, and is dependent on something else;
so the king and kingdom of Judah, though in tolerable circumstances, yet
were humble and dependent on the king of Babylon:

whose branches turned towards him; the eagle, Nebuchadnezzar, to whom
the people of the Jews were tributary:

and the roots thereof were under him; they were rooted and settled in
their own land, yet under the power, and at the dispose, of the
Babylonish monarch:

so it became a vine; a flourishing kingdom in some measure, though
attended with some degree of weakness and dependence as a vine:

and brought forth branches, and shot forth sprigs; increased in people
and in riches; particularly the king had many children, so that there
was a prospect of a succession, and of a more flourishing estate, and a
continuance of it, [Jer 52:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#010.md).

[Ezekiel 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 17:7</span></span>

There was also another great eagle,.... Hophra king of Egypt, a very
powerful prince, whom Herodotus (u) calls Apries; and says he was the
most happy and fortunate, after Psammitichus, of all the kings that were
before; though not so mighty as the king of Babylon; therefore all the
same things are not said of the one as of the other:

with great wings and many feathers: had large dominions, but not go
extensive as the former, and therefore is not said to be "longwinged" as
he; and had "many feathers", but not "full" of them, nor had it such a
variety; he had many people, and much wealth, and a large army, but not
equal to the king of Babylon:

and, behold, this vine did bend her roots towards him; Zedekiah, and the
people of the Jews under him; inclined to an alliance with the king of
Egypt, and gave him some private intimations of it:

and shot forth her branches towards him; sent ambassadors to acquaint
him with it, [Eze 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015.md);

that he might water it by the furrows of her plantation; Nebuchadnezzar
had planted this vine, and made furrows for the watering of it, and by
his means it was become prosperous and flourishing; but Zedekiah, not
content with the greatness and glory he had raised him to, sought to the
king of Egypt to help him with horses and people, in order to free
himself from subjection to the king of Babylon, and to increase his
lustre and glory: the allusion is thought to be to the trenches and
canals of the river Nile, by which the land of Egypt was watered: the
words may be rendered, "out of the rivulets of her plantation" (w) which
best agrees with watering.

\(u\) L. 2. sive Euterpe, c. 161. (w) "ex rivulis loci in quo plantata
est", Gussetius, p. 642. such as run between beds in gardens, of which
this word is sometimes used; hence some render it "ex areolis",
Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Polanus, so Ben Melech; or
ditches and canals, such as were made out of the river Nile to water the
land; "a fossa plantarii sui", Texelius, ut supra, p. 209.

[Ezekiel 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 17:8</span></span>

It was planted in, a good soil, by great waters,.... As is expressed in
[Eze 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005.md); this was done by the king
of Babylon, who had raised Zedekiah from a low estate to a high one, and
set him on the throne of Judah, over many people; and put him in such a
condition, and in such circumstances, that he and his people might have
been very happy, could they have been content:, for his view was,

that he might bring forth branches, and that it might bear fruit, that
it might be a goodly vine; that he and his people might grow numerous
and rich, and be a prosperous and flourishing kingdom; this is mentioned
to aggravate the ingratitude of Zedekiah, and the people of the Jews, in
rebelling against the king of Babylon, who had used them well, and of
whom they had no reason to complain.

[Ezekiel 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 17:9</span></span>

Say thou, thus saith the Lord God,.... Tell Zedekiah and his people, in
the name of the Lord, what will be the issue of his ingratitude and
treachery to the king of Babylon, and his vain confidence in the king of
Egypt:

shall it prosper? the vine, the kingdom of Judah, and Zedekiah the king
of it; can it be thought that prosperity will attend such conduct as
this? was is it ever known that persons guilty of such vices ever
succeeded?

shall he not pull up the roots thereof; the first eagle, Nebuchadnezzar,
being provoked by the rebellion of the king of Judah and his people;
will he not come against them, and utterly destroy them, and root them
up from being a people and a nation?

and cut off the fruit thereof, that it wither? the sons of the king, and
of the nobles, and people of the land; so that the kingdom shall be
ruined, and no hope left of its ever being restored again; which is the
case of a vine when withered:

it shall wither in all the leaves of her spring; whereas it had been a
springtime with this vine, under the influence of the king of Babylon,
its leaves were green and flourishing; but now should wither, not as
leaves do in autumn, which is to be expected, but in spring, which must
be fatal; signifying, that in the midst of their prosperity, and when
there was the greatest hope and expectation of a continuance and
increase of it, utter ruin should come upon them:

even without great power or many people to pluck it up by the roots
thereof; signifying with what ease the king of Babylon would take
Jerusalem, and the land of Judea, its king and its princes, and utterly
destroy them; he would have no need of a large army, or to employ all
his forces, a few, were sufficient to do it; even as it does not require
many hands to pluck up, a vine by the roots, a single person is equal to
it.

[Ezekiel 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 17:10</span></span>

Yea, behold, being planted,.... Supposing it ever so well planted, as
first by Nebuchadnezzar; and still put into a better condition by the
assistance of the king of Egypt, as was imagined:

shall it prosper? it shall not; their own strength, with the help of the
king of Egypt, will not be able to protect them from the rage of the
king of Babylon:

shall it not utterly wither, when the east wind toucheth it? which is
very hurtful to vines, and by which is meant the Chaldean army; for
Babylon, as Kimchi observes, lay northeast of the land of Israel; and it
signifies how easily the destruction would be brought about, it would be
only a touch of the east wind, and this vine would wither away atones:

it shall wither in the furrows where it grew; notwithstanding its being
watered by Egypt, or the help and assistance that could afford it; or
amidst all its prosperity, and the means of it, and the springing
growing hope it had; or in the very country itself where it had been
planted, and had flourished; Zedekiah and his princes were taken in the
plains of Jericho, and his children and princes were put to death in
Riblah, [Jer 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#008.md).

[Ezekiel 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 17:11</span></span>

Moreover the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Here follows the
explanation of the above riddle and parable, which the prophet from the
Lord had orders to deliver.

[Ezekiel 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 17:12</span></span>

Say now to the rebellious house,.... It had been a rebellious house to
God, and to his prophets, before; see [Eze
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005.md) and See Gill on [Eze
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#005.md); and now, besides this was
rebellious to the king of Babylon, to whom they were in some measure
subject, [Eze 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015.md);

know ye not what these things mean? the riddle and parable concerning
the two eagles and the vine; suggesting that they must be very
inattentive, and very stupid, if they did not know the meaning of them;
for though the things intended were delivered in an enigmatical and
parabolical way, yet they were easily to be understood by all that know
the affairs of the Jewish nation; being things that were lately
transacted there, and were obvious to everyone's view; but if they were
so stupid and blockish as not to understand them, the prophet had the
following order, to explain them to them:

tell them, behold, the king of Babylon is come to Jerusalem; so that
Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon is meant by the first "eagle", and the
land of Judea, and particularly Jerusalem, by Lebanon, it came unto,
[Eze 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#003.md). The Septuagint, Syriac, and
Arabic versions, read this and the following verses in the future; as if
these were things that were yet to come to pass, whereas they are
related as things already done; and so the Targum renders all in the
past sense, as the history of them requires it should:

and hath taken the king thereof, and the princes thereof, and led them
with him to Babylon; the king of Judea, and the princes of it; Jeconiah
and his nobles, who had been carried captive into Babylon by
Nebuchadnezzar; for Ezekiel was among these captives, [Eze
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#002.md); see [Kg2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012.md); so that it appears that by the
"twigs" of the cedar the princes of the land are designed; and by the
"top" of them King Jeconiah; and by "the land of traffic" the land of
Chaldea; and by the "city of merchants" the city of Babylon, [Eze
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#004.md); whither they were carried.

[Ezekiel 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 17:13</span></span>

And hath taken of the king's seed,.... One of the royal family,
signified by the seed of the land, [Eze
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005.md). Mattaniah, son of King Josiah,
and uncle to King Jeconiah; whom Nebuchadnezzar took and made king of
Judea, and called him Zedekiah, which signifies the "justice of the
Lord": to put him in mind of doing justly, by observing the covenant and
oath after mentioned, or that he must expect vengeance:

and made a covenant with him, and hath taken an oath of him; he gave him
the throne and kingdom upon certain conditions to be performed, and for
the perform once of which he made him swear by the God of Israel; see
[Ch2 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#013.md);

he hath also taken the mighty of the land: or, "the rams of the land"
(x); the principal men of it for wisdom, riches, and valour, the princes
and nobles of it; which he did, as to weaken the nation, that it might
not be so capable of rebelling against him, so to be hostages for the
performance of the covenant entered into; and this is meant by planting
the seed with circumspection, [Eze
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005.md).

\(x\) "arietes terrae", Montanus.

[Ezekiel 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 17:14</span></span>

That the kingdom might be base,.... Low or humble; its king but a
viceroy, a tributary to the king of Babylon; and the subjects obliged to
a tax, payable to him; and this is intended by the vine being of "low
stature", [Eze 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#006.md);

that it might not lift up itself; above other neighbouring kingdoms and
states; and particularly that it might not rebel against Nebuchadnezzar,
but be kept in a dependence on him, and subjection to him:

but that by keeping of his covenant it might stand; continue a kingdom,
and Zedekiah king of it; so that it was for their good that such a
covenant was made, and it was their interest to keep it; for, had it not
been made, it would have ceased to have been a kingdom, and would have
become a province of the Babylonian monarchy, and have been put under
the government of one of Nebuchadnezzar's princes or captains; and,
should they break it, would endanger the ruin of their state, as the
event showed. In the Hebrew text it is, "to keep his covenant, to make
it stand"; or, "to stand to it" (y); that is, as it should seem, to make
the covenant stand firm. The Targum is,

"that it might keep his covenant, and serve him;''

Nebuchadnezzar.

\(y\) "ad custodiendum pactum ejus, ad astandum ei", Montanus; "ad
servandum foedus suum, ad consistendumm", Starckius.

[Ezekiel 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 17:15</span></span>

But he rebelled against him,.... Zedekiah rebelled against the king of
Babylon, broke the covenant he entered into, and violated his oath:

in sending his ambassadors into Egypt; to form an alliance with the king
of it, and obtain help from him to break off the Babylonian yoke; this
is signified by the vine "bending its roots, and shooting forth its
branches towards another great eagle", the king of Egypt, [Eze
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#007.md);

that they might give him horses and much people; with both which Egypt
abounded, [Kg1 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#028.md); but in Judea
there was a scarcity, as of horses, so of men, by means of the multitude
of captives which the king of Babylon had carried away; wherefore
Zedekiah sent to Egypt for both, for recruits of men; and for horses to
form a cavalry, to free himself from the king of Babylon, and defend
himself and people against him:

shall he prosper? shall he escape that doeth such things? that is guilty
of breaking an express law of God, which forbids the kings of Israel
multiplying horses, and sending to Egypt for them, [Deu
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016.md); and placing confidence in an
arm of flesh, [Isa 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001.md); and of such
base ingratitude to the king of Babylon, who had set him upon the
throne, and put him in a comfortable and flourishing condition:

or shall he break the covenant, and be delivered? shall one guilty, as
of the other crimes, so of breach of covenant, and of perjury, escape
the vengeance of God and man? he shall not.

[Ezekiel 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 17:16</span></span>

As I live, saith the Lord God,.... This is the form of an oath, as
Kimchi and Ben Melech observe; the Lord swears, in his wrath, by
himself, by his life; this shows how much he resented, what Zedekiah had
done, and how sure and certain his ruin was:

surely in the place where the king dwelleth that made him king; in
Babylon, where Nebuchadnezzar dwelt, that made Zedekiah king of Judah;
which is mentioned, to point out the ingratitude of that prince to the
king of Babylon:

whose oath he despised, whose covenant he broke; the oath of fealty and,
allegiance, which Zedekiah took to Nebuchadnezzar; and the covenant
entered into between them, by which the former held the kingdom of Judea
of the latter: the oath he made light of, though solemn, one made by the
God of Israel; and the covenant he broke, though ratified by an oath; in
which things were given to him he could not claim, at least possess, but
by the courtesy of the conqueror; these sins were displeasing to God:
oaths and covenants, though made with conquerors, and with Heathen
princes, are to be kept:

even with him; that is, with Nebuchadnezzar:

in the midst of Babylon he shall die; when first taken he was had to
Riblah, and there his eyes were put out; and after that he was carried
to Babylon, and put in prison, and there died, [Jer
52:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#009.md).

[Ezekiel 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 17:17</span></span>

Neither shall Pharaoh, with his mighty army and great company,

make for him in the war,.... The king of Egypt, to whom Zedekiah applied
for horses and men to help him; though he should come with a great army,
and a large multitude of people, yet should be of no use to Zedekiah,
nor do any hurt to Nebuchadnezzar, or hinder him from taking Jerusalem:

by casting up mounts, and building forts, to cut off many persons; that
is, when Nebuchadnezzar should besiege Jerusalem, and raise mounts, and
build fortifications, in order to take the city, and destroy its
inhabitants; as he did, [Jer 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#004.md); the
Egyptian army should not be able to hinder him going on with the siege,
and taking the city; for though the siege was broke up for a time, upon
the approach of Pharaoh's army, yet Nebuchadnezzar, having conquered the
Egyptians, returned again to the siege of Jerusalem, and took it; see
[Jer 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#005.md).

[Ezekiel 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 17:18</span></span>

Seeing he despised the oath, by breaking the covenant,.... This is
repeated again, to show the heinousness of the sin Zedekiah had been
guilty of, and what was the cause of his ruin:

when, lo, he had given his hand; to the king of Babylon, to testify his
hearty agreement with him, and that he might depend upon the oath and
covenant being sacredly observed by him. This was a rite for custom
frequently and early used in different nations, when covenants and
agreements were entered into; we find it used in the times of Homer (z);
and among the Romans. When Antoninus, Lepidus, and Octavius made peace,
the historian says (a), they joined their hands together. Virgil (b)
speaks of the same ceremony used by Anchises to Achaemenides, for
confirmation of friendship. Though some understand this of his giving
the hand to Pharaoh king of Egypt, and entering into an alliance with
him, and broke the covenant and oath made to the king of Babylon; and so
the Targum,

"and, lo, he stretched out his hand to Pharaoh:''

and hath done all these things; been guilty of such and so many crimes,
as ingratitude, perjury, covenant breaking, and vain confidence:

he shall not escape; divine vengeance, just and proper punishment for
his sins.

\(z\) ' , Iliad. 6. (a) Florus, Hist. Rom. Gest. l. 4. c. 5. (b) "Ipse
pater dextram Anchises, haud malta moratur, Dat juveni atque animum
praesenti pignore firmat". Aeneid. l. 3. prope finem.

[Ezekiel 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 17:19</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God, as I live,.... A repetition of the
oath of God as before, expressing his indignation at the king of Judah,
and the certainty of his ruin:

surely mine oath that he hath despised, and my covenant that he hath
broken; the Lord calls it his oath, because it was made and taken in his
name, [Ch2 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#013.md); and his covenant,
because it was agreeable to his will, and was made in his sight, and he
was solemnly appealed to at the making of it; all which were an
aggravation of Zedekiah's sin in violating them, and made his punishment
the heavier:

even it will I recompense upon his own head; he shall personally bear
the punishment due to such crimes. The Targum is,

"I will revenge his way upon his head.''

Jarchi thinks this refers to the putting out of his eyes; and Kimchi
takes notice of the same sense.

[Ezekiel 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 17:20</span></span>

And I will spread my net upon him, and he shall be taken in my
snare,.... See Gill on [Eze 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze012.htm#013.md);
where the same words are used, and of the same person:

and I will bring him to Babylon; though, as it is said in the place
referred to, he should not see it, his eyes being put out before he was
brought thither:

and I will plead with him there for his trespass that he hath trespassed
against me; for though it was breaking covenant and oath with a Heathen
prince, yet it was a trespass against God, in whose name they were made;
and his being laid in prison at Babylon, and kept there to the time of
his death, was the Lord's pleading with him, and judging of him; it was
a reproof for his sins, and a condemnation of him and them.

[Ezekiel 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 17:21</span></span>

And all his fugitives with all his bands shall fall by the sword,.... So
those of his army that fled, and attempted to make their escape, when
the city of Jerusalem was taken, as many as fell into the Chaldean army,
which was round about the city, at least a great number of them, fell by
the sword of the Chaldeans, [Jer 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007.md);

and they that remain shall be scattered towards all winds; and so it
was, that such that escaped the sword were either carried captive into
Babylon, or fled some one way, and some another, even into all parts,
east, west, north, and south:

and ye shall know that I the Lord have spoken it; the Targum adds, by my
word, and will do it; who is the Lord God omniscient and omnipotent,
just and righteous; faithful and true, as to his word of promise, so of
threatening.

[Ezekiel 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 17:22</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God,.... Lest it should be thought, by the above
prophecies, that the tribe of Judah should be utterly lost, and the
family of David extinct, and the promise to him void, that he should
have one of his seed to sit upon his, throne for evermore, [Psa
132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011.md); it is here in a figurative
manner signified, that of his seed the Messiah should be raised up, by
whom the church and kingdom of God would be brought into a flourishing
state and condition:

I will also take of the highest branch of the high cedar; Nebuchadnezzar
had took one of the family of David, and set, him upon the throne,
signified by taking of the seed of the land, and planting it, [Eze
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#005.md); but without success; wherefore
the Lord here promises that he will "also", take one and plant it, which
should thrive and prosper: by the "high cedar" is meant the Jewish
nation, which the Lord chose and set on high above all nations of the
earth distinguishing it with peculiar blessings and favours; for which
reason it may be compared to the high and spreading cedar; see [Num
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#005.md); and by "the highest branch" of
it the tribe of Judah, who prevailed above his brethren, because from
him came the chief ruler, [Ch1 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#002.md);
and from whence the Messiah was to come, and did, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010.md), [Rev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005.md);

and set it; namely, the slip taken from the highest branch of the high
cedar; or one that should descend from the Jewish nation, and
particularly from the tribe of Judah, more fully described in the next
clause:

I will crop off from the top of his young twigs a tender one; and by the
"top" and "young twigs" of the highest branch of the cedar, or of the
chief tribe in Israel, are meant the house and family of David, the
royal family, and the descendants of it, the chief of the tribe of
Judah; and by the "tender one" is designed the Messiah; and so Jarchi
interprets it; and which interpretation is mentioned by Kimchi, though
he would have Zerubbabel intended; and owns it to be the sense of the
Targum, which is this,

"I will bring one of the kingdom of the house of David, which is like to
a high cedar, and I will raise him up an infant from his children's
children;''

and so Abendana observes, that from Shealtiel, the son of Jeconiah,
comes forth the King Messiah, who shall rule over all the world, and
under whom every bird of wing shall dwell. The Messiah is often called a
"branch" in prophecy, [Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002.md); and
here a "tender twig" or branch, as in [Isa
53:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#002.md); a "tender plant"; which is
expressive of the meanness of his descent, David's family being very low
at the time of his birth, and of the contemptible appearance he made in
the form of a servant; having also all the sinless infirmities of the
human nature on him, as well as was attended with poverty, griefs, and
sorrows of various kinds; and so made a very unpromising appearance of
being the great Prophet, Priest, and King in Israel: and now by the
"cropping off" of this tender twig seems to be designed not the
incarnation of the Messiah, but his sufferings and death; whereby he was
cut off, not for himself, but for the sins of his people, and in which
his divine Father had a considerable hand, [Isa
53:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#008.md); and to which is owing the great
fruitfulness of his kingdom and interest, [Joh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024.md); moreover, this may respect not
only the person of the Messiah, and his mean appearance in the world;
but also his church and interest, which were at first like a little
stone cut out of the mountain, and like a grain of mustard seed, the
least of all seeds, [Dan 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034.md); the
Gospel, which was the instrument of raising the church of God, was very
contemptible, because of its subject, a crucified Christ; and the first
preachers of it were mean and illiterate persons; those that received it
were the poor of this world, and those but a few, and they the
offscouring of all things;

and will plant it on a high mountain and eminent; which may be
expressive not of the incarnation of Christ, but rather of his ascension
to heaven after his death, and resurrection from the dead; and the
constitution of him upon that as Lord and Christ, or the setting of him
up as King over God's holy hill of Zion, the church of God: and no doubt
but there is an allusion to Mount Zion, and to Jerusalem, from whence
the Gospel first went forth, and where the first Gospel church was
planted; and being said to be on a mountain high and eminent, may note
both the visibility and stability of the church of Christ.

[Ezekiel 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 17:23</span></span>

In the mountain of the height of Israel will I plant it,.... In the
highest part of the land of Israel, as Jerusalem is said to be by the
Jewish writers; the land of Israel, they say, particularly Kimchi upon
the place, was higher than all other lands, and Jerusalem was the
highest part of that land; here the Messiah preached and wrought his
miracles, even in the mountain of the Lord's house, the temple; and here
the first Christian church was planted and established:

and it shall bring forth boughs, and bear fruit, and be a goodly cedar;
that is, the tender twig or branch cropped off, set and planted as
before described: by the "boughs" or "branches" it brings forth may be
meant believers, who are as branches in Christ; are of the same nature
with him, united to him; have a communication of life and grace from
him; are supported and strengthened by him; and so, abiding in him,
persevere to the end; see [Joh 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#004.md);
and the same may be said of particular churches; and by "fruit" it is
said to bear may be designed the persons of the chosen, redeemed, and
called; who are the fruit of Christ's death, and of the ministration of
his Gospel, [Joh 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024.md); or the
blessings of grace which are in him, come from him, and are communicated
by him; even fill spiritual blessings, as justification, pardon,
adoption, sanctification, and eternal life; in short, both grace and
glory; and thus he becomes and appears to be a "goodly cedar", in his
person, office, and grace, to his people, to whom he is altogether
lovely; being full of grace and truth, [Sol
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#016.md); and in his kingdom and interest,
especially in the latter day, when the kingdoms of this world shall
become his:

and under it shall dwell all fowl of every wing; in the shadow of the
branches thereof shall they dwell; by whom are designed converted
sinners of all sorts, and of all nations, Jews and Gentiles; compared to
birds, because weak, defenceless, and timorous; exposed to danger; and
wonderfully delivered; are subject to wander and go astray; and for
their chirping and warbling notes: now these may be said to "dwell"
under the "shadow" of the "branches" of this "goodly cedar", Christ and
his church; that is, under the ministration of the word and ordinances,
which is a very delightful and refreshing shadow, a very safe and
fruitful one, [Sol 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003.md); and here
saints choose to dwell, and determine to abide and continue, as it is
their interest and happiness so to do; and what a flocking and
tabernacling of these birds here will there be in the latter day, where
they will chirp and sing in the height of Zion? [Isa
66:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#004.md); compare with this [Mat
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#032.md); where our Lord is thought by
some to allude to this passage.

[Ezekiel 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 17:24</span></span>

And all the trees of the field shall know,.... All the nations of the
World, and the great ones, and the mighty men of the earth, shall know,
own, and acknowledge, when the above things are accomplished:

that I the Lord have brought down the high tree, have exalted the low
tree, have dried up the green tree, and have made the dry tree to
flourish: some by the high and green tree understand Zedekiah, who was
brought low; and by the "low" and "dry tree", Jeconiah, who was raised
by the king of Babylon, [Jer 52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011.md);
this is Jarchi's sense, and is mentioned by Kimchi: others, by the
former, think Nebuchadnezzar and the Babylonish monarchy are intended,
which were brought down; and, by the latter, the house of David, and
kingdom of Judah, which were exalted: though rather by the one are meant
the people of the Jews, once the people of God, but now cast off; and by
the other the Gentiles, called by the grace of God, and received by him:
though it seems best of all to interpret the "high and green tree" of
the mighty kingdoms of this world, which will be put down by Christ; and
the "low and dry tree" of his kingdom and interest, which shall flourish
and spread abundantly, and be an everlasting kingdom; see [Dan
2:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#044.md);

I the Lord have spoken and have done it; because the prophecy of it is
sure, and because of the certainty of the fulfilment of it, it is said
to be done as soon as it was spoken of.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 18](eze018.md)

</div>
