<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezekiel Index](eze.md)  
  [Previous](eze022)  [Next](eze024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezekiel Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#001.md)

[Ezekiel](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">eze 23:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZEKIEL 23

In this chapter the idolatries of Israel and Judah are represented under
the metaphor of two harlots, and their lewdness. These harlots are
described by their descent; by the place and time in which they
committed their whoredoms; by their names, and which are explained, [Eze
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#001.md), the idolatries of Israel, or the
ten tribes, under the name of Aholah, which they committed with the
Assyrians, and which they continued from the Egyptians, of whom they had
learned them, are exposed, [Eze 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005.md),
and their punishment for them is declared, [Eze
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#009.md) then the idolatries of Judah, or
the two tribes, under the name of Aholibah, are represented as greater
than those of the ten tribes, [Eze
23:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#011.md), which they committed with the
Assyrians, [Eze 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#012.md), with the
Chaldeans and Babylonians, [Eze 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#013.md)
in imitation of the Egyptians, reviving former idolatries learnt of
them, [Eze 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#019.md), wherefore they are
threatened, that the Chaldeans, Babylonians, and Assyrians, should come
against them, and spoil them, and carry them captive, [Eze
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#022.md), and the prophet is bid to
declare the abominable sin of them both, [Eze
23:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#036.md), and to signify that they should
be judged after the manner of adulteresses, should be stoned, and
dispatched with swords, their sons and their daughters, and their houses
burnt with fire; by which means their adulteries or idolatries should be
made to cease, [Eze 23:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#045.md)

[Ezekiel 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">eze 23:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord came unto me,.... The word of prophecy, as the
Targum; another prophecy, one upon the same subject, as in [Eze
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#001.md),

saying; as follows:

[Ezekiel 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">eze 23:2</span></span>

Son of man, there were two women,.... Or two nations and kingdoms, the
kingdom of Israel or the ten tribes, and the kingdom of Judah or the two
tribes. So the Targum,

"son of man, prophesy concerning two provinces, which are as two
women:''

the daughters of one mother; either Sarah the wife of Abraham, from whom
they sprung; or because they were originally one kingdom and nation; so
they were when they came out of Egypt, and during the times of the
judges, and in the reigns of David and Solomon; but became two in the
days of Rehoboam the son of Solomon, from whom ten tribes revolted, and
set up a separate kingdom, with Jeroboam at the head of it.

[Ezekiel 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">eze 23:3</span></span>

And they committed whoredoms in Egypt,.... When they were but one body,
one nation; and while they sojourned as strangers in that land they
learned and practised the idolatries of it, [Jos
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#014.md), and so the Targum,

"and they erred in Egypt, after the worship of their idols they erred,
and there they corrupted their works:''

they committed whoredoms in their youth; as soon as they were come out
of Egypt, and were formed into a political and ecclesiastical state, had
the law of God given them, and promised obedience to him, and were
espoused by him, which times are called the days of their youth and
espousal, [Jer 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002.md), and then were they
guilty of whoredom, or spiritual adultery, which idolatry, in making and
worshipping the golden calf, after the manner of Egypt; and in joining
themselves to Baalpeor, the god of the Moabites, [Exo
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#001.md);

there were their breasts pressed, there they bruised the teats of their
virginity; that is, the Egyptians, who drew them into idolatry, and with
whom they committed it; which is expressed by the actions of adulterous
persons, suggesting that, before this, they were as chaste and pure
virgins to God, adhered to his worship, and served him only, and were
not defiled with the superstition and idolatry of the Heathens: or,
"they made (l) the teats or paps of their virginity"; that is, made them
swell and increase, being impregnated by them, and their idolatry
completed; or to move and heave being pressed.

\(l\) "fecerant mammas", Starckius; "fecerent ut earam mammae agrerent",
Gussetius; "sese commovendo scilicet, in contentione libidinis
aestuantes, et pectoris anheli reciprocationem sequentes", ib. p. 652.
"ibi subagitarunt ubera virginum", Coeccius.

[Ezekiel 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">eze 23:4</span></span>

And the names of them were Aholah the elder,.... Or, "the greater" (m)
meaning the ten tribes of Israel, which were more in number than Judah,
and greater in power and riches; their name, Aholah, signifies "her tent
or tabernacle", which was entirely their own, and not the Lord's: their
worship, and places of worship, were of their own appointing, namely,
their calves at Dan and Bethel; God had nothing to do with them, there
he did not dwell; his tabernacle was not there, that was at Salem, [Psa
76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md),

and Aholibah her sister; which name signifies "my tent or tabernacle is
in her": this is the name of Judah or the two tribes, in which stood the
temple of the Lord, where he was worshipped, and where he dwelt: some
think these were proper names of two Egyptian harlots; others think
there is allusion to the wife of Esau, [Gen
36:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#002.md),

and they were mine; or, "I had them (n)"; when they were together; they
were originally espoused unto him; he avouched them to be his people,
and they avouched him to be their God; he chose them for himself above
all other people, and they professed themselves to be his, and promised
to serve and worship him; and for a while did continue in his service
and worship: and they bare sons and daughters; to the Lord, whom they
brought up in the fear of God, and taught them to serve him: the phrase
is expressive of their increase, and of their happiness and prosperity,
while they adhered to the pure worship of God:

thus were their names; this is the application of them: "Samaria is
Aholah"; or Aholah signifies Samaria, which was the metropolis of
Ephraim, and belonged to the ten tribes, and is put for the whole, [Isa
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009.md), "and Jerusalem Aholibah"; or
Aholibah designs Jerusalem, the head city of Judah, and stands for the
two tribes of Judah and Benjamin.

\(m\) "major", Junius and Tremellius, Polanus, Starckius. (n) "et habui
eos", V. L. Heb.; "facte sunt mihi", Piscator; "sub uxores", Grotius.

[Ezekiel 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">eze 23:5</span></span>

And Aholah played the harlot when she was mine,.... His married wife,
and so ought to have cleaved to him alone: or, under me (o); under his
cover, power, and protection, and therefore it was their interest to
serve him only: or, "instead of me" (p); or, as the Syriac version,
"besides me": they worshipped other gods in the room of the true God, or
other gods besides him. The Targum is,

"and Aholah erred from my worship;''

the ten tribes fell into idolatry, when they were God's professing
people:

and she doted on her lovers; whom she loved even to madness; she was mad
with love, to the idols, temples, altars, and idolatrous worship of the
Heathens; particularly doted "on the Assyrians her neighbours"; who were
become so by the conquest of Syria; and these they treated as their
neighbours, and sought to have them to be their allies and confederates;
courted their help and assistance, and gave them much money for that
purpose; as Menahem gave to Pul king of Assyria a thousand talents of
silver, to confirm the kingdom in his hand, [Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019.md).

\(o\) "sub me", Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, Tigurine version. Piscator,
Cocceius, Starckius. (p) "Exteros excipiens loco meo", Junius &
Tremellius, Polanus.

[Ezekiel 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">eze 23:6</span></span>

Which were clothed with blue,.... A colour the Assyrians were fond of,
and clothed their soldiers in, and was taking to the eye; and is
mentioned, because that men, finely clothed find beautifully arrayed,
are more engaging to women, who are fond of dress:

captains and rulers; men of power and authority in military and civil
affairs, either in the camp, or in the court; officers either in the
army, or in the king's palace; and which was a recommendation of them:

desirable young men; for their youth, strength, beauty, and honourable
employments and offices:

horsemen riding upon horses: of which there was a scarcity in Judea;
wherefore such were the more desirable to them, as appearing more grand,
and being more serviceable and helpful to them.

[Ezekiel 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">eze 23:7</span></span>

Thus she committed her whoredoms with them,.... Entered into alliance
with them, and joined them in their idolatrous worship:

with all them that were the chosen men of Assyria; before described by
their habit, office, and age:

and with all on whom she doted; had an insatiable desire and lust after:

with all their idols she defiled herself; worshipped all the idols the
Assyrians did; and which were defiling, as they must needs be, since, as
the word used signifies, they were dunghill gods.

[Ezekiel 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">eze 23:8</span></span>

Neither left she her idols brought from Egypt,.... Though the Israelites
took in the gods of the Assyrians into their worship, they did not
relinquish the golden calves set up at Dan and Bethel, in imitation of
the Egyptian deities; the idolatrous worship of which they learned in
Egypt, and brought from thence:

for in her youth they lay with her; the Egyptians enticed the Israelites
to idolatry when among them, as soon as they began to be a people; See
Gill on [Eze 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#003.md),

and they bruised the breasts of her virginity; who before retained the
pure worship of God, and was like a chaste virgin:

and poured their whoredom upon her; expressive of the numerous acts of
idolatry committed together by them.

[Ezekiel 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">eze 23:9</span></span>

Wherefore I have delivered her into the hand of her lovers,.... To
destruction; their persons, families, riches, and kingdom itself:

into the hand of the Assyrians, on whom she doted; first into the hands
of Pul, then Tiglathpileser, then Shalmaneser, all kings of Assyria, by
whom they were spoiled or carried captive; by the two first in part, by
the last wholly; see [Kg2 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019.md).

[Ezekiel 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">eze 23:10</span></span>

These discovered her wickedness,.... That is, stripped them of all their
substance:

they took her sons and her daughters; and carried them captive:

and slew her with the sword; put an end to the kingdom of Israel, or the
ten tribes, and which was never recovered to this day:

and she became famous among women; or among the provinces, as the
Targum; she became famous, or rather infamous, among other nations; was
talked of for her sins, her whoredoms and idolatries, and the vengeance
of God upon her for them; she became a byword and a proverb among the
kingdoms of the world for her wickedness and her destruction:

for they had executed judgment upon her; that is, the Assyrians, who
were the instruments in God's hand in doing justice to her, and
inflicting his judgments on her, and for that she became famous.

[Ezekiel 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">eze 23:11</span></span>

And when her sister Aholibah saw this,.... The two tribes of Judah and
Benjamin, when, they saw the idolatries the ten tribes fell into, and
the destruction which came upon them for the same; instead of receiving
instruction, and taking caution by all this,

she was more corrupt in her inordinate love than she; in courting the
friendship, alliance, and help of their Heathen neighbours:

and in her whoredoms more than her sister in her whoredoms; guilty of
more idolatries than the ten tribes, as in the times of Manasseh; see
[Jer 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028.md).

[Ezekiel 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">eze 23:12</span></span>

She doted upon the Assyrians her neighbours,.... As in the times of
Ahaz, who sent to Tiglathpileser, king of Assyria, for help; and from
whence he took the pattern of an altar, and had one built like it at
Jerusalem, and offered upon it, [Kg2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007.md),

captains and rulers clothed most gorgeously; or "perfectly" (q); with
all kind of precious garments, and of all manner of colours; not with
blue only, but purple, scarlet, crimson, &c.

horsemen riding upon horses, all of them desirable young men; See Gill
on [Eze 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#006.md).

\(q\) "omni genera pulchrarum vestinto", Pagninus; "absoluto vestira",
Montanus; "perfectione, sive universitate, sub. vestium", Vatablus;
"perfectissime", Janius & Tremellius, Polanus; "perfecto ornatu",
Piscator; "vestitos accurate", Cocceius.

[Ezekiel 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">eze 23:13</span></span>

Then I saw that she was defiled,.... With idols, and the worship of
them, [Eze 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#007.md),

that they took both one way; the same way of idolatry; worshipped the
same idols, lived the same course of life, were guilty of the same sin,
both Israel and Judah.

[Ezekiel 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">eze 23:14</span></span>

And that she increased her whoredoms,.... Added to the number of her
idols, increased her idols, and even was guilty of more than her sister:

for when she saw men portrayed on the wall; of the temple, as idols
were, [Eze 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#010.md) or upon the wall of a
private house, where they were worshipped as household gods:

the images of the Chaldeans portrayed with vermilion: the images of
their heroes, who after death were deified; and these, being drawn upon
the wall with vermilion, which, being mixed with ceruse, made a flesh
colour, were worshipped; as Bel, Nebo, Merodach, which are names of
their idols, [Isa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001.md) or these were
graven on the walls, or etched out upon them with minium or red lead; or
rather were "painted" (r), as some render the word, with minium,
vermilion, or cinnabar, which are the same; See Gill on [Jer
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#014.md), and it may be observed, that it
was usual with the Heathens to paint the images and statues of their
gods with these. Thus Virgil (s) represents Pan, the god of Arcadia,
coloured red with minium or vermilion; and Pausanius (t) speaks of the
statue of Bacchus being besmeared with cinnabar: and Pliny (u) says the
face of the image of Jupiter used to be anointed with minium or
vermilion on festival days; and observes, that the nobles of Ethiopia
used to colour themselves all over with it; this being the colour of the
images of their gods, which they reckoned more august, majestic, and
sacred. Hence the Romans, in their triumphs, used to paint themselves
with vermilion; particularly it is said of Augustus Caesar, that he did
this to make himself the more conspicuous and respectable, after the
example of the Assyrians and Medes (w): and the triumphers chose to be
rubbed all over with a red colour, that they might, according to Isidore
(x), resemble the divine fire.

\(r\) "depictas sinopide", Pagninus; "pictas minio", Piscator. (s) "Pan
deus Arcadiae venit, quem vidimus ipsi Sanguineis ebuli baccis, minioque
rubentern." Bucolic. Eclog. 10. (t) Achaica, sive l. 7. p. 452. &
Arcadica, sive l. 8. p. 520. (u) Nat. Hist. l. 33. c. 7. (w) Alex. ab
Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 6. c. 6. p. 332. (x) Originum, l. 18. c. 2.

[Ezekiel 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">eze 23:15</span></span>

Girded with girdles upon their loins,.... As a token of dignity and
authority; see [Isa 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#005.md), which was
the peculiar custom of the Babylonians, as Kimchi, from the Talmudists,
observes: "exceeding in dyed attire upon their heads"; having turbans of
various colours upon their heads, after the manner of the Persians:

all of them princes to look to; bore the resemblance of kings, princes,
and the great men of the earth, and whose images indeed they were; even
of such who in their lifetime were famous for military exploits, or for
some excellency or another, either real or pretended, and after death
reckoned among the gods, and worshipped:

after the manner of the Babylonians of Chaldea, the land of their
nativity; either where these heroes were born whose images were
portrayed; or where Abraham, the father of the Jewish nation, was born,
and so called from thence the land of their nativity; putting them in
mind of their original, and of the idolatries of their ancestors, which
they were now returning to.

[Ezekiel 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">eze 23:16</span></span>

And as soon as she saw them with her eyes, she doted upon them,.... As
lustful women, on the sight of the pictures of men, fall in love with
them, and are mad after them; such a vehement desire after the idols of
the Chaldeans prevailed, upon seeing their images:

and sent messengers unto them in Chaldea; to make alliances with the
Chaldeans, and to have their idols, and worship them.

[Ezekiel 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">eze 23:17</span></span>

And the Babylonians came to her in the bed of love,.... Entered into
alliance with the Jews, and worshipped together in the same idols'
temple. Jarchi thinks this refers to the messengers of the king of
Babylon to Hezekiah; who were gladly received by him, and to whom he
showed all the treasures of his house:

and they defiled her with their whoredom; or with their idols, as the
Targum; they drew them into their idolatrous practices; which were
defiling them, and by which they were corrupted from the simplicity of
the true worship of God:

and she was polluted with them, and her mind was alienated from them: or
"plucked", or "disjoined from them" (y); the Chaldeans, broke league and
covenant with them, hating them as much as before they doted upon them;
this was done in the times of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah, who rebelled
against the king of Babylon, [Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001.md)
as it often is the case with lewd women, when they have satisfied their
lust with their gallants, loath and despise them, and cast them off.

\(y\) "avulsa est", Munster; "et luxata est anima ipsius ab eis", Junius
& Tremellius, Polanus.

[Ezekiel 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">eze 23:18</span></span>

So she discovered her whoredoms, and discovered her nakedness,.... The
Jews did not cease from their idolatries when they broke with the
Babylonians; but were rather more frequent and impudent in them, and
courted the friendship and alliance of other Heathen nations, and their
worship; even as a lewd woman, when she has cast off her former lovers,
does not leave her lewdness, but seeks after others; and by her
impudence in discovering her whoredoms, and her nakedness, and by all
the signs of a prostitute, draws in others to commit lewdness with her:

then my mind was alienated from her, like as my mind was alienated from
her sister; as a virtuous husband is alienated from an adulterous wife,
and cannot admit her to his bed and board, so the mind of the Lord was
alienated from the Jews, because of their idolatries; nor could he
favour them with his presence, and the blessings of his providence and
goodness, as he had formerly done; even as his mind had been alienated,
on the same account, from the ten tribes of Israel, and which he showed
by suffering them to be carried captive.

[Ezekiel 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">eze 23:19</span></span>

Yet she multiplied her whoredoms,.... Though the Lord frowned upon the
Jews in the times of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah, yet still they went on, and
increased their alliances and idolatries with the Heathen nations:

in calling to remembrance the days of her youth, wherein she had played
the harlot in the land of Egypt; they called to mind with pleasure the
idolatries of their fathers in Egypt, and committed the same themselves;
they sent ambassadors to Egypt, in the times of Zedekiah, for help and
assistance, and to enter into alliance with them, when they renewed
among them the idolatries of that nation; see [Eze
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#015.md).

[Ezekiel 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">eze 23:20</span></span>

For she doted upon their paramours,.... Or "concubines" (z); the
neighbouring nations and allies of the Egyptians, whose friendship the
Jews courted, and whose idols they served: the Septuagint and Arabic
versions wrongly read the Chaldeans:

whose flesh is as the flesh of asses, and whose issue is like the issue
of horses; by "flesh" is meant the "membrum virile", which in asses is
very large, and therefore dedicated to Priapus by the Heathens; and vast
is the profusion of seed in coitus by horses, to which the flesh and
issue of the Egyptian paramours are compared; who were very libidinous,
and therefore desirable to insatiable women; all which serves to express
the eagerness of the people of the Jews after idolatry.

\(z\) "equecubinas eorum", Vatablus, so Junius & Tremellius, Polanus;
"concubitores", Munster, Tigurine version; "cinaedos", Castalio; and, as
Ben Melech observes, these were men, and not women.

[Ezekiel 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">eze 23:21</span></span>

Thus thou calledst to remembrance the lewdness of thy youth,.... By
committing the same; the same idolatries their fathers committed in
Egypt they now committed, being in alliance with the same people: or,

thou causest to be visited the lewdness of thy youth (a); by the Lord,
who remembered their sins, and punished them for them:

in bruising thy teats by the Egyptians for the paps of thy youth:
committing spiritual fornication, that is, idolatry with them; signified
by pressing and bruising the breasts and paps of virgins, by corporeal
fornication with them.

\(a\) "et visitasti scelus adolescestiae, vel pueritiae tuae", Piscator,
Starckius; i.e. "visitari fecisti a Deo", a Lapide.

[Ezekiel 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">eze 23:22</span></span>

Therefore, O Aholibah, thus saith the Lord God,.... Or, ye two tribes of
Benjamin and Judah, hear what the Lord says unto you:

behold, I will raise up thy lovers against thee; the Chaldeans, whom
they had formerly loved, and in whose alliance they were, and whose
idols they worshipped:

from whom thy mind is alienated; having broke covenant with them, and
cast off their yoke, and rebelled against them:

and I will bring them against thee on every side; to besiege and
encompass Jerusalem on every side with their army, as they did, so that
there was no escaping.

[Ezekiel 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">eze 23:23</span></span>

The Babylonians, and all the Chaldeans,.... Both the inhabitants of the
city of Babylon, called in the Hebrew text the children of Babylon, and
all the inhabitants of the several parts of the country of Chaldean, of
which Babylon was the metropolis:

Pekod, and Shoa, and Koa; the Vulgate Latin version, and so Jerom, take
these words to be appellatives, and render them noblemen, tyrants, and
princes; as some mentioned by Jarchi do, governors, princes, and rulers;
and Kimchi (b) thinks they are the titles of the Babylonian princes
spoken of in Jeremiah, as Nebuzaradan. Nebushasban, Rabsaris, Rabmag,
&c. [Jer 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#003.md), but with others they
are the proper names of persons or places: and so the Targum calls them,
Pekodaites, Shoaites, and Koaites; that is, the inhabitants of places so
called; and certain it is that Pekod was a province of Babylon, [Jer
50:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#021.md), which, according to Junius, lay
between the two rivers Tigris and Lycus, and in which was the famous
city of Nineveh; and, according to him, Shoa, or the Shoaites, lay
between the rivers Lycus and Gorgus, among where were the Adiabeni, and
the town called Siai by Ptolemy; and the Koaites were situated in the
inward part of Assyria, by Arbelitis, where formerly was the fortified
town of Koah, by historians called Gauga; and by Strabo Gaugamela.
Grotius thinks that Pekod are the Bactriani; and that Shoa is Siai in
Armenia with Ptolemy; and that Koa is Choana of Media, with the same
Ptolemy; but, be they who they will, they were such people as were to
come with the Chaldean army against the Jews:

and all the Assyrians with them: which were now one people with the
Chaldeans and Babylonians, by whom formerly the ten tribes were carried
captive:

all of them desirable young men, captains and rulers, great lords and
renowned, all of them riding upon horses; persons of high rank and
dignity, in chief offices at court or in the camp, all in the bloom and
strength of youth; men of name and renown for their honour and valour;
and all well mounted, a famous cavalry of them; and who before were
lovely on these accounts, when they were their gallants and lovers,
their confederates and allies, but now formidable and terrible being
their enemies; see [Eze 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#005.md).

\(b\) So R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 51. 1.

[Ezekiel 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">eze 23:24</span></span>

And they shall come against thee with chariots, wagons, and wheels,....
With "chariots", in which were their princes and great men, their chief
commanders, generals, and captains, and in which they fought, as was
usual in those times; and with "wagons", to carry their provisions and
warlike stores; and with "wheels", that is, either with chariots and
wagons that ran upon wheels, or with wheels for them in case they should
break down; the first of these words here, according to some Jewish
interpreters, as Donesh in Jarchi, signifies warlike instruments in
general; and the second word is used for chariots: and so the whole is
paraphrased by the Targum,

"and they shall come against thee with instruments of war, with chariots
and wheels;''

all which denotes how well prepared they should be, and with what
swiftness they would come:

and with an assembly of people, which shall set against thee buckler,
and shield, and helmet, round about; a multitude of people, a vast army
gathered out of all the provinces of Babylon, having bucklers and
shields about their bodies, and helmets on their heads to protect and
defend them; and these should surround the city of Jerusalem. So the
Targum,

"an army of people, armed with shields and helmets, shall set themselves
against thee round about:''

and I will set judgment before them, and they shall judge thee according
to their judgments; that is, I will deliver you into their hands, and
they shall judge and condemn you; not according to my laws and yours,
but according to their own laws, according to the customs and usages
among them, according to the law of nations; they shall deal with you as
rebels and covenant breakers, such Zedekiah was; he broke covenant with
the king of Babylon, and rebelled against him: and this was fulfilled
when he fell into his hands, and when he slew his children before his
face, and then put out his eyes.

[Ezekiel 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">eze 23:25</span></span>

And I will set my jealousy against thee, and they shall deal furiously
with thee,.... As a jealous husband, enraged against his adulterous
wife, falls upon her in his fury, and uses her with great severity; so
the Jews having committed spiritual fornication, that is, idolatry, and
departed from the Lord, he threatens to stir up the fury of his
jealousy, and punish them severely by the Chaldeans, as follows:

they shall take away thy nose and thine ears, and thy remnant shall fall
by the sword; as gallants use their harlots when they leave them, or
jealous husbands their adulterous wives, disfiguring them, that they may
be marked and known what they are, and be despised by others; and as has
been the custom in some countries, particularly with the Egyptians, to
cut off the noses of adulterous persons; here it is to be understood
figuratively: by the "nose", according to Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben
Melech, is meant the king, who is higher than his people, as the nose is
the highest part in a man's face; and by the "ears" the priest, who
caused a noise to be heard when he entered into the temple with his
bells; or rather because it was the priest's office to attend to the
word of God, and teach it the people; in general, these denote
everything that was excellent among the Jews, their city, temple, king,
kingdom, princes, priests, and prophets, which should be demolished and
removed; and by the remnant is meant the common people, that should come
into the hands of the Chaldeans, and fall by their sword. So the Targum
paraphrases it,

"thy princes and thy nobles shall go into captivity, and thy people
shall be killed with the sword:''

they shall take thy sons and thy daughters, and thy residue shall be
devoured by the fire; take and carry their sons and daughters captive,
and burn with fire the city left by them. Thus the Targum,

"they shall carry thy sons and daughters captive, and the beauty of thy
land shall be burnt with fire;''

that is, the city of Jerusalem, the temple, the king's palaces, the
houses of the great men, and others in it, which were all burnt with
fire when taken by the Chaldeans, [Jer
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013.md).

[Ezekiel 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">eze 23:26</span></span>

They shall also strip thee out of thy clothes,.... As such who are taken
captives are usually served:

and take away, thy fair jewels; their ornaments of every kind: or "the
vessels of thy glory" (c); Kimchi observes this may be meant either of
the garments of the priests, and the vessels of the sanctuary; or of
whole spoil of the city in general, whether in the temple, or in other
houses.

\(c\) "vasa gloria tuae", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "instrumenta ornatus
tui", Junius & Tremellius, Polanus, Piscator; "vasa ornatus tui",
Starckius.

[Ezekiel 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">eze 23:27</span></span>

Thus will I make thy lewdness to cease from thee,.... That is, their
idolatry; for, after this captivity, the Jews never were guilty of
idolatry any more:

and thy whoredom brought from the land of Egypt; the idolatry which they
learned there, and brought from thence; so the Targum,

"the worship of thine idols, which was with thee when thou wast in the
land of Egypt:''

so that thou shall not lift up thine eyes unto them; to the idols of
Egypt, to pray unto them, and worship them:

nor remember Egypt any more; with any delight and pleasure, and so as to
desire an alliance with them, and help from them, or to join with them
in their idolatries: so the Targum,

"and the idols of the Egyptians thou shalt remember no more.''

[Ezekiel 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">eze 23:28</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord God, I will deliver thee into the hand of them
whom thou hatest,.... The Chaldeans and Babylonians, before loved by
her, and doted upon, but now hated and rebelled against; and to fall
into such hands must be a sore judgment; and this the Lord threatens to
bring upon the Jews for their sins; and he having said it, it might be
depended upon it would be performed; and, for the greater certainty of
it, it is repeated in different words:

into the hand of them from whom thy mind is alienated; See Gill on [Eze
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#017.md).

[Ezekiel 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">eze 23:29</span></span>

And they shall deal with thee hatefully,.... The Chaldeans should hate
the Jews as much as before they loved them, when they came into the bed
of love to them, [Eze 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#017.md) and as
much as the Jews hated them; which they showed by their severe and
rigorous usage of them, putting some to the sword, carrying the rest
captive, and employing them in hard service and labour; and, which is
still worse, and an aggravation of all this:

and shall take away all thy labour; whatever they got by labour, that
they should not enjoy, but should be taken away from them:

and shall leave thee naked and bare: stripped of all the necessaries and
conveniences of life:

and the nakedness of thy whoredoms shall be discovered, both thy
lewdness and thy whoredoms; it shall then be manifest to all that thou
hast been guilty of idolatry, and hast departed from the Lord thy God,
which has caused him to bring these judgments upon thee for thy sins.
The Targum paraphrases the latter part of the clause thus,

"the sins of thy wicked counsels, and thy pride.''

It seems to be a heap of words, to express the grossness of their
idolatries, which now should be exposed.

[Ezekiel 23:30](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">eze 23:30</span></span>

And I will do these things unto thee,.... What the Chaldeans did God is
said to do, because he suffered them to do these things, as a punishment
for their sins; yea, it was according to his will, and by his orders.
The Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions render it, "they have done
these things unto thee"; that is, the Chaldeans. The Targum is,

"thy sins are the cause of these things unto thee;''

that is, their idolatry and other iniquities. Hence the Syriac version
is very particular,

"for thy whoredoms these things shall be done unto thee;''

and the Arabic version,

"thy whoredom hath done (or is the cause of) these things unto thee,''

as follows:

because thou hast gone a whoring after the Heathen, and because thou art
polluted with their idols; imitated them in their idolatries; worshipped
the same dunghill gods as they did, as the word signifies; with which it
was no wonder they should be polluted, and become abominable unto God.

[Ezekiel 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">eze 23:31</span></span>

Thou hast walked in the way of thy sister,.... Samaria, or the ten
tribes of Israel; followed them in their idolatrous practices, were
guilty of the same:

therefore will I give her cup into thine hand; the cup of her vengeance,
as the Targum; inflict the same punishment on the two tribes as on the
ten, and suffer them to be carried captive as they had been.

[Ezekiel 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">eze 23:32</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God, thou shall drink of thy sister's cup deep and
large,.... That is, partake of the same punishment, which was very
great, signified by a deep and large cup, which holds much:

thou shall be laughed to scorn, and had in derision; by the nations
round about, who, instead of pitying them under their troubles, will
rejoice at them; just as drunken men are laughed at, when intoxicated
and reeling about:

it containeth much; the cup of wrath and vengeance; as much as will last
severity years drinking. The Targum connects this with the preceding
clause,

"and thou shalt be for derision and for laughter, because of the
greatness of the tribulation that shall come upon thee.''

[Ezekiel 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">eze 23:33</span></span>

Thou shalt be filled with drunkenness and sorrow,.... Sorrow is the
effect of drunkenness; these two generally go together; when a man is
filled with the one, he is with the other; this expresses the greatness
of the sorrow and distress of the Jews in captivity:

with the cup of astonishment and desolation; their punishment would be
so great, and their condition be so desolate, that it should astonish
them, and bereave them of their senses; and they should be like mad men,
as their actions in the following verse show:

with the cup of thy sister Samaria; the same punishment as inflicted on
the ten tribes.

[Ezekiel 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">eze 23:34</span></span>

Thou shalt even drink it, and suck it out,.... The very dregs of it,
that which lies at the bottom, which is the most nauseous and the most
pernicious; not through love to it, but through force, shall be obliged
to it; see [Psa 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md),

and thou shall break the sherds thereof; and suck them, so that not a
drop of the liquor shall be lost; even what has penetrated into the
earthen vessel, which this cup is supposed to be; and therefore it shall
be broken to pieces, and these pieces sucked, that all may be got out;
suggesting that there will be no abatement of the punishment, it shall
be endured to the utmost: or it may be an allusion to drunkards, who,
having drunk up their liquor, and become drunk, break their glasses,
pots, and cups, and to which the next clause agrees:

and pluck off thine own breasts; as men in their drunken fits, being
like mad men, tear their own flesh; and so the Targum paraphrases it,

"thou shall tear thy flesh;''

so the Jews, under punishment for sin, and pressed with the guilt of it,
through indignation at themselves should tear their flesh, and
particularly pluck off their breasts: the allusion is to fornication, to
which idolatry is compared, in which those parts are particularly
affected; see [Eze 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#021.md), the Syriac
version renders this and the former clause thus, "thou shall shave thine
hair and cut off thy breasts"; Kimchi thinks by the "breasts" are meant
the oral and written laws, which ceased in the time of the captivity;
but without any foundation:

for I have spoken it, saith the Lord; and therefore it shall be done.

[Ezekiel 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">eze 23:35</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God, because thou hast forgotten me,....
His word, worship, and ordinances, and did not attend unto them, but
worshipped strange gods: so the Targum,

"because thou hast left my worship:''

and cast me behind thy back; or, as the same paraphrase,

"hast cast the fear of me from before thine eyes;''

or out of thy sight, his laws and statutes; see [Neh
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#026.md), as men cast behind their backs
that which they have no value for and loath, and which they do not care
to see, and choose to forget:

therefore bear thou also thy lewdness and thy whoredoms; that is, the
guilt of their sins, the punishment of their idolatries, and shame and
confusion for them.

[Ezekiel 23:36](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">eze 23:36</span></span>

The Lord said moreover unto me, son of man, wilt thou judge Aholah and
Aholibah?.... Plead the cause of Israel and Judah? say any thing in
their defence, and in excuse of them? or intercede and pray for them,
that threatened judgments may not come upon them? no, do nothing of this
kind; if thou wilt do anything, do as follows:

yea, declare unto them their abominations; their abominable sins, their
murders, adulteries, and idolatries; set them in a true light before
them, in all their aggravated circumstances; that, if it can be, they
may be brought to a true sight and sense of them, to repent of them, be
ashamed of them, loath them, confess them, and forsake them.

[Ezekiel 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">eze 23:37</span></span>

That they have committed adultery,.... Either literally, adultery with
their neighbours' wives, which was a prevailing sin with this people; or
figuratively, spiritual adultery, that is, idolatry:

and blood is in their hands; the Targum is,

"they have shed the blood of innocents with their hands;''

the blood of prophets and righteous men, sent unto them; and the blood
of their infants in sacrificing to idols, as after mentioned:

and with their idols have they committed adultery; by worshipping them,
which is spiritual adultery; and this being so explicitly mentioned, it
seems to be distinguished from corporeal adultery in the first clause,
which may be only there designed; and so Kimchi thinks:

and have also caused their sons, whom they bare unto me, to pass for
them through the fire, to devour them; their children, who were the
Lord's by national adoption, and who ought to have been trained up in
the worship and service of God, were, in a most barbarous and unnatural
manner, caused to pass through the fire, for or to the idols Molech and
Baal; and that not merely by way of lustration and dedication, which was
sometimes done by passing between two fires, but so as to be devoured
and destroyed by the fire.

[Ezekiel 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">eze 23:38</span></span>

Moreover this they have done unto me,..... The following piece of
wickedness, which was very provoking to the Lord:

they have defiled my sanctuary in the same day; as they caused their
children to pass through the tire to their idols, by entering into the
sanctuary when they had so done, and were thus defiled, and by offering
sacrifices to their idols in it; or under pretence of serving the Lord,
when they had just been guilty of murder and idolatry:

and have profaned my sabbaths; not only by doing their own worldly and
civil business, but by slaying their infants on those days, and
sacrificing them to idols.

[Ezekiel 23:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">eze 23:39</span></span>

For when they had slain their children to their idols,.... This explains
more clearly what is before said, that by causing their children to pass
through the fire was a slaying them; and that their passing through it
"for them" was for their idols, and unto them; see [Eze
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#037.md), and how when they had been
guilty of such shocking wickedness,

then they came the same day into my sanctuary to profane it; not that
they came into the temple on purpose to profane it; but coming into it,
being themselves defiled with the murder of their infants, and offering
sacrifices to idols, or performing a hypocritical service to the Lord,
this was in the event a profanation of the sanctuary:

and, lo, thus they have done in the midst of mine house; set up idols
there, and worshipped them; as they did in the temple itself, in the
times of Ahaz and Manasseh; see [Jer
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#030.md).

[Ezekiel 23:40](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">eze 23:40</span></span>

And furthermore, that ye have sent for men to come from far,.... From
Egypt, Assyria, and Chaldea, to treat with them, and enter into
alliances and confederacies with them, and to join them in their
idolatrous practices; these Heathen nations did not send to the Jews,
but the Jews to them; they did not court their friendship and alliance,
but the Jews courted theirs:

unto whom a messenger was sent; to court their favour, and solicit a
confederacy, and to desire that ambassadors might be sent to reside
among them:

and, lo, they came; these Heathen courts listened to the proposal, and
accordingly sent their plenipotentiaries and ambassadors to them, who
came in their masters' name, and with their credentials; and for the
reception of whom great preparations were made, as follows:

for whom thou didst wash thyself, paintedst thy eyes, and deckedst
thyself with ornaments; just as harlots do to make themselves agreeable
to their lovers; who use washes and paint, as Jezebel did, and dress
themselves in their best clothes, and adorn themselves in the best
manner they can. Harlots had their particular attire, by which they were
known, [Pro 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#010.md) and they not only
used bagnios or baths, but washes for their face, to make them look
beautiful; and particularly painted their eyes, to make them look
larger; for large eyes in women, in some nations, were reckoned very
handsome, particularly among the Greeks: hence Juno, in Homer (d), is
called the ox eyed, as some translate it; or rather the large eyed Juno:
and the Grecian women, in order to make their eyes large, made use of a
powder mixed with their washes, which shrunk their eyebrows, and caused
their eyes to stand out, and look fuller and larger; and such was the
paint which Pliny, (e) calls stibium, and says, it was by some named
"platyophthalmon", because in the beautiful eyebrows of women it dilated
the eyes; and it seems that painting with something of this nature was
used by the Jewish women, in imitation of the Heathens, for the same
purpose, especially by harlots; hence the phrase of rending the face, or
rather the eyes, with paint, [Jer
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030.md), so the Moorish women now, as Dr.
Shaw (f) relates, to add a gracefulness to their complexions, tinge
their eye lids with "alkahol", the powder of lead ore; and this is
performed by first dipping into this powder a small wooden bodkin, of
the thickness of a quill, and then drawing it afterwards through the
eyelids, over the ball of the eye; and which is properly a rending the
eyes indeed, as the prophet calls it, with powder of "pouk", or lead
ore: so, for the gratifying these idolatrous ambassadors, idols were set
up, altars built, and sacrifices prepared; and, in order to their public
entry, and to show how acceptable they were, palaces were fitted up for
them; and the streets through which they passed decorated, and all
public marks of esteem and affection given them; to this the Targum
seems to have respect, paraphrasing the words thus,

"and, lo, they came to the place thou hadst prepared; thou hast adorned
the streets, and appointed palaces.''

\(d\) Iliad. 1. l. 550. (e) Nat. Hist. l. 33. c. 6. (f) Travels, p. 229.
Ed. 2.

[Ezekiel 23:41](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">eze 23:41</span></span>

And satest upon a stately bed,.... Or honourable (g), a bed of state:
either a throne, a royal seat under a canopy, on which the king of Judah
sat to receive foreign ambassadors; or a stately bed at a feast, made
for the entertainment of them; it being usual in the eastern nations to
sit on beds at eating, to which the next clause agrees. The allusion is
to a harlot sitting on a bed decked out by her to allure men to lie with
her; see [Pro 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#016.md),

and a table prepared before it; before the bed, furnished with the
richest provisions to treat the ambassadors with; or this may design an
altar built for them to offer on it sacrifices to their idols, according
to the customs of their countries:

whereupon thou hast set mine incense and mine oil; which were the gifts
of God to this people, and which they should have used in his service;
but with these they treated the ministers of Heathen princes; scenting
the room where they were entertained with incense, and anointing their
heads and feet with oil, for their pleasure and refreshment; or they
offered these on the altars of the idols to them.

\(g\) "honorato", Junius and Tremellius, Polanus, Coeccius, Starckius.

[Ezekiel 23:42](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">eze 23:42</span></span>

And a voice of a multitude being at ease was with her,.... With
Aholibah, with the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin: or, "in her", in
Jerusalem; or "in it", or "about it" (h); the bed, or table, or both:
these were either the people of the many nations that came in great
numbers with the ambassadors, as their retinue, and for the greater
splendour of them; and who came, not to make war, but in a peaceable
way, being invited to come; or these were a confluence of the Jewish
people, who came from all parts to see the public entry of these
ambassadors; who were quite easy with it, since they came as the
ambassadors of their allies and friends, in whose alliance they thought
themselves safe and happy; and therefore welcomed them with their loud
huzzas:

and with the men of the common sort were brought Sabeans from the
wilderness; or, "and with men because of a multitude of men" (i); that
is, with those men that came from several parts on this occasion, for
the sake of a greater number, and of making a greater appearance, the
Sabeans that dwelt in the desert of Arabia were fetched from thence; or
their neighbours round about Moab and Ammon, that dwelt in the
wilderness, were sent for, and brought to make the solemnity the
greater; so Jarchi; and to this sense the Targum renders it,

"because of the multitude of men that came round about on every side
from the wilderness,''

Some render it, "drunkards from the wilderness" (k); a parcel of drunken
fellows that lived in the wilderness, rustic, brutish, people; these
were brought as fit persons to drink healths, and roar on this occasion:

which put bracelets upon their hands, and beautiful crowns upon their
heads; that is, the Jews put these ornaments upon the hands and heads of
these men of the common sort, and the Sabeans with them, and these poor
country drunken fellows too, that they might make the better appearance
when they met and huzzaed the ambassadors at their entry; or which
Sabeans and other foreigners put these ornaments on Aholah and Aholibah,
and enticed them to the worship of their idols, and taught them
idolatry.

\(h\) "in ea", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius,
Polanus; "in illa", Cocceius, Starckius, "in illo", Piscator; "circa
eam", a Lapide. (i) "et cum viris ut multiplicarent homines" Pagninus;
"ut adessent multi homines", Munster; "prae multitudine hominum",
Tigurine version, Cocceius, Starckius; "propter multiplicare homines",
Vatablus. (k) "ebrosi ex deserto", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Polanus; so R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 99. 1.

[Ezekiel 23:43](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">eze 23:43</span></span>

Then said I unto her that was old in adulteries,.... That had been an
old adulterer or idolater; meaning either Aholah the ten tribes, who
from Jeroboam's time had been guilty of idolatry; or Aholibah the two
tribes, who had remained longer in their own country, and had been long
given to idolatry; or both of them, as some think, the whole body of the
people of Israel, who had been addicted to idolatry ever since they came
out of Egypt, and so was like an old harlot indeed: now the Lord said
"unto her", or "concerning her" (l); in his own mind, after the manner
of men. So the Targum,

"I said concerning the congregation of Israel, whose people are old in
sins:''

will they now commit whoredoms with her, and she with them? will they
commit adultery with such an old harlot? are they not weary of her? and
will they not rather loath and despise her? as it is common when such
prostitutes grow old; and what pleasure can she take, thus advanced in
years, in such impurities? suggesting that alliances and confederacies
between the Jews and the nations of the world could not be agreeable on
either side, especially to the former; but so it was, and so were their
idolatries likewise. The Targum is,

"now she will leave her idols, and return to thy worship; but she
returned not.''

\(l\) "de inveterata illa", Vatablus.

[Ezekiel 23:44](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">eze 23:44</span></span>

Yet they went in unto her,.... Made a league with one another, and
joined in idolatrous worship:

as they go in unto a woman that playeth the harlot; with the same heat
of lust, with the same greediness and eager desire as young men do when
they go into a brothel house where a beautiful harlot lives:

so went they in unto Aholah and unto Aholibah; the lewd women, the ten
tribes of Israel, and the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, which
apostatized from God, and committed idolatry; with these the Sabeans
before mentioned, and other nations, joined in idolatrous worship.

[Ezekiel 23:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">eze 23:45</span></span>

And the righteous men,.... Some understand this of the prophets, who
were really righteous men; and foretold the righteous judgments of God
that should come upon the idolatrous Jews, which was a judging them:
others, of righteous men in general, who will one and all agree that
persons guilty of such crimes ought to suffer the punishment adequate to
them, and usually inflicted on such; but rather the Babylonians are here
meant; who, though not righteous in themselves, or truly so, yet were so
in comparison of the wicked Jews, who had a divine revelation, and knew
better than to commit such idolatries; whereas these were Gentiles that
knew not God, nor his will. So the Targum,

"and righteous men in respect (or comparison) of them;''

that is, of Israel and Judah; and they may be also called so, because
they were the executioners of justice, the instruments of inflicting
God's righteous judgments on the Jews; and, among other things, for
their perfidy and treachery to them; so that they would appear just in
the eyes of other nations for treating them as they did:

they shall judge them after the manner of adulteresses, and after the
manner of women that shed blood; that is, according to the law
concerning such persons; and shall condemn them to suffer the punishment
denounced on such, and shall execute it on them:

because they are adulteresses, the blood is in their hands; are guilty,
not only of corporeal uncleanness, but of spiritual adultery; that is,
idolatry; and of the murder of their prophets and righteous men, and
even of their own children sacrificed to idols; than which nothing can
be more unnatural and barbarous for women to do.

[Ezekiel 23:46](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">eze 23:46</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord God, I will bring up a company upon them,....
Or, "do thou bring up a company upon them" (m), or "against them". The
Targum represents it as spoken to the prophet, thus,

"prophesy that armies shall come up against them.''

Kimchi interprets it as we do, "I will bring up", &c. and so others (n).
By this "company" is to be understood the Chaldean army, whom God in his
providence, and in righteous judgment, would bring up against the Jews;
styled a "convocation" (o), assembly or congregation, in allusion to the
sanhedrim, or court of judicature, that took cognizance of such crimes,
and judged and condemned for them:

and will give them to be removed and spoiled; or, "for a removing", and
a "spoil" (p); that is, he would give the Jews into the hands of the
Chaldean army; their persons to be carried captive into other lands, and
their substance to be spoiled and plundered.

\(m\) ' , Sept.; "adduc super eas coetum", V. L. "ascendere tac contra
eas, vel eaos, coetum", Cocceius, Starckius. (n) "Facium ascendere",
Pagninus; "adducam", Munster, Tigurine version; "quum adduxero",
Piscator. (o) "congretio", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "consessus
judicum", Grotius, Starckius. (p) "commotioni et directioni", Junius &
Tremellius, Polanus, Piscator; "in commotionen et in praedam",
Starckius.

[Ezekiel 23:47](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">eze 23:47</span></span>

And the company shall stone them with stones,.... Which was the
punishment of adulterers and idolaters, [Deu
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#010.md), this seems to refer to the
Chaldean army casting out stones from their slings and engines into the
city of Jerusalem, when they besieged it, by which they killed some, and
beat down the houses, which fell upon others, and destroyed them. So the
Targum,

"and the army shall stone them with the stones of a sling:''

and dispatch them with their swords; cut them in pieces with them, such
as sallied out of the city upon them, or they found without, or by any
means fell into their hands:

they shall slay their sons and their daughters; when they broke into the
city, and took it; or when they found them making their escape, and
hiding themselves in secret places:

and burn up their houses with fire; as they did; the temple, the king's
palace, the houses of noblemen, and all the houses in Jerusalem; see
[Jer 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013.md).

[Ezekiel 23:48](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">eze 23:48</span></span>

Thus will I cause to cease lewdness out of the land,.... There being no
opportunity for it, nor any to commit it; what were not destroyed by
famine, sword, and pestilence, during the siege, were carried captive;
and, when they returned, were never more given to idolatry; see [Eze
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#027.md),

that all women may be taught not to do after your lewdness; that is,
that all provinces, as the Targum, all kingdoms; states, churches, and
people, hearing and reading the judgments of God on this people for
their idolatry, may learn to shun it; it is even an instruction to us,
at this distance, not to commit idolatry, as they did, [Co1
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#007.md). The church of Rome ought to
observe this.

[Ezekiel 23:49](../../../bib/kjv/eze023.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">eze 23:49</span></span>

And they shall recompense your lewdness upon you,.... Or, "give your
lewdness" (q); the punishment of it; the just recompence of reward for
their idolatry:

and ye shall bear the sins of your idols; the shame, and guilt, and
punishment of their sins committed in worshipping idols:

and ye shall know that I am the Lord God; the only Lord God who is to be
worshipped, and not idols; jealous of my honour and glory, and true to
my word; who can and will accomplish all I have said; this the Jews knew
and acknowledged when in captivity, and returned from it, as they will
more fully when they shall be converted in the latter day.

\(q\) "et dabunt scelus vestrum", V. L. Montanus, Cocceius, Starckius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Chapter 24](eze024.md)

</div>
