<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr001)  [Next](ezr003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZRA 2

This chapter contains a list of those that went up from Babylon to
Jerusalem, of their leaders, their chief men, princes and priests, [Ezr
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001) of the people, described by their
families, towns, and cities, and number of persons, [Ezr
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#003), of the priests, Levites, and
Nethinims, [Ezr 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036), and of those
that could not make out their genealogy, people and priests, [Ezr
2:59](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#059), and then the sum total of the
whole congregation is given, [Ezr
2:64](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#064), besides men and maidservants,
singing men and women, and cattle of divers sorts, [Ezr
2:65](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#065), and the chapter is closed with
an account of the freewill offerings of the principal men towards the
building of the temple, and of the settlement of the people in their
respective cities, [Ezr 2:68](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#068).

[Ezra 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 2:1</span></span>

Now these are the children of the province,.... Either of the province
of Babylon, as Aben Ezra, where they were either born, or had dwelt for
many years; or else rather, according to Jarchi, of the province of
Judea, as it is called, [Ezr 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr005.htm#008) once
a flourishing kingdom, but reduced to a province of the Babylonian
monarchy, now in the hands of the Medes and Persians, of which province
they and their fathers originally were:

that went out of the captivity, of those which had been carried away,
whom Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon had carried away unto Babylon; who
either in person, or in their parents, were carried captive by him, and
who were the tribes of Judah and Benjamin; and they are only mentioned,
because they were the principal that returned, though there were some of
the other tribes that also came up with them:

and came again unto Jerusalem and Judah, everyone unto his city; that he
dwelt in before, or was now assigned to him by lot, see [Neh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#001), &c.

[Ezra 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 2:2</span></span>

Which came with Zerubbabel,.... The head of them, the prince of Judah;
and the chief that came with him are the ten following; Jeshua,
Nehemiah, Seraiah, Reelaiah, Mordecai, Bilshan, Mispar, Bigvai, Rehum,
Baanah; the first of these, Jeshua, was Joshua the high priest, the son
of Josedech, [Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001). Dr. Lightfoot
(s) thinks that Nehemiah is the same, whose name the following book
bears; and that Mordecai is he who was uncle to Esther, so Aben Ezra;
but, if so, they must both return again; for that Nehemiah came to
Jerusalem in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, [Neh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001), and that Mordecai brought up his
niece in the city of Shushan, in the times of Ahasuerus, is certain; and
this, with respect to both, is denied by others (t), who take them to be
different men of the same name; and the same writer is of opinion that
Seraiah, and who is called Azariah, [Neh
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh007.htm#007) is the same with Ezra, who
therefore must and did return, since he went up to Jerusalem in the
seventh year of Artaxerxes, [Ezr 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001),
as for the others, we know nothing more of them than their names:

the number of the men of the people of Israel; either of the principal
of them before named, or of the common people, which next follows.

\(s\) Works, vol. 1. p. 127. So Broughton, Works, p. 258. (t) Vid.
Rainold. de Libr. Apocryph. Praelect. 111, 117, 148.

[Ezra 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 2:3</span></span>

The children of Parosh, two thousand an hundred and seventy two. From
hence, to the end of [Ezr 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#035), a list
is given of the captives that returned, described by the families they
were of, their ancestors from whence they sprung, or the towns and
cities to which they originally belonged, and by their numbers;
otherwise nothing more of them is known.

[Ezra 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">ezr 2:36</span></span>

The priests,.... An account of them is given in this and the three
following verses, and only four families are mentioned, those of
Jedaiah, Immer, Pashur, and Harim, and the number of them amounted to
4289; these, according to the Jews, were heads of four courses, which
were all that returned from Babylon (u).

\(u\) T. Hieros. Taanioth, fol. 68. 1.

[Ezra 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">ezr 2:40</span></span>

The Levites,.... Singers and porters, who are reckoned in this, and the
two following verses, whose numbers were no more than three hundred and
forty one; whereas, in the times of David, they were 38,000, [Ch1
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1023.htm#003).

[Ezra 2:43](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">ezr 2:43</span></span>

The Nethinims,.... Supposed by Aben Ezra and Jarchi to be the
Gibeonites, who were "given" by Joshua, as the word Nethinims signifies,
to the congregation, to be hewers of wood and drawers of water; but
rather were those that were given by David to assist the Levites; of
these is an account from hence to the end of [Ezr
2:58](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#058), together with those who
descended from Solomon's servants, who seem to be the remains of the
Canaanites in the land, whom Solomon made bondservants of, [Kg1
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#020), who, and their posterity, became
proselytes; or those sprung from men that were domestic servants of
Solomon's, and valued themselves on that account; the number of the
Nethinims and these together were three hundred ninety and two.

[Ezra 2:59](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#059)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">ezr 2:59</span></span>

And these were they that went up from Telmelah, Telharsa,.... Places in
the land of Babylon, see [Isa 37:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#012).

Cherub, Addan, and Immer; but they could not show their father's house,
and their seed, whether they were of Israel; these were such that
professed the Jewish religion, and went for Jews in Babylon, but could
not trace their pedigree, and tell what family they were of, who their
ancestors, and where they had lived in Judea; they had lost their
genealogical tables, if they ever had any, and could not make it out,
whether their parents were Israelites or proselyted Gentiles; or they
were such who had been exposed, and taken out of the streets, and their
parents unknown.

[Ezra 2:60](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#060)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_060">ezr 2:60</span></span>

The children of Delaiah, the children of Tobiah, and the children of
Nekoda, six hundred fifty and two. These, though their immediate parents
were known, yet by their being mentioned here, it seems as if they could
not carry their genealogy further, and make it clearly appear what was
the house of their fathers, or what their family.

[Ezra 2:61](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#061)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_061">ezr 2:61</span></span>

And of the children of the priests,.... Who could not make out their
pedigree, for those that could are mentioned before:

the children of Habaiah, the children of Koz, the children of Barzillai;
how the latter came by this name follows:

which took a wife of the daughters of Barzillai the Gileadite, and was
called after their name; this man married a woman that descended from
the famous Barzillai the Gileadite, in the times of David; and the
priesthood being in disuse, and mean and despicable, in Babylon, he
chose to take the name of his wife's family, and pass for a descendant
from that, and perhaps destroyed, or at least neglected, to take care of
the genealogy of his own family.

[Ezra 2:62](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#062)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_062">ezr 2:62</span></span>

These sought their register among those that were reckoned by
genealogy,.... To find their names written and registered there; for the
Jews kept public registers of their priests, their descent, marriages,
and offspring, that it might be known who were fit, and who not, to
officiate as such:

but they were not found; their names were not there, nor any account
taken of them:

therefore were they, as polluted, put from the priesthood; were not
suffered to attend at the altar, and offer sacrifice, and enjoy the
privileges belonging to that office.

[Ezra 2:63](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">ezr 2:63</span></span>

And the Tirshatha said unto them,.... By whom Jarchi understands
Nehemiah, and observes, that their rabbins say he was so called, because
the wise men allowed him to drink the wine of the Gentiles, he being
cupbearer to the king; but Aben Ezra, with greater probability, takes it
to be a name of honour and grandeur in the Chaldee language, as a prince
or governor; and no doubt Zerubbabel is meant, the prince of the Jews,
the same with Sheshbazzar, [Ezr 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#008)
according to Gussetius (w), this office was the same with that of the
king's commissary in a province, delegated to carry his orders, make
them known, and see them put in execution; and that this name Tirshatha
is the same with Tithraustes in Aelian (x); but that seems to be not the
title of an office, but the personal name of a man that was a chiliarch:

that they should not eat of the most holy things; as of the shewbread,
and those parts of the sin offerings, and of the peace offerings and
meat offerings, which belonged to the priests, which the governor forbid
these to eat of, who were rejected from the priesthood:

till there stood up a priest with Urim and Thummim; as yet there was not
any priest that had them; they were not to be found at the return from
Babylon; the governor might hope they would be found, and a priest
appear clothed with them, when it might be inquired of the Lord by them,
whether such priests, before described, might eat of the holy things or
not; but since the Jews (y) acknowledge that these were one of the five
things wanting in the second temple; it is all one, as the Talmudists
(z) express it, as if it had been said, until the dead rise, or the
Messiah comes; and who is come, the true High Priest, and with whom are
the true Urim and Thummim, lights and perfections to the highest degree,
being full of grace and truth; of the Urim and Thummim; see Gill on [Exo
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#030).

\(w\) Ebr. Comment. p. 809. (x) Var. Hist. l. 1. c. 21. Vid. Corn. Nep.
Vit. Conon. l. 9. c. 3. (y) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 21. 2. (z) T. Bab. Sotah,
fol. 48. 2. & Gloss. in Kiddushin, fol. 60. 2.

[Ezra 2:64](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">ezr 2:64</span></span>

The whole congregation together was forty and two thousand three hundred
and threescore. But the sums before given make no more, with Zerubbabel,
and the ten principal men, than 29,829, so that there are more than
12,000 wanting; wherefore, in answer to the question, where are the
12,000? the Jews say in their chronology (a) these are they of the other
tribes, who set up the altar on its bases, and gave money to the masons,
&c. [Ezr 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#001), this was a much larger
number than were carried captive; see [Kg2
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014), but not to be compared with the
number that came out of Egypt, [Exo
12:37](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#037). An Arabic writer (b) makes them
50,000, but wrongly.

\(a\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 29. p. 86. (b) Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. Dyn.
5. p. 82.

[Ezra 2:65](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">ezr 2:65</span></span>

Besides their servants and their maids, of whom there were seven
thousand three hundred thirty and seven,.... This shows that the greater
part of those that returned were of the poorer sort, since there were so
few servants that belonged unto them; these came not into the above
account:

and there were among them two hundred singing men and singing women;
among the servants, who were kept by persons of figure for their
pleasure and recreation, see [Ecc 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc002.htm#008),
for that these were such as were employed in sacred service is not so
clear, especially the latter, though some conclude it from [Ch1
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#005), but rather they were such as
were employed at marriages, festivals, and funerals; though Jarchi
thinks they were employed by the returning captives, to make them
cheerful as they travelled along; see Gill on [Isa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#012).

[Ezra 2:66](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#066)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_066">ezr 2:66</span></span>

So that the far greatest part of them must walk on foot, since these can
be thought to be little more than sufficient to carry their goods or
baggage; some copies of the Vulgate Latin read six hundred and thirty
six horses (c).

\(c\) Ed. of Sixtus V. and the Lovain in James's Contrariety of Popish
Bibles, p. 295.

[Ezra 2:68](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#068)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_068">ezr 2:68</span></span>

And some of the chief of the fathers, when they came to the house of the
Lord that is at Jerusalem,.... That is, when they came to the place
where it formerly stood, and where were still the ruins of it:

offered freely for the house of God, to set it up in its place; to
rebuild it upon the spot where it formerly stood; this they did besides
the freewill offerings they brought with them from Babylon.

[Ezra 2:69](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#069)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_069">ezr 2:69</span></span>

They gave after their ability unto the treasure of the world threescore
and one thousand drachms of gold,.... These "darcemons or darics" were a
Persian coin; one of which, according to Brerewood (k), was of the value
of fifteen shillings of our money, and so this quantity of them amounted
to 45,750 pounds; but according to Bishop Cumberland (l) they were of
the value of twenty shillings and four pence of our money, and so came
to upwards of 61,000 pounds; these everyone, according to his ability,
put into the common stock or treasury for the work of building the
temple; the Vulgate Latin (m) reads 40,000:

and five thousand pounds of silver; and an Hebrew "mina", or pound,
being of our money seven pounds, ten shillings, according to Brerewood
(n), amounted to 31,250 pounds: but others (o), reckoning a drachm of
gold at ten shillings, and a mina or pound of silver at nine pounds,
make the whole to amount only to 75,500 pounds of our money:

and one hundred priests' garments; which, as they were laid up among
treasures, so were necessary for the service of the temple.

\(k\) De Pret. & Ponder. Vet. Num. ch. iii. v. (l) Scripture Weights &
Measures, ch. 4. p. 115. (m) Sixtus V. Lovain & MSS. in James ut supra.
(Contrariety of Popish Bibles, p. 295) (n) Ut supra, (De Pret. & Ponder.
Vet. Num.) ch. iv. v. (o) Universal History, vol. 10. p. 183, marg.

[Ezra 2:70](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#070)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_070">ezr 2:70</span></span>

So the priests and the Levites, and some of the people, and the singers,
and the Nethinims, dwelt in their cities,.... Which were assigned to
them out of the several tribes, and in which they or their forefathers
had dwelt before the captivity:

and all Israel in their cities; as those of the tribes of Judah and
Benjamin, so of the other ten, as many as returned and joined those who
were left in the land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 3](ezr003)

</div>
