<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ezr003)  [Next](ezr005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001.md)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZRA 4

The contents of this chapter are the offer the Samaritans made to the
Jews, to assist them in building the temple, which having refused, they
gave them all the trouble they could, [Ezr
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001.md) and a letter of theirs to
Artaxerxes, king of Persia, full of accusations of them, [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007.md) and the answer of Artaxerxes to
it, giving orders to command the Jews to cease building the temple, [Ezr
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017.md) which orders were accordingly
executed, and the work ceased till the second year of Darius, [Ezr
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023.md).

[Ezra 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 4:1</span></span>

Now when the adversaries of Judah and Benjamin,.... The Samaritans, as
appears from [Ezr 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002.md),

heard that the children of the captivity; the Jews, who had been in
captivity seventy years, and were just come out of it, and still were
not quite free, but under the jurisdiction and control of the king of
Persia:

builded the temple unto the Lord God of Israel; that they were going
about it, and had laid the foundation of it, which might soon come to
their ears, the distance not being very great. Josephus (c) says they
heard the sound of the trumpets, and came to know the meaning of it.

\(c\) Antiqu. l. 11. c. 4. sect. 3.

[Ezra 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 4:2</span></span>

Then they came to Zerubbabel, and the chief of the fathers,.... These
they addressed, as knowing that if they could not prevail with them,
they could never succeed in their design; and these were no doubt the
principal of the Samaritans that applied:

and said unto them, let us build with you; that is, the temple, they
proposed to join with them, and assist them in it; which proposal at
first sight might seem very agreeable and welcome, and would have been
so had they been sincere, but they were not; they hoped, by getting
among them, to have sown discord among them, and disunited them; and so
by these or other means to have retarded the building; or if it went
forward, that they might have a claim to it as theirs, at least as to
set up their own idols in a part of it; the reasons they gave follow:

for we seek your God as ye do; which was false, for they did not worship
him alone, but with idols, nor in the same manner as the Jews did:

and we do sacrifice unto him; but even that could not recommend them to
the Jews, since they ought not to sacrifice, even to the Lord himself,
but at Jerusalem: there is a various reading here; the textual reading
is, "we do not sacrifice"; that is, to idols; the marginal reading is,
"we sacrifice to him", which we follow; Aben Ezra takes in both, perhaps
most rightly; "we do not sacrifice to any other, but to him"; which was
also false:

since the days of Esarhaddon, king of Assur, who brought us up hither;
to Samaria, from Babylon, and other places; see [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024.md).

[Ezra 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 4:3</span></span>

But Zerubbabel, and Joshua, and the rest of the chief of the fathers,
said unto them,.... The prince and high priest, and chief of the people:

you have nothing to do with us to build an house to our God; being
neither of the same nation, nor of the same religion:

but we ourselves together will build to the Lord God of Israel; we and
we only, who are together as one man, united in one body of people, and
in the same religious sentiments, being Israelites; we separately,
without admitting strangers among us, will build a temple to the God of
Israel:

as King Cyrus, the king of Persia, hath commanded us; thereby letting
them know that they acted by his authority, and the commission they had
from him only concerned themselves, and not others.

[Ezra 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 4:4</span></span>

Then the people of the land weakened the hands of the people of Judah,
and troubled them in building. By threatening them, or by dissuading the
workmen from going on, by endeavouring to hinder their having materials
from the Tyrians and Zidonians, or money out of the king's revenues to
bear the expenses as ordered; see [Ezr
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#004.md).

[Ezra 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 4:5</span></span>

And hired counsellors against them, to frustrate their purpose,....
Either to advise and persuade the king of Persia's officers in those
parts not to supply them with money, or to influence the great men at
his court to get the edict revoked: and this they did

all the days of Cyrus king of Persia; who, though the hearty friend and
patron of the Jews, yet being engaged in wars abroad with the Lydians
and Scythians, and leaving his son as viceroy in his absence, who was no
friend unto them, the work went on but slowly, attended with
interruptions and discouragements:

even until the reign of Darius king of Persia; who was Darius Hystaspis,
between whom and Cyrus were Cambyses the son of Cyrus, and Smerdis the
impostor, who pretended to be Smerdis, the brother of Cambyses; a space
of about fifteen years.

[Ezra 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 4:6</span></span>

And in the reign of Ahasuerus, in the beginning of his reign,....
According to Jarchi, this was Ahasuerus the husband of Esther; but, as
most think (d), was Cambyses, the son and successor of Cyrus; so
Josephus (e); who was an enemy to the Egyptians; and, fearing the Jews
might take part with them, was no friend to them; their enemies
therefore took the advantage of the death of Cyrus, and the first
opportunity after Cambyses reigned in his own right:

and wrote they unto him an accusation against the inhabitants of Judah
and Jerusalem; full of hatred and enmity, spite and malice, charging
them as a turbulent, disobedient, and rebellious people.

\(d\) Spanhem. Introduct. Chron. ad Hist. Eccl. p. 54. & Universal
History, Vol. 5. p. 203. Prideaux, p. 175. (e) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 11.
c. 4.) sect. 4, 6. Vid. R. David Ganz. Tzemach David, par. 2. fol. 8. 2.
So Dr. Lightfoot, Works, vol. 1. p. 139.

[Ezra 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ezr 4:7</span></span>

And in the days of Artaxerxes,.... The same with Ahasuerus, in the
preceding verse; and who also is Cambyses, which is his name in Heathen
authors, Artaxerxes being a common name to the kings of Persia; though
some (f) think this was Smerdis, the magician and impostor, who was
between Cambyses and Darius; but as he reigned but seven months, it is
not very likely that he should be wrote unto, and an answer received
from him; besides he sent to every nation he ruled over (g), and so to
the Jews, and proclaimed to them freedom from tribute and the militia
for three years, to ingratiate himself to them:

wrote Bishlam, Mithredath, Tabeel, and the rest of their companions; or
his company; for Jarchi thinks only one person is meant; that Mithredath
Tabeel is the name of one of the adversaries of Judah; and that Bishlam
is an appellative, and signifies that he wrote in peace, or in a way of
salutation and greeting; but they seem to be the names of governors in
the cities of Samaria under the king of Persia: these wrote

to Artaxerxes king of Persia; instigated by the Samaritans:

and the writing of the letter was written in the Syrian tongue, and
interpreted in the Syrian tongue; or Chaldee, of which Ezra gives a copy
in the Chaldee language; the meaning either is, that it was written both
in Syriac letters, and in the Syriac language; for sometimes words are
written in one language and in the character of another, as the Syriac
is sometimes written in, Hebrew characters, and the Hebrew in Roman; or
else there was a postscript added to this letter, explaining some things
in it, which also was written in the same language: some take (h) the
word "nishtevan", rendered "written", to be the name of a province on
the borders of the country beyond Euphrates, whose figure and characters
were in high esteem, and fit to write in to kings; but the words and
language were Syrian, and needed interpretation.

\(f\) Prideaux's Connect. par. 1. p. 175. Authors of the Universal
History, vol. 5. p. 199, 203. So Vitringa, Hypotypos. Hist. Sacr. p.
108. (g) Herodot. Thalia, sive, l. 3. c. 67. Justin. l. 1. c. 9. (h)
Praefat. Arugas Habbosem apud Buxtorf. de liter. Heb. add.

[Ezra 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 4:8</span></span>

Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, wrote a letter against
Jerusalem to Artaxerxes the king in this sort. This means the same
letter as before; which, according to Jarchi, was sent in the name of
Mithredath Tabeel and his company, was endited by Rehum, master of words
or sense, and written by Shimshai the scribe, whom he makes to be a son
of Haman (i); but it was written rather in all their names.

\(i\) So Midrash Esther, fol. 85. 3.

[Ezra 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ezr 4:9</span></span>

Then wrote Rehum the chancellor, and Shimshai the scribe, and the rest
of their companions,.... who all signed the letter; namely, the
governors of the following nations:

the Dinaites, the Apharsathchites, the Tarpelites, the Apharsites, the
Archevites, the Babylonians, the Susanchites, the Dehavites, and the
Elamites; which were colonies from several parts of Chaldea, Media, and
Persia, and were settled in the several cities of Samaria, as several of
their names plainly show, as from Persia, Erech, Babylon, Shushan, and
Elimais; some account for them all, but with uncertainty; according to
R. Jose (k) these were the Samaritans who first were sent out of five
nations, to whom the king of Assyria added four more, which together
make the nine here mentioned, see [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024.md).

\(k\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 38.

[Ezra 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 4:10</span></span>

And the rest of the nations whom the great and noble Asnappar brought
over,.... The river Euphrates:

and set in the cities of Samaria; placed there in the room of the
Israelites carried captive; this Asnappar was, according to Jarchi and
others (l) Sennacherib; but, with Grotius, Shalmaneser; rather he was
Esarhaddon, the son of the former, and grandson of the latter; so Dr.
Prideaux (m); though he might be only some commander of the Assyrian
monarch, who carried them over by his orders:

and the rest that are on this side the river; the river Euphrates:

and at such a time; which may respect the date of the letter, which, no
doubt, was expressed, though not here given; or this, as some think, was
the same with our &c. something following, unto King Artaxerxes
greeting, or something like that; though David de Pomis (n) takes it to
be the general name of the people beyond the river.

\(l\) Kimchi Sepher Shorash. fol. 166. 2. & Vajikra Rabba in ib. T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 94. 1. (m) Connexion, &c. vol. 1. p. 30. (n) Tzemach
David, fol. 63. 3.

[Ezra 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 4:11</span></span>

This is the copy of the letter they sent unto him, even unto Artaxerxes
the king,.... Which Ezra brought with him from Babylon, and is contained
in the five following verses:

thy servants the men on this side the river, and at such a time; this
was the inscription of the letter, or the beginning of it.

[Ezra 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ezr 4:12</span></span>

Be it known unto the king,.... The intent of this letter was, that it
might be known to the king what follows:

that the Jews which came up from thee to us are come unto Jerusalem;
this they observe partly out of contempt of the Jews, having been lately
captive in Babylon, and partly to insinuate what ingratitude they were
guilty of; that having got their liberty, and come to Jerusalem, they
made use of it to the king's detriment:

building the rebellious and the bad city; as they suggest it had been to
kings, even his predecessors, in former times, [Ezr
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015.md)

and have set up the walls thereof, and joined the foundations; which was
a falsehood; for the most they had done was setting up the walls of
their houses in Jerusalem, and laying the foundation of the temple; as
for the walls of the city, they had not as yet done anything unto them.

[Ezra 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 4:13</span></span>

Be it known now unto the king,.... And let it be seriously and
thoroughly considered by him and his counsellors:

that if this city be builded, and its walls set up again, then will they
not pay toll, tribute, and custom; being able to defend themselves
against the king's forces, sent to reduce them to their obedience; these
three words take in all sorts of taxes and levies on persons, goods, and
merchandise:

and so thou shall endamage the revenue of the kings; not only his own,
but his successors':

this they thought would be a very striking and powerful argument with
him.

[Ezra 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ezr 4:14</span></span>

Now because we have maintenance from the king's palace,.... Have posts
under the king, to which salaries were annexed, by which they were
supported, and which they had from the king's exchequer; or "salt" (o),
as in the original, some places of honour and trust formerly being paid
in salt; hence, as Pliny (p) observes, such honours and rewards were
called "salaries":

and it was not meet for us to see the king's dishonour; to see any thing
done injurious to his crown and dignity, to his honour and revenues,
when we are supported by him; this would be ungrateful as well as
unjust:

therefore have we sent and certified the king; of the truth of what is
before related; and, for the further confirmation of it, refer him to
the ancient records of the kingdom, as follows.

\(o\) "salem vel sale", Montanus, Vatablus, Michaelis. (p) Nat. Hist. l.
31. c. 7.

[Ezra 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 4:15</span></span>

That search may be made in the book of the records of thy fathers,....
That is, his predecessors in the Babylonian monarchy; though, as the
Medes and Persians were included in that, and joined the Babylonians in
their wars with others, and particularly with the Jews, the records of
the Medes and Persians might also be applied to:

so shalt thou find in the book of the records, and know that this city
is a rebellious city, and hurtful unto kings and provinces, and that
they have moved sedition within the same of old time; against the king
of Babylon, particularly in the times of Jehoiakim and Zedekiah:

for which cause was this city destroyed; as it was by Nebuchadnezzar;
see [Kg2 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#001.md).

[Ezra 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ezr 4:16</span></span>

We certify the king, that if this city be builded again, and the walls
thereof set up,.... As it formerly was, and now attempted, as they
suggest:

by this means thou shalt have no portion on this side the river; the
river Euphrates; intimating that the Jews would not only shake off his
yoke, and refuse to pay tribute themselves, but would seize on all his
dominions on that side the river, and annex them to their own.

[Ezra 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ezr 4:17</span></span>

Then sent the king an answer unto Rehum the chancellor, and to Shimshai
the scribe,.... This affair, upon examination, being found to be of
importance, the king of Persia thought fit to send an answer to the
above letter, which was doing them an honour, and gave them the power
and authority they wished to have:

and to the rest of their companions that dwelt in Samaria; in the
kingdom, province, and cities of Samaria:

and unto the rest beyond the river; the river Euphrates, the rest of the
nations before mentioned, [Ezr 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#009.md).

Peace, and at such a time: that is, all health and prosperity, &c.

[Ezra 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ezr 4:18</span></span>

The letter which ye sent unto us,.... The plural number is used, being
now become courtly for kings thus to speak of themselves:

hath been plainly before me; by such that understood both the Syrian and
Persian languages; the letter was written in the Syrian language, and
the king being a Persian, it was necessary it should be interpreted and
explained to him.

[Ezra 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ezr 4:19</span></span>

And I commanded, and search hath been made,.... In the records of his
predecessors, whether Chaldeans or Persians:

and it is found that this city of old time hath made insurrection
against kings, and that rebellion and sedition have been made therein:
and yet this could not be carried higher than to the times of Zedekiah
and Jehoiakim, as before observed, which was not one hundred years ago,
unless the rebellion of Hezekiah against the king of Assyria could be
thought to be in these records, [Kg2
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#007.md), and yet from hence it is
concluded as if in ages past they had been guilty of rebellion and
sedition, and even always.

[Ezra 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ezr 4:20</span></span>

There have been mighty kings also over Jerusalem, which have ruled over
all countries beyond the river,.... As David and Solomon; and the
account of these they had in their records, see [Sa2
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001.md)

and toll, tribute, and custom, was paid unto them; as appears from the
places referred to; and this served to strengthen the insinuation made
to the king, that if these people were suffered to go on building, he
would lose his tribute and taxes in those parts.

[Ezra 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ezr 4:21</span></span>

Give ye now commandment to cause these men to cease,.... From building:

and that this city be not builded until another commandment shall be
given from me; he might suspect that this case, in all its
circumstances, was not truly stated, and that hereafter he might see
reason to recede from the present orders he gave; and the rather, as by
searching, and perhaps on his own knowledge, must have observed, that
his father Cyrus had shown favour to the Jews, and had not only set them
at liberty, but had encouraged them to rebuild their temple; which might
be what they were about, and was the case, and nothing else, except
their houses to dwell in.

[Ezra 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ezr 4:22</span></span>

Take heed now that ye fail not to do this,.... To put his orders into
execution, and at once, without any loss of time, oblige the Jews to
desist from rebuilding the walls of their city, which he was told they
were doing, though a great falsehood:

why should damage grow to the hurt of the kings? of him and his
successors, to be deprived of their toll, tribute, and customs, and to
have insurrections, mutinies, and rebellions, in the dominions belonging
to them.

[Ezra 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ezr 4:23</span></span>

Now when the copy of King Artaxerxes letter was read before Rehum, and
Shimshai the scribe, and their companions,.... By him or them to whom it
was particularly directed:

they went up in haste to Jerusalem unto the Jews; not only in obedience
to the king's command, but from an eagerness of spirit to put a stop to
the proceedings of the Jews, to whom they had an aversion, instigated by
the Samaritans:

and made them to cease by force and power; from going on with the
building of the temple, which they reckoned a part of the city, and
within their commission; this they did by showing the power and
authority they had under the king's hand, and by the forces they brought
with them to compel them to it, should they refuse to obey; or, however,
they threatened them highly what they would do, if they did not desist.

[Ezra 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ezr 4:24</span></span>

Then ceased the work of the house of God, which is at Jerusalem,.... How
far they had proceeded is not said, whether any further than laying the
foundation of it; though probably, by this time, it might be carried to
some little height; however, upon this it was discontinued:

so it ceased unto the second year of the reign of Darius king of Persia;
not Darius Nothun, as some think, for from the first of Cyrus to the
sixth of his reign, when the temple was finished, was upwards of one
hundred years; yea, according to some, about one hundred and forty;
which would carry the age of Zerubbabel, who both laid the foundation of
the temple, and finished it, and the age of those who saw the first
temple, to a length that is not probable; but this was Darius Hystaspis,
who succeeded Cambyses the son of Cyrus, there being only, between, the
short usurpation of Smerdis for seven months.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 5](ezr005.md)

</div>
