<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ezra Index](ezr)  
  [Previous](ezr008)  [Next](ezr010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZRA 9

Ezra being informed, by some of the princes who complained unto him, of
the marriages of many of the Israelites with the people of the land, the
Canaanites and others, was greatly grieved and distressed, [Ezr
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001), upon which he made a confession
of their sins to God, with great shame, sorrow, and contrition, and
deprecated the evils which they deserved, [Ezr
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006).

[Ezra 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 9:1</span></span>

Now when these things were done,.... When the captives with Ezra had
refreshed themselves, and weighed the money and vessels they brought,
and put them into the hands of proper persons, and offered sacrifices,
and delivered the king's commissions to his lieutenants and governors,
and shown his own:

the princes came to me; some of the nobles of Israel, the most religious
of them, who were concerned at the corruptions that were among them,
though not a sufficient number to reform them:

saying the people of Israel, and the priests, and the Levites, have not
separated themselves from the people of the land: but joined with them,
though not in idolatrous practices, yet by marrying with them, which
might lead them into them:

doing according to their abominations; not serving idols as they did,
but imitating them in their marriages: even

of the Canaanites, the Perizzites, the Jebusites, the Ammonites, the
Moabites, the Egyptians, and the Amorites; affinity with many of these
was forbidden by an express law, [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001) all but the Moabites, Ammonites,
and Egyptians, and from these for the same reason they were to abstain;
namely, lest they should be drawn into idolatry; that the priests and
Levites should do this, who ought to have known the law, and instructed
the people better, was very sad and shocking.

[Ezra 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 9:2</span></span>

For they have taken of their daughters for themselves, and for their
sorts,.... Some that were widowers not only took wives to themselves of
the above nations, either when they were of Babylon, where many of these
nations also were, or rather since their return; but they took for their
sons also; yea, some that had wives took Heathenish ones to them, see
[Mal 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#013),

so that the holy seed; such as the Lord had separated from other
nations, chosen them to be an holy people above all others, and devoted
them to his service and worship:

have mingled themselves with the people of those lands; before
mentioned, by marrying with them:

yea, the hand of the princes and rulers hath been chief in this
trespass; they were the first that went into it, were ringleaders of it,
who should by their authority and example have restrained others; or
they were

in this first trespass (i); which was the first gross and capital one
the people fell into after their return from the captivity.

\(i\) "in praevaricatione ista prima", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Ezra 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 9:3</span></span>

And when I heard this thing, I rent my garment and my mantle,.... Both
inward and outward garments, that which was close to his body, and that
which was thrown loose over it; and this he did in token of sorrow and
mourning, as if something very dreadful and distressing, see [Job
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020)

and plucked off the hair of my head and of my beard; did not shave them,
and so transgressed not the law in [Lev
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027) but plucked off the hair of
them, to show his extreme sorrow for what was told him: which has
frequently been done by mourners on sorrowful occasions in various
nations, see [Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002). So in the
apocryphal "addition" to Esther,"And laid away her glorious apparel, and
put on the garments of anguish and mourning: and instead of precious
ointments, she covered her head with ashes and dung, and she humbled her
body greatly, and all the places of her joy she filled with her torn
hair.'' (Esther 14:2)she is said to fill every place of joy with the
tearing of her hair; and Lavinia in Virgil (k); several passages from
Homer (l), and other writers, both Greek and Latin, are mentioned by
Bochart (m) as instances of it:

and sat down astonished; quite amazed at the ingratitude of the people,
that after such favours shown them, in returning them from captivity
unto their own land, and settling them there, they should give into
practices so contrary to the will of God.

\(k\) Aeneid. 12. prope finem. Vid. Ciceron. Tusc. Quaest. l. 3. (l)
Vid. Iliad. 10. ver. 15. & Iliad. 22. ver. 77, 78, 406. & Iliad. 24.
ver. 711. (m) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 45. col. 481.

[Ezra 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ezr 9:4</span></span>

There were assembled unto me everyone that trembled at the words of the
God of Israel,.... That had a reverence for the word of God, and the
things contained in it; feared to break the laws of God, and trembled at
his judgments, which they might apprehend would come upon transgressors,
see [Isa 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002),

because of the transgression of those that had been carried away; into
Babylon, and were now returned, and which was an aggravation of their
transgression:

and I sat astonished until the evening sacrifice: or until the ninth
hour, as the Syriac version, which was about our three o'clock in the
afternoon, at which time the evening sacrifice was offered; perhaps it
was in the morning when Ezra first received his information from the
princes.

[Ezra 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ezr 9:5</span></span>

And at the evening sacrifice I rose up from my heaviness,.... The signs
and tokens of it, particularly sitting on the ground; or "from my
fasting" (n), having eaten nothing that day, it being early in the
morning when he was told the above case:

and having rent my garment and my mantle; which he had done before, and
still kept them on him in the same case:

fell upon my knees, and spread out my hands unto the Lord my God; in the
posture and with the gesture of an humble supplicant.

\(n\) "jejunio meo", Michaelis; so Jarchi.

[Ezra 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ezr 9:6</span></span>

And said, O my God,.... Here begins the prayer of Ezra, and that with
faith in God as covenant God, even when he was about to make confession
of sin, and repentance for it; that prayer is right which is put up in
faith, and that repentance genuine which is accompanied with faith, and
flows from it:

I am ashamed, and blush to lift up my face to thee, my God; a true sight
and sense of sin causes shame and blushing, and never more than when a
man is sensible of his covenant interest in God, and of his grace and
favour to him, particularly in the forgiveness of his sin, see [Eze
16:61](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#061)

for our iniquities are increased over our head; arisen and swelled like
mighty waters, which seemed to threaten an overwhelming of them:

and our trespass is grown up unto the heavens; being done in an open,
public, and insolent manner, and in such numbers, that they were, as it
were, piled up in heaps, reaching to heaven, and calling down vengeance
from thence. Ezra includes himself as being one of the same nation; and
these sins being so common were become national ones, which involved all
the individuals, and exposed them to the divine resentment.

[Ezra 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ezr 9:7</span></span>

Since the days of our fathers have we been in a great trespass unto this
day,.... The sins they were guilty of had been long continued in, which
was an aggravation of them:

and for our iniquities have we, our kings, and our priests, been
delivered into the hand of the kings of the lands; the ten tribes and
their king into the hand of the king of Assyria, the kings of Judah,
Jehoiakim, Jeconiah, and Zedekiah, into the hands of the king of
Babylon, with the priests and people:

to the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil; some were slain with the
sword, others carried captive, and the houses of them all plundered and
spoiled:

and to confusion of face, as it is this day; being filled with shame
when they reflected on their sins, the cause of those evils; and
besides, the captivity of the ten tribes continued, and of many others,
which exposed them to shame among their neighbours.

[Ezra 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ezr 9:8</span></span>

And now, for a little space, grace hath been showed from the Lord our
God,.... It was but a small time since the Lord first began to show
favour to them, so that they soon after began to revolt from him; which
argued the strange propensity of their minds to that which is evil, and
from which they could not be restrained by the recent goodness of God
unto them:

to leave us a remnant to escape; out of captivity, from whence a small
number were graciously and safely returned to their own land:

and to give us a nail in his holy place; a fixed settlement in the land
of Judea, the holy land the Lord had chosen, and in the temple, the holy
place sacred to his worship; or a prince of their own, Zerubbabel, to be
the governor of them, under whom they might enjoy settled happiness and
prosperity, see [Isa 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#023),

that our God may lighten our eyes; refresh our spirits, cheer our souls,
and give us light and gladness, see [Sa1
14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#027)

and give us a little reviving in our bondage; for they were still in
some degree of bondage, being in subjection, and tributaries to the
kings of Persia; but yet being returned to their own land, it was as
life from the dead unto them, at least it was giving them a little life,
liberty, and joy.

[Ezra 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ezr 9:9</span></span>

For we were bondmen,.... To the Chaldeans when in Babylon, which was
more than the Jews in the times of Christ would own, [Joh
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#033),

yet our God hath not forsaken us in our bondage; had not left them to
continue in it always:

but hath extended mercy unto us in the sight of the kings of Persia;
moved them to have pity and compassion on them, and release them:

to give us a reviving; while in captivity, they were as in their graves,
and like the dry bones in Ezekiel's vision, but revived upon the
proclamation of Cyrus, and the encouragement he gave them to return to
their own land:

to set up the house of our God, and repair the desolations thereof; both
to rebuild the temple, and to restore the worship of it:

and to give us a wall in Judah and in Jerusalem; not to set up the walls
of Jerusalem, and of other cities, which as yet was not done; but rather
the walls of their houses, which they had rebuilt; they had walled
houses given them in Judah and Jerusalem; though the word signifies an
hedge or fence, such as is about gardens and vineyards, and may denote
the protection of the kings of Persia, which was a fence to them against
the Samaritans and others; and especially the hedge of divine Providence
about them, which guarded and defended them, see [Job
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#010).

[Ezra 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ezr 9:10</span></span>

And now, O our God, what shall we say after this?.... What apology or
excuse can be made for such ingratitude? what can be said in favour of
such a people? what kindness can be expected to be shown to a people who
had behaved in so base a manner?

for we have forsaken thy commandments: particularly those which related
to marriages with people of other nations.

[Ezra 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ezr 9:11</span></span>

Which thou hast commanded by thy servants the prophets,.... Moses, and
Joshua, and others, see [Deu 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003)

saying, the land, unto which ye go to possess it; meaning the land of
Canaan:

is an unclean land with the filthiness of the people of the lands, with
their abominations, which have filled it from one end to another with
their uncleanness; which is to be understood not of their idolatries
only, but of their incestuous marriages, and impure copulations, on
which account the Lord spewed out the old inhabitants of it; for which
reason the Jews ought to have been careful not to have defiled it again
by similar practices; see [Lev 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#001).

[Ezra 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ezr 9:12</span></span>

Now therefore give not your daughters unto their sons, nor take their
daughters unto your sons,.... That is, in marriage, see [Deu
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#003), where the prohibition is
expressed in the same language:

nor seek their peace or their wealth for ever; that is, as long as they
continue in their idolatries and impurities, see [Deu
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#006),

that ye may be strong, and eat the good of the land, and leave it for an
inheritance to your children for ever; that they might be strengthened
and established in the land into which they were brought, and enjoy all
the good things it produced, and leave their children in the possession
of it, to hold at least until the Messiah came, see [Isa
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#019).

[Ezra 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ezr 9:13</span></span>

And after all that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great
trespass,.... As famine, sword, pestilence, and captivity, for their
idolatries and other heinous sins:

seeing that our God hast punished us less than our iniquities deserve;
for they deserved eternal punishment, whereas it was temporal punishment
that was inflicted, and this moderate, and now stopped; the sense is,
according to Aben Ezra,"thou hast refrained from writing some of our
sins in the book of remembrance, and thou hast let them down below in
the earth, according to the sense of thou wilt cast all their sins into
the depths of the sea;''but Jarchi better,"thou hast refrained thyself
from exacting of us all our sins, and hast exacted of us beneath our
sins (or less than they deserve), and hast not taken vengeance on us
according to all our sins:"

and hast given us such deliverance as this; from captivity, which they
now enjoyed.

[Ezra 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ezr 9:14</span></span>

Should we again break thy commandments, and join in affinity with the
people of these abominations?.... That are guilty of abominable
idolatries, and of all uncleanness:

wouldest thou not be angry with us till thou hadst consumed us; it might
be justly expected:

so that there should be no remnant nor escaping? any left or suffered to
escape the wrath of but all consumed by it.

[Ezra 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 9:15</span></span>

O Lord God of Israel, thou art righteous,.... And would appear to be so,
should Israel be entirely cut off, and utterly consumed for their
iniquities:

for we remain yet escaped, as it is this day; that they remained yet
escaped out of captivity, and escaped the wrath and vengeance of God,
was not owing to any deserts of theirs, but to the grace and mercy of
God, who had not stirred up all his wrath, as their sins deserved:

behold, we are before thee in our trespasses; to do with us as seems
good in thy sight; we have nothing to plead on our behalf, but cast
ourselves at thy feet, if so be unmerited favour may be shown us:

for we cannot stand before thee because of this; this evil of
contracting affinity with the nations; we cannot defend ourselves; we
cannot plead ignorance of the divine commands; we have nothing to say
for ourselves why judgment should not be passed upon us; we leave
ourselves in thine hands, and at thy mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 10](ezr010)

</div>
