<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ezra Index](ezr.md)  
  [Previous](ezr007)  [Next](ezr009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ezra Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001.md)

[Ezra](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ezr 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO EZRA 8

In this chapter we are told who and how many went up with Ezra to
Jerusalem, [Ezr 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001.md), the gathering of
them together at a river, from whence he sent to Babylon for Levites to
come to him, who did, [Ezr 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015.md), the
proclaiming a fast for a safe and prosperous journey, [Ezr
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021.md), the delivery of the vessels and
money given him into the hands of priests, to take the care and charge
thereof, [Ezr 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024.md), their safe arrival
at Jerusalem, where they deposited the gifts in the temple, offered
sacrifices to God, and delivered the king's commissions to his
lieutenants and governors, [Ezr 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#031.md).

[Ezra 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ezr 8:1</span></span>

These are now the chief of their fathers, and this is the genealogy of
them,.... Which follows from hence to the end of [Ezr
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#014.md),

that went up with me from Babylon; with Ezra the priest and scribe, the
writer of this book:

in the reign of Artaxerxes the king; that is, Darius Hystaspis, in the
seventh year of his reign, see [Ezr
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#001.md), though many think Artaxerxes
Longimanus is meant.

[Ezra 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ezr 8:2</span></span>

Of the sons of Phinehas; Gershom: of the sons of Ithamar; Daniel,....
Not Daniel the prophet, he was of the royal blood, and of the tribe of
Judah; this was a priest, a descendant of Ithamar, as Gershom was of
Eleazar in the line of Phinehas:

of the sons of David; Hattush; perhaps the same with him in [Ch1
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#022.md), who was a descendant of David
the king; these three men seem to have come alone without any of their
families, at least they are not mentioned, nor their numbers given, as
the rest that follow be.

[Ezra 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ezr 8:3</span></span>

Of the sons of Shechaniah, of the sons of Pharosh,.... Who is so
described, to distinguish him from another Shechaniah, [Ezr
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#005.md),

Zechariah: and with him were reckoned by genealogy, of the males an
hundred and fifty; males only were reckoned, not women and children;
though that there were such that went up is clear from [Ezr
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021.md), from hence to the end of [Ezr
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#014.md) an account is given of the number
of the males that went up with Ezra, who were chiefly, if not
altogether, sons of those that went up with Zerubbabel; such of them as
were left there behind, and now returned, at least a great number of
them, see [Ezr 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#001.md), it is particularly
remarked of the sons of Adonikam, [Ezr
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#013.md), that they were the last of them;
not that they were the last that came in to go with Ezra, or were
backward and dilatory, but the last with respect to the first of his
sons that were gone before, and seem with them to be the whole of his
family; the number of all that went up under their respective heads
amounts to 1496.

[Ezra 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ezr 8:15</span></span>

And I gathered them together to the river that runneth to Ahava,....
From whence also the river bore the same name; or that from the river,
see [Ezr 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021.md), and may be the same
with Adiabene, a country in Assyria, which had its name from the river
Adiava:

and there abode we in tents three days; or pitched their camp; this was
the place of their rendezvous:

and I viewed the people and the priests; mustered them, took the number
of them, and what tribe and families they were of:

and found there none of the sons of Levi; excepting the priests.

[Ezra 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ezr 8:16</span></span>

Then sent I for Eliezer, for Ariel, for Shemaiah, and for Elnathan, and
for Jarib, and for Elnathan, and for Nathan, and for Zechariah, and for
Meshullam, chief men; also for Joiarib, and for Elnathan, men of
understanding. These were all in the camp, in some part of it, to whom
Ezra sent messengers to come unto him; three of them are of the same
name; the first nine were men of chief note, rank, and dignity in their
family, and the other two were noted for men of good sense, and that
could speak to a case well, and so fit to be sent on such an affair as
they were.

[Ezra 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ezr 8:17</span></span>

And I sent them with commandment unto Iddo the chief, at the place
Casiphia,.... Not a place by the Caspian sea, and near the Caspian
mountains, as Munster, which was too far off to go and return in the
time they must, see [Ezr 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#009.md), but, as
Jarchi, a place in Babylon so called, a village near it, or a parish or
street in it, where Ezra knew lived many of the Levites and Nethinims,
and where Iddo was the chief of the Levites, and over them both:

and I told them what they should say unto Iddo, and to his brethren the
Nethinims, at the place Casiphia; but Iddo was not one of the Nethinims;
for he was chief of the Levites, and by his authority many of them were
sent as well as of the Nethinims; but none of the latter were over the
Levites, for they were servants to them, [Ezr
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#020.md), but, according to Jarchi, the
Nethinims are not at all intended in this clause, who reads the words:

to Iddo and Achim, (the name of a man with him; perhaps it may be better
rendered, "to Iddo and his brother",)

who were appointed, or settled, in the place Casiphia; and with him De
Dieu agrees, and so the Syriac version:

who dwelt in Casiphia: that they should bring unto us ministers for the
house of our God; both Levites to be singers and porters there, and the
Nethinims to wait on them.

[Ezra 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ezr 8:18</span></span>

And by the good hand of our God upon us,.... Favouring their designs and
orders, protecting those that were sent, and inclining those they were
sent to use their interest and authority with those that were under
them, and making them willing also to agree to what was proposed to
them:

they brought us a man of understanding of the sons of Mahli, the son of
Levi, the son of Israel; an Israelite, of the tribe of Levi, in the line
of Mahli a son of Merari, the third son of Levi:

and Sherebiah; or rather "even Sherebiah"; so Aben Ezra; for he is the
understanding man that is meant, and described by his pedigree:

with his sons and his brethren, eighteen; all together made this number.

[Ezra 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ezr 8:19</span></span>

And Hashabiah, and with him Jeshaiah of the sons of Merari,.... These
were of the same division of Levites as Sherebiah:

his brethren and their sons, twenty; these thirty eight, with those they
came with, were all Levites; the Nethinims follow.

[Ezra 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ezr 8:20</span></span>

Also of the Nethinims, whom David and the princes had appointed for the
service of the Levites,.... To wait upon them, and minister to them, as
they did to the priests; some think those were the same with the
Gibeonites, whom Joshua gave to the service of the sanctuary, and David
confirmed; but others are of opinion these were different from them, and
an addition to them:

two hundred and twenty Nethinims: all of them were expressed by name; in
the history that Iddo sent of them to Ezra; and so the names of the
Levites, though not here expressed, only the names of those they came
with.

[Ezra 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">ezr 8:21</span></span>

Then I proclaimed a fast there, at the river Ahava,.... After the
messengers to Iddo were returned with those they brought with them:

that we might afflict ourselves before our God; humble themselves before
him for their sins, confess them, and declare their repentance of them,
and ask forgiveness for them:

to seek of him a right way for us; to take from thence towards
Jerusalem, to be directed by him in it: either by a prophet, or by a
vision in a dream, as Eben Ezra; or rather by the guidance of his
providence; this they sought in prayer by the river side, where it had
been usual with them, and since has been, to perform religious
exercises, see [Eze 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#001.md), hence
Tertullian (z) calls the prayers of the Jews "orationes littorales";
they sought not so much which was the shortest and easiest way for them
to travel in, as which was the safest:

and for our little ones and for all our substance; for the safe
conveyance of them; this shows, that though males only are numbered, as
before, yet they had their wives and children with them; for little ones
cannot be supposed without women to take care of them.

\(z\) Ad nationes, l. 1. c. 13. Vid. lib. de jejuniis, c. 16.

[Ezra 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">ezr 8:22</span></span>

For I was ashamed to require of the kings band of soldiers and
horsemen,.... Which he might have had, only asking for them; so great
was the interest he had in the king's favour:

to help us against the enemy in the way; the Arabs, Samaritans, and
others, that might lie in wait for them, to rob them of their substance:

because we had spoken unto the king: of the special favour of God to
them, his singular providence in the protection of them:

saying, the hand of our God is upon all them for good that seek him;
that pray unto him, serve and worship him; his hand is open to them to
bestow all needful good upon them, temporal and spiritual, and his power
and providence are over them, to protect and defend them from all evil:

but his power and his wrath is against all them that forsake him; his
word, his ways and worship; his powerful wrath, or the strength and
force of it, is exerted against them and they are sure to feel the
weight and dreadful effects of it: and now all this being said to the
king, after this, to desire a guard to protect them, it would look as if
they had not that favour in the sight of God, and did not believe what
they had said, but distrusted his power and providence towards them;
therefore, rather than reflect any dishonour on God, they chose to
expose themselves to danger, seeking his face and favour, and relying on
his goodness and power.

[Ezra 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">ezr 8:23</span></span>

So we fasted, and besought our God for this,.... Sought the Lord by
fasting and prayer for a good journey, and preservation in it:

and he was entreated of us; accepted their prayer, as Jarchi, so that
they came safe to Jerusalem.

[Ezra 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">ezr 8:24</span></span>

Then I separated twelve of the chief of the priests,.... That were in
company with him; so that it seems there were more than the two
mentioned, [Ezr 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#002.md), very probably
their families, or some of their brethren, were with them:

Sherebiah, Hashabiah, and ten of their brethren with them; these men
named were Levites, and not priests, [Ezr
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#018.md) and therefore the copulative
"and" must be supplied:

and Sherebiah, &c. or with the twelve priests, Sherebiah, &c. and ten
Levites more with them; so that the number of priests and Levites were
equal, and in all twenty four.

[Ezra 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">ezr 8:25</span></span>

And I weighed unto them the silver, and the gold, and the vessels,....
When he delivered them to them; this he did as a proof of his own
integrity and faithfulness, and as a security against any charge or
accusation of embezzling any part of them, and to set them an example,
and also that they might be under no temptation of acting such a part,
and might be vindicated should they be charged with it: even

the offering of the house of our God; what was freely offered for the
service of it:

which the king and his counsellors, and his lords, and all Israel there
present, had offered; as freewill offerings, see [Ezr
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#015.md).

[Ezra 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">ezr 8:26</span></span>

I even weighed unto their hand six hundred fifty talents of silver,....
Which, according to Scheuchzer (a) amount to 975,000 imperials, and, of
our money, 2,229,450 pounds sterling: and silver vessels one hundred
talents; which came to 35,300 pounds, or 50,000 imperials; according to
Jarchi, there were one hundred vessels, and every vessel weighed a
talent, and so Aben Ezra, which, with Brerewood (b), was three hundred
and seventy five pounds:

and of gold one hundred talents; which, according to Scheuchzer (c),
were equal to 1,222,000 ducats of gold; the value of gold now is above
14 and a 3d to the value of silver, by which may be judged the
difference between one hundred talents of gold and one hundred talents
of silver; according to David de Pomis (d), there were two sorts of
talents; common talents, which weighed sixty pounds, and the talent of
the sanctuary, which weighed double to that.

\(a\) Physica Sacra, vol. 4. p. 651. (b) De Pond. & Pret. Vet. Num. c.
4. (c) Ut supra. (Physica Sacra, vol. 4. p. 651.) (d) Tzemach David,
fol. 57. 3.

[Ezra 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">ezr 8:27</span></span>

Also twenty basins of gold, of a thousand drams,.... Which were upwards
of 1000 pounds of our money; for Bishop Cumberland says (e), the Persian
"daric", "drachma", or "drachm", weighed twenty shillings and four
pence; and, according to Dr. Bernard, it exceeded one of our guineas by
two grains; see Gill on [Ch1 29:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1029.htm#007.md).

and two vessels of fine copper, precious as gold; which perhaps is the
same with the Indian or Persian brass Aristotle (f) speaks of, which is
so bright and pure, and free from rust, that it cannot be known by its
colour from gold, and that there are among the cups of Darius such as
cannot be discerned whether they are brass or gold but by the smell: the
Syriac version interprets it by Corinthian brass, which was a mixture of
gold, silver, and copper, made when Corinth was burnt, and which is
exceeding valuable; of which Pliny (g) makes three sorts, very precious,
and of which he says, it is in value next to, and even before silver,
and almost before gold; but this sort of brass was not as yet in being:
Kimchi (h) interprets the word here of its colour, being next to the
colour of gold.

\(e\) Scripture Weights and Measures, ch. 4. p. 115. (f) De Mirabilibus,
p. 704, vol. 1. (g) Nat. Hist. l. 34. c. 1, 2. (h) Sepher Shorash. rad.

[Ezra 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">ezr 8:28</span></span>

And I said unto them, ye are holy unto the Lord, the vessels are holy
also,.... As they were dedicated and set apart to holy service, so the
vessels were sacred to holy uses, and therefore not to be converted to
any other:

and the silver and the gold are a freewill offering unto the Lord God of
your fathers: and therefore not to be made use of but in his service.

[Ezra 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">ezr 8:29</span></span>

Watch ye, and keep them,.... The vessels, the gold, and the silver, that
they be not hurt and diminished:

until ye weigh them before the chief of the priests and the Levites, and
chief of the fathers of Israel at Jerusalem, in the chambers of the
house of the Lord: that is, until they had delivered them in full
weight, as they had received them, in the presence of those persons as
witnesses, and into their hands, in order to be laid up in the chambers
and treasuries of the temple.

[Ezra 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">ezr 8:30</span></span>

So took the priests and the Levites,.... The twelve priests and twelve
Levites, mentioned in [Ezr 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#024.md),

the weight of the silver and the gold, and the vessels, to bring them to
Jerusalem unto the house of our God; this they undertook to do, and did.

[Ezra 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">ezr 8:31</span></span>

Then we departed from the river of Ahava, on the twelfth day of the
first month, to go unto Jerusalem,.... The month Nisan, answering to
part of March and part of April; this was two days before the passover
began:

and the hand of our God was upon us; guiding, directing, and protecting
them by his providence:

and he delivered us from the hand of the enemy, and of such as lay in
wait by the way; either by intimidating them, that they dared not attack
them, or by directing them to take a different road, whereby they
escaped them, see [Ezr 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#022.md).

[Ezra 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">ezr 8:32</span></span>

And we came to Jerusalem, and abode there three days. Before they went
about any business, delivered what was committed to them for the use of
the temple, and the commissions to the king's officers; as it was but
proper they should have some rest after such a fatiguing journey.

[Ezra 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">ezr 8:33</span></span>

Now on the fourth day,.... After their arrival at Jerusalem:

was the silver, and the gold, and the vessels, weighed in the house of
our God; the temple, that it might be seen and known that the exact
weight which had been deposited with them was now faithfully delivered:

this was done by the hand of Meremoth the son of Uriah the priest, and
with him was Eleazar the son of Phinehas; these were priests:

and with them was Jozabad the son of Jeshua, and Noadiah the son of
Binnui, Levites; two priests and two Levites; for since there were of
both that were charged with the above things, it was proper there should
be some of both, when weighed, that they might be witnesses of their
fidelity.

[Ezra 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">ezr 8:34</span></span>

By number and by weight of everyone,.... They were delivered in by tale
and weight, which exactly agreed to the number and weight in which they
received them:

and all the weight was written at that time; an account was taken in
writing, and laid up, that it might not only be known hereafter what
freewill offerings had been made in Babylon, but that it might be a
voucher for the fidelity and integrity of those that brought them,
should it ever be called in question.

[Ezra 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">ezr 8:35</span></span>

Also the children of those that had been carried away, which were come
out of the captivity,.... Namely, those that now came along with Ezra:

offered burnt offerings unto the God of Israel; by way of thankfulness
for their deliverance from captivity, and for their safe journey:

twelve bullocks for all Israel: according to the number of the tribes;
and there might be some of every tribe that now came up:

ninety and six rams, seventy and seven lambs; these and the bullocks
were burnt offerings:

twelve he goats for a sin offering; according to the number of the
twelve tribes, also to make atonement for sins they had been guilty of:

all this was a burnt offering unto the Lord; excepting the twelve he
goats, which were a sin offering.

[Ezra 8:36](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">ezr 8:36</span></span>

And they delivered the king's commissions unto the king's lieutenants,
and to the governors on this side the river,.... The governors of the
provinces of Syria, Palestine, and Judea, which were on that side of
Euphrates the land of Israel was:

and they furthered the people, and the house of God; or "lifted them up"
(i), eased them of all burdens, and freed them from all impediments, and
assisted them and furnished them with everything, as the decree of
Artaxerxes enjoined them; and provided everything as they required for
ornamenting the temple, and for the sacrifices of it; all which is to be
understood of the king's lieutenants and governors, who obeyed his
commands.

\(i\) "elevaverunt", V. L. Piscator; "exaltaverunt", Pagninus, Montanus,
Vatablus; "sublevarunt", Junius & Tremellius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezra Chapter 9](ezr009.md)

</div>
