<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen039)  [Next](gen041.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 40](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 40:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 40

The history of this chapter is, the imprisonment of two of Pharaoh's
officers, his chief butler and chief baker, who by the captain of the
guard were made the charge of Joseph, [Gen
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001.md); they both dreamed in prison,
which made them sad; Joseph taking notice of their sadness, asked the
reason of it, and encouraged them to tell him their dreams, [Gen
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#005.md); the chief butler told his dream
of the vine and three branches, which Joseph interpreted of his
restoration to his office within three days, and desired him to remember
him unto Pharaoh when he stood before him, telling him his case, [Gen
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#009.md); then the chief baker told his
dream of three white baskets of food on his head, which the birds ate,
and this Joseph interpreted of his being hanged within three days, [Gen
40:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#016.md); and the events answered to the
interpretation, but Joseph was forgot by the chief butler, [Gen
40:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020.md).

[Genesis 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 40:1</span></span>

And it came to pass after these things,.... After Joseph had been
accused and cast into prison, where he had been for some time:

that the butler of the king of Egypt and his baker had offended their
lord the king of Egypt; committed some fault, at least were accused of
one, which raised his displeasure at them. The Targum of Jonathan says,
that they consulted to put poison into his drink and food; which, it is
not improbable, considering their business and office, they might be
charged with; at least it is much more probable than what Jarchi
suggests, that the one put a fly into his cup, and the other a little
stone or sand into his bread.

[Genesis 40:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 40:2</span></span>

And Pharaoh was wroth against two of his officers,.... The same above
mentioned:

against the chief of the butlers, and against the chief of the bakers;
for as there were several butlers and bakers that belonged unto him, who
were employed in providing wine and food for him, there was one of each
who was over the rest; and as their business was to see that those under
them did their work well, when they were faulty the principal officers
were answerable for it: wherefore, if in this case they had not been
guilty of anything criminal themselves personally, yet they might have
neglected to look after those that were under them, and so were
culpable, and drew upon them the wrath and resentment of their lord and
sovereign.

[Genesis 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 40:3</span></span>

And he put them in ward in the house of the captain of the guard,....
Who is generally thought to be Potiphar, since this was the office he
was in, [Gen 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#001.md); unless he was dead,
and there was another put into his room, or there were more than one in
the same office:

into the prison, the place where Joseph was bound; that is, where he had
been bound, and where he was still a prisoner, though not fettered and
in that close confinement he had been in.

[Genesis 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 40:4</span></span>

And the captain of the guard charged Joseph with them,.... Committed
them to his care and custody, he being very probably recommended to him
by the keeper of the prison for his prudence and fidelity; and if it was
Potiphar, he knew his character full well, and might be now reconciled
unto him, as having had a more full and clear account of the affair
between him and his wife from the keeper of the prison; and therefore
though he might not think fit for his own and his wife's reputation to
remove him from prison as yet, nevertheless might be inclined to do him
what service he could, as well as honour, as this was, to have two such
state prisoners committed to his care. Some render it, "he committed
Joseph with them" (x); to be with them, as Jarchi interprets it; they
were put together, not merely for the sake of company, but that Joseph
might wait upon them, which might be beneficial as well as creditable,
as it follows:

and he served them; he ministered unto them, and brought them every
thing they wanted:

and they continued a season in ward; or "days" (y); some certain days,
many days, a year, as Jarchi and Ben Gersom interpret it, and which is
sometimes the use of the word. The story of the butler and baker is
told, partly to show the divine faculty of interpreting dreams Joseph
was possessed of; and partly to observe the remarkable steps in
Providence, though secret, towards his advancement in Pharaoh's court.

\(x\) "et commisit Josephum cum eis", Junius & Tremellius. (y) "per
annum", Pagninus, Vatablus, Schmidt.

[Genesis 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 40:5</span></span>

And they dreamed a dream both of them,.... Not one and the same dream:

each man his dream in one night; which made it the more remarkable, and
the more impressed their minds, concluding from hence there must be
something of importance in their dreams:

each man according to the interpretation of his dream; they dreamed each
what was suitable to his office and character, and which portended what
should hereafter befall them, as the interpretation of them by Joseph
afterwards, and the event showed; so that it was not a vain idle dream,
but divine and certain:

the butler and the baker of the king of Egypt, which were bound in the
prison; this is added for explanation's sake, showing who were the
persons spoken of that dreamed the dreams.

[Genesis 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 40:6</span></span>

And Joseph came in unto them in the morning,.... For though Joseph and
they were in the same prison, yet not in the same ward. Aben Ezra thinks
that Joseph lodged in the dungeon in the night, [Gen
40:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#015.md); and was let out in the morning
to wait on these prisoners; but the great interest he had in the keeper
of the prison, and the favour shown him by the captain of the guard, in
putting such prisoners under his care, will easily make one conclude,
that Joseph now had a better lodging than that; though it had been his
case, he was now provided with a better apartment in the prison; and
when he arose in the morning, like a careful and faithful servant, he
came to the ward where the prisoners under his care were, to see that
they were safe, and what they wanted:

and looked upon them, and, behold, they were sad; they looked sorrowful,
dejected, and uneasy.

[Genesis 40:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 40:7</span></span>

And he asked Pharaoh's officers that were with him,.... The chief butler
and baker that were committed to his care, and with whom he now was:

in the ward of the lord's house; this seems to confirm what is before
observed, that the captain of the guard that charged Joseph with them
was Potiphar his master; though indeed the keeper of the prison that was
under Potiphar, the captain of the guard, might be called Joseph's lord
or master, but the house could not with so much propriety be called his:

saying, wherefore look ye so sadly today? as they were officers, who had
been in lucrative places, they lived well and merrily, and expected very
probably they should be released in a short time, nothing appearing
against them; but now there was a strange alteration in them, which was
very visible to Joseph, and for which he expresses a concern, being of a
kind, tender, and benevolent disposition, as the question he puts to
them shows.

[Genesis 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 40:8</span></span>

And they said unto him, we have dreamed a dream,.... Each of them:

and there is no interpreter of it; in that place in which they were, the
prison; otherwise there were persons enough in the land that pretended
to the interpretation of dreams, [Gen
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#008.md); but they could not come at them,
being in prison:

and Joseph said unto them, do not interpretations belong to God? that
is, of dreams, and to him only, meaning the true God whom he worshipped;
for as dreams themselves, which are of importance, and predict things to
come, are of God; for none can foretell future events but he, and such
to whom he imparts the gift of prophecy; so none can interpret dreams
with any certainty but God himself, and those to whom he gives the
faculty of interpretation of them; this Joseph said to take off their
minds from the magicians and wise men, and interpreters of dreams among
the Egyptians, these officers were hankering after, and wished they had
them with them to interpret their dreams to them; and to suggest unto
them, that though he did not arrogate such a power to himself, as having
it of himself, yet intimates that he doubted not, but upon an address to
his God, he would favour him with the interpretation of their dreams,
and therefore encourages them to relate them to him:

tell me them, I pray you; or "now" (z), directly, as the Targums of
Onkelos and Jonathan; signifying, that he would immediately interpret
them to them; no doubt Joseph said this under a divine impulse.

\(z\) "nunc", Drusius.

[Genesis 40:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 40:9</span></span>

And the chief butler told his dream to Joseph,.... He listened to what
Joseph said, and paid a regard to it, and began to think he might be
able to interpret his dream, and therefore was forward, and the first to
tell him it at once; whereas the chief baker did not seem disposed to do
it, until he observed the good interpretation given of the butler's
dream, [Gen 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#016.md),

and said unto him, in my dream, behold, a vine was before me; it
appeared to him in his dream, as if a vine sprung up at once, and stood
before him; which was very suitable to his office as a butler, wine
being the fruit of the vine, which he provided for the king his master,
and presented to him at table.

[Genesis 40:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 40:10</span></span>

And in the vine were three branches,.... Which shot out from the root or
body of it:

and it was as though it budded; the branches seemed to sprout out:

and her blossoms shot forth; it knotted, and the flowers of the vine
appeared, which blowing off, the tender grapes were seen:

and the clusters thereof brought forth ripe grapes; all which is
agreeably to the order nature observes, from the first putting forth of
the vine, to its producing ripe fruit; and which in this dream
immediately followed one another, as it seemed according to the
representation of things to the, mind of the butler, and which he
perfectly remembered, it having made a strong impression upon him.

[Genesis 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 40:11</span></span>

And Pharaoh's cup was in his hand,.... So it seemed to him in his dream,
as it often had been when in his office:

and I took the grapes; from off the vine that was before him:

and pressed them into Pharaoh's cup; which some think was the custom of
those times, to take a bunch of grapes and squeeze them into a cup,
especially when they would make trial of what sort of wine they would
produce; for it can hardly be thought that this was usually done, or
that it was customary to drink such new wine; but it is more probable
that the grapes were first pressed into another vessel, and so made wine
of, and then poured into Pharaoh's cup, or mixed in it, though this
circumstance is omitted. Indeed Herodotus (a) relates of the Egyptian
priests, that wine pressed out of the vine is given them:

and I gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand; as he had used to do.

\(a\) Euterpe sive, l. 2. c. 37.

[Genesis 40:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 40:12</span></span>

And Joseph said unto him, this is the interpretation of it,.... Of the
dream:

the three branches are three days; signify three days, or, as Jarchi
expresses it, are a sign of three days; which Joseph could know only by
divine revelation; for there is no more likeness between branches and
days, than between them and months or years, and bid as fair to signify
one as the other, if the interpretation depended on similarity, or bare
conjecture.

[Genesis 40:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 40:13</span></span>

Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head,.... The Targum
of Jonathan adds, with glory; and the sense is, either that Pharaoh
would raise him up from the low estate in which he now was, to the same
exalted station in which he had been before; or that he would reckon and
number him among his servants, when he should take a catalogue of them,
or make a new list, so Jarchi and Aben Ezra; and this phrase is used of
taking the sum of persons, or the number of them, and is so rendered,
[Exo 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#012.md); the allusion is thought to
be to a custom used by great personages, to have the names of their
servants called over on a certain day, as Pharaoh perhaps used to do on
his birthday, [Gen 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020.md); when they
struck out of the list or put into it whom they pleased, and pardoned or
punished such as had offended; and this sense is the rather inclined to,
because Pharaoh is said to lift up the head of both the butler and the
baker, [Gen 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020.md); yet it may be
observed, that the phrases used by Joseph concerning them differ; for of
the baker he says, "Pharaoh shall lift up thy head from off thee", [Gen
40:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#019.md); wherefore, though the heads of
them both were lift up, yet in a different sense: the one was lifted up
to the gallows, and the other to his former dignity, as follows:

and restore thee unto thy place: to his office in ministering: to
Pharaoh as his cup bearer:

and thou shalt deliver Pharaoh's cup into his hand, after the former
manner when thou wast his butler; which was signified in the dream, by
squeezing the grapes into Pharaoh's cup he had in his hand, and gave
unto him.

[Genesis 40:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 40:14</span></span>

But think on me, when it shall be well with thee,.... He desires no
reward for the interpretation of his dream, only that he would remember
him in adversity, when he should be in prosperity in Pharaoh's court,
and speak a good word for him, which was the least he could do; and
though Joseph knew by his own dreams that he should be raised from his
low estate to a very high and advanced one, yet he thought proper, in a
dependence on God, to make use of all lawful means for his deliverance;
nor is he to be blamed, as if he sought help of man and not of God, as
he is by some writers, both Christian and Jewish, particularly by the
Targum of Jonathan,"Joseph lost his superior confidence, and retained
the confidence of men;''whereas means are always to be used in order to
the end, in subordination to the divine will; and what Joseph asked of
the butler was but reasonable, and what he ought to have done for him,
and was prudently moved by Joseph, as a rational method of his
deliverance, and in which he was, no doubt, guided and directed by the
providence of God, as the event shows:

and show kindness, I pray thee, unto me; he pleads no merit for what he
had done in interpreting his dream, but puts the good office he desires
him to do for him upon the foot of kindness to a man in distress, and
asks it as a favour, by way of entreaty and request:

and make mention of me and bring me out of this house: the prison in
which he was; for though he had much favour shown him, and had more
liberty granted him than other prisoners had, yet a prisoner he was, and
a prison he dwelt in, and deliverance from it was desirable, could it be
had; and this was a likely way to obtain it, if the butler would speak a
good word for him to Pharaoh, which he would have an opportunity to do,
being often in his presence, and frequently when cheerful.

[Genesis 40:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 40:15</span></span>

For indeed I was stolen away out of the land of the Hebrews,.... Not the
whole land of Canaan, so called, either from the Hebrews sojourning: in
it, or from its being given unto them by God; neither of which could be
a reason why Joseph, when talking with an Egyptian, should give it this
name, and which, it must be supposed, was known to him; but that part of
the land of Canaan where the Hebrews had sojourned for three
generations, where Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob had lived, even at or near
Hebron; and being persons of great note, and having done great exploits,
their names were well known, and the country where they lived, and
particularly among the Egyptians: now Joseph does not expose the sin of
his brethren in selling him to the Ishmaelites, by whom he was brought
into Egypt and sold there; only relates that he was stolen out of his
native country, being taken from it without his own or his father's
consent:

and here also have I done nothing that they should put me into the
dungeon; since he had been in the land of Egypt, he had not been guilty
of any criminal action wherefore he should be put into a prison, and
especially into a dungeon, a dark and filthy place under ground, as
dungeons usually were, and into which Joseph was put when first in
confinement, though since took out of it: he makes no mention of the
wickedness of his mistress, and of her false accusation of him, nor of
the injustice of his master in putting him into prison without hearing
him; only asserts his own innocence, which was necessary to recommend
himself to the butler, that he might not think he was some loose fellow
that was committed to prison for some capital crime, and so it would
have, been a disgrace to him to have spoken for him.

[Genesis 40:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 40:16</span></span>

When the chief baker saw that the interpretation was good,.... Meaning
not that it was right and just, though it was; but that it was agreeable
and pleasing, and portended good in the event; and therefore hoped a
like interpretation would be given of his dream, and this encouraged him
to tell it, which perhaps otherwise he would not have done:

he said unto Joseph, I also was in a dream; or had a dream, and in it
things were represented to his mind as follows:

and, behold, I had three white baskets on my head; which were made of
wicker, of rods that had the bark pulled off, and so were white; or
which had holes in them, baskets wrought with holes, after the manner of
network; though some think this denotes not the colour or form of the
basket, but of the bread in them, and interpret the words, baskets of
white bread, as Saadiah Gaon, and so the Targum of Jonathan, baskets of
most pure bread, and the Targum of Jerusalem, baskets of hot bread; this
dream was very agreeable to his office and business as a baker.

[Genesis 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 40:17</span></span>

And in the uppermost basket there was of all manner of bakemeats for
Pharaoh,.... All sorts of pastry, as tarts, pies, &c. Josephus (b) says,
two of the baskets were full of bread, and the third had various sorts
of food, such as is usually, prepared for kings:

and the birds did eat them out of the basket upon my head; all the three
baskets were upon his head, but this seems to be the uppermost, which
the birds could more easily come at; though if the baskets were full of
holes, they might through them peck the bread with their bills.

\(b\) Antiqu. l. 2. c. 5. sect. 3.

[Genesis 40:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 40:18</span></span>

And Joseph answered and said,.... Immediately, directly, without any
further thought and meditation, being divinely instructed:

this is the interpretation thereof; of the above dream:

the three baskets are three days; signify three days.

[Genesis 40:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 40:19</span></span>

Yet within three days shall Pharaoh lift up thine head from off
thee,.... Order thee to be beheaded; so the Targum of Jonathan and Ben
Melech interpret it,"Pharaoh shall remove thy head from thy body with a
sword:"

and shall hang thee on a tree; his body after his head was severed from
it, this should be hung upon a gallows or gibbet, and there continue:

and the birds shall eat the flesh from off thee; as they usually do when
bodies are thus hung up, see [Sa2
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#009.md); this was signified by the birds
eating the bakemeats out of the uppermost basket when upon his head, as
it seemed to him in his dream.

[Genesis 40:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 40:20</span></span>

And it came to pass the third day, which was Pharaoh's birthday,.... The
third day from the time the dreams were told, and the interpretation of
them given, was the birthday of Pharaoh; either the day in which a son
of his was born, or in which he himself was born, as Ben Melech
observes; but the latter is more probable, since the former could not
with propriety be called Pharaoh's birthday; and this might be either
the day of his natural birth, or of his political birth, the time of his
accession to the throne, which with the Romans was called "natalis
imperii", and was observed with feasting and rejoicing (c), as well as
the former, both among them and other nations: it is most likely this
was Pharaoh's natural birthday, which was observed among the Egyptians
as birthdays were among the Persians (d), and as Herod's was at his
court in the days of Christ, [Mat
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#006.md); and as is usual in our times in
most countries:

that he made a feast unto all his servants; his ministers of state, his
courtiers, and all in his palace:

and he lifted up the head of his chief butler and of his chief baker,

among his servants; that is, among his servants, when their names were
called over; or at this festival, these two were taken notice of, as
being charged with crimes, and their cases were looked into and
examined, and their heads were lifted up in a different sense: they were
both lifted out of prison, but the one was lifted up to his former post
and place in Pharaoh's court, and the other was lifted up to a gallows
or gibbet, as follows; though perhaps this lifting of them both may only
signify the trial of them, when they were set on high to be seen by the
judge and all the court, see [Kg1
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#009.md).

\(c\) Plin. Ep. l. 1. ep. 61. Herodot. Calliope, sive, l. 9. c. 109. (d)
Herodot. Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 133.

[Genesis 40:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 40:21</span></span>

And he restored the chief butler unto his butlership again,.... Put him
into the same office he was in before:

and he gave the cup into Pharaoh's hand; ministered to him in his office
the same day, according to his dream and the interpretation of it: the
Targum of Jonathan adds this as a reason of his being restored,"because
he found that he was not in that counsel,''in which it was consulted to
poison Pharaoh; see Gill on [Gen 40:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#001.md).

[Genesis 40:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 40:22</span></span>

But he hanged the chief baker,.... The is, he ordered him to be hanged;
because, as the same Targum says, he consulted to kill him (Pharaoh):

as Joseph had interpreted to them; the events as to both answered to the
interpretation Joseph had given of their several dreams.

[Genesis 40:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen040.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 40:23</span></span>

Yet did not the chief butler remember Joseph,.... To speak of him to
Pharaoh, neither on that day in which he was restored, nor for a long
time after, even for the space of two years, as seems from the following
chapter:

but forgot him; never more thought of him, of the favour he had done him
in interpreting his dream; of the request he made to him, and of the
promise which he had probably given him; which was an instance of great
ingratitude, and is frequently the case and character of courtiers, who
being in high places themselves, neglect others, their petitions to
them, and their own promises to do all they can for them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 41](gen041.md)

</div>
