<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen021)  [Next](gen023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 22:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 22

In this chapter we have an account of an order given by God to Abraham
to sacrifice his son, [Gen 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001); of
his readiness to obey the will of God, he immediately preparing
everything for that purpose, [Gen
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#003), of the order being reversed, and
another sacrifice substituted in its room, which occasioned the giving a
new name to the place where it was done, [Gen
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011); upon which the promise of
special blessings, of a numerous offspring, and of the seed in whom all
nations should be blessed, is renewed, [Gen
22:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#015); after this Abraham returns to
Beersheba, where he is informed of the increase of his brother Nahor's
family, [Gen 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#019).

[Genesis 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 22:1</span></span>

And it came to pass after these things,.... Recorded in the preceding
chapter: according to the Talmudists (b), the following affair was
transacted quickly after the weaning of Isaac, when he was about five
years old, which is the opinion of some, as Aben Ezra on [Gen
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#004); makes mention of; but that is an
age when it can hardly be thought he should be able to carry such a load
of wood as was sufficient to make a fire to consume a burnt offering,
[Gen 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#006); the age of thirteen, which
he fixes upon, is more likely: Josephus (c) says, that Isaac was twenty
five years of age; and in this year of his age Bishop Usher (d) places
this transaction, twenty years after the weaning of him, in A. M. 2133,
and before Christ 1871; and near to this is the computation of a Jewish
chronologer (e), who makes Isaac to be at this time twenty six years of
age; but some make him much older: according to the Targum of Jonathan,
he was at this time thirty six years old; and it is the more generally
received opinion of the Jewish writers (f) that he was and with whom the
Arabic writers (g) agree: so that this affair, after related, was thirty
years after the weaning of Isaac and the expulsion of Ishmael, supposing
Isaac to be then five years old. But, however this be, what came to pass
was after many promises of a son had been given him, and those
fulfilled; and after many blessings had been bestowed upon him; and when
he seemed to be well settled in the land of the Philistines, having
entered into an alliance with the king of the country; his family in
peace, and his son Isaac, the son of the promise, grown up and a hopeful
youth; the first appearance of which seemed to threaten the destruction
of all his comforts, hopes, and expectations; and it was so:

that God did tempt Abraham; not to sin, as Satan does, for God tempts no
man, nor can he be tempted in this sense; and, had Abraham slain his
son, it would have been no sin in him, it being by the order of God, who
is the Lord of life, and the sovereign disposer of it; but he tempted
him, that is, he tried him, to prove him, and to know his faith in him,
his fear of him, his love to him, and cheerful obedience to his
commands; not in order to know these himself, which he was not ignorant
of, but to make them known to others, and that Abraham's faith might be
strengthened yet more and more, as in the issue it was. The Jewish
writers (h) observe, that Abraham was tempted ten times, and that this
was the tenth and last temptation:

and said unto him, Abraham: calling him by his name he well knew, and by
that name he had given him, to signify that he should be the father of
many nations, [Gen 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#005); and yet was
going to require of him to slay his only son, and offer him a sacrifice
to him:

and he said, behold, here I am; signifying that he heard his voice, and
was ready to obey his commands, be they what they would.

\(b\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin: fol. 89. 2. (c) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 13. sect. 2.
(d) Annales Vet. Test. p. 10. (e) Ganz Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 6. 1.
(f) Zohar in Gen. fol. 68. 2. & 74. 4. & 76. 2. Targ. Hieros. in Exod.
xii. 42. Praefat. Echa Rabbat. fol. 40. 2. Pirke Eliezer, c. 31. Seder
Olam Rabba, c. 1. p. 3. Juchasin, fol. 9. 1. Shalshalet Hakabala, fol.
3. 1. (g) Patricides, p. 19. Elmacinus, p. 34. Apud Hottinger. Smegma,
p. 327, &c. (h) Targum. Hieros. in loc. Pirke Eliezer, c. 31.

[Genesis 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 22:2</span></span>

And he said, take now thy son,.... Directly, immediately; not thine ox,
nor thy sheep, nor thy ram, nor thy lamb, nor thy servant, but thy son:

thine only son Isaac; for, though Ishmael was his son, he was a son by
his maid, by his concubine, and not by his wife; Isaac was his only
legitimate son, his only son by his lawful wife Sarah; the only son of
the promise, his only son, in whom his seed was to be called:

whom thou lovest; on whom his affections were strongly set, being a
lovely youth, a dutiful son, and the child of promise; on whom all his
hope and expectation of a numerous offspring promised him was built, and
in whose line the Messiah was to spring from him; even Isaac, which
stands last in the original text: so that, if what had been said was not
sufficient to describe him, he is expressed by name, and the description
is gradually given, and the name of his son reserved to the last, that
he might be by degrees prepared to receive the shocking order; every
word is emphatic and striking, and enough to pierce any tender heart,
and especially when told what was to be done to him. The Jews (i)
represent God and Abraham in a discourse together upon this head: God
said, take now thy son; says Abraham, I have two sons; take thine only
son; says he, they are both only sons to their mothers; take him whom
thou lovest; I love them both, replied he; then take Isaac; thus ended
the debate:

and get thee into the land of Moriah; so called by anticipation, from a
mountain of that name in it; the Septuagint render it, "the high land",
the hill country of the land of Canaan, particularly that part of it
where Jerusalem afterwards stood, which was surrounded with hills: hence
Aquila, another Greek interpreter, renders it, "conspicuous", as hills
and mountains are, and a mountainous country is; Onkelos and Jonathan
paraphrase it, "a land of worship", of religious worship; for in this
country afterwards the people of God dwelt, the city of the living God
was built, and in it the temple for divine service, and that upon Mount
Moriah; and the Targum of Jerusalem has it here,"to Mount Moriah;''the
Jews are divided about the reason of this name, some deriving it from a
word (k) which signifies to "teach", and think it is so called, because
doctrine or instruction came forth from thence to Israel; others from a
word (l) which signifies "fear", and so had its name because fear or
terror went from thence to the nations of the world (m); but its
derivation is from another word (n), which signifies to "see", and which
is confirmed by what is said [Gen
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014),

and offer him there for a burnt offering; this was dreadful work he was
called to, and must be exceeding trying to him as a man, and much more
as a parent, and a professor of the true religion, to commit such an
action; for by this order he was to cut the throat of his son, then to
rip him up, and cut up his quarters, and then to lay every piece in
order upon the wood, and then burn all to ashes; and this he was to do
as a religious action, with deliberation, seriousness, and devotion:

upon one of the mountains which I will tell thee of; for there were
several of them adjoining to, or pretty near each other, which
afterwards went by different names, as Mount Sion, [Deu
4:48](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#048); the hill Acra; Mount Calvary,
[Luk 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#033); and Mount Moriah, [Ch2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001); supposed to be the mount
intended; and so Aben Ezra says it was the place where the temple was
built, and where was the threshing floor of Araunah, [Ch2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001). Some learned men are of opinion,
that the account which Sanchoniatho (o) gives of Cronus or Saturn
sacrificing his own son, refers to this affair of Abraham's; his words
are,"there being a pestilence and a mortality, Cronus offered up his
only son a whole burnt offering to his father Ouranus;''which Porphyry
(p), from the same historian, thus relates; Cronus, whom the Phoenicians
call Israel, (a grandson of Abraham's, thought, through mistake, to be
put for Abraham himself,) having an only son of a nymph of that country
called Anobret, (which according to Bochart (q) signifies one that
conceived by grace, see [Heb 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#011);)
whom therefore they called Jeoud (the same with Jehid here, an only
once); so an only one is called by the Phoenicians; when the country was
in great danger through war, this son, dressed in a royal habit, he
offered up on an altar he had prepared. But others (r) are of a
different sentiment, and cannot perceive any likeness between the two
cases: however, Isaac may well be thought, in the whole of this, to be a
type of the Messiah, the true and proper Son of God, his only begotten
Son, the dear Son of his love, in whom all the promises are yea and
amen; whom God out of his great love to men gave to be an offering and a
sacrifice for their sins, and who suffered near Jerusalem, on Mount
Calvary, which very probably was a part of Mount Moriah; and which, with
other mountains joining in their root, though having different tops,
went by that common name.

\(i\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 89. 2. Pirke Eliezer, c. 31. Jarchi in
loc. (k) "docuit". (l) "timuit". (m) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 16. 1. (n)
"vidit". (o) Apud Euseb. Evangel. Praeparat. p. 38. (p) Apud ib. p. 40.
& l. 4. c. 15. p. 156. (q) Canaan, l. 2. c. 2. col. 711, 712. (r) See
Cumberland's Sanchoniatho, p. 37, 38, 134, &c.

[Genesis 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 22:3</span></span>

And Abraham rose up early in the morning,.... For it seems it was in a
dream or vision of the night that the above orders were given; and as
soon as it was morning he rose and prepared to execute them with all
readiness, and without any hesitation and delay:

and saddled his ass; for his journey, not to carry the wood and
provision on, which probably were carried by his servants, but to ride
on; and this Jarchi thinks he did himself, and the words in their
precise sense suggest this; but it does no, necessarily follow, because
he may be said to do what he ordered his servant to do; of the Jews'
fabulous account of this ass, see [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009),

and took two of his young men with him; the Targum of Jonathan says,
these were Ishmael his son, and Eliezer his servant; and so other Jewish
writers (r), who tell us, that just at this time Ishmael came out of the
wilderness to visit his father, and he took him with him; but for this
there is no foundation: they were two of his servants, of whom he had
many:

and Isaac his son: who was the principal person to be taken, since he
was to be the sacrifice: whether Abraham acquainted Sarah with the
affairs and she consented to it, cannot be said with certainty; it is
plain Isaac knew not what his father's design was; and though Sarah and
the whole family might know, by the preparation made, he was going to
offer a sacrifice, yet they knew not where, nor what it was to be:

and clave the wood for the burnt offering; not knowing whether he should
find wood sufficient on the mountain, where he was to go; and that he
might not be unprovided when he came there, takes this method, which
shows his full intention to obey the divine command:

and rose up, and went unto the place of which God had told him; that is,
he mounted his ass, and rode towards the place God had spoken of to him,
and who had directed him which way to steer his course.

\(r\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 31. Jarchi in loc.

[Genesis 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 22:4</span></span>

Then on the third day,.... After he had received the command from God,
and from his setting out on his journey; for he had now travelled two
days, Mount Moriah being forty miles from Beersheba, where Abraham dwelt
(s); or, as others compute it, forty: Hebron (t) was twenty miles from
Beersheba, and Jerusalem twenty two from Hebron; and to travel twenty
miles a day on foot, as Isaac and the servants seem to have done, there
being but one ass among them, was far enough in those hot countries. Now
all this while Abraham had time to reconsider things in his mind, and
deliberate thoroughly what he was going about; and by proceeding in it,
after he had such leisure to revolve things in his mind, it appears that
he was satisfied it was not an illusion, but an oracle of God he was
going to obey; and that he did not do this rashly and hastily, and that
his faith and obedience were sufficiently tried, and found genuine. The
Jews (u) take great notice of this third day, and compare the passage
with [Hos 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#002); and which they
interpret of the third day of the resurrection; and the deliverance of
Isaac on this third day was doubtless typical of Christ's resurrection
from the dead on the third day; for from the time that Abraham had the
command to offer up his son, he was reckoned no other by him than as one
dead, from whence he received him in a figure on this third day, [Heb
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019),

Abraham lift up his eyes, and saw the place afar off; where he was to
offer his Son. Baal Hatturim says, the word "place", by gematry,
signifies Jerusalem: it seems by this, that as God had signified to
Abraham that he would tell him of the place, and show it to him, where
he was to sacrifice, so that he gave him a signal by which he might know
it, which some of the Jewish writers (w) say was a cloud upon the mount;
with which agrees the Targum of Jonathan,"and Abraham lift up his eyes
and saw the cloud of glory smoking upon the mountain, and he knew it
afar off.''And others say (x), he saw the glory of the divine Majesty
standing upon the mount, in a pillar of fire, reaching from earth to
heaven; and they further observe, that the place where he was, when he
saw this, was Zophim, a place not far from Jerusalem; and from hence,
when the city and temple were built, a full view might be taken of them
(y), from whence it had its name.

\(s\) Bunting's Travels, p. 57. (t) Reland. Palestina illustrata, tom.
2. p. 620. (u) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 56. fol. 49. 3. (w) Bereshit Rabba,
sect. 56. fol. 49. 3. Jarchi in loc. (x) Pirke Eliezer, ut supra. (c.
31.) (y) Gloss. in T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 49. 2. Schulchan Aruch, par. 1.
Crach Chayim, c. 3. sect. 6.

[Genesis 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 22:5</span></span>

And Abraham said unto the young men, abide you here with the ass,.... At
the place from whence he had his first sight of Mount Moriah: he chose
not to take his two servants with him, lest when they saw him binding
his son, and going about to sacrifice him, they should lay hold upon
him, and restrain him from doing it; and to prevent this he takes this
precaution, which shows how fully intent he was to yield obedience to
the divine precept:

and I and the lad will go yonder and worship; pointing to the place
where the signal was, but whether they saw it or no is not certain: the
Jews say (z) Isaac did see it, but they did not; however, Abraham made
them to understand that he was going to one of the mountains which were
in sight, and there worship God by offering sacrifice to him. Isaac is
here called a "lad"; of what age he was at this time; see Gill on [Gen
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002); and he might be at the largest
number of years there mentioned, and yet be so called, since Joshua the
son of Nun has this appellation when he was fifty six years of age, [Exo
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo033.htm#011),

and come again to you, both he and Isaac; this he said under a spirit of
prophecy, as Jarchi thinks, or in the faith of Isaac's resurrection from
the dead, [Heb 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#019).

\(z\) Bereshit Rabba (sect. 56. fol. 49. 2, 3.) and Pirke Eliezer, ut
supra. (c. 31.)

[Genesis 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 22:6</span></span>

And Abraham took the wood of the burnt offering,.... Which Josephus (a)
says was laid upon the ass, and carried by that; and if so, he took it
from thence: but it is probable it was carried by his two servants,
since it was not more than Isaac himself afterwards carried, as in the
next clause:

and laid it upon Isaac his son: who was a grown man, and able to carry
it: in this also he was a type of Christ, on whom the wood of his cross
was laid, and which he bore when he went to be crucified, [Joh
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#017); and this wood may be also a
figure of our sins laid on him by his Father, and which he bore in his
body on the tree, [Pe1 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#024); and which
were like wood to fire, fuel for the wrath of God, which came down upon
him for them:

and he took the fire in his hand, and a knife; a vessel in one hand, in
which fire was to kindle the wood with, and a knife in the other hand to
slay the sacrifice with; the one to slay his son with, and the other to
burn him with; and to carry these for such purposes must be very trying.
This is the first time we read in Scripture of fire for use, or of a
knife. Some say the first inventor of fire was Prometheus, others
Phoroneus (b), from whence he seems to have his name; but according to
Sanchoniatho (c), the immediate posterity of Cain first invented it,
whose names were light, fire, and flame; and these, he says, found out
the way of generating fire, by rubbing pieces of wood against each
other, and taught men the use of it. "Knife", in the Hebrew language,
has its name from eating and consuming, as Ben Melech observes; some
render it a "sword" (d), but wrongly, and which has led the painter into
a mistake, to represent Abraham with a sword in his hand to slay his
son:

and they went both of them together; from the place where they left the
young men, to the place where the sacrifice was to be offered.

\(a\) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 13. sect. 2. (b) Pausan. Corinthiaca sive, l. 2.
p. 119. (c) Apud Euseb. Evangel. Praepar. l. 1. c. 10. p. 34. (d)
"gladium", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin.

[Genesis 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 22:7</span></span>

And Isaac spake unto Abraham his father,.... As they were walking
together:

and said, my father; a cutting word to Abraham, who knew what he was
going to do with him, so contrary to the relation and affection of a
parent:

and he said, here am I, my son; what hast thou to say to me? I am ready
to answer thee; he owns the relation he stood in unto him, a sense of
which he had not put off, and curbs his affections, which must be
inwardly moving towards him, and showed great strength of faith to
grapple with such a trying exercise:

and he said, behold the fire and the wood; the fire which his father had
his hand, and the wood which was upon his own, shoulders:

but where is the lamb for a burnt offering? he perceived by the
preparation made, by the fire and the wood, that it was to be a burnt
offering which they were going to offer; but there being no creature
provided for the sacrifice, he puts this question, by which it appears
that as yet he was quite ignorant of the true design of this journey,
and little thought that he was to be the sacrifice: however, from what
he said, it plain he had been used to sacrifices, and had been trained
up in them, and had seen them performed, and knew the nature of them,
and what were requisite unto them.

[Genesis 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 22:8</span></span>

And Abraham said, my son, God will provide himself a lamb for a burnt
offering,.... In which answer Abraham may have respect to the Messiah,
the Lamb of God, [Joh 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029), whom he
had provided in council and covenant before the world was; and who in
promise, and type, and figure, was slain from the foundation of the
world, [Rev 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#008); and whom in due time
God would send into the world, [Joh
10:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#036), and make him an offering for
sin, [Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010), and accept of him in
the room and stead of his people: and this was a provision that could
only be made by the Lord, and was the produce of his infinite wisdom,
and the fruit of his grace, favour, and good will and of which Abraham
had a clear sight and strong persuasion, see [Joh
8:56](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#056); though as the words may be
considered as a more direct answer to Isaac's question, which related to
the sacrifice now about to be offered, they may be regarded as a
prophecy of Abraham's, and of his faith in it, that God would, as in
fact he did, provide a lamb or ram in the room of that he was called to
offer; or he may mean Isaac himself, whom he was bid to take and offer,
and so was a lamb of God's providing; though he did not choose directly
to say this, but puts him off with such an answer, suggesting that it
was best for him to leave it with God, who, as he had called them to
such service, would supply them with a proper sacrifice; and in speaking
in this manner he might give room for Isaac to suspect what was
intended, and so by degrees bring him to the knowledge of it. Some
Jewish writers (e) say, that Abraham to this answer added in express
terms,"my son, thou art the lamb:"

so they went both of them together; they proceeded on in their journey
until they came to the place they were directed to go. The Targum of
Jonathan says,"they went both of them with a perfect heart as one;''the
Jerusalem Targum is,"with a quiet, easy, and composed mind or
heart;''and Jarchi,"with a like heart;''all intimating that Isaac was
thoroughly acquainted with what was to be done, that he was to be the
sacrifice, and that he heartily agreed to it, and that he and his father
were of one mind in it, and that he went with the same will to be
offered up, as his father did to offer him; and indeed the expression
being repeated from [Gen 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#006), seems
to suggest something remarkable and worthy of attention.

\(e\) Pirke Eliezer, ut supra. (c. 31.)

[Genesis 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 22:9</span></span>

And they came to the place which God had told him of,.... Mount Moriah.
Maimonides (f) says,"it is a tradition in or by the hands of all, that
this is the place where David and Solomon built an altar in the
threshing floor of Araunah, the Jebusite, and where Abraham built an
altar, and bound Isaac on it; and where Noah built one when he came out
of the ark, and is the altar on which Cain and Abel offered; and where
the first man offered when he was created, and from whence he was
created.''And so the Targum of Jonathan, and other Jewish writers (g).
The Mahometans say (h), that Meena or Muna, a place about two or three
miles from Mecca, is the place where Abraham went to offer up his son
Isaac, and therefore in this place they sacrifice their sheep.

And Abraham built an altar there; of the earth, and turf upon it he
found on the mount, erected an altar for sacrifice, even for the
sacrifice of his own son: he had built many before, but none for such a
purpose as this, and yet went about it readily, and finished it. But if
there was one before, Abraham could not with any propriety be said to
build it, at most only to repair it; but there is no doubt to be made of
it that he built it anew, and perhaps there never was an altar here
before:

and laid on the wood in order: for the sacrifice to be put upon it:

and bound Isaac his son: with his hands and feet behind him, as Jarchi
says; not lest he should flee from him, and make his escape, as Aben
Ezra suggests, but as it was the usual manner to bind sacrifices when
offered; and especially this was so ordered, that Isaac might be a type
of the Messiah, who was bound by the Jews, [Joh
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#012); as well as he was bound and
fastened to the cross:

and laid him on the altar upon the wood; it is highly probable with his
own consent; for if he was twenty five, and as some say thirty seven
years of age, he was able to have resisted his father, and had he been
reluctant could have cleared himself from the hands of his aged parent:
but it is very likely, that previous to this Abraham opened the whole
affair to him, urged the divine command, persuaded him to submit to it;
and perhaps might suggest to him what he himself had faith in, that God
would either revoke the precept, or prevent by some providence or
another the fatal blow, or raise him again from the dead; however, that
obedience to the will of God should be yielded, since disobedience might
be attended with sad consequences to them both; and with such like
things the mind of Isaac might be reconciled to this affair, and he
willingly submitted to it; in which he also was a type of Christ, who
acquiesced in the will of his Father, freely surrendered himself into
the hands of justice, and meekly and willingly gave himself an offering
for his people.

\(f\) Hilchot Beth Habechirah, c. 2. sect. 1. 2. (g) In Pirke, ut supra.
(c. 31.) (h) See Pitts's Account of the Mahometans, c. 7. p. 97.

[Genesis 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 22:10</span></span>

And Abraham stretched forth his hand,.... All things being ready for
execution, the altar built, the wood laid on it, the sacrifice bound and
laid on that, nothing remained but to cut the throat of the sacrifice;
and in order to that, the instrument for it laying by him, he put forth
his hand, one would think in a trembling manner, for it is enough to
make one tremble to think of it:

and took the knife to slay his son; with a full intention to do it,
which was carrying his obedience to the divine will to the last
extremity, and shows he was sincere in it, and really designed to
complete it; and this was taken by the Lord as if it was actually done.
He had his knife in his hand, and was near the throat of his son, and
just ready to give the fatal thrust; in another moment, as it were, it
would have been all over; but in the nick of time God appeared and
prevented it, as follows:

[Genesis 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 22:11</span></span>

And the Angel of the Lord called unto him out of heaven,.... Not a
created angel, but the eternal one, the Son of God, who perhaps appeared
in an human form, and spoke with an articulate voice, as be frequently
did; for that this was a divine Person is clear from his swearing by
himself, and renewing the promise unto Abraham, [Gen
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016),

and said, Abraham, Abraham; the repeating his name denotes haste to
prevent the slaughter of his son, which was just upon the point of
doing, and in which Abraham was not dilatory, but ready to make quick
dispatch; and therefore with the greater eagerness and vehemency the
angel calls him by name, and doubles it, to raise a quick and immediate
attention to him, which it did:

and he said, here am I: ready to hearken to what shall be said, and to
obey what should be ordered; see Gill on [Gen
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#001).

[Genesis 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 22:12</span></span>

And he said, lay not thine hand upon the lad,.... Which he was just
going to stretch out, with his knife in it, to slay him; and though the
Lord had bid him take his son, and offer him for a burnt offering, to
try his faith, fear, love, and obedience, yet he meant not that he
should actually slay him, but would prevent it when it came to the
crisis; for he approves not of, nor delights in human sacrifices; and
that this might not be dawn into an example, it was prevented; though
the Gentiles, under the influence of Satan, in imitation of this, have
practised it:

neither do thou anything unto him; by lacerating his flesh, letting out
any of his blood, or wounding him ever so slightly in any part:

for now I know that thou fearest God; with a truly childlike filial
fear; with such a reverence of him that has fervent love, and strong
affection, joined with it; with a fear that includes the whole of
internal religious worship, awe of the divine Being, submission to his
will, faith in him, and love to him, and obedience springing from
thence. And this is said, not as though he was ignorant before how
things would issue; for he knew from all eternity what Abraham would be,
and what he would do, having determined to bestow that grace upon him,
and work it in him, which would influence and enable him to act the part
he did; he knew full well beforehand what would be the consequence of
such a trial of him; but this is said after the manner of men, who know
things with certainty when they come to pass, and appear plain and
evident: or this may be understood of a knowledge of approbation, that
the Lord now knew, and approved of the faith, fear, love, and obedience
of Abraham, which were so conspicuous in this affair, see [Psa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#006); Saadiah Gaon (i) interprets it,
"I have made known", that is, to others; God by trying Abraham made it
manifest to others, to all the world, to all that should hear of or read
this account of things, that he was a man that feared God, loved him,
believed in him, and obeyed him, of which this instance is a full and
convincing proof:

seeing thou hast not withheld thy son, thine only son from me: but as
soon as he had the order to offer him up, prepared for it, took a three
days' journey, and all things along with him for the sacrifice; when he
came to the place, built an altar, laid the wood in order, bound his
son, and laid him on it, took the knife, and was going to put it to his
throat; so that the Lord looked upon the thing as if it was really done:
it was a plain case that he did not, and would not have withheld his
son, but would have freely offered him a sacrifice unto God at his
command; and that he loved the Lord more than he did his son, and had a
greater regard to the command of God than to the life of his son, and
preferred the one to the other. And thus God spared not his own Son, but
delivered him up for us all, [Rom
8:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#032).

\(i\) Apud Aben Ezram, in ver. 1.

[Genesis 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 22:13</span></span>

And Abraham lifted up his eyes,.... They were before fixed upon his son
lying upon the altar, and intent upon that part he was going to thrust
his knife into; but hearing a voice from heaven above him, he lift up
his eyes thitherward:

and looked, and, behold, behind him a ram caught in a thicket by his
horns; the ram making a noise and rustling among the bushes behind the
place where Abraham was, he turned himself, and looked and saw it: the
Targum of Onkelos introduces the clause thus, "after these things"; and
so the Arabic version: after Abraham had heard the voice of the angel,
and had lift up his eyes to heaven, he was directed to look behind him;
and both that and the Targum of Jonathan paraphrase it,"and he saw and
beheld one ram;''and so the Septuagint, Syriac and Samaritan versions,
reading instead of This ram was caught and held by his horns in a
thicket of briers, brambles, and thorns, or in the thick branches of the
shrubs or bushes which grew upon the mount; and the horns of a ram being
crooked, are easily implicated in such thickets, but not easily loosed.
From whence this ram came is not known; it can hardly be thought to come
from Abraham's fold, or to be his property, since he was three days'
journey distant from home; very likely it had strayed from neighbouring
flocks, and was by the providence of God directed hither at a seasonable
time. The Jewish writers (k) say, it was from the creation of the world;
and there is no absurdity or improbability to suppose it was immediately
created by the power of God, and in an extraordinary manner provided;
and was a type of our Lord Jesus, who was foreordained of God before the
foundation of the world, and came into the world in an uncommon way,
being born of a virgin, and that in the fulness of time, and seasonably,
and in due time died for the sins of men. The ram has its name from
"strength", in the Hebrew language, and was an emblem of a great
personage, [Dan 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#003); and may denote
the strength and dignity of Christ as a divine Person; being caught in a
thicket, may be an emblem of the decrees of God, in which he was
appointed to be the Saviour; or the covenant agreement and transactions
with his Father, in which he voluntarily involved himself, and by which
he was held; or the sins of his people, which were laid upon him by
imputation, were wreathed about him, and justice finding him implicated
with them, required satisfaction, and had it; or the hands of wicked
men, sons of Belial, comparable to thorns, by whom he was taken; or the
sorrows of death and hell that encompassed him, and the curses of a
righteous law which lay upon him; and perhaps he never more resembled
this ram caught in a thicket, than when a platted crown of thorns was
put upon his head, and he wore it:

and Abraham went and took the ram; without regarding whose property it
was, since God, the owner and proprietor of all, had provided it for
him, and brought it to him at a very seasonable time, and directed him
to take it:

and offered him for a burnt offering in the stead of his son; in which
also was a type of Christ, who was made an offering for sin, and a
sacrifice to God of a sweet smelling savour; and its being a burnt
offering denotes the sufferings of Christ, and the severity of them; and
which were in the room and stead of his people, of God's Isaac, of
spiritual seed of Abraham, of the children of God of the promise, of all
his beloved ones; who therefore are let go, justice being satisfied with
what Christ has done and suffered, it being all one as if they had
suffered themselves; as here in the type, the ram having, its throat
cut, its blood shed, its skin flayed, and the whole burnt to ashes, were
as if Isaac himself had been thus dealt with, as Jarchi observes.
Alexander Polyhistor (l), an Heathen writer, has, in agreement with the
sacred history, given a narrative of this affair in a few words,"God (he
says) commanded Abraham to offer up his son Isaac to him for a burnt
offering, and taking the lad with him to a mountain, laid and kindled an
heap of wood, and put Isaac upon it; and when he was about to slay him,
was forbidden by an angel, who presented a ram to him for sacrifice, and
then Abraham removed his son from the pile, and offered up the ram.''

\(k\) Pirke Eliezer, ut supra. (c. 31.). Targum Jon. & Jarchi in loc.
(l) Apud Euseb. Evangel. Praepar. l. 9. c. 19. p. 421.

[Genesis 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 22:14</span></span>

And Abraham called the name of that place Jehovahjireh,.... Which may be
rendered either "the Lord hath seen", as the Septuagint, or "has
provided", the future being put for the past, as Abendana observes, and
so it is called, in answer to what Abraham had said, [Gen
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#008); "God will provide": now he had
provided, and, as a memorial of it, gives the place this name; or "he
will see or provide" (m); as he has provided for me, so he will for all
those that trust in him; as he has provided a ram in the room of Isaac,
so he has provided, and will send his only Son in the fulness of time to
be a sacrifice for the sins of his people:

as it is said to this day, in the mount of the Lord it shall be seen;
from this time to the times of Moses, and so on in after ages, even
until now, it has been used as a proverbial saying, that as God appeared
to Abraham, and for his son, in the mount, just as he was going to
sacrifice him, and delivered him, so the Lord will appear for his people
in all ages, in a time of difficulty and distress, and when at the
utmost extremity, who call upon him, and trust in him. This may also
refer to the presence of God in this mount, when the temple should be
built on it, as it was, [Ch2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001); and
to the appearance of Christ in it, who was often seen here: some choose
to render the words, "in the mount the Lord shall be seen" (n); "God
manifest in the flesh", [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016), the
"Immanuel", "God with us", [Mat 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023),
who was frequently in the temple built on this mount, and often seen
there in his state of humiliation on earth.

\(m\) "Dominus videbit", V. L. Montanus, Drusius, Schmidt; "Dominus
providebit", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (n) "in monte Dominus
videbitur", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version.

[Genesis 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 22:15</span></span>

And the Angel of the Lord called unto Abraham out of heaven the second
time. The Angel having restrained him from slaying his son, and having
provided another sacrifice, which he offered, calls to him again; having
something more to say to him, which was to renew the covenant he had
made with him, and confirm it by an oath.

[Genesis 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 22:16</span></span>

And said, by myself have I sworn, saith the Lord,.... Which Aben Ezra
observes is a great oath, and abides for ever; for because he could
swear by no greater, he swore by himself, his own nature, perfections,
and life, [Heb 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013); hence it appears,
that the Angel that called to Abraham was a divine Person, the true
Jehovah:

for because thou hast done this thing, and hast not withheld thy son,

thine only son; that is, from the Lord, as in [Gen
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#012); and is here repeated as being a
most marvellous thing, a wonderful instance of faith in God, and fear of
him, and of love and obedience to him; for, with respect to the will of
Abraham, and as far as he was suffered to go, it was as much done as it
was possible for him to do, and was looked upon as if actually done: yet
this is not observed as meritorious of what follows; the promise of
which had been made before, but is now repeated to show what notice God
took of, and how well pleased he was with what had been done; and
therefore renews the promise, which of his own grace and good will he
had made, for the strengthening of Abraham's faith, and to encourage
others to obey the Lord in whatsoever he commands them.

[Genesis 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 22:17</span></span>

That in blessing I will bless thee,.... With temporal and spiritual
blessings; with the Spirit and all his graces; with Christ and
redemption, justification, and salvation by him; and with eternal life,
as the gift of God, through him:

and in multiplying I will multiply thy seed as the stars of the heaven,
and as the sand which is upon the sea shore: both his natural seed,
descending from him in the line of Isaac, and his spiritual seed, both
among Jews and Gentiles, that tread in his steps; see [Gen
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#015),

and thy seed shall possess the gate of his enemies: "gate" for "gates",
where courts of judicature were held, and which are the security of
cities and put for them, and which also include the whole country round
about: so that this phrase is expressive of an entire jurisdiction and
dominion over them; and was literally fulfilled in the times of Joshua,
David, and Solomon; and spiritually in Christ, Abraham's principal seed,
when he destroyed Satan and his principalities and powers; overcame the
world; made an end of sin and abolished death; and delivered his people
out the hands of all their enemies; and in all Abraham's spiritual seed,
who are made more than conquerors over them, through Christ that has
loved them.

[Genesis 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 22:18</span></span>

And in thy seed shall all nations of the earth be blessed,.... That is,
in his one and principal seed, the Messiah, that should spring from him,
[Gal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016), in whom all the elect of
God, of all nations under the heavens, are blessed with all spiritual
blessings, with peace, pardon, righteousness, and eternal life, with
grace here and glory hereafter; See Gill on [Gen
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#003); or, "shall bless themselves" (o)
in him; or, "account themselves blessed"; apply to him for blessings,
claim their interest in them, and glory in them, and make their boast of
them:

because thou hast obeyed my voice; in taking his son and offering him up
unto him, as much as he was permitted to do; and thus honouring God by
his obedience to him, he of his grace and goodness honours him with the
promise of being the father of multitudes, both in a literal and
spiritual sense, and with being the ancestor of the Messiah, in whom all
the blessings of grace and goodness meet.

\(o\) "benedicent se", Munster; to the same purpose Vatablus, Tigurine
version, Piscator.

[Genesis 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 22:19</span></span>

So Abraham returned to his young men,.... He had left at a certain place
with the ass, while he and Isaac went to the mount to worship; and who
stayed there till he came to them, according to his order, [Gen
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#005); no mention is made of Isaac, but
there is no doubt that he returned with Abraham, since we hear of him
afterwards in his house; for as to what the Targum of Jonathan says, it
cannot be depended on, that the angels took Isaac and brought him to the
school of Shem the great, and there he was three years:

and they rose up, and went together to Beersheba; that is, when Abraham
and Isaac came to the place where the young men were, they got up and
proceeded on in their journey along with them to Beersheba, from whence
Abraham came, and where he had for some time lived:

and Abraham dwelt at Beersheba; there he continued for some time
afterwards, and but for a time, for in the next chapter we hear of him
at Hebron, [Gen 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#002).

[Genesis 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 22:20</span></span>

And it came to pass, after these things,.... Abraham's taking his son
Isaac to the land of Moriah, building an altar on one of the mountains
there, and laying him on it with an intention to sacrifice him, and
offering of a ram in his stead, and the return of them both to
Beersheba:

that it was told Abraham; by some person very probably who was lately
come from those parts where the following persons lived; though Jarchi
suggests this was told him by the Lord himself, and while he was
thinking of taking a wife for Isaac of the daughters at Aner, or Eshcol,
or Mamre; and to prevent which the following narration was given him:

saying, behold Milcah, she hath also borne children unto thy brother
Nahor; as Sarah, supposed to be the same with Iscah, a daughter of
Haran, had borne a son to him, and whom he had received again as from
the dead; so Milcah, another daughter of Harsh, had borne children to
his brother Nahor, whom he had left in Ur of the Chaldees, when he
departed from thence, and who afterwards came and dwelt in Haran of
Mesopotamia; see [Gen 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#027).

[Genesis 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 22:21</span></span>

Huz his firstborn, and Buz his brother,.... The first of these gave name
to the land of Uz, where Job dwelt, and who seems to be a descendant of
this man, [Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001); and from whom
sprung the Ausitae of Ptolemy (p), who dwelt near Babylon and by the
Euphrates. The latter, was the father of the Buzites, of which family
Elihu was, that interposed between Job and his friends, [Job
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#002),

and Kemuel the father of Aram; not that Aram from whom the Syrians are
denominated Arameans, he was the son of Shem, [Gen
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022), but one who perhaps was so
called from dwelling among them, as Jacob is, called a Syrian, [Deu
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#005), or he had this name given him in
memory and honour of the more ancient Aram: from this Kemuel might come
the Camelites, of which there were two sorts mentioned by Strabo (q),
and who dwelt to the right of the river Euphrates, about three days'
journey from it.

\(p\) Geograph. l. 5. c. 19. (q) Geograph. l. 16. p. 515.

[Genesis 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 22:22</span></span>

And Chesed,.... From whom it is generally thought sprung the Chaldees,
who are commonly called Chasdim; but mention is made of the Chaldees
before this man was born, unless they are called so by anticipation; See
Gill on [Gen 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022),

and Hazo, and Pildash, and Jidlaph, and Bethuel; of these men and their
posterity we hear no more, excepting: the last, for whose sake the rest
are mentioned. Hazo or Chazo settled in Elymais, a country belonging to
Persia, where is now a city called Chuz after his name, and from whence
the whole country is called Chuzistan; and the inhabitants of it are by
the Assyrians called Huzoye or Huzaeans (r); the same which Strabo (s)
makes mention of under the name of Cossaeans, who are described as a
warlike people, inhabiting a barren and mountainous country, and given
to spoil and robbery; and are mentioned by him along with Elymaeans,
Medes, and Persians. Some Arabic writers say the Persians are from Pars,
the son of Pahla; and Dr. Hyde (t) queries whether Pahla is not the same
with Paldas, that is, Pildash, another of the sons of Nahor.

\(r\) Hyde's Hist. Relig. Vet. Pers. c. 35. p. 415. (s) Geograph. l. 11.
p. 359, 361. & l. 16, p. 512. (t) Ut supra, (Hyde's Hist. Relig. Vet.
Pers. c. 35) p. 419.

[Genesis 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 22:23</span></span>

And Bethuel begat Rebekah,.... Who was to be and was the wife of Isaac;
and, for the sake of her genealogy, the above account is given, as Aben
Ezra observes, and so Jarchi; and this is observed to pave the way for
the history of the chapter; for no notice is taken of any other of
Bethuel's children but her, not even of Laban her brother:

these eight Milcah did bear, to Nahor, Abraham's brother; this is
observed, and the exact number given, as well as their names, to
distinguish them from other children of Nahor he had by another woman,
as follows:

[Genesis 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 22:24</span></span>

And his concubine, whose name was Reumah,.... Not an harlot, but a
secondary wife, who was under the proper and lawful wife, and a sort of
a head servant in the family, and chiefly kept for the procreation of
children; which was not thought either unlawful or dishonourable in
those times such as was Hagar in Abraham's family:

she bare also Tebah, and Gaham, and Thahash, and Maachah, of whom we
have no account elsewhere; only it may be observed, that here Maachah is
the name of a man, which sometimes is given to a woman, [Kg1
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#013).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 23](gen023)

</div>
