<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen024)  [Next](gen026) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 25:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 25

This chapter contains an account of Abraham's marriage with another
woman, and of the children he had by her and of their posterity [Gen
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001); of Abraham's disposal of his
substance; and his sons, [Gen 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#005); of
the years of his life, his death and burial, [Gen
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#007); of the children of Ishmael, and
of the years of his life, and of his death, [Gen
25:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#012); and of the sons of Isaac the
fruit of prayer, and of the oracle concerning them before they were
born, and of their temper and disposition, conduct and behaviour, [Gen
25:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#019).

[Genesis 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 25:1</span></span>

Then again Abraham took a wife,.... Three years after the death of
Sarah, and when his son Isaac was married, and he alone, and now one
hundred and forty years of age:

and her name was Keturah; who she was, or of what family, is not said.
An Arabic writer (z) says she was a daughter of the king of the Turks;
another (a) of them calls her the daughter of King Rama; and another (b)
the daughter of Pactor, king of Rabbah; but there were then no such
people in being. Very probably she was one of Abraham's handmaids born
in his house, or bought with his money, perhaps the chief and principal
of them. The Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem say she is the same with
Hagar, and so, Jarchi; but this is rejected by Aben Ezra, since mention
is made of Abraham's concubines, [Gen
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006); whereas it does not appear he
ever had any other than Hagar and Keturah, and therefore could not be
the same; and besides, the children of Hagar and Keturah are in this
chapter reckoned as distinct. Cleodemus (c), a Heathen writer, makes
mention of Keturah as a wife of Abraham's, by whom he had many children,
and names three of them. Sir Walter Raleigh (d) thinks, that the
Kenites, of whom Jethro, the father- in-law of Moses, was, had their
name from Keturah, being a nation of the Midianites that descended from
her.

\(z\) Abul. Pharag. Hist. Dynast. p. 14. (a) Elmacinus, p. 34. apud
Hottinger. Smegma, p. 309. (b) Patricides, p. 19. in ib. (c) Apud Euseb.
Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 20. p. 422. (d) History of the World, l. 2.
c. 4. sect. 2. p. 157.

[Genesis 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 25:2</span></span>

And she bare him Zimran,.... That Keturah should bear children who
probably, was a young woman, is not strange; but that Abraham, whose
body forty years before this was dead should now have any bore to him,
may seem difficult to account for, and only can be attributed to the
fresh vigour his body was endued with at the generation of Isaac; and
which still continued for the fulfilment of the promise to him of the
multiplication of his seed. But if the notion of a late learned bishop
(e) is right, there will be no need to have recourse to any thing
extraordinary; which is, that Abraham took Keturah for his concubine,
about twenty years after his marriage with Sarah, she being barren, and
long before he took Hagar; though not mentioned till after the death of
Sarah, that the thread of the history might not be broken in upon; and
there are various things which make it probable, as that she is called
his concubine, [Ch1 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#032), which one
would think she should not be, if married to him after the death of
Sarah, and when he had no other wife, and seeing before he died he had
great grandchildren by her, and the children of her are reckoned down to
the third generation; whereas there are only mention of two generations
of Hagar, as in [Gen 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#001); and
therefore seems to have been taken by him before Hagar, and even when he
was in Haran, and the children by her are thought to be the souls gotten
there; nor does it seem very probable that he should take a wife after
the death of Sarah, when he was one hundred and forty years of age, and
was reckoned an old man forty years before this; and Dr. Lightfoot (f)
is of opinion, that Abraham married her long before Isaac's marriage, or
Sarah's death; and if this was the case, the difficulty of accounting
for Abraham's fitness for generation vanishes. The first son of Keturah,
born to him, was called Zimran, from whence came the Zamareni, a people
in Arabia Felix mentioned by Pliny (g); and hereabout the sons of
Keturah settled, being sent by Abraham into the east country, even into
Arabia, which lay east of the place where he then was; and very probably
Zabram; or it may be rather Zamram, a royal city in the country of the
Cinaedocolpites, a part of Arabia Felix, as placed by Ptolemy (h), may
have its name from this man: five more of Abraham's sons by Keturah
follow:

and Jokshan, and Medan, and Midian, and Ishbak, and Shuah: some think
that the first of these is the same with Cahtan, whom the Arabs call the
father of their nation; but that Cahtan rather seems to be Joktan the
son of Eber, see [Gen 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#025).
Philostorgius (i) speaks of a nation in his time, called Homerites, who
were a people that sprung from Keturah, and inhabited Arabia Felix, and
who used circumcision on the eighth day: and Bishop Patrick observes
from Theophanes, a chronologer of the ninth century, that the Homerites,
who lived in the interior parts of Arabia, descended from Jectan, which
he conjectures should be read Jocshan, though perhaps he is no other
than the Joktan before mentioned. From Medan and Midian sprung the
Midianites, so often mentioned in Scripture; their posterity seem to be
confounded together, for the same people are called Medanites and
Midianites, [Gen 37:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#028); from these men
the towns in Arabia might have their names, as the Modiana and Madiana
of Ptolemy (k): as for Ishbak, there is no tracing of his name anywhere,
unless, as Bishop Patrick observes, some footsteps of it are to be found
in Bacascami, a town of the Zamareni, who descended from his brother
Zimran, and in the people Backliltae, both mentioned by Pliny (l);
though Junius think that Scabiosa Laodicea, in Laodicene of Syria, has
its name from him; which seems not likely. The name of Shuah or Shuach
may be traced in Socacia, Soaca, and Socheher, cities placed by Ptolemy
(m) in Arabia Felix: though some think the posterity of this man are
those whom the geographers call Sauchites, Sauchaeans, and Saccaeans,
who settled in Arabia Deserta, and from whom Bildad the Shuhite, [Job
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011), descended; which is not
improbable. But others have been of opinion, that the town of Suez,
which Pliny calls Suaza, had its name from this Shuah, situate at the
extremity of the Red sea (n).

\(e\) Dr. Clayton's Chronology of the Hebrew Bible, p. 83, &c. (f)
Observations on the Book of Genesis in his Works, vol. 1. p. 695. (g)
Nat. Hist. l. 6. c. 28. (h) Geograph. l. 6. c. 7. (i) Eccl. Hist. l. 3.
sect. 4. p. 477. (k) Ut supra. (h)) (l) Ut supra. (g)) (m) Ut supra.
(h)) (n) See Egmont and Heyman's Travels, vol. 2. p. 184.

[Genesis 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 25:3</span></span>

And Jokshan begat Sheba and Dedan,.... Bochart (o) is of opinion, that
the posterity of this Sheba are the same with the Sabeans who inhabited
at the entrance of Arabia Felix, not far from the Nabathaeans; and who,
by Strabo (p), are mentioned together as near to Syria, and used to make
excursions on their neighbours; and not without some colour of reason
thought to be the same that plundered Job of his cattle, [Job
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#015). From Dedan came the Dedanim or
Dedanites, spoken of with the Arabians in [Isa
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013); Junius thinks Adada in
Palmyrene of Syria had its name from this man, and in which country is
the mountain Aladan or Alladadan. Bochart (q) more probably takes Dedan,
a city in Idumea, to derive its name from him. There is a village called
Adedi in the country of the Cassanites, a people of Arabia Felix, which
Ptolemy (r) makes mention of, and seems to have some appearance of this
man's name:

and the sons of Dedan were Asshurim, and Letushim, and Leummim; these
names being plural are thought not to be proper names of men, but
appellatives, descriptive of their places of abode, or of their
business: hence the Targum of Onkelos represents them as such that dwelt
in camps, in tents, and in islands; and the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem call them merchants, artificers and heads of the people:
however, Cleodemus (s) the Heathen historian is wrong in deriving
Assyria from Asshurim, whom he calls Ashur; since Assyria and Assyrians
are so called from Ashur, the son of Shem, [Gen
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#022).

\(o\) Phaleg. l. 2. c. 9. col. 227. (p) Geograph. l. 16. p. 536. (q)
Phaleg. l. 4. c. 6. col. 219. (r) Ut supra. (Geograph. l. 6. c. 7.) (s)
Apud Euseb. ut supra. (Praepar. Evangel. 9. c. 20. p. 432.)

[Genesis 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 25:4</span></span>

And the sons of Midian,.... The fourth son of Abraham by Keturah; he had
five sons next mentioned, who were heads of so many tribes or families
in Midian: hence we read of five kings of Midian; [Num
31:8](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#008); their names follow:

Ephah, and Epher, and Hanoch, and Abidah, and Eldaah: the two first of
these, whom Cleodemus (t) calls Aphra and Apher, and makes them to be
sons of Abraham by Keturah, when they were his grandsons, he says, from
them the city Aphra, and all Africa, had their names, and that these
accompanied Hercules into Lybia, he having married a daughter of Aphra.
Ephah is mentioned along with Midian in [Isa
60:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#006); but of the rest no notice is
taken in Scripture. Ptolemy (u) makes mention both of a mountain, and of
a village, near Madiana in Arabia Felix, called Hippos, which perhaps
had their name from this man. Some trace of Epher is thought to be in
Taphuron which Philostorgius says (w) was the metropolis of the
Homerites, before mentioned; and Arrianus, as Bishop Patrick observes,
expressly says, the metropolis of the Homerites, is called Aphar: to
which may be added, that Ptolemy (x) speaks of a people called
Tappharites, near the Homerites. Hanoch, the next son, is thought to
have some footsteps of his name in Cane, a mart, which Ptolemy (y)
places in the country of the Adramites in Arabia Felix, and also in the
country of Canauna in Arabia, mentioned by, Pliny (z): near Cananua is
placed, by the same writer, the island Devadae, called by Philostorgius
(a) "Divus", in which it is supposed there is some trace of the name of
Abidah, by an inversion of the two last syllables; and perhaps also in
Abissa, which Ptolemy (b) places in the country of the Sachalites in
Arabia Felix. As for Eldaah, Bishop Patrick thinks there are no remains
of this name, unless in the city of Elana, from whence there was a gulf
called Elanites, and a people that lived there Elanitae; but one would
think there are some traces of it in the cities Alata, Lattha, and
Leaththa, all, according to Ptolemy (c), in Arabia Felix:

all these were the children of Keturah; her children and grandchildren.

\(t\) Apud Euseb. ut supra. (Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 20. p. 432.) (u)
Ut supra. (Geograph. l. 6. c. 7.) (w) Eccl. Hist. l. 3. sect. 4. 478.
(x) Ut supra. (u)) (y) lb. (z) Nat. Hist. l. 6. c. 28. (a) Ut supra,
(w)) sect. 3. (b) Ut supra. (u)) (c) lb.

[Genesis 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 25:5</span></span>

And Abraham gave all that he had unto Isaac. By his last will and
testament; not all out of his own hand, while he lived, at least he
reserved somewhat for himself, and for gifts to his other children; so
his servant declared to the parents and friends of Rebekah, [Gen
24:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#035); wherefore some render the words
here "had given" (d); or the sense is, that he had at that time purposed
and promised to give all that he had to Isaac, and now he actually did
it.

\(d\) "dederat", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Genesis 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 25:6</span></span>

But unto the sons of the concubines which Abraham had,.... These were
Hagar and Keturah, though they are both called his wives, [Gen
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#003); yet they were concubines; so
Keturah, [Ch1 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1001.htm#032); they were, as some
render the word, "concubine wives" (e); they were half wives or
secondary ones: the Jewish writers say that they were espoused, but not
by writing, as wives were; they were under the lawful wife, when there
were any, and a kind of head servants in the family, and their children
did not inherit; now the sons of the concubines of Abraham were Ishmael
by Hagar, and the six above mentioned by Keturah: to these

Abraham gave gifts; money, gold and silver, of which he had plenty: the
Targum of Jonathan calls them substance and movable goods; by this it
appears, that though he had sent Ishmael away without anything, yet he
afterwards remembered him, and gave him a portion with the rest of the
children of his, concubines:

and sent them away from Isaac his son; that they might not be
troublesome to him and his family; and that there, might be no
contention among them about inheriting the land of Canaan given to him
and his seed: and this Abraham did

while he yet lived; or otherwise after his death a separation would not
have been easily made; but his authority had weight with them: and they
were sent by him

eastward, into the east country; into Arabia, and the parts thereabout,
which lay east from the place where Abraham was; these are the children
of the east, mentioned along with the Midianites, who sprung from
Keturah, [Jdg 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#003).

\(e\) "concubinarum uxorum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Genesis 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 25:7</span></span>

And these are the days of the years of Abraham's life, which he
lived,.... Being about to die, an account is given of his age, which was

an hundred threescore and fifteen years; one hundred and seventy years;
so that Isaac was now seventy five years of age, for he was born when
Abraham was an hundred years old, and Jacob and Esau must how be fifteen
years of age at this time, since they were born when Isaac was sixty
years of age, [Gen 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026); and Ishmael
must be eighty nine years old; it may be observed, that as Abraham was
seventy five years old when he went from Haran into the land of Canaan,
[Gen 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#004); he had been just an hundred
years a sojourner in this country.

[Genesis 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 25:8</span></span>

Then Abraham gave up the ghost,.... Very readily and cheerfully, without
any previous sickness or present pain, but through the decay of nature
by reason of old age, in a very easy quiet manner:

and died in a good old age, an old man; for quantity, in those times few
arriving to a greater; for quality, not attended with those
inconveniences and disadvantages with which old age generally is, and
therefore called evil:

and full of years; in the original it is only, "and full"; the Targum of
Jonathan adds, "of all good"; temporal and spiritual, with which he was
filled and satisfied; or he had had enough of life, and was willing to
depart, and was full of desires after another and better world:

and was gathered to his people; which is to be understood not of his
interment, there being only the body of Sarah in the sepulchre in which
he was laid; but of the admission of his soul into the heavenly state
upon its separation from the body, when it was at once associated with
the spirits of just men made perfect. The Arabic writers (f) say that he
died in the month of Nisan, others say Adar, in the year of the world
3563; but, according to Bishop Usher, he died A. M. 2183, and before
Christ 1821.

\(f\) Elmacinus, p. 34. Patricides, p. 21. Apud Hottinger. Smegma
Oriental. p. 315.

[Genesis 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 25:9</span></span>

And his sons Isaac and Ishmael buried him in the cave of Machpelah,....
Isaac, though the younger brother, is set first, because he was born of
the lawful wife of Abraham, the free woman, whereas Ishmael was born of
a concubine and a bondwoman; Isaac was heir not only to Abraham's
temporal estate, but of the promise made concerning the Messiah, (not so
Ishmael,) and was on all accounts the greater man. It appears from
hence, that, though them had been a quarrel between Ishmael and Isaac,
and the latter had been persecuted by the former, yet the difference was
now made up, and they were reconciled, at least they agreed in this act
of showing their last respect to their father; and that, though Ishmael
had been expelled his father's house, yet he was not at any great
distance from him, and there was a correspondence between him and his
father; nor was he forgotten by him, as is clear from [Gen
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#006); and he retained a filial
affection for him; and Jarchi from hence concludes, that he was a
penitent and a good man. The place where these two brothers buried their
father was the cave of Machpelah:

in the field of Ephron, the son of Zohar the Hittite, which is before
Mamre; see [Gen 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#008); wherefore very
false is the tradition of the Mahometans (g), that Abraham's sepulchre
is at Mecca, which they, now show, and stands about twelve paces from
the temple there, enclosed with iron rails.

\(g\) Pitt's Account of the Religion of the Mahometans, c. 7. p. 93.

[Genesis 25:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 25:10</span></span>

The field which Abraham purchased of the sons of Heth,.... Of one of
them, Ephron, the rest being witnesses of it, [Gen
23:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#016),

there was Abraham buried, and Sarah his wife; Sarah had been buried
there thirty eight years before, which was the reason why his sons
buried, him there; if he died in Beersheba, as seems probable, see [Gen
24:62](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#062); from thence to Hebron were
sixteen miles (h); so far was he carried to be interred.

\(h\) Bunting's Travels, p. 57.

[Genesis 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 25:11</span></span>

And it came to pass, after the death of Abraham, that God blessed his
son Isaac,.... Yet more and more, both with spiritual and temporal
blessings; showing hereby, that, though Abraham was dead, he was not
unmindful of his covenant, which should be established with Isaac, [Gen
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#019),

and Isaac dwelt by the well Lahairoi; which was near the wilderness of
Beersheba and Paran, where Ishmael dwelt; so that they were not far from
one another, see [Gen 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#014).

[Genesis 25:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 25:12</span></span>

Now these are the generations of Ishmael, Abraham's son,.... Or the
genealogy of his posterity; and which is given to show that the Lord was
not unmindful of his promise made to Abraham, concerning the
multiplication of his seed, [Gen
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#010),

whom Hagar the Egyptian, Sarah's handmaid, bare unto Abraham; see [Gen
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#001).

[Genesis 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 25:13</span></span>

And these are the names of the sons of Ishmael,.... After mentioned: by
their names, according to their generations; which were imposed upon
them at their birth, and are recited according to the order in which
they were born, as follows:

the firstborn of Ishmael, Nebajoth: mentioned in [Isa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#007); and from whence a people of the
Arabs are called Nabathaeans, and their country Nabathaea. Josephus (i)
says, that all the country from Euphrates to the Red sea is called the
Nabatene country. The posterity of this man inhabited part of Arabia
Deserta and of Arabia Petraea, even to the entrance of Arabia Felix.
Strabo (k) reckons the Nabataeans among the Arabians, and calls Petra
the metropolis of Arabia Petraea, Petra Nabataea, and Petra of the
Arabian Nabataeans, who he says dwelt about Syria, and often made
excursions into it; and observes, that their country is populous and
abounds with pastures; hence the rams of Nebaioth, mentioned in [Isa
60:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#007); Pliny also (l) places them in
Arabia, and says they inhabit the town called Petra, and that they
border upon Syria.

And Kedar is the second son of Ishmael; and the posterity of this man
and their country are reckoned in Arabia by Isaiah, [Isa
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013); and they are so well known to
be Arabians, that the Arabic language is most frequently, in Jewish
writings, called the language of Kedar. These are the people whom Pliny
(m) names Cedrei, and mentions them along with the Nabathaeans, as near
unto them, and indeed they dwelt in the same country, Arabia Petraea,
and in tents, living by pasturage, hence they are sometimes called
Scenites; and mention is made of the tents of Kedar in [Sol
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005); these are the Scenite Arabs,
called Saracens by Ammianus Marcellinus (n). Two other sons of Ishmael
follow:

and Adbeel and Mibsam; of whom no mention is made elsewhere, nor are
there any traces of their names, unless the Agubeni, placed by Ptolemy
(o) near Arabia Felix.

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 12. sect. 4. (k) Geograph. l. 16. p. 528, 534,
536. (l) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 11. & l. 6. c. 28. & l. 12. c. 17. (m)
lbid. l. 5. c. 11. (n) L. 22. p. 228. l. 23. p. 250. Ed. Vales. (o)
Geograph. l. 5. c. 19.

[Genesis 25:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 25:14</span></span>

And Mishma, and Dumah, and Massa. Of Mishma and Massa, and of their
posterity, there is not anything said elsewhere, unless the Masani,
Ptolemy (p) places near Arabia Felix, came from Massa. Dumah seems to be
the same Isaiah speaks of in [Gen
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#011); and in Arabia Deserta, where
some of Ishmael's posterity settled, is a place called Dumaetha, by
Ptolemy (q), which perhaps had its name from this son of his. The Targum
of Jonathan translates these three names,"hearing, silence, and
patience;''which the Jews use as a proverb, when they would signify that
there are some things to be heard and not spoken of, and to be patiently
borne. If Ishmael had in view to teach such lessons by the names he gave
his children, he will seem to be a better man than he is usually thought
to be.

\(p\) Georaph. l. 16. p. 528. 534. 536. (q) lbid.

[Genesis 25:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 25:15</span></span>

Hadar and Tema,.... From the first of these the city Adra in Arabia
Petraea, and from the other the city Themma in Arabia Deserta, both
mentioned by Ptolemy (r), may be thought to have their names; or the
city Adari and the Athritae in Arabia Felix (s); and the inhabitants of
the land of Tema are mentioned as Arabians, [Isa
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013); and Pliny (t) speaks of a
people called Thimaneans, whom he says the ancients joined to the
Nabathaeans: the troops of Tema mentioned in Job were of this people,
[Job 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019); and Eliphaz the Temanite,
[Job 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#011), is thought by some not to
be the descendant of Teman the grandson of Esau, but to be of this man's
people and country. The three last sons follow:

Jetur, Naphish, and Kedemah; the two first of these are reckoned among
the Hagarites, as the Ishmaelites were sometimes called, [Ch1
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#019); from Jetur came the Itureans,
whom Pliny (u) places in Coelesyria; and their country Iturea is
reckoned by Strabo (w) along with Arabia; and the Ithyreans with Virgil
(x) are famous for their bows, as Ishmael and his posterity were for
archery in all ages, and still are; see Gill on [Gen
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#020). As for the posterity of Naphish
and Kedomah, we have no account elsewhere, nor any traces of their
names, unless those of the latter should be meant by the men of the
east, or the men of Kedem, [Jer 49:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#028),
which is not improbable, since they are mentioned with the posterity of
Kedar the second son of Ishmael; and the Nubaeans by Lebanon may be from
Naphish.

\(r\) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17, 19. (s) Ibid. l. 6. c. 7. (t) Nat. Hist. l.
6. c. 28. (u) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 23. (w) Geograph. l. 16. p. 520. (x)
Georgic. l. 2. ver. 448.

[Genesis 25:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 25:16</span></span>

These are the sons of Ishmael,.... The twelve before mentioned, [Gen
25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013),

these are their names, by their towns and by their castles; their towns
and their castles being called after their names, some of which we are
able to trace at this distance, as the above notes show:

twelve princes according to their nations; these were princes, or heads
of tribes, and there were twelve of them, and continued so, see [Gen
17:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#020); where is the prophecy, and here
an accomplishment of it.

[Genesis 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 25:17</span></span>

And these are the years of the life of Ishmael, an hundred and thirty
and seven years,.... one hundred and thirty seven years old. So that he
lived forty eight years after the death of Abraham, [Gen
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008); and, though he did not live to
be so old as he, yet it was a considerable age he attained unto; see
Gill on [Gen 25:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#007),

and he gave up the ghost and died, and was gathered unto his people;
some of the same expressions being used of him as of his father, [Gen
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#008), have led some to conclude that
he was a penitent and died a good man, and was gathered to the same
people; but these phrases are used both of good and bad men.

[Genesis 25:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 25:18</span></span>

And they dwelt from Havilah unto Shur,.... That is, the posterity of
Ishmael, whose country reached from one place to the other; not from
India to Chaluza, as the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem; but the
extent is that vast desert of Arabia, which eastward was called the
wilderness of Havilah, and westward the wilderness of Shur; so that they
inhabited it from east to west:

that is before Egypt, as thou goest to Assyria; which last place was
over against Egypt, and bordered on that part where lies the way to the
land of Assyria:

and he died in the presence of all his brethren; they being present when
he died, or in peace with them, in all prosperity along with them: but
since his death is spoken of before, and here the situation of his
posterity, the words may be read, "it fell (y) in the presence of his
brethren"; his lot, or the habitation of his posterity fell by lot
between his brethren the Egyptians on one side of him, and the
Israelites on the other; or between the sons of Keturah on the east, and
the posterity of Isaac on the west.

\(y\) "cecidit habitatio ipsi", Schmidt; "cecidit sors ejus", Aben Ezra,
Kimchi, Ben Gersom, and Ben Melech.

[Genesis 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 25:19</span></span>

And these are the generations of Isaac, Abraham's son,.... Moses, having
given the genealogy of Ishmael and his posterity, returns to Isaac, the
other son of Abraham, with whom and his children the following part of
his history is chiefly, if not altogether concerned:

Abraham begat Isaac; for the further confirmation of his being his
proper legitimate son this clause is added.

[Genesis 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 25:20</span></span>

And Isaac was forty years old when he took Rebekah to wife,.... Which
was three years after the death of his mother; Isaac was born when she
was ninety, and therefore must be thirty seven when she died. The Jews
say Rebekah was but fourteen, though it is highly probable she was
older; who is described as

the daughter of Bethuel the Syrian, of Padanaram; so called to
distinguish it from other Arams, as Aram of Damascus, &c. this seems to
be the same with Aram Naharaim, or Mesopotamia, which lay between the
rivers Euphrates and Tigris; for Padan, as Jarchi observes from the
Targum, signifies two; but rather, as he, and Aben Ezra, and others say,
Padan in the Arabic language signifies a field; it here intends the
field or country of Syria, as in [Hos
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#012). Haran, in Syria or Mesopotamia,
was the place where Bethuel and Laban lived, see [Gen
28:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#005). Some traces of Padan in
Mesopotamia are thought to be in the cities of Aphphadana and Aphadana,
which are placed by Ptolemy (z) in that country. Moreover, Rebekah is
also said to be

the sister to Laban the Syrian, the son of Bethuel, who are both called
Syrians, because they now lived in Syria: otherwise they were originally
Chaldees, being descended from Nahor the brother of Abraham, who both
were of Ur of the Chaldees; so Jacob is called a Syrian, because he
lived long in the same place, [Deu
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#005).

\(z\) Geograph. l. 5. c. 18.

[Genesis 25:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 25:21</span></span>

And Isaac entreated the Lord for his wife,.... Was very earnest and
constant in his supplications for her, as the word signifies, as is
observed by Jarchi; or, "before his wife" (a), she being present, and
joining with him in his prayers: the reason was:

because she was barren; which appeared by the length of time they had
been married, which was near twenty years, see [Gen
25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026). The Jewish writers (b) say,
that, after twenty years, Isaac took her and went with her to Mount
Moriah, to the place where he was bound, and prayed that she might
conceive; putting the Lord in mind of the promise he there made of the
multiplication of Abraham's seed, [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017),

and the Lord was entreated of him; he granted him his request; for,
though God has purposed and promised to do many things for his people,
yet he will be sought unto by them to do them for them:

and Rebekah his wife conceived; two sons at once, as it follows.

\(a\) "praesente uxore sua", Munster, Fagins. (b) Pirke Eliezer, c. 32.
Targum. Jon. in loc. Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 3. 1.

[Genesis 25:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 25:22</span></span>

And the children struggled together within her,.... When she was quick
with child: this was some time before her delivery, and was not a common
and ordinary motion felt by women in such circumstances, but an
extraordinary one; the two children in her strove with each other, as if
it was for mastery, or who should get out first before the proper time;
which not only gave her great uneasiness of mind, but pain of body: this
was an emblem of the future difference between those two children, Esau
and Jacob, and of the contentions that would be between their respective
offspring, and of the enmity and war between good and bad men in all
ages, and of the conflict between flesh and spirit in all good men:

and she said, if it be so, why am I thus? that is, either if it be so
with me as is not with others in the like condition; for, as Aben Ezra
suggests, she had inquired of other women, whether it had ever been so
with them, and they replied, no: then, says she, how comes it to pass
that it should be different with me from others? or, if those children
by struggling should kill one another, or be abortive and kill me, why
should I have been so desirous of conception? or prayed for it, as
Jarchi observes? or, if so it is, and this will be the case, "why am I
thus" (c)? this unhappy woman, to be in such circumstances, to endure so
much pain, and to no purpose? why have I conceived and carried my burden
so long, and at last cannot be delivered, or bring forth a live child?
all my prayers and pains have been in vain:

and she went to inquire of the Lord; to the school of Shem the great,
say the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem, and so Jarchi: the Arabic
writers say (d), she inquired of Melchizedek; and, according to Aben
Ezra, of some prophet, or of Abraham, who lived fifteen years after this
event: and indeed, if she inquired of any particular person of note for
religion, and as a prophet, there is none so likely as he, who was the
friend of God, and had great intimacy with him, and to whom he revealed
his secrets. But perhaps no more is meant by it, than that she went
either to some proper and private place, and prayed unto the Lord that
he would show her the reason of what had happened unto her; or to some
public place of worship, and where prayer was wont to be made, and where
she inquired by means of such as were engaged therein concerning this
matter; see [Psa 73:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#017).

\(c\) "eur ego hoc?" Tigurine version, Montanus, Fagius. (d) Patricides,
apud Hottinger, Smegma Oriental. p. 335. Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. p.
15.

[Genesis 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 25:23</span></span>

And the Lord said unto her,.... Either by one or other of the above
persons she acquainted with this affair, and entreated to seek the Lord
for her; or by an impulse upon her own mind:

two nations are in thy womb; or two persons, from whom two nations will
spring, the Edomites and Israelites, the one from Esau, the other from
Jacob:

and two manner of people shall be separated from thy bowels; different
in their bodies, complexions, manner of life, religion, as well as place
of abode:

and the one people shall be stronger than the other people: the
Edomites, the posterity of Esau, were a very potent people, and had a
succession of dukes and kings, before the Israelites, the posterity of
Jacob, made any figure in the world, and while they were slaves in
Egypt, see [Gen 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#001); though in later
times the Israelites became the stronger:

and the elder, or "greater":

shall serve the younger, or "lesser": the offspring of Esau, the eldest,
should become tributary to the posterity of Jacob, the younger; which
was verified in the times of David, when the Edomites were subdued by
him, [Sa2 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014); and still more in the
times of Hyrcanus, when the Edomites or Idumeans became one people with
the Jews, and embraced their religion (e), rather than to be
dispossessed of their country; and will have a further accomplishment in
the latter day, when the prophecies in [Oba
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/oba001.htm#018) shall be fulfilled. Of the use
which the Apostle Paul makes of this passage; see Gill on [Rom
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#011), [Rom
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#012).

\(e\) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 13. c. 9. sect. 1.

[Genesis 25:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 25:24</span></span>

And when her days to be delivered were fulfilled,.... The nine months
were up from the time of her conception; or, as the Targum of Jonathan,
when the two hundred and seventy days she went with child were
completed:

behold, there were twins in her womb; as was perceived by the midwife; a
double mercy was granted, more given than asked for; probably only one
child was asked for, but two given.

[Genesis 25:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 25:25</span></span>

And the first came out red,.... Either his body, or rather the hair it
was covered with, red; which was a sign, as Jarchi observes, that he
would be a shedder of blood, fierce and cruel as were he and his
posterity:

all over like an hairy garment; his body was all over full of hair,
which stood as thick as a garment made of hair, and was a sign of the
roughness of his disposition, as well as of the strength of his body:

and they called his name Esau; his parents, and those present at his
birth, all that saw him thus covered with hair; for he had his name not
from the colour of his body or hair; for the word does not signify
"red", but comes from a word which signifies "to make", he being a
"maker": that made his way out before his brother, or an active man as
afterwards, or because of his hair was "made" or born more like a man
than a child; and so the Targum adds,"because he was wholly perfect,
with the hair of his head and beard, and with his teeth and
grinders:''but chiefly because of his hairiness, for Esau in the Arabic
language signifies "covered" (f), as he was with hair: some say, a word
in that language signifies a hairy garment made of camel's hair (g).

\(f\) "texit", "operuit", Castel. col. 2930. (g) Vid. Stockium. p. 923.

[Genesis 25:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 25:26</span></span>

And after that came his brother out,.... Out of his mother's womb,
either by his own strength, or by the help of the midwife:

and his hand took hold on Esau's heel; to pluck him back and get out
first; and this was not casual, but was so ordered in Providence, and
had a meaning and mystery in it:

and his name was called Jacob; by his parents and others, and that for
the above reason, because he took his brother by the heel, which his
name has the signification of, and Esau has respect to in [Gen
27:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#036),

and Isaac was threescore years old when she bare them; and so it was
twenty years after he had been married to her; so long was his faith
tried and exercised about the promised seed that was to spring from him.

[Genesis 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 25:27</span></span>

And the boys grew,.... In stature, became strong and fit for business,
and betook themselves to different employments:

and Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field: whose business lay in
tilling and sowing it, which his father Isaac followed sometimes; or
rather he chose to range about the field and hunt after beasts and
birds, in which he was very expert, and contrived traps and snares to
catch them in; and this course of life was most agreeable to his temper
and disposition, being active, fierce, and cruel; according to the
Targum of Jonathan, he was also a hunter and slayer of men, Nimrod and
Henoch his son:

and Jacob was a plain man; an honest plain hearted man, whose heart and
tongue went together; a quiet man, that gave no disturbance to others; a
godly man, sincere, upright, and perfect, that had the truth of grace
and holiness in him, as well as the perfect righteousness of his
Redeemer on him:

dwelling in tents; keeping at home and attending the business of the
family, as we afterwards find him boiling pottage, [Gen
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029); or rather this denotes his
pastoral life, being a shepherd, he dwelt in tents, which could be
removed from place to place for the convenience of pasturage: Jarchi's
note is,"in the tent of Shem and in the tent of Eber;''agreeably to the
Targum of Jonathan,"a minister in the school of Shem, seeking doctrine
from the Lord;''a student there, where he resided awhile, in order to be
instructed in the doctrines of truth and righteousness.

[Genesis 25:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 25:28</span></span>

And Isaac loved Esau, because he did eat of his venison,.... Better than
Jacob, not only because he was his firstborn, but because he brought him
of the flesh of creatures, which he took in hunting, and being dressed,
were savoury food to him: it is in the original, "because venison (or
what he hunted) was in his mouth" (h), into which he put it, and was
very grateful to his taste:

but Rebekah loved Jacob; more than Esau, being more at home with her,
and of a milder disposition; and more especially being a good man, a
partaker of the grace of God, and to whom she knew by the oracle the
blessing and promise belonged.

\(h\) "quia venatio in ore ejus", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Genesis 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 25:29</span></span>

And Jacob sod pottage,.... Or boiled broth; this he did at a certain
time, for this was not his usual employment; the Targum of Jonathan
says, it was on the day in which Abraham died; and whereas this pottage
was made of lentiles, as appears from [Gen
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034); this the Jewish writers (i) say
was the food of mourners; and so this circumstance furnishes out a
reason for Jacob's boiling pottage of lentiles at this time: and hence
also they (k) gather, that Jacob and Esau were now fifteen years of age;
for Abraham was an hundred years old when Isaac was born, and Isaac was
sixty at the birth of his sons; and Abraham lived to be one hundred and
seventy five, and therefore Esau and Jacob must be fifteen years old
when he died:

and Esau came from the field, and be was faint: for want of food, and
weary with hunting, and perhaps more so, having toiled and got nothing.

\(i\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 35. (k) Seder Olam Rabba, p. 3. Shalshalet
Hakabala, fol. 5. 1.

[Genesis 25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 25:30</span></span>

And Esau said to Jacob, feed me, I pray thee, with that same red
pottage,.... Or, "with that same red (l), red"; not knowing what it was,
or what it was made of, and therefore only calls it by its colour; and
the word being doubled, may denote that it was very red; or he, being in
haste and greedy of it through hunger, repeats it in a quick and short
way: this pottage was made of lentiles, as we learn from [Gen
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034); which sort of food was much in
use with the Egyptians, Egypt abounding with lentiles; and particularly
Alexandria was famous for them, from whence they were carried into other
countries, as Austin (m) relates. The lentiles of Pelusium, a city in
Egypt, are made mention of by Virgil (n) and Martial (o), for which that
place was famous; where, as Servius says (p), lentiles were first found,
or where they grew the best; and, in the Misnah (q), an Egyptian lentil
is spoken of, as neither large nor small, but middling. Pliny (r) speaks
of two sorts of it in Egypt, and says he found it in some authors, that
eating of these makes men even tempered, good humoured, and patient; and
observes (s), that they delight in red earth, or where there is much
ruddle, or red ochre, from whence they may receive a red tincture; and
the pottage made of them is of such a colour. And Dr. Shaw (t) says,
that lentiles dissolve easily into a mass, and make a pottage or soup of
a chocolate colour, much used in the eastern countries: and, as
Scheuchzer observes (u), coffee is of the bean kind, and not unlike a
lentil, and makes a red decoction. The colour of it took with Esau, as
well as it was sweet and savoury, as Athenaeus (w) reports; and
especially, he being faint and hungry, desires his brother to give him
some of it, and even to feed him with it:

for I am faint; so faint that he could not feed himself, or however
wanted immediate sustenance, and could not wait till other food he had
used to live upon was dressed:

therefore was his name called Edom; not from his red hair, but from this
red pottage; for Edom signifies "red", and is the same with the names
Pyrrhus and Rufus.

\(l\) "de rufo, rufo isto", Pagninus, Montanus, Drusius; so Piscator,
Schmidt. (m) Comment. in Psal. xlvi. tom. 8. p. 174. (n) Virgil.
Georgic. l. 1. ver. 228. (o) Martial. l. 13. epigr. 9. (p) In Virgil. ut
supra. (Georgic. l. 1. ver. 228) (q) Misn. Celim. c. 17. sect. 8. (r)
Nat. Hist. l. 18. c. 12. (s) lbid. c. 17. (t) Travels, p. 140. Ed. 2.
(u) Physica Sacra, vol. 1. p. 78. (w) Deipno Sophist. l. 4. c. 14, 15.

[Genesis 25:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 25:31</span></span>

And Jacob said, sell me this day thy birthright. Which had many
privileges annexed to it, as honour and authority in the family next to
parents; a double portion of inheritance; some say the exercise of
priesthood, but that is questioned; the parental blessing, and
especially in this the promises of the Messiah, and of inheritance of
the land of Canaan, and which was typical of the heavenly inheritance:
all which Rebekah knew by the divine oracle were designed for Jacob, and
which no doubt she had acquainted him with, and advised him to deal with
his brother about parting with his birthright as he had opportunity; and
very likely they had talked together about it before in a distant
manner, and Esau had shown some indifference to his right, and made no
great account of it; and now, an opportunity offering to get him in the
mind to part with it, he takes it, and moves for a sale of it
immediately, at once, without any more delay, and even before he had his
pottage; thus taking the advantage of his brother's necessity: or, sell
it me "as the day" (x), let the bargain be as clear as the day, as
Jarchi interprets it; let it be made in plain and full terms, that there
may be no dispute about it hereafter, or any revocation of it: but the
former sense seems best, as appears from [Gen
25:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#033), where the same way of speaking
is used.

\(x\) "juxta hunc diem", Fagius, Drusius.

[Genesis 25:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 25:32</span></span>

And Esau said, behold, I am at the point to die,.... Or, "going to die"
(y), going the way of all flesh; which he might say on account of the
common frailty and mortality of man, and the brevity of life at most, or
by reason of the danger of life he was always exposed to in hunting of
wild beasts, as Aben Ezra suggests; or rather, because of his present
hunger and faintness, which, unless immediately relieved, must issue in
death. Dr. Lightfoot (z) thinks it was now the time of the famine spoken
of in the following chapter, [Gen
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#001),

and what profit shall this birthright do to me? a dying man, or when
dead? In such a case, all the privileges of it in course would devolve
on Jacob; and as for the promises of the Messiah, and of the land of
Canaan, made to Abraham and his seed, these seemed to be at a great
distance, and if he lived ever so long might never enjoy them; and
therefore judged it most advisable to consult his present interest, and
have something in hand, than to trust to futurity; and, by thus saying,
he signified an entire willingness to part with his birthright on the
terms proposed.

\(y\) "vadens ad moriendum", Montanus. (z) Works, vol. 1. p. 15, 696.

[Genesis 25:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 25:33</span></span>

And Jacob said, swear unto me this day,.... For the more sure and
certain confirmation of the bargain; and by this oath oblige himself to
let him peaceably enjoy the birthright, nor seek to revoke it, or
dispute it with him, or disturb him in the possession of it:

and he sware unto him; that he would abide by the bargain, and never
give him any trouble on that account; and hereby he made it over to
Jacob as firm as it could be; God himself being appealed to as a witness
of it, whose will it was that Jacob should have the birthright, the
blessing, and the promises:

and he sold his birthright unto Jacob; with all the privileges and
appurtenances of it, and that for one morsel of meat, as in [Heb
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#016).

[Genesis 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 25:34</span></span>

Then Jacob gave Esau bread and pottage of lentiles,.... This shows what
the pottage was made of, of which see [Gen
25:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#030); and that Jacob gave to Esau
more than he asked and bargained for, bread as well as pottage; but
neither of them until the bargain was made and swore to, and be had got
the birthright secured unto him; as cunning as Esau, and as simple and
plain as Jacob were, the latter outwitted the former, and was too crafty
for him:

and he did eat, and drink, and rose up, and went his way; following his
former course of life, without any remorse of conscience, reflection of
mind, or repentance for what he had done; for though he afterwards
carefully sought the blessing with tears he had parted with, yet not
until his father was upon his deathbed, [Heb
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#017),

thus Esau despised his birthright; by setting it at so mean a price, and
by not repenting of it when he had so done; having no regard especially
to spiritual blessings, to the Messiah, and to the heavenly inheritance,
eternal glory and happiness by Christ: the Jerusalem Targum adds,"and he
despised his part in the world to come, and denied the resurrection of
the dead;''and the Targum of Jonathan on [Gen
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#029) says, that"on that day he
committed five transgressions; he performed strange worship (or
committed idolatry), he shed innocent blood, he lay with a virgin
betrothed, he denied the life of the world to come (or a future state),
and despised the birthright;''which confirms the character the apostle
gives of him, that he was a fornicator and a profane person, [Heb
12:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#016).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 26](gen026)

</div>
