<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen007)  [Next](gen009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 8

This chapter gives an account of the going off of the waters from the
earth, and of the entire deliverance of Noah, and those with him in the
ark, from the flood, when all the rest were destroyed: after an one
hundred and fifty days a wind is sent over the earth, the fountains of
the deep and the windows of heaven are stopped, the waters go off
gradually, and the ark rests on Mount Ararat, [Gen
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001.md) two months and thirteen days after
that the tops of the mountains were seen, [Gen
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#005.md) and forty days after the
appearance of them, Noah sent forth first a raven, and then a dove, and
that a second time, to know more of the abatement of the waters, [Gen
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#006.md). When Noah had been in the ark ten
months and thirteen days, he uncovered it, and the earth was dry, yet
not so dry as to be fit for him to go out upon, until near two months
after, [Gen 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013.md) when he had an order
from God to go out of the ark, with all that were with him, which was
accordingly obeyed, [Gen 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#015.md) upon
which he offered sacrifice by way of thankfulness for his great
deliverance, which was accepted by the Lord; who promised him not to
curse the earth any more, nor to drown it, but that it should remain,
and as long as it did there would be the constant revolutions of the
seasons of the year, and of day and night, [Gen
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020.md).

[Genesis 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 8:1</span></span>

And God remembered Noah, and every living thing, and all the cattle that
was with him in the ark,.... Not that God had forgotten Noah, for he
does not, and cannot forget his creatures, properly speaking; but this
is said after the manner of men, and as it might have seemed to Noah,
who having heard nothing of him for five months, and having been perhaps
longer in the ark than he expected, might begin to think that he was
forgotten of God; but God remembered him, and his covenant with him, and
the promise that he had made to him, that he and his family, and all the
living creatures in the ark, should be preserved alive during the flood,
[Gen 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#017.md) and God may be said
particularly to remember him, and them, when he began to take measures
for removing the waters from the earth, as he did by sending a wind,
next mentioned: and thus God's helping his people when in difficulties
and in distress, and delivering out of them, is called his remembrance
of them; and he not only remembered Noah and his family, who are
included in him, but every living creature also, which is expressed; for
as the creatures suffered in the flood for the sins of men, so those in
the ark were remembered and preserved for the sake of Noah and his
family, and the world of men that should spring from them:

and God made a wind to pass over the earth, and the waters assuaged; not
a stormy blustering one, that would have endangered the ark, but a
gentle, hot, drying one; which stopped the increase of the waters, and
made them less, and both drove away the rain, as the north wind does, as
this perhaps was (r), and caused the waters to move wards their proper
channels and receptacles: this was the work of God, who has the command
of the winds and waters, brings the former out of his storehouses, and
restrains the latter at his pleasure; and this wind had this effect to
assuage the waters, not from its own nature, but was attended with the
mighty power of God to make it effectual, in an extraordinary manner:
and it was, as the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem call it, "a wind of
mercies", or a merciful wind; or a wind of comforts, as Jarchi; for so
it was to Noah and his family, and to all the creatures, since it served
to dry up the waters of the flood, and caused them to subside.

\(r\) ------------for clouds were fled, Driv'n by a keen north wind,
that, blowing dry, Wrinkled the face of Deluge, as decay'd. Milton, B.
11. l. 841, &c.

[Genesis 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 8:2</span></span>

The fountains also of the deep, and the windows of heaven, were
stopped,.... The passages which let out the subterraneous waters in
great quantity upon the earth, and the clouds of heaven, which poured
down water upon it like spouts, were stopped from sending forth any
more, as they had from the first of the flood unto one hundred and fifty
days from thence: Jarchi observes, that it is not said that "all" the
fountains of the deep, as when they were broken up, [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011.md) because some of them were left
open for the use and benefit of the world; besides, some must be left
for the return of the waters:

and the rain from heaven was restrained: which seems to confirm what has
been before observed, that after the rain of forty days and nights it
ceased not to rain, more or less, though not so vehemently, until the
end of an hundred and fifty days, and then it entirely ceased.

[Genesis 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 8:3</span></span>

And the waters returned from off the earth continually,.... Or "going
and returning" (s); they went off from the earth, and returned to their
proper places appointed for them; some were dried up by the wind, and
exhaled by the sun into the air: and others returned to their channels
and cavities in the earth, or soaked into it:

and after the end of the hundred and fifty days, the waters were abated;
or began to abate, as Jarchi and the Vulgate Latin version; which days
are to be reckoned from the beginning of the flood, including the forty
days' rain; though Jarchi reckons them from the time of the ceasing of
it; so that there were from the beginning of the flood one hundred and
ninety days; six months, and ten days of the year of the flood now past;
and in this he is followed by Dr. Lightfoot (t): but the former
reckoning seems best, and agrees better with what follows.

\(s\) , "eundo et redeundo", Pagninus, Montanus. (t) Works, vol. 1. p.
6.

[Genesis 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 8:4</span></span>

And the ark rested in the seventh month, on the seventeenth day of the
month,.... That is, five months after the flood began, and when the
waters began to decrease; for this is not the seventh month of the
flood, but of the year, which being reckoned from Tisri, or the autumnal
equinox, must be the month Nisan, which answers to part of our March,
and part of April; and so the Targum of Jonathan explains it,"this is
the month Nisan;''but Jarchi makes it to be the month Sivan, which
answers to part of May, and part of June, taking it to be the seventh
month from Cisleu, when the forty days' rain ceased; in which he is
followed by Dr. Lightfoot (u); and according to Bishop Usher (w) the
seventeenth day of the seventh month, on which the ark rested, was
Wednesday the sixth of May: and then it rested

upon the mountains of Ararat; that is, on one of them, for Ararat is
said to be a long ridge of mountains like the Alps, or the Pyrenean
mountains; which, as Sir Walter Raleigh (x) thinks, are the same which
run through Armenia, Mesopotamia, Assyria, &c. and are by Pliny (y)
called Taurus. But what is now called Ararat, and by the Armenians
Messis or Macis, and by the Turks Augri-daugh or Agrida, is a single
mountain, and is so high that it overtops all the mountains thereabout;
and that which makes it seem so very high is, that it stands by itself
in the form of a sugar loaf, in the middle of one of the greatest plains
one can see; it has two tops, one greater, and the smaller is most sharp
pointed of the two (z). The Vulgate Latin version renders it the
mountains of Armenia; and so Ararat in the Septuagint of [Isa
37:38](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#038.md) is rendered Armenia, and in our
version also; and it is the more commonly received opinion, that Ararat
was a mountain there; and this agrees with the testimonies of various
Heathen writers, which are produced by Josephus and Eusebius. Berosus
the Chaldean (a) says,"it is reported that in Armenia, on a mountain of
the Cordyaeans, there is part of a ship, the pitch of which some take
off, and carry about with them, and use it as an amulet to avert
evils.''And Nicholas of Damascus (b) relates, that in Minyas in Armenia
is an huge mountain called Baris, to which, as the report is, many fled
at the flood, and were saved; and that a certain person, carried in an
ark or chest, struck upon the top of it, and that the remains of the
timber were preserved a long time after; and, adds he, perhaps he may be
the same that Moses, the lawgiver of the Jews, writes of. Now this
mountain seems plainly to have its name from the ark of Noah, for a
boat, or ship, is, with the Egyptians, called Baris. Herodotus (c) gives
a large account of ships they call by this name; and the boat in which
Charon is said to carry the dead bodies over the lake Acherusia, near
Memphis, is said by Diodorus Siculus (d) to have the same name. Abydenus
the Assyrian (e) tells us, that"Saturn having foretold to Sisithrus,
that there would be a vast quantity of rain on the fifteenth of the
month Daesius, he immediately sailed to the Armenians; and that the ship
being driven to Armenia, the inhabitants made amulets of the wood of it,
which they carried about their necks, as antidotes against
diseases.''And hence Melo (f), who wrote against the Jews, suggests, as
if the deluge did not reach Armenia; for he says,"at the deluge a man
that had escaped with his sons went from Armenia, being driven out of
his possession by those of the country, and passing over the
intermediate region, came into the mountainous part of Syria, which was
desolate.''And with what Berosus says of a mountain of the Cordyaeans,
in Armenia, agree the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, and the Syriac
and Arabic versions, who all render the words here the mountains of
Cardu or Carda: from the resting of the ark on this day on the mountains
of Ararat, Jarchi concludes, and Dr. Lightfoot (g) after him, that the
ark drew eleven cubits water, which, according to them, thus appears; on
the first day of the month Ab, the mountain tops were first seen, and
then the waters had fallen fifteen cubits, which they had been sixty
days in doing, namely, from the first day of Sivan, and so they had
abated the proportion of one cubit in four days: by this account we
find, that on the sixteenth day of Sivan they had abated but four
cubits, and yet on the next day, the seventeenth, the ark resteth on a
hill, where the waters yet lay eleven cubits above it.

\(u\) Works. vol. 1. p. 8. (w) Annales Vet. Test. p. 4. (x) History of
the World, B. 1. ch. 7. sect. 13. (y) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 27. (z)
Cartwright's Preacher's Travels, p. 32. Tournefort's Voyage to the
Levant, vol. 3. p. 177, 183, 186. (a) Apud Joseph. Antiqu. l. 1. c. 3.
sect. 6. (b) Apud ib. (c) Euterpe sive, l. 2. c. 96. (d) Bibliothec. l.
1. p. 87. (e) Apud Euseb. Evangel. Praepar. l. 9. c. 12. p. 414, 415.
(f) Apud ib. c. 19. p. 420. (g) Ut supra, (Works. vol. 1.) p. 8.

[Genesis 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 8:5</span></span>

And the waters decreased continually until the tenth month,.... That is,
from the seventeenth of the seventh month, to the first of the tenth
month, a space of two months and thirteen days, and being summer time,
through the heat of the sun, they decreased apace:

in the tenth month, on the first day of the month, were the tops of the
mountains seen; not the tenth month of the flood, but of the year; the
month Tammuz, as the Targum of Jonathan, and answers to part of June,
and part of July; and the first day of this month, according to Bishop
Usher (h), was Sunday the nineteenth of July: but according to Jarchi,
whom Dr. Lightfoot (i) follows, this was the month Ab, which answers to
July and August, the tenth from Marchesvan, when the rain began.

\(h\) Ut supra. (Annales Vet. Test. p. 4.) (i) Ut supra. (Works, vol 1.
p. 6.)

[Genesis 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 8:6</span></span>

And it came to pass at the end of forty days,.... From the appearance of
the mountains, that is, from the first day of the tenth month, to forty
days after; and being ended, this must be the eleventh day of the
eleventh month, the month Ab, which answers to July and August; and
according to Bishop Usher (k) it was Friday the twenty eighth of August:

that Noah opened the window of the ark which he had made; of which See
Gill on [Gen 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#016.md).

\(k\) Ut supra. (Annales Vet. Test. p. 4.)

[Genesis 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 8:7</span></span>

And he sent forth a raven,.... That by it he might make his observation,
how high or low the waters were upon the earth; and the rather he sent
out the raven, a bird of prey, which feeds on carrion, that if the earth
had been dry, the smell of the dead carcasses would have invited it to
go far off from the ark, and not return; but if not, he would see it
again:

which went forth to and fro, until the waters were dried up from the
earth; or, "and it went forth, going forth and returning" (l); it went
forth out of the ark, and returned, but might not go into it, but went
forth again, and then returned; and thus it continued going backwards
and forwards, until the waters were dried up, when it returned no more:
the Septuagint version is, "and it returned not"; and so some Jewish
writers (m) say, it found the carcass of a man on the top of the
mountains, and sat upon it for food, and returned not: hence came the
fable of Apollo's sending a raven to fetch water, while he was
sacrificing, which lighting on a large corn field, yet green, and being
willing to enjoy some grains of it, waited till it was ripe, and
neglected its orders (n); and hence is the proverb, "corvus nuntius".
Some make this creature to be an emblem of the law, first sent forth,
but brought no good tidings of the waters of God's wrath being assuaged,
but worketh wrath, and is the ministration of condemnation and death:
rather it is an emblem of unregenerate men, who are, like it, black
through original sin and actual transgressions; are unclean and polluted
in all the powers and faculties of their souls; are hateful, hating one
another, and live in carnal and sensual lusts pleasures.

\(l\) "et exiit egrediende et redeundo", Pagninus, Montanus, Schmidt.
(m) Pirke Eliezer, c. 23. (n) Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 1. c. 47.

[Genesis 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 8:8</span></span>

Also he sent forth a dove from him,.... Seven days after he had sent out
the raven, as in [Gen 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#010.md).

to see if the waters were abated from off the face of the ground; for
the dove is a creature that delights in cleanness, flies low, and goes
far off, so that if it returned not again, he might conclude that the
waters were gone off the earth; but being a sociable creature, and
familiar to men, and especially loving to its mate, if they were not
gone off, it would certainly return again. This some take to be an
emblem of the Gospel, bringing the good tidings of peace, pardon,
righteousness and salvation by Jesus Christ: rather it is an emblem of a
sensible sinner, and true believer in Christ, being mournful, timorous,
swift, modest, and affectionate; such persons, like doves of the valley,
mourn for their iniquities; tremble at the sight of their sins, and the
curses of the law, at the apprehension of divine wrath, at the awful
judgment of God; and are fearful lest Christ should not receive them, to
whom they swiftly fly for refuge, as doves to their windows; and who are
modest, meek, and lowly, and affectionate to Christ, and one another.
The Targum of Jonathan calls this an house dove, or tame one: hence,
perhaps, came the practice of making use of doves as messengers to carry
letters from place to place (o).

\(o\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 37.

[Genesis 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 8:9</span></span>

But the dove found no rest for the sole of her foot, and she returned
unto him into the ark,.... It being a creature that feeds upon seeds it
picks off from the ground, and loving cleanness, it could find no place
where it could alight, and have food to live upon, and retain its
cleanness; for though the tops of the mountains were clear of the
waters, yet they might be muddy and filthy with what the waters had
raised up in them, or left upon them; and therefore it returned to Noah
again, and not only like the raven unto the ark, but into it:

for the waters were on the face of the whole earth: there was no place
dry, and so neither food nor footing for this creature; and which was an
emblem of a sensible sinner, who finds no rest in anything short of
Christ; not in worldly enjoyments; nor in external duties, not in
hearing, reading, praying, fasting, nor in external humiliation and
tears; nor in the law, and in the works of it; nor in natural descent,
nor in education principles, nor in a profession of religion, and
subjection to ordinances; only in Christ, where it finds rest from the
burden and guilt of sin, and the tyrannical power of it; from the
bondage, curse, and condemnation of the law, and from a sense of divine
wrath and fear of it; and though not from afflictions, yet it finds rest
in Christ amidst them:

then he put forth his hand and took her, and pulled her in unto him into
the ark: she hovered about it, and got near the window, which Noah
opened and took her in; which may represent the gracious reception
sensible souls meet with from Christ, who apply to him; he kindly
embraces them, and they find room in his heart and affections, fulness
of everything they want, and security from all danger.

[Genesis 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 8:10</span></span>

And he stayed yet other seven days,.... As he had stayed seven days
between the sending out of the raven and the dove, so he stayed seven
days more after he had sent out the dove, and it returned to him,
waiting patiently for his deliverance, and the signs of it; though he
could have been glad to have known its near approach, for which he made
the experiments be did:

and again he sent forth the dove out of the ark; very probably the
selfsame dove he had sent out before.

[Genesis 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 8:11</span></span>

And the dove came in to him in the evening,.... It having been out all
day delighting itself in a free air, and perching upon the trees, but
yet not finding sufficient food, or a proper lodging, it returned to
Noah at the evening for food and dwelling in the ark:

and, lo, in her mouth was an olive leaf plucked off: which might easily
be done, and even an "olive branch", as the word sometimes signifies,
and is by some (p) rendered; for it being now the summer season, young
branches sprouted out, which being tender, were easily cropped: the
Targum of Jonathan adds,"which it had took from the mount of
Olives;''but there is no necessity to suppose it went so far from the
ark, since Assyria, a country nearer, was a land of olive oil, like that
of Judea; [Kg2 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#032.md) and besides,
olives grew in Armenia itself, where the ark rested. Gogarene, in
Armenia, is said by Strabo (q) to produce olive trees; though a modern
author says (r)"I do not see where the dove which was sent out of the
ark could find an olive branch, if the ark be supposed to have rested on
Mount Ararat, or any of the mountains in Armenia; for this sort of trees
is not found hereabout, where the species must be lost, and yet olives
are known to be a kind of trees which never die:''but the above accounts
show it to be otherwise in ancient times:

so Noah knew the waters were abated from off the earth: by this he
perceived not only that they were gone off the mountains, but the lower
grounds, at least the hills on which olive trees delight to grow; and
yet that they were only abated, and not entirely gone off, since the
dove returned to him: this dove sent out the second time, and returning,
may be considered as an emblem of a Gospel minister, comparable to a
dove, for the dove like gifts of the Spirit of God, by which he is
qualified for his work, and for his simplicity, harmlessness, meekness,
and humility; and the olive leaf in its mouth may be an emblem of the
Gospel, which is from Christ, the good olive; is the Gospel of peace,
which an olive branch is a symbol of, proclaiming and publishing peace
and reconciliation by Christ; and as that is ever green, the Gospel
always continues, and is the everlasting Gospel, and which was brought,
and more fully and clearly dispensed in the evening of the world; and by
it, it is known that the waters of divine wrath are assuaged, and the
people of God may be assured they will never return to come upon them.

\(p\) "ramum olivae", V. L. so Ainsworth, see Neh. viii. 15. (q)
Geograph. l. 11. p. 363. (r) Tournefort's Voyage to the Levant, vol. 3.
p. 173.

[Genesis 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 8:12</span></span>

And he stayed yet other seven days,.... After the dove had returned:

and sent forth the dove; the same dove again:

which returned not again unto him any more: the earth being dry, it
found rest for the sole of its feet, sufficient food to eat, and a
proper place for its habitation; and liking to be at liberty, and in the
open air, chose not to return to the ark, even though its mate was
there: of those birds sent out, the Heathen writers make mention:
Abydenus says (s), that Sisithrus, the same with Noah, sent out birds
making an experiment to see whether the earth was emersed out of the
water, which returned again to him; and after them he sent out others;
and having done so three times, obtained what he wished for, since the
birds returned with their wings full of clay or mud; and so Josephus (t)
says, the dove which brought the olive leaf was all over with clay or
mud: and Plutarch (u) makes particular mention of the dove, and says
that, according to the mythologists, a dove was let out of the ark; and
that her going out was to Deucalion, (the same with Noah) a sign of fair
weather, and her return of foul: and the story that Lucian (w) tells of
a golden dove upon the head of a statue in the temple of Hierapolis,
supposed to be Deucalion's, seems plainly to refer to this dove of Noah;
for the report, he says, was, that this golden dove flew away twice in a
year, at the commemoration there made of the flood, by pouring out
abundance of water into a chasm or cleft of the earth, then not very
large; and which, it was told him, was formerly a very great one, and
swallowed up all the flood that drowned the world.

\(s\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 12. p. 414, 415. (t)
Antiqu. l. 1. c. 3. p. 5. (u) De Solert. Animal. (w) De Dea Syria.

[Genesis 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 8:13</span></span>

And it came to pass, in the six hundred and first year,.... Of Noah's
life, and so the Septuagint adds, in the first month:

the first day of the month; so that it was the first day of the year,
New Year's Day, and a joyful one it was to Noah and his family, when
they saw dry ground; which they had not seen for above ten months:
according to R. Joshua, this was the month Nisan, which was the first
month with the Jews on sacred accounts; but according to R. Eliezer it
was the month of Tisri, as Jarchi observes, which was their first month
on civil accounts, and was their most ancient way of reckoning; and so
the Targum of Jonathan explains it, adding, and Tisri; which answers to
part of September, and part of October; and according to Bishop Usher
(x), this day was Friday, October 23, A. M. 1657:

the waters were dried up from off the earth: by the wind that continued
to pass over it, and by the sun, which exhaled great quantities of it
throughout the whole summer season; as it was from the end of the one
hundred days, when the wind was first made, and the waters began to
assuage to this time; as well as also by their soaking into the earth,
and by returning to the cavities and receptacles in it:

and Noah removed the covering of the ark, and looked; not the roof of
it, at least not the whole, only a board or two; though perhaps this was
a covering made of skins, that was thrown over the ark, like that which
was put over the tabernacle of Moses, and was made of skins, [Exo
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#014.md) where the same word is used as
here: the use of this might be to hang over the window and defend it
from the rain; so that the uncovering of the ark was only putting by, or
turning up this covering, that he might be able more clearly to see, out
of the window, how things were:

and, behold, the face of the ground was dry; the ground or surface of
the earth looked dry; but was not so dry and hard as to bear heavy
bodies, or the foot to tread on it, being soft and tender, through the
water so long upon it, and had left mud and slime, not yet sufficiently
hardened by the wind and sun to walk upon.

\(x\) Ut supra. (Annales Vet. Test. p. 4.)

[Genesis 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 8:14</span></span>

And in the second month, on the seven and twentieth day of the
month,.... This was the month Marchesvan, as the Targum of Jonathan,
which answers to part of our October, and part of our November; though
according to Bishop Usher (y), this day was Friday the eighteenth of
December, A. M. 1657; it was on the seventeenth of this month that Noah
went into the ark, [Gen 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011.md) so that
be was in it twelve months and ten days, according to a solar year; but
if the reckoning is made according to Jewish months, six of which
consisted of thirty days, and six of twenty nine only, then the twelve
months made but three hundred and fifty four days, add to which eleven
days to the twenty seventh, fully ended, it makes three hundred and
sixty five days; so that he was in the ark just a full year, according
to the course of the sun; but it seems very plain that the months here
reckoned consisted of thirty days, since the one hundred and fifty, days
when the waters abated are reckoned, from the seventeenth day of the
second month, to the seventeenth day of the seventh month; which make
exactly five months, and allow thirty days to a month: and at this time,
when Noah had waited almost two months, after he had removed the
covering of the ark:

was the earth dried; so that it was fit to walk upon, and was become
commodious both for man and beast: a different word from that in the
preceding verse is here used for "dry", this being a different kind, or,
however, a greater degree of dryness than the other.

\(y\) Ut supra. (Annales Vet. Test. p. 4.)

[Genesis 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 8:15</span></span>

And God spake unto Noah, saying,.... Whether in a dream or vision, or by
an articulate voice, appearing in an human form, or by an impulse on his
mind, is not certain; however, the Lord spoke so to him, that he heard
him and understood him: it was, no doubt, very rejoicing to him, since
he had not heard his voice for a year or more, at least that we read of;
and what he said to him was as follows.

[Genesis 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 8:16</span></span>

Go forth of the ark,.... Though the earth was dry and fit to be
inhabited, yet be would not go out without orders, as he had to go in;
which he waited for before he would, and now he has them:

thou and thy wife, and thy sons, and thy sons' wives, with thee: the
Jewish writers (z) observe, that the manner of Noah and his family
coming out of the ark is different from that of their going into it:
when they went into it then went the men by themselves, and the women by
themselves, and so continued apart in the ark, the use of the marriage
bed being forbidden them, being a time of distress; but now when they
came out they are coupled together, signifying that they were now free
to cohabit together.

\(z\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 23. Jarchi in loc.

[Genesis 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 8:17</span></span>

Bring forth with thee every living thing that is with thee,.... There is
a various reading of the word for "bring forth"; according to the
margin, as Jarchi observes, the sense is, order them to come forth; and
according to the Scripture, if they will not, oblige them to come:

of all flesh, both of fowl, and of cattle, and of every creeping thing
that creepeth upon the earth; for of each of these there were some that
went with him into the ark, and continued there:

that they may breed abundantly in the earth, and be fruitful, and
multiply upon the earth, for which end they were preserved in the ark.
Jarchi observes, it is said "on the earth", not in the ark, which shows
he thinks that birds and beasts were not allowed to couple, and that
they did not breed there. It is a question with some, how the creatures,
which were only in Asia at their coming out of the ark, could spread
themselves all over the earth; particularly how they could get into
islands, and especially into America: to which it may be answered, that
this might be done by many of them, by swimming over narrow seas, for
some wild creatures will swim whole days and nights together, when they
are forced to it; and by men's carrying others in vessels to distant and
different parts, on one account or another, either for profit or
pleasure; and especially, what is it the power and providence of God
cannot do, who could not be at a loss for ways and means to replenish a
world in all the parts of it he had made desolate, when it was his
pleasure?(Most creationists think the earth entered an ice age after the
flood. This would make the sea level lower than it is today. If the
average sea level was lowered by only six hundred feet, all the major
continents would be connected by land bridges. Animals could easily
migrate to any continent. Ed.)

[Genesis 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 8:18</span></span>

And Noah went forth,.... Being obedient to the divine command, and no
doubt with great pleasure in his countenance, and with a heart full of
thankfulness for so great a deliverance:

and his sons, and his wife, and his sons' wives with him: in all eight
persons, and no more were saved in the ark, as Peter observes, [Pe1
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#020) and the Arabic writers say (a.md),
Noah and his sons built a city near the place where they came out of the
ark, and called it Themanin, giving this as a reason of the name, we are
eight, that is, who have escaped; so Berosus says (b), that the earth
being dried of the waters, there were then only eight men in Armenia,
from whence all mankind sprung.

\(a\) Elmacleus, p. 12. Patricides, p. 10. apud Hottinger. Smegma
Oriental. l. 1. c. 8. p. 282. (b) Hist. l. 2. fol. 11. 1.

[Genesis 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 8:19</span></span>

Every beast, every creeping thing, and every fowl, and whatsoever
creepeth upon the earth,.... All went out, not one was left, and they
went out

after their kind; not in a confused disorderly manner, mixing with one
another; but as they went in by pairs, male and female of every sort, so
they came forth in like manner, or, "according to their families" (c);
by which it seems as if the creatures did breed in the ark, and had
their families of young ones; and which is the sense of some in Aben
Ezra, and he himself thinks it not foreign, though he interprets it as
we do, and as the Greek version does, "after their kind": thus they

went forth out of the ark; everyone with his mate, in order to procreate
and multiply upon the earth.

\(c\) "juxta familias suas", Tigurine version, Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Genesis 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 8:20</span></span>

And Noah builded an altar unto the Lord,.... Not an house for himself
and his family, but an altar for God; his first and greatest concern
being for the glory of God, and not for the temporal good of himself and
his: this altar was erected, and devoted to the service of God; it was
built according to his will, and by his direction: Noah's view was to
renew the worship of God, preserve and propagate it by his example; and
this was done by way of thanksgiving to God for his wonderful
preservation of him, and was also propitiatory and typical of Christ:
the Jewish writers (d) say, this was the altar on which Adam sacrificed,
when expelled the garden of Eden, and on which Cain and Abel offered;
and being demolished by the flood, was rebuilt by Noah, which is not at
all probable; it is much more likely what Aben Ezra says, that it was
built on one of the mountains of Ararat, and that as Noah took the first
opportunity, so he built it in the first place he came to, or at least
not far from the place where he came out of the ark:

and took of every clean beast, and of every clean fowl, and offered
burnt offerings on the altar; the clean beasts were the bullock, the
sheep, and goat, and the clean fowl, the turtle and young pigeon, one of
each sort at least was taken. The Targum of Jonathan says, he offered
four upon the altar: these were typical of Christ; the bullock or heifer
might denote his strength, the sheep or lamb his patience and
harmlessness, the turtle or dove his meekness; and being burnt
offerings, may signify the painful and dolorous sufferings of Christ,
when the wrath of God was poured on him like fire.

\(d\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 51. 3, 4. Targum Jon. in loc. Pirke Eliezer, c.
23.

[Genesis 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 8:21</span></span>

And the Lord smelled a sweet savour,.... Or a "savour of rest" (e); he
was delighted and well pleased with his sacrifice, which was offered up
in the faith of the sacrifice of Christ; the apostle says, "is for a
sweetsmelling savour", [Eph 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002.md)
referring to this passage; that being a satisfaction to the justice of
God, an appeasing of his wrath, and a propitiation for the sins of men:

and the Lord said in his heart; within himself; it was awhile a secret
there, but Noah being a prophet, as Aben Ezra observes, he revealed it
to him, or "to his heart" (f), that is, to the heart of Noah, as some
interpret it, he spoke comfortably to him, as follows, when the Jewish
writers (g) say he stretched out his right hand and swore, agreeably to
[Isa 54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009.md).

I will not again curse the ground for man's sake, or drown it for the
sin of man, as he had cursed it for the sin of Adam, and which continued
till this time; but now was taken off, and it became more fruitful, and
very probably by means of the waters which had been so long upon it, and
had left a fructifying virtue in it, as the waters of the Nile do in
Egypt. Some interpret the phrase, "for man's sake", for the man Christ's
sake, for the sake of his sacrifice, of which Noah's was a type, and the
sense be, that God would no more curse the earth; for by his sacrifice
the curse of the law is removed, with respect to his people; they are
redeemed from it, and shall inherit that new earth, of which this earth,
renewed after the flood, was a type, in which there will be no more
curse, [Rev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001.md) which sense, though
evangelical, cannot be admitted, because of the reason following, unless
the first word be rendered "though", as it may:

for the imagination of man's heart is evil from his youth; his nature is
depraved, his heart is corrupt, the thoughts of it evil, yea, the
imagination of it, and of them, is sinful, and that originally, even
from his birth; from the time he is shook out of his mother's womb, as
Jarchi interprets the phrase: man is conceived in sin, and shapen in
iniquity, and is a transgressor from the womb, and so a child of wrath,
and deserving of the curse of the law upon himself, and all that belong
to him; and yet this is given as a reason why God will not any more
curse the ground for his sake: that which was a reason for destroying
the earth, is now one against it, see [Gen
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005.md) which may be reconciled thus, God
for this reason destroyed the earth once, for an example, and to display
his justice; but such is his clemency and mercy, that he will do it no
more to the end of the world; considering that man has brought himself
into such a condition, that he cannot but sin, it is natural to him from
his birth; his nature is tainted with it, his heart is full of it, and
all his thoughts and imaginations are wicked and sinful, from whence
continually flow a train of actual sins and transgressions; so that if
God was to curse and drown the world as often as man sins, he must be
continually doing it; for the words may be rendered, "though the
imagination of man's heart is evil", &c. (h); yet I will not do it; and
so they are expressive of the super abounding grace of God over
abounding sin:

neither will I again smite any more everything living, as I have done;
this hinders not but that there might be, as has been since, partial
calamities, or particular judgments on individual persons, towns, and
cities, as those of Sodom and Gomorrah, or partial inundations, but not
a general deluge, or an universal destruction of the world and creatures
in it, at least not by water, as has been, but by fire, as will be; for
that the earth will have an end, at least as to its present nature,
form, and use, may be concluded from the following words.

\(e\) "odorem quietis", Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, &c. (f) "ad cor
suum", Montanus, Tigurine version; "prophetae suo", Arab. (g) Jarchi in
loc. Pirke Eliezer, c. 23. (h) "quamvis", Piscator; so Ainsworth.

[Genesis 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 8:22</span></span>

While the earth remaineth,.... Which as to its substance may remain for
ever, [Ecc 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#004.md) yet as to its form and
quality will be changed; that and all in it will be burnt up; there will
be an end of all things in it, for so the words are in the original, "as
yet all the days of the earth", or "while all the days of the earth" are
(i); which shows that there is a time fixed for its continuance, and
that this time is but short, being measured by days: but however, as
long as it does continue:

seedtime and harvest, and cold and heat, and summer and winter, and day
and night, shall not cease; as they had done, or seemed to do during the
flood; for the year past there had been no seedtime nor harvest, and it
must have been for the most part damp and cold, through the rains, and
the abundance of water on earth, that the difference of seasons was not
very discernible; as neither of days and nights at some times,
especially when the clouds were so black and thick over the heavens,
that neither sun, moon, or stars could be seen; and such floods of water
continually pouring down, that it must be difficult to know when it was
day, and when night; but for the future it is promised, that these
should not cease as long as the world stands: "seedtime and harvest";
the time of sowing seed in the earth, and the time of gathering in the
fruits of it when ripe, so necessary for the sustenance of man and
beast: once in seven years, and once in fifty years indeed, these ceased
in the land of Judea, while the people of Israel resided there; but then
this was not general all the world over, in other places there were
seedtime and harvest: "and cold and heat, and summer and winter"; in
some places indeed there is but little cold, in others but little heat,
and the difference of summer and winter is not so discernible in some
places as in others, yet there is of all these in the world in general.
According to Jarchi, "cold" signifies a more severe season than
"winter", or the severer part of the winter; and "heat" a hotter season
than the summer, or the hotter part of it. The Jews observe, that the
seasons of the year are divided into six parts, and two months are to be
allowed to each part; which Lyra, from them, and chiefly from Jarchi,
thus gives,"to seedtime the last half of September, all October, and
half November; to cold, the other half of November, all December, and
half January; to winter, half January, all February, and half March: to
harvest, half March, all April, and half May; to summer, half May, all
June, and half July; to heat, half July, all August, and the first half
of September.''But these accounts refer to the land of Judea only: it is
enough for the fulfilment of the promise, that they are more or less, at
one time of the year or another, in all parts of the world, and so will
be until the world shall be no more; and may, in a mystic sense, denote
the continuance of the church of God in the world, as long as it
endures, and its various vicissitudes and revolutions; sometimes it is a
time of sowing the precious seed of the Word; and sometimes it is an
harvest, is an ingathering of souls into it; sometimes it is a winter
season with it, and all things seem withered and dead; and at other
times it is summer, and all things look smiling and cheerful; sometimes
it is in a state of coldness and indifference, and at other times
exposed to the heat of persecution, and more warm and zealous usually
then; sometimes it is night with it, and sometimes day, and so it is
like to be, until that state takes place described in [Rev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#016.md).

\(i\) "cunctis diebus terrae", V. L. "adhuc omnes dies terrae",
Pagninus, Montanus; so Drusius, Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 9](gen009.md)

</div>
