<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen048)  [Next](gen050) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 49:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 49

This chapter contains a prophecy of future things, relating to the
twelve sons of Jacob, and to the twelve tribes, as descending from them,
and which he delivered to his sons on his death bed, having called them
together for that purpose, [Gen 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001),
he begins with Reuben his firstborn, whose incest he takes notice of, on
which account he should not excel, [Gen
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003), next Simeon and Levi have a
curse denounced on them for their cruelty at Shechem, [Gen
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005), but Judah is praised, and good
things prophesied of him; and particularly that Shiloh, or the Messiah,
should spring from him, the time of whose coming is pointed at, [Gen
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007), the predictions concerning
Zebulun, Issachar, and Dan, follow, at the close of which Jacob
expresses his longing expectation of God's salvation, [Gen
49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013) and after foretelling what
should befall Gad, Asher, and Naphtali, [Gen
49:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#019), a large account is given of
Joseph, his troubles, his trials, and his blessings, [Gen
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022), and Benjamin the youngest son
is taken notice of last of all, all the tribes being blessed in their
order according to the nature of their blessing, [Gen
49:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027), and the chapter is closed with
a charge of Jacob's to his sons to bury him in Canaan, which having
delivered, he died, [Gen 49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029).

[Genesis 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 49:1</span></span>

And Jacob called upon his sons,.... Who either were near at hand, and
within call at the time Joseph came to visit him, or if at a distance,
and at another time, he sent a messenger or messengers to them to come
unto him:

and said, gather yourselves together; his will was, that they should
attend him all together at the same time, that he might deliver what he
had to say to them in the hearing of them all; for what he after
declares was not said to them singly and alone, but when they were all
before him:

that I may tell you that which shall befall you in the last days; not
their persons merely, but their posterity chiefly, from that time
forward to the coming of the Messiah, who is spoken of in this prophecy,
and the time of his coming; some things are said relating to temporals,
others to spirituals; some are blessings or prophecies of good things to
them, others curses, or foretell evil, but all are predictions delivered
out by Jacob under a spirit of prophecy; some things had their
accomplishment when the tribes of Israel were placed in the land of
Canaan, others in the times of the judges, and in later times; and some
in the times of the Messiah, to which this prophecy reaches, whose
coming was in the last days, [Heb 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)
and Nachmanides says, according to the sense of all their writers, the
last days here are the days of the Messiah; and in an ancient writing of
the Jews it is said (x), that Jacob called his sons, because he had a
mind to reveal the end of the Messiah, i.e. the time of his coming; and
Abraham Seba (y) observes, that this section is the seal and key of the
whole law, and of all the prophets prophesied of, unto the days of the
Messiah.

\(x\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 126. 1. (y) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 57. 4. & 58. 1.

[Genesis 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 49:2</span></span>

Gather yourselves together,.... This is repeated to hasten them, and to
suggest that he had something of importance to make known unto them,
which he chose to do, when they were together:

and hear, ye sons of Jacob, and hearken to Israel your father: these
words are used and doubled to excite their attention to what he was
about to say, and which is urged from the near relation there was
between them.

[Genesis 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 49:3</span></span>

Reuben, thou art my firstborn,.... Jacob addressed himself to Reuben
first, in the presence of his brethren, owned him as his firstborn, as
he was, [Gen 29:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#031) did not cashier him
from his family, nor disinherit him, though he had greatly disobliged
him, for which the birthright, and the privileges of it, were taken from
him, [Ch1 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#001).

my might, and the beginning of my strength; begotten by him when in his
full strength (z), as well as the first of his family, in which his
strength and glory lay; so the Septuagint, "the beginning of my
children"; and because he was so, of right the double portion belonged
to him, had he not forfeited it, [Deu
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017). Some versions render the words,
"the beginning of my grief", or "sorrow" (a), the word "Oni" sometimes
so signifying, as Rachel called her youngest son "Benoni", the son of my
sorrow; but this is not true of Reuben, he was not the beginning of
Jacob's sorrow, for the ravishing of Dinah, and the slaughter and spoil
of the Shechemites, by his sons, which gave him great sorrow and grief,
were before the affair of Reuben's lying with Bilhah:

the excellency of dignity, and the excellency of power; that is, to him
of right belonged excellent dignity, power, and authority in the family,
a preeminence over his brethren, a double portion of goods, succession
in government, and, as is commonly understood, the exercise of the
priesthood; and so the Targums interpret it, that he should, had he not
sinned, took three parts or portions above his brethren, the birthright,
priesthood, and kingdom. Jacob observes this to him, that he might know
what he had lost by sinning, and from what excellency and dignity,
grandeur and power, he was fallen.

\(z\) "Nate. meae vires. --------" Virgil. (a) , Aquila; , Symmachus
apud Drusium; "principium doloris mei", V. L. Tigurine version.

[Genesis 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 49:4</span></span>

Unstable as water,.... Which is not to be understood of the levity of
his mind, and his disposition to hurt, and the impetuous force of that
breaking forth like water, and carrying him into the commission of it;
but rather of his fall from his excellency and dignity, like the fall of
water from an high place; and of his being vile, mean, and contemptible,
useless and unprofitable, like water spilled on the ground; and of his
weak and strengthless condition and circumstances, being deprived of the
prerogatives and privileges of his birthright, and having lost all his
honour and grandeur, power and authority. The word in the Arabic
language signifies (b) to be proud and haughty, to lift up one's self,
to swell and rise like the turgent and swelling waters: but though he
did thus lift himself, yet it follows:

thou shall not excel; not have the excellency of dignity and power which
belonged to him as the firstborn; the birthright and the double portion
were given to Joseph, who had two tribes descending from him, when
Reuben had but one; the kingdom was given to Judah, and the priesthood
to Levi, as both the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem observe: as he
did not excel his brethren in honour and dignity, so neither in wealth
and riches, nor in numbers; see [Deu
33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006) where the word "not" is wrongly
supplied; nor in his share in the land of Canaan, his posterity being
seated on the other side of Jordan, at their request; nor did any
persons of note and eminence spring from his tribe: because thou wentest
up to thy father's bed, then defiledst thou it; referring to his incest
with Bilhah, his father's concubine wife, [Gen
35:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#022) which, though done forty years
ago, was now remembered, and left an indelible spot on Reuben's
character, and his posterity:

he went up to my couch: turning himself to his other sons, to take
notice of the crime, as very abominable and detestable; affirming the
truth of it, and speaking of it with some vehemency, his affections
being moved; and it may be could not bear to look at Reuben, but turned
himself to his brethren; though he had forgiven the sin, and very
probably Reuben had repented of it, and had forgiveness of God, which he
might have, though in some sense vengeance was taken on this sinful
invention of his, [Psa 99:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#008). There are
various senses given of this phrase; some, as Aben Ezra, "my bed
departed from me"; that is, he departed from his bed; or, as Kimchi (c),
"it ceased to be my bed"; he left it, he abstained from the bed of
Bilhah upon its being defiled by Reuben: and others separate these
words, and read singly, "it went up" (d); either the excellency of
Reuben went up, vanished and disappeared like smoke; or, as Ben Melech
connects it with the beginning of the verse, "unstable as water", giving
the sense, "it", the inundation of water, "ascended" and prevailed over
thee; as waters ascend, meaning his lust ascended, and got the
prevalence over him; but the accents will not admit of such a separation
of the words; it is best to understand them in the first sense. As to
the manner of the expression, of going up to a bed, it may be observed,
that not only their beds in those times might be raised higher than
ours, but that they were placed in an higher part of the room, and so
there was an ascent to them: and Dr. Shaw (e) says this is the custom of
the eastern people to this day,"at one end of each chamber there is a
little gallery, raised three, four, or five feet above the floor, with a
balustrade in the front of it, with a few steps likewise leading up to
it, here they place their beds.''

\(b\) "superbivit, semet extulit gloria fastuque", Golius, col. 1767. so
Castel. col. 2980. (c) Sepher Shorash. rad. (d) "ascendit", i.e. "abiit"
"et evanuit", Vatablus. (e) Travels, p. 209. Ed. 2.

[Genesis 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 49:5</span></span>

Simeon and Levi are brothers,.... Not because they were so in a natural
sense, being brethren both by father and mother's side, for there were
others so besides them; but because they were of like tempers,
dispositions, and manners (f), bold, wrathful, cruel, revengeful, and
deceitful, and joined together in their evil counsels and evil actions,
and so are joined together in the evils predicted of them:

instruments of cruelty are in their habitations: or vessels, utensils,
household goods gotten by violence and rapine, and through the cruel
usage of the Shechemites; these were in their dwellings, their houses
were full of such mammon of unrighteousness, or spoil; or, as others,
"instruments of cruelty" are "their swords" (g); what they should only
have used in their own defence, with these they shed the blood of the
Shechemites very barbarously, [Gen
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025). Some think the word here used
is the Greek word for a sword; and the Jews say (h) that Jacob cursed
the swords of Simeon and Levi in the Greek tongue; and others say it is
Persic, being used by Xenophon for Persian swords; but neither of them
seems probable: rather this word was originally Hebrew, and so passed
from thence into other languages; but perhaps the sense of it, which
Aben Ezra gives, may be most agreeable, if the first sense is not
admitted, that it signifies covenants, compacts, agreements (i), such as
these men made with the Shechemites, even nuptial contracts; for the
root of the word, in the Chaldee language, signifies to espouse (k); and
these they abused to cruelty, bloodshed, and slaughter, in a most
deceitful manner: in the Ethiopic language, the word signifies counsels;
so De Dieu takes it here.

\(f\) "--------par nobile fratrum Nequitia et nugis pravorum et amore
gemellum." Horat. Sermon. l. 2. Satyr. 3. (g) "Machaerae eorum",
Montanus, Tigurine version, Schmidt; and so R. Sol. Urbin Ohel Moed,
fol. 31. 2. (h) Pirke Eliezer, c. 38. (i) So Castell. Lexic. col. 2058.
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (k) Chald. & Syr. "despondit",
"desponsavit", Schindler. Lex. col. 998.

[Genesis 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 49:6</span></span>

O my soul, come not thou into their secret,.... Their cabinet counsels,
combinations and conspiracies; this Jacob said, as abhorring the wicked
counsel they had took of slaying the Shechemites; and lest any should
think he was concerned in it, or connived at it, he expressed a
detestation of the fact on his dying bed: the future tense may be put
for the past; and so Onkelos renders it, "my soul was not in their
secret"; and so the other two Targums paraphrase it, that when they got
and consulted together, his soul was not pleased and delighted with
their counsel, but abhorred it; or "my soul shall not come", which
Jarchi thinks prophetical refers to the case of Zimri, the son of Salu,
of the tribe of Simeon, as the following clause to the affair of Korah,
of the tribe of Levi, as foreseeing and disapproving them, and desiring
they might not be called by his name, or his name called upon them, [Num
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#014).

unto their assembly, mine honour, be not thou united; the same thing
expressed in different words; by his "honour or glory" he means his
soul, the more honourable part of man, or his tongue, with which man
glorifies God; and hereby Jacob intimates, that he did not in thought,
and much less in express words, give any consent unto, and approbation
of the deed of those two sons of his, and that he never was, nor never
desired to be with them in their meetings and consultations:

for in their anger they slew a man; Hamor or Shechem, together with all
the males of the city; and so "man" may be put for "men", the singular
for the plural, as is frequent. The Targum of Jonathan is, a king and
his governor; and the Targum of Jerusalem, kings with governors:

and in their selfwill they digged down a wall; not the wall of the city
of Shechem, which does not appear to be walled, by their easy access
into it; and if it was, they do not seem to have had proper instruments
for such an undertaking, nor a sufficient number for such work, and
which would have required longer time than they used, unless it was a
poor wall indeed: rather the wall of Shechem's house, or the court
before it, which they dug down, or broke through to get in and slay
Hamor and Shechem, and take away their sister; though the word, as here
pointed, always signifies an ox; and so the Samaritan and Septuagint
versions render it, they hamstringed a bull, or houghed an ox, just in
like manner as horses are said to be houghed, [Jos
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#006) and which some understand (l)
figuratively of a prince or ruler; so great personages are called bulls
of Bashan, [Psa 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012) and interpret it
either of Hamor or of Shechem, who was a prince among his people, and
furious in his lust towards Dinah, and so this clause is much the same
with the former: and besides, him they enervated by circumcision, and
took the advantage of this his condition at the worst, and slew him,
which seems to be the true sense of the text, agreeably to [Gen
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025) but the Jerusalem Targum
paraphrases it of Joseph, whom his brethren sold, who was like unto an
ox; and so Jarchi interprets it of him, whom they designed to slay, see
[Deu 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017) but it is better to take
the words in a literal sense, either of the oxen that Simeon and Levi
took from the Shechemites, which they plucked or drove away from their
mangers, as some render the words (m); and some of them they might hough
or hamstring, that they might not get away from them, see [Gen
34:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#028) or rather of Shechem himself,
who was "a prince", a word which has some likeness and affinity to this
in the text.

\(l\) R. Jacob Ben Eleazer in Ben Melech, in loc. (m) "avulserunt
boves", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; others, "enervarunt bovem",
Schmidt; so Ainsworth.

[Genesis 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 49:7</span></span>

Cursed be their anger, for it was fierce,.... It was sinful anger in the
nature of it, and so criminal and detestable; it was strong, fierce, and
furious in its operation and effects, and so justly cursed; not their
persons, but their passions:

and their wrath, for it was cruel; it issued in the cruel and barbarous
slaughter of the inhabitants of Shechem; the same thing as before in
other words repeated, to express his great abhorrence of their wrath and
rage. Aben Ezra thinks that the words may be considered either as a
prophecy or a prayer, that their anger might cease: what follows is
certainly a prophecy:

I will divide them in Jacob, and scatter them in Israel; which he is
said to do, because he foretold it would be done; as Jeremiah is said to
root out and pull down kingdoms, because he prophesied thereof, [Jer
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#010) and this was fulfilled in the
tribes of Simeon and Levi; as for the tribe of Simeon, that had not a
distinct part by itself in the land of Canaan, but had their inheritance
out of the portion, and within the inheritance of the tribe of Judah,
[Jos 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001) and their cities did not
join to one another, as Aben Ezra observes, but lay scattered up and
down in the tribe of Judah; and when they were increased and straitened
for room, many of them went without the land, to the entrance of Gedor,
where they of Ham, or the Egyptians, had dwelt, and others to Mount Seir
in Edom, [Ch1 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#039) and it is a notion
which prevails with the Jews, and which Jarchi takes notice of, that a
great many of this tribe were scribes and teachers of the law, and even
teachers of children, and by which they lived among the several tribes;
and so the Jerusalem Targum,"I will divide the tribe of Simeon, that
they may be scribes and teachers of the law in the congregation of
Jacob.''And as for the tribe of Levi, it is well known that they had no
inheritance in the land of Canaan, but had forty eight cities assigned
them in the several tribes here and there; and thus Jacob's prophecy had
an exact accomplishment.

[Genesis 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 49:8</span></span>

Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise,.... His name
signifies praise, and was given him by his mother, her heart being
filled with praises to God for him, [Gen
29:35](../../../bib/kjv/gen029.htm#035) and is here confirmed by his
father on another account, because his brethren should praise him for
many excellent virtues in him; and it appears, by instances already
observed, that he had great authority, and was highly esteemed among his
brethren, as his posterity would be in future times for their courage,
warlike expeditions and success, and being famous for heroes, such as
David, and others; and especially his famous seed the Messiah, and of
whom he was a type, should be praised by his brethren, who are so
through his incarnation, and by divine adoption, and who praise him for
the glories and excellencies of his person, and the blessings of his
grace:

thine hand shall be in the neck of thine enemies; pressing them down by
his superior power, subduing them, and causing them to submit to him,
and which was verified in David, who was of this tribe, [Psa
18:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#040) and especially in the Messiah,
in a spiritual sense, who has conquered and subdued all his and his
people's enemies, sin, Satan, the world and death:

thy father's children shall bow down before thee; before the kings that
should spring from this tribe, and should rule over all the rest, as
David and Solomon, to whom civil adoration and respect were given by
them; and before the King Messiah, his son and antitype, in a way of
religious worship, which is given him by the angels, the sons of God,
and by all the saints and people of God, who are his father's children
by adoption; these bow before him, and give him religious adoration as a
divine Person, and submit to his righteousness as Mediator, and bow to
the sceptre of his kingdom, and cast their crowns at his feet, and give
him the glory of their whole salvation. This in some Jewish writings (n)
is applied to the time of the Messiah's coming.

\(n\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 127. 2.

[Genesis 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 49:9</span></span>

Judah is a lion's whelp,.... Or as one; the note of similitude being
wanting, as Aben Ezra and Ben Melech observe; he was comparable to a
young lion for his strength, courage, and generosity; and it may refer
to the infant state of this tribe in the times of the judges, who first
went up against the Canaanites and overcame them, [Jdg
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001).

from the prey, my son, thou art gone up; alluding to the lion going up
to the mountains, where it chiefly resides, after it has found its prey
and satiated itself with it:

he stooped down, he couched as a lion, and as an old lion; one that is
grown up, and has arrived to its full strength, such an one is a proper
emblem of David king of Israel, of his royalty, courage, valour and
conquests; and who having subdued the nations round about him, couched
like a lion, and had rest from all his enemies; and especially this was
verified in the times of Solomon his son, when he had peace on all
sides, and Judah and Israel dwelt safely under their vines and fig
trees, [Kg1 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#024).

who shall rouse him up? a lion grown up and in its full strength, or a
lioness, as some choose to interpret it, and which is the fiercest, and
therefore the most dangerous to rouse up when laid down, either in its
den, or with its prey in its paws: so dangerous it was to provoke the
tribe of Judah, as its enemies after found, especially in the times of
David: all this may be applied to Christ, the lion of the tribe of
Judah; the lion being the king of beasts, and the strongest among them,
may denote the kingly power and authority of Christ, his great strength
as the mighty God and mighty Saviour, his courage in engaging with all
the powers of darkness, and valour in vanquishing all enemies; his
generosity and lenity to those that stoop to him, and his fierceness to
his adversaries, who took the prey from the mighty, and then ascended on
high, leading captivity captive; where he sat down at the right hand of
God at rest and ease, and who will dare to rouse him up, or be able to
stand before him when once he is angry? This verse in some ancient (o)
writings of the Jews is interpreted of Messiah the son of David.

\(o\) Raya Mehimna in Zohar in Exod. fol. 49. 3. 4.

[Genesis 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 49:10</span></span>

The sceptre shall not depart from Judah,.... Which some understand of
the tribe, that Judah should not cease from being a tribe, or that it
should continue a distinct tribe until the coming of the Messiah, who
was to be of it, and was, and that it might appear he sprung from it;
but this was not peculiar to this tribe, for the tribe of Benjamin
continued, and so did the tribe of Levi unto the coming of Christ:
besides, by Judah is meant the tribe, and to say a tribe shall not
depart from the tribe, is not only a tautology, but scarcely sense; it
rather signifies dominion, power, and authority, as the sceptre always
does, it being an emblem of it, see [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017) and this intends either the
government, which was in the heads and princes of the tribe, which
commenced as soon as it became a tribe, and lasted as long as it
remained one, even unto the times of the Messiah; or kingly power and
government, which the sceptre is generally thought to be an emblem of,
and which first commenced in David, who was of the tribe of Judah, and
continued unto the Babylonish captivity, when another sort of governors
and government took place, designed in the next clause:

nor a lawgiver from between his feet; which may be rendered
disjunctively, "or a lawgiver"; any ruler or governor, that has
jurisdiction over others, though under another, as the word is used,
[Jdg 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#014) and the sense is, that till
the Messiah came there should be in the tribe of Judah, either a king, a
sceptre bearer, as there was unto the captivity; or a governor, though
under others, as there were unto the times of Christ under the
Babylonians, Persians, Grecians, and Romans; such as Gedaliah,
Zorobabel, &c. and particularly the sanhedrim, a court of judicature,
the members of which chiefly consisted of the tribe of Judah, and the or
prince of it, was always of that tribe, and which retained its power to
the latter end of Herod's reign, when Christ was come; and though it was
greatly diminished, it had some power remaining, even at the death of
Christ, but quickly after had none at all: and if by the "lawgiver" is
meant a scribe or a teacher of the law, as all the Targums, Aben Ezra,
Ben Melech, and others interpret it, who used to sit at the feet of a
ruler, judge, or prince of the sanhedrim; it is notorious there were of
these unto, and in the times of the Messiah: in short, it matters not
for the fulfilment of this prophecy what sort of governors those were
after the captivity, nor of what tribe they were; they were in Judah,
and their government was exercised therein, and that was in the hands of
Judah, and they and that did not depart from thence till Shiloh came;
since those that were of the other tribes, after the return from the
captivity all went by the name of Judah:

until Shiloh come; which all the three Targums interpret of the Messiah,
as do many of the Jewish writers, ancient and modern (p); and is the
name of the Messiah in their Talmud (q), and in other writings (r); and
well agrees with him, coming from a root which signifies to be "quiet",
"peaceable", and "prosperous"; as he was of a quiet and peaceable
disposition, came to make peace between God and men, and made it by the
blood of his cross, and gives spiritual peace to all his followers, and
brings them at length to everlasting peace and happiness; having
prospered and succeeded in the great work of their redemption and
salvation he undertook:

and unto him shall the gathering of the people be; not of the Jews,
though there were great gatherings of them to hear him preach, and see
his miracles; as there were of all his people to him at his death, and
in him as their head and representative, [Eph
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010) but of the Gentiles; upon his
death, the Gospel being preached to all nations, multitudes among them
were converted to Christ, embraced his doctrines, professed his
religion, and abode by him, see [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010) some render it, the obedience of
the people (s), from the use of the word in [Pro
30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017), which sense agrees with the
former; for those who are truly gathered by the ministry of the word
yield an obedience to his doctrines and ordinances; and others read,
"the expectation of the people" (t); the Messiah being the desire of all
nations, [Hag 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006) this, with what goes
before, clearly shows that the Messiah must be come, since government in
every sense has departed from Judah for 1900 years or thereabout, and
the Gentiles have embraced the Messiah and his Gospel the Jews rejected:
the various contradictory senses they put upon this prophecy show the
puzzle and confusion they are in about it, and serve to confirm the true
sense of it: some apply it to the city Shiloh, others to Moses, others
to Saul, others to David; nay, some will have Shiloh to be Jeroboam, or
Ahijah the Shilonite, and even Nebuchadnezzar: there are two senses they
put upon it which deserve the most notice, the one is, that "Shebet", we
render "sceptre", signifies a "rod"; and so it does, but such a rod as
is an ensign of government, as it must here, by what follows, see [Eze
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze019.htm#011), but they would have it to
signify either a rod of correction (u), or a staff of support; but what
correction or affliction has befallen the tribe of Judah peculiar to it?
was it not in a flourishing condition for five hundred years, under the
reign of David's family? and when the rest of the tribes were carried
captive and never returned, Judah remained in its own land, and, when
carried captive, after seventy years returned again to it; add to which,
that this is a prediction, not of affliction and distress, that should
abide in the tribe of Judah, but of honour and glory to it: and besides,
Judah has had a far greater share of correction since the coming of the
true Messiah than ever it had before: and what support have the Jews
now, or have had for many hundred years, being out of their land (v),
destitute of their privileges, living among other nations in disgrace,
and for the most part in poverty and distress? the other sense is this,
"the sceptre and lawgiver shall not depart from Judah for ever, when
Shiloh comes (w)"; but this is contrary to the accents which separate
and divide the phrase, "between his feet", from that, "for ever", as
this version renders the word; though never signifies "for ever",
absolutely put, without some antecedent noun or particle; nor does
signify "when", but always "until", when it is joined with the particle
as it is here; besides, this sense makes the prophecy to pass over some
thousands of years before any notice is taken of Judah's sceptre, which,
according to the Jews, it had thousands of years ago, as well as
contradicts a received notion of their own, that the Messiah, when he
comes, shall not reign for ever, but for a certain time, and even a
small time; some say forty years, some seventy, and others four hundred
(x).

\(p\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 32. 4. & in Exod. fol. 4. 1. & in Numb. fol.
101. 2. Bereshit Rabba, fol. 98. sect. 85. 3. Jarchi & Baal Hatturim, in
loc. Nachmanidis Disputat. cum Paulo, p. 53. Abarbinel. Mashmiah
Jesbuah, fol. 10. 1. R. Abraham Seba, Tzeror Hammor, fol. 36. 4. & 62.
2. (q) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 98. 2. (r) Echa Rabbati, fol. 50. 2. (s)
"obedientia populorum", Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Cocceius, Ainsworth; with which agree the Targums of Onkelos and
Jerusalem, Aben Ezra, Kimchi in Sepher Shorash. rad. (t) , Sept
Theodotion; "expectatio Gentium", V. L. (u) R. Joel Ben Sueb apud
Menasseh, Ben Israel. Conciliator in Gen. Quaest. 65. sect. 8. (v)
Written about 1750. Ed. (w) Vid. Menasseh, ib. sect. 3. (x) T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 99. 1.

[Genesis 49:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 49:11</span></span>

Binding his foal unto the vine, and his ass's colt unto the choice
vine,.... Which may be understood either of the tribe of Judah, and
signify that vines should grow in such plenty, and so large and strong,
that a man might fasten his ass to one of them, and if it ate and
destroyed it, it would give no great concern, since the country abounded
with them; or they would be so full of clusters that a man might load an
ass from one of them. Some parts of the tribe of Judah were famous for
vines, especially Engedi; hence we read of the vineyards of Engedi, [Sol
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#014) or else of Shiloh the Messiah,
which some interpret literally of him, when the prophecy in [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009) was fulfilled, as is recorded in
[Mat 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#002) but others better,
figuratively, of Christ's causing the Gentiles, comparable to an ass's
colt, for their impurity, ignorance of, and sluggishness in spiritual
things, to cleave to him the true vine, [Joh
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001) in the exercise of faith, hope,
and love, or to join themselves to his church and people, sometimes
compared to a vine or vineyard, [Isa
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001).

and he washed his garments in wine, and his clothes in the blood of
grapes: an hyperbolical expression, setting forth the great abundance of
wine in this tribe, of which there was such plenty, that if they would,
they might have used it instead of water to wash their clothes in, but
not that they did do so, only might if they would; and may denote the
great quantity of spiritual blessings flowing from the love of God,
which come by Christ; and of his word and ordinances, which are
comparable to wine and milk, and are a feast of fat things, of wine on
the lees, well refined, [Isa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#006) and
may be applied to Christ, to the garment of his human nature, which,
through his sufferings and death, was like a vesture dipped in blood,
and he became red in his apparel, [Isa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001) or to his church and people,
which cleave to him as a garment, and whose garments are washed and made
white in the blood of the Lamb, [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005) these words are interpreted of the
Messiah in the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem, and are applied to him
and his times in the Talmud (y), and in other Jewish writings (z): so
wine is called the blood of the grape by the son of Sirach in the
Apocrypha:"The principal things for the whole use of man's life are
water, fire, iron, and salt, flour of wheat, honey, milk, and the blood
of the grape, and oil, and clothing.'' (Sirach 39:26)"He stretched out
his hand to the cup, and poured of the blood of the grape, he poured out
at the foot of the altar a sweetsmelling savour unto the most high King
of all.'' (Sirach 50:15)

\(y\) T. Bab. Berac. fol. 57. 1. (z) Zohar in Gen. fol. 127. 3. & 128.
2, 3.

[Genesis 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 49:12</span></span>

His eyes shall be red with wine,.... Signifying, not the intemperance of
this tribe, and their immoderate use of wine, and the effect of it on
them; but the goodness and generosity of their wine, that if drank
plentifully of, and especially to excess, would have such an effect, see
[Pro 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#029) and, as applied to the
Messiah, the antitype of Judah, and who was of this tribe, it may denote
not so much the beauty of his eyes, as the Targums paraphrase it; as the
joy and pleasure that sparkled in his eyes when he shed his blood on the
cross, enduring that, and despising the shame of it, for the joy of the
salvation of his people; or the clearness of his sight in beholding the
actions of his enemies, and especially of the fierceness and fury of his
wrath against them, whose eyes are said to be an flames of fire, [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014).

and his teeth white with milk; denoting the fruitfulness of his land,
producing fine pastures, on which flocks and herds fed, and gave
abundance of milk; and so Onkelos paraphrases the whole verse,"his
mountains shall be red with his vineyards, and his hills shall drop
wine, and his valleys shall be white with corn and flocks of sheep;''and
much the same are the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem: the mystical
sense may respect Christ and his people, and be expressive of the purity
of his nature, life, and doctrine, and of the holiness of his members,
their faith and conversation; or the clauses may be rendered, redder
than wine, whiter than milk; but though whiteness recommends teeth, yet
not redness the eyes; wherefore some (a) by transposing the first
letters of the word for "red", make it to signify black, as it does with
the Arabs, and that colour of the eye is reckoned beautiful.

\(a\) Danzius apud Stockium, p. 334.

[Genesis 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 49:13</span></span>

Zebulun shall dwell at the haven of the sea,.... Of the sea of Galilee,
sometimes called the sea of Tiberias and of Gennesaret; and of the
Mediterranean sea; and accordingly we find that the border of this
tribe, when settled in the land of Canaan, was toward the sea, [Jos
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#010) and this was done, not at the
discretion of Joshua, or at the choice of this tribe, but by lot; and
which shows that Jacob said this under a spirit of prophecy, and which
had its fulfilment two hundred years after; and is a full proof of the
prescience and providence of God; and who, as he sets the bounds of the
people, or of the nations of the world, and of the tribes of Israel, so
the bounds of the habitations of particular persons, [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026) and he shall be for an haven of
ships; shall have good ports commodious for ships to station in, and to
cover them from storms and tempests; this tribe being situated by the
sea shore (b):

and his border shall be unto Zidon; not the city Zidon, for the tribe of
Zebulun reached no further than Carmel, as Josephus observes;"the
Zebulunites (says he) obtained the land from Carmel, and the sea to the
lake of Gennesaret.''Now Carmel was forty miles at least from Zidon; but
Phoenicia is meant, of which Zidon was the chief city; and so the
Septuagint in [Isa 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#002) put Phoenicia
instead of Zidon; and whereas Carmel was the border of this tribe that
way, it is also said by Jerom (d) to be the border of Phoenicia; so that
Zebulun reaching to Carmel, its border may be truly said to be to Zidon
or Phoenicia.

\(b\) "in litore maris", V. L. "ad litus marium", Drusius, Cocceius,
Schmidt. (d) Comment. in Amos, 9. 3.

[Genesis 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 49:14</span></span>

Issachar is a strong ass,.... Or as one, the note of similitude being
wanting, as Ben Melech observes; "a bony" (e) one, as the word
signifies; not one that is lean, and nothing but skin and bones, as some
interpret it, but that is strong and robust, able to carry burdens; and
this tribe is compared to an ass, not for stupidity and sluggishness,
but for its strength, and its use in husbandry, in which this tribe was
chiefly occupied: the Targums of Jonathan and Jarchi interpret this
figuratively, of his being strong to bear the yoke of the law: and it is
a notion of the Jews, that this tribe were skilful in the doctrines of
the law, and the intercalation of years, &c. from [Ch1
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#032) couching down between two
burdens: one hanging on one side, and another on the other; which Kimchi
and Ben Melech interpret of bales of goods; and may as well be
understood of sacks of corn, or anything else, carried by these
creatures, which, when they come into a good pasture, and for the sake
of that and ease, will lie down with their burdens on them, and rise up
again with them: the Targums of Onkelos and Jerusalem paraphrase it,
"between two borders" (f), or the borders of his brethren, as Jonathan,
Zebulun and Dan, between which this tribe lay; and this is the reason
Aben Ezra gives why Issachar, who was older than Zebulun, is mentioned
after him, and between him and Dan, because his land lay between them;
and so it may be observed, that in the division of the land in Joshua's
time, Issachar's lot came up after Zebulun's, [Jos
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#010) but Doctor Lightfoot thinks (g)
it refers to the two kingdoms, between which it lay, that of Phoenicia
on one side, and that of Samaria on the other.

\(e\) "Asinus osseus", Montanus, Tigurine version, Munster, Vatablus,
Drusius, Piscator, Cartwright. (f) "inter terminos", V. L. "inter
terminos duos", Pagninus, Montanus, Drusius, Cartwright; so Ainsworth,
"inter duos finos", Tigurine version. (g) Works, vol. 1. p. 698.

[Genesis 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 49:15</span></span>

And he saw that rest was good,.... Not the house of the sanctuary, and
attendance there, and the service of that, as the Targum of Jerusalem;
nor the rest of the world to come, the happiness of a future state, as
that of Jonathan; but rather, as Onkelos, the part and portion of the
good land allotted him; he saw that a quiet industry exercised in a
diligent cultivation and manuring his land was preferable to the hurry
of a court, or the fatigue of a camp, or the dangers of the seas:

and the land that it was pleasant; a fine delightful country, which, if
well looked after and improved, would produce plenty of pleasant fruits;
and within this tribe were the rich vale of Esdraelon or Jezreel, and
the fruitful mountains of Gilboa: of the former it is agreed by all
travellers the like has never been seen by them, being of vast extent
and very fertile, and formerly abounded with corn, wine, and oil; See
Gill on [Hos 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#005) and the latter were
famous for their fruitfulness, through the dews that descended on them,
[Sa2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021).

and bowed his shoulders to bear; the fatigues of ploughing and sowing,
and reaping, and carrying in the fruits of the earth:

and became a servant unto tribute; which greatly arises from agriculture
and the fruits of the earth; and this tribe chose rather to pay more
tribute than the rest, that they might abide at home and attend the
business of their fields, when others were called to go forth to war.

[Genesis 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 49:16</span></span>

Dan shall judge his people as one of the tribes of Israel. There is an
elegant paronomasia, or an allusion to the name of Dan in those words,
which signifies to judge, and the sense of them is, there should be
heads, rulers, and judges of it, as the other tribes had; and this is
the rather mentioned of him, because he is the first of the children of
concubine wives as yet taken notice of; and what is here said of him is
also to be understood of the rest of the sons of the concubines; for the
meaning is not, that a judge should arise out of him as out of the other
tribes, that should judge all Israel, restraining it to Samson, who was
of this tribe, as the Targums and Jarchi; for no such judge did arise
out of all the tribes of Israel; nor was Samson such a judge of Israel
as David, who, according to Jarchi, is one of the tribes of Israel,
namely, of Judah; for David did not judge as Samson, nor Samson as
David, their form of government being different.

[Genesis 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 49:17</span></span>

Dan shall be a serpent by the way, an adder in the path,.... Or be like
that sort of serpents called the adder; or rather, that which has the
name of Cerastes, which lies among sand, and being of the same colour is
not easily discerned, and is often trampled upon unawares, and bites at
once, unexpected; as Bothart (h) from various writers has shown;
particularly Diodorus Siculus (i) says, of this kind of serpents, that
their bites are deadly, and being of the same colour with the sand, few
discern them, so that many ignorantly treading on them fall into danger
unawares; and so Onkelos paraphrases it, that lies in wait by the way;
and is by another writer (k) interpreted, a very grievous and hurtful
serpent as the adder is:

that biteth the horse heels, so that his rider shall fall backward; for
this sort of serpents lying in horse ways and cart ruts, snaps at and
bites horses as they pass along, which bites affecting their legs and
thighs, cause them to fall and throw their riders: this, by the Jewish
writers, who are followed by many Christian interpreters, is applied to
Samson, who by craft and policy managed the Philistines, as in the
affair of the foxes, and especially in his last enterprise, when he got
placed between the two pillars of the house, which answer, as some
think, to the horse heels, as the multitude on the roof of the house to
the riders: but though this may be illustrated in a particular person in
this tribe, as a specimen of the genius and disposition of the whole
tribe, yet the prophecy respects the whole tribe, and points at the
situation of it, which was "by the way", at the extreme part of the
country; so that they had need of craft and policy as well as power to
defend themselves against encroachers and invaders, and describes the
general temper and disposition of this tribe, of which an instance may
be seen in [Jdg 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#001) and it may have
respect to the stumblingblocks and offences laid in this tribe to the
rest of the tribes, by the idol of Micah, and more especially by the
golden calf set up in Dan by Jeroboam.

\(h\) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 3. c. 12. col. 418, 419, 420. (i)
Bibliothec. l. 3. p. 183. (k) R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed. fol. 57. 1.

[Genesis 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 49:18</span></span>

I have waited for thy salvation, O Lord. Jacob finding his spirits faint
and flag, stops and breathes awhile before he proceeded any further in
blessing the tribes; and as he found he was a dying man, and knew not
how soon he should expire, expresses what he had been thoughtful of and
concerned about in time past, and still was; that he had been waiting
and hoping for, and expecting a state of happiness and bliss in another
world, where he should be saved from sin and Satan, and the world, and
from all his enemies, and out of all his troubles; and this he firmly
believed he should enjoy, and hoped it would not be long ere he did; and
especially he may have a regard to the Messiah, the promised Saviour,
and salvation by him he had knowledge of, faith in, and expectation of;
who may be truly called the salvation of God, because of his contriving,
providing, and appointing, whom he had promised and spoken of by all the
prophets; and whom in the fulness of time he would send into the world
to work out salvation for his people; and to him all the Targums apply
the words, which are to this purpose:"said our father Jacob, not for the
salvation of Gideon, the son of Joash, which is a temporal salvation, do
I wait; nor for the salvation of Samson the son of Manoah, which is a
transitory salvation; but for the salvation of Messiah the son of David,
(which is an everlasting one,) who shall bring the children of Israel to
himself, and his salvation my soul desireth:''and though Jacob might be
affected with the evils he foresaw would rise up in the tribe of Dan, he
had last mentioned, and with the troubles that should come upon all the
tribes; and had some pleasing sights of the deliverances and salvations,
that should be wrought for them, by judges and saviours that should be
raised up; yet his chief view was to the Messiah, and salvation by him.

[Genesis 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 49:19</span></span>

Gad, a troop shall overcome him,.... There is a paronomasia, or an
allusion to the name of Gad almost in every word of the verse, which
signifies a troop: the whole is a prediction that this tribe would be a
warlike one, and have the common fate of war, sometimes be conquered,
and at other times conquer, but however should be at last entirely
victorious; all the three Targums refer this to this tribe passing over
Jordan at the head of the armies of Israel, into the land of Canaan, in
Joshua's time, which, when they had subdued, they returned to their own
inheritance on the other side Jordan, [Jos
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#012) and so Jarchi; but it rather
seems to refer to what befell them in their own tribe, which being
seated on the other side Jordan was exposed to the incursions and spoils
of the Moabites and Amonites; who came upon them like troops of robbers,
and seized upon their possessions and retained them for some years; as
in the times of the judges, see [Jdg
10:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg010.htm#007) and in after times we find the
Ammonites in possession of their country, [Jer
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#001) whereby this part of the prophecy
had its accomplishment:

but he shall overcome at the last; as the Gadites with the Reubenites
and half tribe of Manasseh did overcome the Hagarites and Arabians, the
war being of God, and succeeded, and they dwelt in their stead until the
captivity of the ten tribes, [Ch1 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#018)
and thus it is with the people of God in their present warfare state,
who are often foiled with sin, Satan, and the world, their spiritual
enemies; but at last they are more than conquerors over them all through
Christ that has loved them.

[Genesis 49:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 49:20</span></span>

Out of Asher his bread shall be fat,.... Which signifies that this tribe
would have a sufficiency of food out of their own land, without being
obliged to others, and that it would be of the best sort; it occupied a
tract of land, as Andrichomius (l) says, reaching from great Zidon to
Carmel of the sea, a space of twenty miles in length; and in breadth,
from the great sea to Asor, and even to Naason, a space of nine miles;
the land of this tribe is very fat, he says, and exceeding fruitful in
wine and oil, especially in the best wheat: and in this tribe, as the
same writer (m) observes, among other very fruitful places was the
valley of Asher, called the fat valley, which began five miles from
Ptolemais, and reached to the sea of Galilee, and contained more than
ten miles in length; the soil of which was exceeding fat and fruitful,
and produced the most delicate wine and wheat, and might be truly called
the fat valley, see [Deu 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#024).

and he shall yield royal dainties; food fit for kings, of all sorts,
flesh, fish, and fowl: here King Solomon had one of his purveyors to
provide food for him and his household, [Kg1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#016). Asher's country answered to his
name, which signifies happy or blessed: in those parts Christ was much
in the days of his flesh on earth; in Cana of this tribe he turned water
into wine and in this country discoursed concerning the bread of life
himself, who is the best of bread and royal dainties.

\(l\) Theatrum Terrae sanctae, p. 1. (m) lb. p. 13.

[Genesis 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 49:21</span></span>

Naphtali is a hind let loose,.... Onkelos applies it to the tribe
itself, and to the goodness of its land,"as for Naphtali, his lot fell
in a good land, and his inheritance a fruit bearing one,''as it was; for
in it was the most fruitful country of Gennesaret, which gave name to a
sea or lake by it, and which abounded with gardens, with palm trees, fig
trees, and olive trees; and which, Josephus says (n) one might call the
ambition of nature; and Strabo (o), an Heathen writer, says of it, that
it was an happy blessed country, and bearing all sorts of good things;
and Jarchi on the place observes, this is the vale of Gennesaret, which
is as quick to bring forth fruit, as a hind is swift to run. Some will
have this prophecy to be fulfilled in Barak, as Ben Gersom, Abendana,
and others, who was of this tribe, and who at first was fearful like the
hind, and backward to go out to war when called, but afterwards readily
went out with Deborah, and at last gave goodly words in the song they
both sung: but it better describes the genius, disposition, and manners
of the tribe, who were kind and loving, swift and expeditious in their
affairs; lovers of liberty, well spoken persons, humane, affable,
courteous, of a good address and pleasing language, as follows:

he giveth goodly words; to those he converses with; and it may be
applied, particularly to Christ and his disciples, and to the
inhabitants of this tribe in his time, among whom they much were, see
[Mat 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013) he himself is compared to
the hind of the morning, [Psa 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001) in
the title, and to a roe or a young hart, [Sol
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#009) [Sol
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#014) for his amiableness and
loveliness in himself, and for his lovingness to his people, and for his
swiftness to do the will and work of his father, being sent out (p), as
the word here used signifies, by him into this world, on the business of
man's salvation: and so his disciples, who were Galilaeans, were swift
to obey his call, and left all and followed him, and were sent out by
him to preach his Gospel; and both he and they may be said to "give
goodly words", as the doctrines of the Gospel are, words of grace,
truth, and life; wholesome, comfortable, pleasant and delightful; good
tidings of good things, of peace, pardon, righteousness, salvation and
eternal life by Christ: and the inhabitants of this country in Christ's
time were swift to run after him, and hear him; panted after him as the
hart after the water brooks, and both received and gave out the goodly
words of the Gospel, and were made free thereby, and so like an hind let
loose. Bochart gives a different version of these words, which is
countenanced by the Septuagint version, Naphtali is a tree full of
shoots, or "a tree shot out, sprouting out beautiful branches"; but as
this is contrary to the points, and coincides with the next verse, it is
rejected by many learned men.

\(n\) De Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 9. sect. 3. (o) Geograph. l. 16. p. 519.
(p) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 3. c. 18. col. 896.

[Genesis 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 49:22</span></span>

Joseph is a fruitful bough,.... Or as one, like the bough or branch of a
tree laden with fruit, as he was with children; one of which he called
Ephraim from his fruitfulness, and both his sons became numerous, and
the heads of two tribes in Israel; and with other temporal fruits and
blessings, as riches, honour, &c. and especially with the fruits of
grace and righteousness:

even a fruitful bough by a well; those are the most fruitful that are
near a well or fountain of water, as such trees are which are planted by
rivers of water, see [Psa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003) this
being repeated may have respect to the two boughs or branches of
Joseph's family, or the two fruitful and numerous tribes that sprung
from him:

whose branches run over the wall; as such trees that are set against
one, and by the reflected heat of the sun grow the more, and become more
fruitful. The word for "branches" is "daughters", which some refer to
the daughters of Manasseh and Zelophehad, who received their inheritance
on both sides of Jordan; and others interpret it of the cities of the
tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh, as cities are sometimes called.

[Genesis 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 49:23</span></span>

The archers have sorely grieved him, and shot at him, and hated him. His
brethren who grieved him with their ill usage, shot out bitter words
against him, and hated him for his dreams, and because his father loved
him; and they could not speak peaceably to him, they mocked at him,
conspired to kill him, stripped him of his clothes, cast him into a pit,
and then sold him; in all which he was a type of Christ, as used by the
Jews. His mistress also, and Satan by her, grieved him with her
temptations and solicitations to sin, which were as fiery darts shot at
him; but being resisted, her impure love was turned into hatred to him,
and she shot her lies, calumnies, and reproaches, as so many darts at
him; and, as the Targum of Jonathan, the magicians of Egypt, who envied
him for his superior knowledge, and perhaps many others in Pharaoh's
court, who were displeased at his preferments, might bring accusations
to Pharaoh against him, out of hatred to him; and Satan and his
principalities and powers, whose temptations are compared to fiery
darts, are not to be exempted, which they shoot at and grieve the people
of God, who are hated by them. Perhaps reference may be had to the wars
of the posterity of Joseph under Joshua, who was of the tribe of
Ephraim, with the Canaanites.

[Genesis 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 49:24</span></span>

But his bow abode in strength,.... For as his enemies were archers, and
had bows and arrows, so had he, and repelled force by force; but then
his bow and arrows were of a different sort, the virtues and graces that
he was possessed of, as innocence and integrity, chastity, fortitude,
wisdom, prudence and patience, faith, hope, and the like, which remained
unmoved, and in their full exercise, notwithstanding the powerful
attacks made upon them; and so his posterity were unmoved and unshaken,
and stood firm and undaunted, notwithstanding the powerful enemies they
had to deal with, until they were wholly subdued:

and the arms of his hands were made strong by the hands of the mighty
God of Jacob; so that he held his bow, and drew it with great strength
against his enemies, as an archer being used to the bow, his nerves
become strong, and he is not weakened by drawing it, nor weary of using
it; but Joseph had not his strength of himself, but from the Lord, the
mighty One, that had strengthened his father Jacob, and supported him
under all his trouble: saints, like Joseph, have their strength, as well
as their righteousness, in and from Christ; and when they are weak in
themselves, they are strong in him, to exercise grace and perform duty:

from thence is the shepherd, the stone of Israel; from Jacob descended
Joseph; or from the God of Jacob it was that Joseph through divine
Providence was sent into Egypt to be as a shepherd, to feed his father's
family, and as a stone to uphold and support it; in which he was a type
of Christ, the great and good Shepherd of the flock, and the stone that
is laid in Zion, on which the whole spiritual Israel of God is built;
the foundation stone on which they are laid, and are safe, and the
corner stone which knits them together. And some think that Christ is
principally meant, who in his office capacity was from the mighty God of
Jacob, a Shepherd of his providing and appointing, and a stone of his
laying; and so Nachmahides says, the stone here made mention of is the
same as in [Psa 118:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#022).

[Genesis 49:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 49:25</span></span>

Even by the God of thy father, who shall help thee,.... The same with
the mighty God of Jacob, by whom his hands had been made strong, and he
would be still helped, protected, and defended against his powerful
enemies; and by whom Christ, the antitype, was helped as man and
Mediator against his enemies, and to do all the work he engaged in; and
by whom all the Lord's people are helped to fight his battles with their
spiritual enemies, to withstand temptations, exercise every grace, and
do the will and work of God:

and by the Almighty, who shall bless thee with blessings of heaven
above; with those blessings which may be ascribed to the sun, moon, and
stars, and their influences as means, and to the rain and dew which
descend from thence; and as with such temporal blessings, so with
spiritual ones in heavenly things in Christ:

blessings of the deep that lieth under; of rivers, fountains and springs
that rise out of the earth from below, which water and make fruitful:

blessings of the breasts, and of the womb an increase of children, and
of cattle, and those healthy, thriving, and prosperous, which are great
temporal mercies; as are the word and ordinances spiritual ones, those
breasts of consolation, which such that are born again partake of, and
grow thereby.

[Genesis 49:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 49:26</span></span>

The blessings of thy father have prevailed above the blessings of my
progenitors,.... Jacob's blessings were greater and more numerous, both
those which he himself had, and bestowed upon his offspring, than those
that Abraham and Isaac had, he having more children than they, and
blessings for everyone of them; whereas they each of them had but two,
and one of these two were excluded the blessing: and besides, though
these blessings were the same in substance bestowed on his progenitors,
and by them on him, yet these were more clearly and distinctly given out
by him to his posterity, and were nearer their accomplishment:

unto the utmost bounds of the everlasting hills, they shall be on the
head of Joseph: that is, continue on him as long as the everlasting
hills continue, particularly those of a spiritual kind, for they endure
for ever. The word for "bounds" signifies "desire"; and Onkelos
paraphrases the words,"which the princes that were of old
desired:''meaning either the angels who desire to look into heavenly
things, or the patriarchs, who were desirous of the coming of the
Messiah, and salvation by him; and so the Vulgate Latin version is,
"until the desire of the everlasting hills should come"; that is,
Christ, who is the desire of all nations, in whom all nations of the
earth are to be blessed, and therefore desirable; blessings of all kinds
are upon the head of the just, as they were on Joseph, [Pro
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#006).

and on the crown of the head of him that was separate from his brethren;
who shunned company and conversation with him, and at length sold him
into Egypt, where he was parted from them, and remained separate for
many years; and when they came to dwell in the land of Egypt, they lived
in Goshen, and he at Pharaoh's court, where he was distinguished with
peculiar honours, and advanced above them. Of Christ his antitype, see
[Heb 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#026).

[Genesis 49:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 49:27</span></span>

Benjamin shall ravin as a wolf,.... All the three Targums apply this
prophecy to the priests offering the daily sacrifice, morning and
evening, in the temple, which stood in the lot of Benjamin, and dividing
what was left, and eating it. But it respects the tribe itself, compared
to a wolf for its fortitude, courage, and valour, as well as for its
rapaciousness, it being a warlike tribe; and the Jewish writers (q) say,
that it is compared to a wolf, because of its strength. Wolves, said to
be devoted to Mars, are called "martial" wolves by Virgil (r) and Horace
(s); and we have an early instance of the valour and success of this
tribe in a war waged with all the other tribes, and in two pitched
battles, in one with 26,000 men it beat 400,000, [Jdg
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#015), and if this tribe is compared
to a wolf for rapaciousness, this may be illustrated by the remainder of
those, after the loss of a third battle, catching and carrying away the
daughters of Shiloh, and making them their wives, [Jdg
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#023). Some apply this to particular
persons of this tribe, as to Saul the first king of Israel, who was of
Benjamin; and who as soon as he took the kingdom of Israel, in the
morning, in the beginning of that state, fought against all his enemies
on every side, against Moab, Ammon, Edom, the kings of Zobah, and the
Philistines, and the Amalekites, [Sa1
14:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#047) and to Mordecai and Esther, who
were of the same tribe, who after the captivity, and in the evening of
that state, divided the spoil of Haman, [Est
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#001) this is observed by Jarchi, Aben
Ezra, and Ben Gersom. Some of the Christian fathers have applied the
prophecy to the Apostle Paul, who was of the tribe of Benjamin; who in
the morning of his youth was a fierce and ravenous persecutor, and made
havoc of the church of God: and in the evening, or latter part of his
life, spent his days in dividing the spoil of Satan among the Gentiles,
taking the prey out of his hands, turning men from the power of Satan
unto God, and distributed food to the souls of men. In a spiritual sense
he was a warlike man, a good soldier of Christ, and accoutred as such,
had a warfare to accomplish, and enemies to fight with; and did fight
the good fight of faith, conquered, and was more than a conqueror
through Christ, and is now crowned: and why may it not be applied to
Christ himself, seeing the blessing of Benjamin by Moses, [Deu
33:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#012) seems to belong to him? he is
God's Benjamin, the son and man of his right hand, as dear to him as his
right hand, in whom his power has been displayed, and who is exalted at
his right hand; and may as well be compared to a wolf as to a lion, as
he is the lion of the tribe of Judah, and as God himself is compared to
a lion and bear, [Hos 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#007) and who is
expressly said to divide the spoil with the strong, [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012) spoiled principalities and
powers, delivered his people as a prey out of the hands of the mighty,
and will make an utter destruction of all his and their enemies. Some of
these things were done in the morning of the Gospel dispensation, and
others will be done in the evening of it, [Col
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#015).

\(q\) Targum Jon. Aben Ezra & Gersom, in loc. (r) Virgil. Aeneid. 9. (s)
Horat. Carmin. l. 1. Ode. 17.

[Genesis 49:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 49:28</span></span>

All these are the twelve tribes of Israel,.... The twelve sons of Jacob
before mentioned were heads of twelve tribes, who were afterwards
seated, and had their part in the land of Canaan; there were indeed
thirteen tribes, two springing from Joseph; but then the tribe of Levi
had no part in the land of Canaan, which was divided into twelve parts;
this shows that the above predictions respect not the persons of the
patriarchs, but their tribes:

and this is it that their father spake unto them, and blessed them: the
above is the sum and substance of what he had delivered in his
patriarchal benediction of them, a little before his death; and though
some of them, as Reuben, Simeon, and Levi, may seem rather to be cursed
than blessed, yet the greater part of them were clearly and manifestly
blessed; and what he said by way of correction and rebuke to the others,
might be blessed to them for their good; nor is it improbable, that
after he had delivered out the above predictions, he might wish for and
implore a blessing on them all; and certain it is, that they all had a
part in the blessing of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, as it related to the
land of Canaan:

everyone according to his blessing he blessed them; according to the
blessing which was appointed to them of God, and was in later times
bestowed on them, Jacob under a spirit of prophecy was directed to bless
them with, or to foretell what blessings should come upon them, and
which accordingly did.

[Genesis 49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 49:29</span></span>

And he charged them, and said unto them,.... The same charge he had
given to Joseph he here renews, and lays it upon his sons, who were
everyone of them to go along with Joseph to bury him in Canaan:

I am to be gathered unto my people; the people of God, the spirits of
just men made perfect, the souls of all the saints who before this time
had departed this life, and were in a state of happiness and bliss;
called his people, because he and they were of the same mystical body
the church, belonged to the same general assembly, and church of the
firstborn; the company of God's elect, who were in the same covenant of
grace, and partakers of the same blessings and promises of grace: this
shows that the souls of men are immortal; that there is a future state
after death, which is a state of happiness, and into which saints
immediately enter as soon as they die, and where Jacob expected to be in
a short time:

bury me with my fathers; the other part of himself, his body, which
should not be gathered to his people, as his soul would be, he orders to
be interred with his fathers Abraham and Isaac:

in the cave that is in the field of Ephron the Hittite; which is more
particularly described in the following verse, being the place of his
father's sepulchre.

[Genesis 49:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 49:30</span></span>

In the cave that is in the field of Machpelah, which is before Mamre, in
the land of Canaan,.... This is so exactly described, that there might
be no mistake about the place, see [Gen
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#017),

which Abraham bought with the field of Ephron the Hittite, for a
possession of a burying place; this is observed if any of the successors
of Ephron, or any of the Hittites, should lay any claim unto it, or
dispute the right of Jacob's sons to bury him there.

[Genesis 49:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 49:31</span></span>

There they buried Abraham and Sarah his wife,.... Abraham buried Sarah
there himself, and his two sons, Isaac and Ishmael, buried him there:

there they buried Isaac and Rebekah his wife; we have no other account
of the death of Rebekah, and her burial, but here; it is probable she
died before Isaac, and that Isaac buried her in this cave; and here Esau
and Jacob buried him:

and there I buried Leah; of whose death and burial we also read nowhere
else but here; it is probable she died before Isaac, and that Isaac
buried her in this cave; and here Esau and Jacob buried him:

[Genesis 49:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 49:32</span></span>

The purchase of the field, and of the cave that is there, was from the
children of Heth. Which is repeated for the certainty of it, and that it
might be taken notice of, that both the field and cave were bought by
Abraham of Ephron the Hittite, and that the children of Heth were
witnesses of the bargain, and of the payment of the money, and by whom
the estate was made sure to Abraham; all which might be urged, if any
controversy should arise about it; see

[Genesis 49:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 49:33</span></span>

And when Jacob had made an end of commanding his sons,.... Had given all
the proper directions and instructions concerning his interment in the
land of Canaan: he gathered up his feet into the bed; on which he sat
while he blessed his sons, and gave orders to them about his burial; but
now he gathered up his feet into the bed, laid himself along, and
composed himself in a proper posture to die. What authority the Targums
of Jonathan and Jerusalem on [Gen
49:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#021) had for saying this bed was a
bed of gold, I know not:

and he yielded up the ghost; he expired, he died an easy death, without
any pain or sickness: which Ben Melech says this phrase is expressive
of. He died in the year of his age one hundred and forty seven, and not
one hundred and forty four, as a Jewish chronologer (t) wrongly puts it,
and in the year of the world 2315, and before Christ 1689, according to
Bishop Usher (u): and was gathered unto his people:

See Gill on [Gen 49:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#029).

\(t\) Ganz. Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 6. 2. (u) Annales Vet. Test. A.
M. 2315.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 50](gen050)

</div>
