<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Genesis Index](gen)  
  [Previous](gen037)  [Next](gen039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 38:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 38

This chapter is wholly taken up with matters relating to Judah, the
fourth son of Jacob, from whom the Jews have their name, and from whom
Christ sprung: it treats of his marriage with a Canaanitess, his
children by her, their character and end, [Gen
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001); of his incest with his
daughter-in-law, though unknown by him, [Gen
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012); of his resentment against her,
when he heard she was with child, and his confusion when he found it was
by himself, [Gen 38:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024); and of the
birth of twins by her, named Pharez and Zarah, [Gen
38:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#027).

[Genesis 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 38:1</span></span>

And it came to pass at that time,.... This some refer to the time of
Jacob's coming from Padanaram into Canaan, soon after he came to
Shechem, and before the affair of Dinah; but to this may be objected the
marriage of Judah at an age that may seem too early for him, his
separation from his brethren, and having a flock of his own to keep,
which seems not consistent with the above history: wherefore it is
better to connect this with the history of Joseph's being sold into
Egypt; for though there were but twenty three years from hence to
Jacob's going down into Egypt, Joseph being now seventeen, and was
thirty years when he stood before Pharaoh, after which were seven years
of plenty, and two of famine, at which time Jacob went thither with two
of Judah's grandsons, Hezron and Hamul, [Gen
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#012), which make the number
mentioned; yet all this may be accounted for; at seventeen, Er, Judah's
firstborn, might marry, being the eighteenth from the selling of Joseph,
and the marriage of his father; and Onan at the same age, which was the
nineteenth; and allowing two or three years for Tamar's staying for
Shelah, there was time for her intrigue with Judah, and bearing him two
sons at a birth, before the descent of Jacob into Egypt; as for his two
grandsons, they may be said to go into Egypt; as Benjamin's sons did in
their father's loins, being begotten there during Jacob's abode in it:

that Judah went down from his brethren: not from Dothan to Adullam, as
Ben Melech observes, as if this separation was at the time and place of
the selling of Joseph; but rather from Hebron thither, after he and his
brethren were come home to their father, and had reported and condoled
the death of Joseph; and Judah is said to go down, because he went from
the north to the south, as Aben Ezra notes; whether this departure from
his brethren was owing to a misunderstanding or quarrel between them on
account of the affair of Joseph, or on any account, is not certain:

and turned in to a certain Adullamite; an inhabitant of Adullam, a city
which afterwards fell to the tribe of Judah, and where was a famous
cave, that had its name from thence in David's time; it was ten miles
from Eleutheropolis to the east (i), and eight from Jerusalem to the
southwest (k); hither he turned, or stretched out (l); that is, his
tent, with his flock, which he extended to Adullam, as Ben Melech
interprets it, and joined to this man:

whose name was Hirah; whom the Jews (m) fabulously report to be the same
with Hiram king of Tyre, in the days of David and Solomon, and that he
was the husband of Nebuchadnezzar's mother, and lived twelve hundred
years.

\(i\) Jerom de loc. Heb. fol. 88. F. (k) Bunting's Travels, p. 78. (l)
"et tentorium fixerat", Schmidt. (m) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 8. 2.

[Genesis 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 38:2</span></span>

And Judah saw there a daughter of a certain Canaanite,.... Onkelos and
Jonathan, and so Jarchi and Ben Gersom, interpret it a "merchant", to
take off the disgrace of his falling in love with, and marrying a
Canaanitish woman, which was forbidden by his ancestors Abraham and
Isaac, and which his father avoided:

whose name was Shuah; not the name of the woman he married, but the name
of her father, as appears from [Gen
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012); and who very probably was a man
of note in the country:

and he took her; to be his wife, with her and her father's consent, not
by force:

and went in unto her; cohabited with her as his wife.

[Genesis 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 38:3</span></span>

And she conceived, and bare a son, and he called his name Er. Which
signifies a "watchman": but the reason of the name given by the Targum
of Jonathan is,"because he should die without children;''as if it was
the same with Ariri, "childless".

[Genesis 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 38:4</span></span>

And she conceived again, and bare a son,.... As soon as she well could:

and she called his name Onan; the first son Judah gave the name to, but
his wife named this, so called from grief or sorrow; the reason of it,
according to the above Targum, was,"because his father would mourn for
him;''he was a Benoni, see [Gen 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#018),
whose sin and immature death caused sorrow.

[Genesis 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 38:5</span></span>

And she conceived, and bare a son,.... A third son:

and called his name Shelah; which signifies tranquil, quiet, peaceable
and prosperous, and is a word that comes from the same root as Shiloh,
that famous son of Judah that should spring from him, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010) the reason of the name, as given
by the Targum, is,"because her husband forgot her:"

and she was at Chezib when she bare him; Chezib is the name of a place,
by some taken to be the same with Achzib or Ecdippe, now Zib, see [Mic
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014); it seems to be a city in the
tribe of Judah; and Jerom (n) says, in his time there was a desert place
of this name near Adullam, on the borders of Eleutheropolis; the reason
of her being here at the time of her delivery, and of this circumstance
being related, is not certain.

\(n\) De loc. Heb. fol. 90. E.

[Genesis 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 38:6</span></span>

And Judah took a wife for Er his firstborn,.... Chose one for him, and
presented her to him for his liking, whom he approving of married:

whose name was Tamar; which signifies a "palm tree": the Targum of
Jonathan says, she was the daughter of Shem; but it is altogether
improbable that a daughter of his should be living at this time, and
young enough to bear children: it is much more probable that she was
daughter of Levi, Judah's brother, as an Arabic writer (o) asserts; but
it is more likely still that she was the daughter of a Canaanite, who
was living in the same place, though his name is not mentioned, [Gen
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#011).

\(o\) Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. p. 16.

[Genesis 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 38:7</span></span>

And Er, Judah's firstborn, was wicked in the sight of the Lord,.... That
is, exceedingly wicked, as this phrase signifies, [Gen
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013), was guilty of some very heinous
sin, but what is not mentioned; according to the Targum of Jonathan and
Jarchi, it was the same with his brother Onan's, [Gen
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#009), which it is suggested he
committed, lest his wife should prove with child, and lose her beauty;
but if it had been the same with his, it would have been expressed as
well as his. An Arabic writer (p) says, that he cohabited with his wife
not according to the course of nature, but in the "sodomitical" way:

and the Lord slew him; by his immediate hand, striking him dead at once,
as Ananias and Sapphira were stricken, [Act
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#005); or by sending some distemper,
which quickly carried him off, as a token of his displeasure at his sin.

\(p\) Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. p. 16.

[Genesis 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 38:8</span></span>

And Judah said unto Onan,.... Some time after his brother's death:

go in unto thy brother's wife, and marry her; Moses here uses a word not
common for marriage, but which was peculiar to the marrying of a
brother's wife according to a law given in his time: it appears to have
been a custom before, and which the patriarch might be directed to by
the Lord, in such a case when a brother died, and left no issue, for the
sake of multiplication of seed, according to the divine promise, and
which in the time of Moses passed into a law, see [Deu
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005),

and raise up seed unto thy brother; that might bear his name, and enjoy
his inheritance. For this law or custom was partly political, to
continue the paternal inheritance in the family, and partly typical, to
direct to Christ the firstborn among many brethren, [Rom
8:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#029), who in all things was to have
the preeminence, [Col 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018); and this
was not taken from the Canaanites, among whom Judah now was, but from
the ancient patriarchs, which they had no doubt from divine revelation,
and was taught in the school of Shem, and handed down from father to
son; for as to this being a law among the Egyptians in later times, and
which continued to the days of Zeno Augustus (q), it is most likely they
took it from the Jews.

\(q\) Justinian. Cod l. 5. tit. 6. leg. 8.

[Genesis 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 38:9</span></span>

And Onan knew that the seed should not be his,.... Should not be called
a son of his, but a son of his brother Er; this is to be understood only
of the firstborn; all the rest of the children born afterwards were
reckoned the children of the real parent of them; this shows this was a
custom in use in those times, and well known, and was not a peculiar
case:

and it came to pass, when he went in unto his brother's wife; to cohabit
with her, as man and wife, he having married her according to his
father's direction:

that he spilled it on the ground, lest he should give his seed to his
brother: lest his brother's wife he had married should conceive by him,
and bear a son that should be called his brother's, and inherit his
estate; and this is the sin, which from him is called Onania, a sin
condemned by the light of nature, as well as by the word of God, and
very prejudicial to mankind, as well as displeasing to God, as follows:

[Genesis 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 38:10</span></span>

And the thing which he did displeased the Lord,.... Being done out of
envy to his brother, and through want of affection to the memory of his
name; and it may be out of covetousness to get his estate into his own
hands, and especially as it frustrated the end of such an usage of
marrying a brother's wife; which appears to be according to the will of
God, since it afterwards became a known law of his; and it was the more
displeasing, as it was not only a check upon the multiplication of
Abraham's seed as promised, but since the Messiah was to come from
Judah. This was doing all to hinder it that lay in his power:

wherefore he slew him also; in like manner as he had slain his brother,
[Gen 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#007).

[Genesis 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 38:11</span></span>

Then said Judah to Tamar his daughter in law,.... After the death of his
two sons, who had successively married her:

remain a widow at thy father's house till Shelah my son be grown: who
was his third and youngest son, though perhaps not more than a year
younger than Onan; but he might not choose he should marry so soon as
his brethren had done, for a reason following: according to the custom
and law of marrying a brother's wife, who died without issue, she in
course was to be the wife of Shelah; since if there were ever so many
brothers, they all married such an one in turn, until there was issue by
one of them, see [Mat 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#025); as Judah
knew this, he pretended at least to give her to his son for wife, only
would have it put off till he was at age of maturity, or was more grown;
and therefore desires her to keep herself unmarried to any other person
until that time; and advises her to go to her father's house, and
continue there, which he did to prevent any intrigues between them, lest
his son should be tempted to marry her sooner than it was his will, and
she should solicit him to it:

for he said; not to Tamar, but within himself:

lest peradventure he die also as his brethren did; by which it seems,
that he was ignorant of the true cause of their death, but thought it
was either owing to their marrying too young, or to something in the
woman unfortunate and unhappy; and he might not really intend he should
marry her at all, only made use of an excuse for the present:

and Tamar went and dwelt in her father's house; she had dwelt in Judah's
house in the time of her two husbands, but now by his advice she removed
to her own father's house; which very probably was in the same place,
and her father yet living, who received her, and with whom she
continued, see [Lev 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#013).

[Genesis 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 38:12</span></span>

And in process of time the daughter of Shuah, Judah's wife,

died,.... Shuah was his wife's father, who was a Canaanite, [Gen
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#002); what her name was is not
certain, nor the exact time of her death; it was some time after Tamar
was sent home to her father's house; and some take the death of Judah's
wife to be a correction and reproof to him for his ill usage of his
daughter-in-law, in neglecting to give her to his son, or not designing
to do it at all:

and Judah was comforted: he mourned awhile for the death of his wife,
according to the custom of the country, and of those times, and then he
laid aside the tokens of it, and his sorrow wore off, and he appeared in
company and conversed with his friends:

and went up unto his sheepshearers to Timnath; a city in the tribe of
Judah, [Jos 15:57](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#057), said (s) to be six
miles from Adullam, where Judah lived; here he had his flocks of sheep,
at least this was judged a proper place for the shearing and washing of
them, and this time of the year a proper time for it, at which it was
usual to have a feast; and Judah went up to his shearers, not only to
see how they went on with their work, but with this view to make an
entertainment for them, see [Sa1 25:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#003),

he and his friend Hirah the Adullamite; he took him along with him for a
companion, and to partake of the entertainment.

\(s\) Bunting's Travels, p. 78.

[Genesis 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 38:13</span></span>

And it was told Tamar,.... By some of her neighbours, or by some of
Judah's family:

saying, behold, thy father in law goeth up to Timnath to shear his
sheep; which might be told her as an indifferent thing, without any
design in it; but she took notice of it, and it gave her an opportunity
she wanted.

[Genesis 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 38:14</span></span>

And she put her widow's garments off from her,.... By which it appears
that in those times and countries it was usual for widows to have a
different apparel from others, especially in the time of their mourning,
as it has been since in other nations, and with us at this day, and
which is commonly called "the widow's weed":

and covered herself with a veil, and wrapped herself; in it, or in a
cloak, or some such like garment, which the Arabs now call "hykes"; this
she did that she might not be known, and not that she might appear as an
harlot; for it was common to all women in those countries to go abroad
with their veils: and on the contrary, whatever might be the custom here
in those early times, which cannot be said what it was; in other
countries, and in later times, harlots have been used to appear unveiled
(t) and open to the view of all; though Juvenal (u) represents the
Empress Messalina as covering herself with a night hood, and hiding her
black hair under a yellow bonnet or peruke, that she might appear as an
harlot going to the stews: and so the Arabs now, their whores as well as
other women, veil themselves in the streets, but in Egypt they are used
to sit at the door, or walk in the streets unveiled (w):

and sat in an open place, which is in the way to Timnath; the Septuagint
version renders it, "at the gates of Aenan"; some take it to be the name
of a place, and suppose it had its name, as Aben Ezra observes, from two
fountains of water that were in the way, like a door, through which
Judah passed when he returned home: so Philo the Jew (x) reads, [Gen
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#021); "where is the harlot which was
in Ainan by the way?" and Jerom (y) speaks of Aenan as you go to
Timnath, now a desert place, and near to the great village Timnath,
which is between Aelia and Diospolis (i.e. Jerusalem and Lydia), and
there is a fountain in the above place, from whence it has its name: the
Targum of Jonathan paraphrases it,"in the division of the ways where all
eyes look;''for the word has the signification of eyes as well as of
fountains; and seems to design a place where two ways or more met, which
were not only open and obvious to every eye, but required persons to
make use of their eyes, and look about them, and consider which way they
should go; and where perhaps a way mark was set up for them to look to,
to direct them; and here Tamar placed herself as harlots used to do:
hence Catullus (z) calls common prostitutes "semitariae moechae",
pathway whores; and on the contrary, such an one as was a secret whore,
and less exposed, Horace (a) calls "devium scortum", an whore that was
at some distance from the public road, not so common as others: so in
the Apocryph,"The women also with cords about them, sitting in the ways,
burn bran for perfume: but if any of them, drawn by some that passeth
by, lie with him, she reproacheth her fellow, that she was not thought
as worthy as herself, nor her cord broken.'' (Baruch 6:43)whorish women
are represented as sitting in the ways and by the roadside, girt with
cords (of bulrushes, and so easily broken), to be picked up by men as
they passed by; referring to what Herodotus (b) reports of the women in
the temple of Venus at Babylon. This method Tamar took:

for she saw that Shelah was grown: was at least at the age of her former
husbands when, married, if not older: this might be two or three years
after his brother's death: for it was in process of time, or when there
had been a multiplication of days after this, that Judah's wife died,
and now his mourning for her was over, [Gen
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#012),

and she was not given unto him for wife: as he had given her reason to
expect, [Gen 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#011), and as was usually
done.

\(t\) Alex. ab Alexand. Genial. Dier. l. 5. c. 18. (u) Satyr. 6. (w)
Pitts's Account of the Mahometans, p. 56, 67. and Norden's Travels in
Egypt, vol. 2. p. 47. (x) De profugis, p. 471. (y) De loc. Heb. fol. 87.
F. G. (z) Epigram, 35. 16. (a) Carmin. l. 2. Ode 11. (b) Clio sive, l.
1. c. 199.

[Genesis 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 38:15</span></span>

When Judah saw her, he thought her to be an harlot,.... By her posture
and the place she was in:

because she had covered her face; with her veil, that he did not know
her; for this is not given as a reason why he took her to be an harlot;
the reason of this was, because she sat in the public road; but having
covered her face he could not discern who she was, and therefore, from
the other circumstance, concluded that she was an harlot, and sat there
to prostitute herself to any that passed by.

[Genesis 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 38:16</span></span>

And he turned unto her by the way,.... Which led to her; he turned out
of the way in which he was to that where she sat; and very probably it
was at some little distance from the way, and therefore he turned aside
to it, his lust towards her being excited at the sight of her; perhaps
he left his friend Hirah the Adullamite, and sent him on his way, while
he committed the following crime:

and said, go to, I pray thee, let me come in unto thee; that is, lie
with her:

for he knew not that she was his daughter in law; or otherwise, it is
suggested by the historian, he would not have offered such a thing to
her; but though this may excuse him from wilful incest, yet not from
fornication; for he took her to be an harlot, and however knew she was
not his wife, and whom he ought not to have had any concern with in such
a manner:

and she said, what wilt thou give me, that thou mayest come in unto me?
perhaps she said this with a very low voice, that he might not know her
by it; and she behaved like an harlot by requiring an hire, on condition
of which she consented: she knew Judah though he did not know her, and
therefore cannot be excused from wilful incest: some indeed extenuate
her crime, by supposing that she, though a Canaanite, was become a
proselyte to the true religion by marrying into Judah's family, and had
knowledge of the Messiah being to be born of Jacob's line; and therefore
was desirous of being the mother or ancestor at least of that great
Person, and so took this method; that since she could not have the son
for her husband, was desirous of enjoying the father, not for the
gratification of her lust, but in hopes of the promised seed; and
accordingly she has a place in the genealogy of the Messiah, [Mat
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003).

[Genesis 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 38:17</span></span>

And he said, I will send thee a kid from the flock,.... Either from
Timnath, where his flock was shearing, or rather from Adullam, where he
lived; since it is probable he was now returning from Timnath, where he
had been feasting and making merry with his shearers, and so in a
disposition to commit such an action:

and she said, wilt thou give me a pledge, till thou send it? she made no
objection to the hire or present, only required a pawn, or security for
it till she had it; and this was her view indeed in asking an hire that
she might have something to produce, should she prove with child by him,
to convince him by whom it was.

[Genesis 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 38:18</span></span>

And he said, what pledge shall I give thee?.... Being willing to part
with anything for the gratification of his lust:

and she said, thy signet, and thy bracelets, and thy staff that is in
thine hand; she asks all these, that if one should be lost, or fail of
being sufficient proof, the other might: the first of these the
Septuagint version renders, "thy ring"; the ring upon his finger, which
had a seal on it, and was the signet of his right hand; so Onkelos and
Ben Melech: the second word seems not so well rendered, since
"bracelets" were wore by women and not men: Jarchi takes it to be a
garment with which he was covered; so Ben Melech and the Targum, a
cloak, which is not likely, that she should desire him to strip off his
clothes: it seems to be either a covering of his head, a wrap of linen
such as the Turks wear, or else a handkerchief he had in his pocket; and
the staff in his hand was either his walking staff or a shepherd's crook
or staff:

and he gave it her, all the above things as a pledge:

and came in unto her; not on the public road, but in some private place
at some distance, to which they retired. Maimonides (c) says, before the
law was given, if a man met a woman in the street, and he and she
agreed, he gave her hire, and he lay with her, and went away, and such
an one was called "Kedeshah", a harlot, the word used afterwards for
Tamar:

and she conceived by him; she proved with child upon it.

\(c\) Hilchot lshot, c. 1. sect. 4.

[Genesis 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 38:19</span></span>

And she arose and went away,.... To her father's house immediately, as
soon as ever she had parted with Judah; and lest she should be found by
the person that would be sent with the kid, and be discovered, she made
all the haste she could:

and laid by her veil from her, and put on the garments of her widowhood;
that it might not be known or suspected that she had been abroad.

[Genesis 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 38:20</span></span>

And Judah sent the kid by the hand of his friend the Adullamite,.... Who
went with him to Timnath, and was privy to all this wickedness, and kept
the secret; but would have acted the more friendly and faithful part had
he dissuaded him from it: him he employed to carry the kid he had
promised, and not any of his servants, for the greater secrecy: and

to receive his pledge from the woman's hand; his signet, bracelets, and
staff, or whatever they were:

but he found her not; she was gone from the place where she sat, or
where she retired to with Judah.

[Genesis 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 38:21</span></span>

Then he asked the men of that place,.... Or "of her place" (d), of the
woman's place, supposing that she dwelt somewhere thereabout:

saying, where is the harlot that was openly by the wayside? that sat
there very publicly some little time ago: the word for "harlot" (e)
comes from another, which signifies to sanctify or separate to holy
uses; and harlots were so called, either by an antiphrasis, by way of
contradiction, being unholy; or because, as Jarchi observes, they were
separated and destined to whoredom; or because they were such as were
devoted to Venus, and the worshippers of her, and prostitutes in her
temple, and in the temples of other Heathen deities; but it is
questionable whether such practices as yet were used:

and they said, there was no harlot in this place; they had not known any
harlot to frequent that place lately, and Tamar sat there so small a
time as not to have been observed by them.

\(d\) "viros loci ejus, scil mulieris", Piscator, Schimdt. (e)

[Genesis 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 38:22</span></span>

And he returned to Judah, and said, I cannot find her,.... That is, the
Adullamite returned to him, and informed him that he could not find the
harlot to whom he was sent to deliver the kid and receive the pledge,
after he had made the strictest inquiry for her he could:

and also the men of the place said, that there was no harlot in this
place; by which it appears, that near the place where Tamar was, there
was a town or city, and which was so free from such infamous persons,
that there was not one in it that was known to be of such a character,
at least, that in such a public manner exposed herself: it would be well
if the same could be said of many other places.

[Genesis 38:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 38:23</span></span>

And Judah said, let her take it to her,.... The pledge, and make no
further inquiry after her:

lest we be shamed; Judah for committing fornication, which even among
Heathens, at least at that time of day, was reckoned a shameful action;
and be laughed at also, for committing such a pledge to an whore, who
had tricked him out of it; and his friend Hirah for conniving at the
sin, and being employed on such an errand:

behold, I sent this kid, and thou hast not found her: who could be a
witness for him, if there should be any occasion, that he was faithful
to his promise.

[Genesis 38:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 38:24</span></span>

And it came to pass about three months after,.... The above affair
happened, and when the pregnancy of Tamar began to be somewhat visible,
as it does in women with child about that time:

that it was told Judah, saying, Tamar thy daughter in law hath played
the harlot: her being with child being observed by some of the family,
or her neighbours, and knowing that she did not cohabit with Shelah,
who, according to custom, ought to have been her husband, concluded that
she had had a criminal conversation with some other person, which they
were officious enough to report to Judah:

and also, behold, she is with child by whoredom; which was judged to be
a plain proof and evidence that she had played the harlot:

and Judah said, bring her forth, and let her be burnt: not that Judah
can be thought to be a civil magistrate in a Canaanitish and Heathen
city where he sojourned, and as such pronounced this sentence on her at
once, or even had the power of life and death in his own family; and
besides Tamar was not in his, but in her own father's house: but the
sense seems to be, that as he was a man of credit and esteem in the
neighbourhood, and had an influence and interest in it; he moved that
she might be brought out of her father's house, and take her trial
before the civil magistrates, and be committed to prison until she was
delivered, for it would have been barbarous, and contrary to the law and
light of nature, to have burnt her when quick with child, and then
indeed to be burnt to death, according to the usage of this country; and
as we find adultery in later times was punished with this kind of death,
even among Heathens, [Jer 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer029.htm#022); as it
was in Egypt in the times of Sesostris the second (f); so Salaethus,
prince of Croton in Italy, made a law that adulterers should be burnt
alive, as Lucian (g) relates; as did also Macrinus the emperor, that
those that were guilty of adultery should be burnt alive together, their
bodies joined to each other (h): and this criminal action of Tamar was
judged adultery, because she was, of right, and according to a custom or
law then in use, the wife of Shelah: the Targum of Jonathan intimates,
she was judged deserving of this death, because the daughter of a
priest; the same law obtaining among the patriarchs as did in the times
of Moses, [Lev 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#009); and some, as
Jarchi relates, say she was the daughter of Shem (i), the same with
Melchizedek, priest of the most high God: one reason why Judah was in
haste to have the sentence pronounced on her, and as soon as could be
executed, was not only the disgrace she brought upon his family, but
that she might be dispatched, and so his son Shelah freed from being
obliged to marry her, which he did not care he should, and was glad of
this opportunity to prevent it.

\(f\) Diodor. Sicul. l. 1. p. 54. (g) "Pro mercede conductis". (h) Alex.
ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 4. c. 1. (i) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 4. 1.

[Genesis 38:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 38:25</span></span>

When she was brought forth,.... From her father's house, not to the
place of execution, or in order to be burnt, but to the court of
judicature, in order to take tier trial:

she sent to her father in law, saying, by the man whose these are,

am I with child; she sent a messenger to him, and by him the signet,
bracelets, and staff, be they what they may, she had received from him
as a pledge for the kid he promised her; and ordered the messenger to
say, at the same time he showed him these things, that she was with
child by the person to whom they belonged; which was a very modest way
of laying it to his charge, and yet very striking and convincing:

and she said; by the messenger she sent:

discern, I pray thee, whose are these, the signet, and bracelets, and
staff; which were the things given her as a pledge till she received the
kid, the hire she was to have for his lying with her.

[Genesis 38:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 38:26</span></span>

And Judah acknowledged them,.... He knew them, and owned them to be his:

and said, she hath been more righteous than I; he means, not with
respect to the sin of uncleanness committed by them, in which she was
the greatest criminal; she sat not only in the way to tempt him to it,
but she knew who he was, and wilfully committed incest with him; whereas
he thought and knew of nothing else but simple fornication; but with
respect to the affairs in connection between them: she had on her part,
according to his direction, kept herself a widow, in expectation of
being given to his son Shelah for a wife; but he had not made good his
part, he had not fulfilled his promise, he had neglected to give her to
his son, which he ought to have done, according to the usage of those
times, and as he had suggested to her he would; and his neglect of this
had been the cause and occasion of this criminal conversation between
them; and this is the reason he himself gives of her being more
righteous than he:

because I gave her not to Shelah my son; as he ought to have done, and
as he promised he would:

and he knew her again no more; in a carnal way; he did not repeat the
sin, but abstained from it having, no doubt, true repentance for it;
though Jarchi observes, that some interpret the words, and Ben Melech
says some copies read, "he did not cease to know her"; but took her for
his wife and married her, which is supposed to be as justifiable as
other things done before the law of Moses; but this is not likely, and
it looks as if he never married any wife after, or, if he did, had no
more children, since we read of no other but Shelah, and the twins he
had by Tamar; and it seems as if Shelah also did not marry Tamar upon
this, such an incest being committed with her, since he appears to have
had children by another woman, [Num
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#020).

[Genesis 38:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 38:27</span></span>

And it came to pass in the time of her travail,.... When her time to
bring forth was come, and her pains were on her, and her midwife with
her:

that, behold, twins were in her womb; which the midwife could discover
before the birth of either.

[Genesis 38:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 38:28</span></span>

And it came to pass when she travailed,.... Her birth throes came strong
and quick upon her:

that the one put out his hand; which showed that she was like to have a
difficult and dangerous time of it; that the birth was not like to be
according to the usual and natural order, which may be considered as a
correction for her sin:

and the midwife took and bound upon his hand a scarlet thread, saying,

this came out first; she tied this to his wrist, that she might know
whose hand it was, and so which was the firstborn; which, to know was a
matter of consequence, since to the firstborn there were some special
and peculiar privileges.

[Genesis 38:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 38:29</span></span>

And it came to pass as he drew back his hand,.... Into the "uterus"
again:

that, behold, his brother came out; out of his mother's womb, and so was
properly born first:

and she said; either Tamar, or rather, her midwife:

how hast thou broken forth? it was astonishing to her how it could be,
having never met with the like in her practice before; she could not
imagine how it was possible for him to come forth first, when his
brother lay in the way of him, and nearest the birth, as appeared by his
putting out his hand:

this breach be upon thee; if any damage comes either to the mother or to
the brother, and so carries in it the nature of an imprecation; or
rather, that the memory of so strange an event might be preserved, she
imposed a name on him that should continue it:

therefore his name was called Pharez: or "therefore he called", &c. (k);
Judah called his name Pharez, agreeably to what the midwife had related.
From him, in a line of succession, sprang the Messiah, the Pharez or
breaker, [Mic 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#013); for the sake of
which the whole history of this chapter seems to be recorded, [Mat
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003).

\(k\) "vocavit", Pagninus, Montanus; "ideoque vocavit", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Schmidt.

[Genesis 38:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 38:30</span></span>

And afterward came out his brother that had the scarlet thread upon his
hand,.... By which it was known that he so far came out first; which
confirms the remarkable birth of his brother, who notwithstanding got
the start of him:

and his name was called Zarah; not from "rising", or his coming forth
like the rising sun, as is usually observed; but rather from his return,
or drawing back his hand, and as it were returning to his mother's womb;
and so, according to Hillerus (l), Zarah, by a transposition of letters,
comes from "Chazar", to return: but Jarchi thinks he had his name from
the refulgent appearance of the scarlet thread on his wrist.

\(l\) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 372.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 39](gen039)

</div>
