<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen042)  [Next](gen044.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 43](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 43:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 43

This chapter informs us how that the famine continued in the land of
Canaan, and the corn that Jacob's family had from Egypt being consumed,
Jacob pressed his sons to go down for more, which they refused to do,
unless Benjamin was sent with them, for whose safety Judah offered to
become a surety, [Gen 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001.md); Jacob with
reluctance was prevailed upon to let him go, and dismissed them with a
present to the governor of Egypt, and with double money to buy corn
with, and with his blessing upon them, [Gen
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011.md); upon which they set out for
Egypt; and when they came into the presence of Joseph, he seeing
Benjamin with them, ordered his steward to have them to his house, and
get dinner ready, it being his pleasure that they should dine with him
that day, [Gen 43:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#015.md); this threw them
into a fright, supposing they were going to be called to an account for
the money they found in their sacks; wherefore they related to the
steward very particularly the whole of that affair, who bid them not be
uneasy, for he had had their money; and as a proof that things would go
well with them, brought Simeon out to them, and treated them very kindly
and gently, [Gen 43:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#018.md); and having got
their present ready against Joseph came home, they delivered it to him
with great veneration and submission; who asked of the welfare of their
father, and whether that was not their younger brother they spoke of,
the sight of whom so affected him, that he was obliged in haste to
retire to his chamber, and weep, [Gen
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#025.md); and having washed his face, and
composed himself, he returned and ordered dinner to be brought, which
was set on different tables, one for himself and the Egyptians, and the
other for his brethren, whom he placed according to their age, to their
great surprise; and sent them messes from his table to each, and to
Benjamin five times more than the rest, and they were so liberally
entertained, that they became cheerful and merry, [Gen
43:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#031.md).

[Genesis 43:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 43:1</span></span>

And the famine was sore in the land. In the land of Canaan; it increased
yet more and more: this is observed for the sake of what follows,
showing the reason and necessity of Jacob's sons taking a second journey
into Egypt.

[Genesis 43:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 43:2</span></span>

And it came to pass, when they had eaten up the corn which they had
brought out of Egypt,.... Which, in so numerous a family as Jacob's was,
having so many children, grandchildren, and servants, what nine men on
so many asses could bring with them must be consumed in a short time,
how long cannot be said; no doubt they lived sparingly on it in such a
time of scarcity, to make it last as long as they could, and perhaps
only he, his children and grandchildren, might eat of it; the servants,
as Calvin observes, might live on meaner food, as acorns, herbs, and
roots; and it must not be thought that all this corn was eaten up
entirely, and none left, but the far greater part of it, and but very
little remaining; or otherwise, how should Jacob, and his sons' wives
and children be supported until the return of his sons from Egypt with
fresh provisions? indeed it may be supposed, that the land of Canaan
produced some corn, though but little; and it is certain there were
other fruits which were serviceable for food, as appears from [Gen
43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011.md),

their father said, go again, buy us a little food; just enough for him,
and them, and theirs, for the present; hoping that the famine would be
over quickly, and therefore orders them to go once more to Egypt, and
buy some provisions: they made no motion themselves to go, as it is
highly probable they determined they would not, since Jacob had resolved
Benjamin should not go, but waited for their father's motion, and which
he did not make until necessity obliged him.

[Genesis 43:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 43:3</span></span>

And Judah spake unto him,.... Reuben the eldest son had met with a
repulse already, [Gen 42:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#036.md); Simeon
the next was now in Egypt, [Gen 42:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#024.md),
and Levi, perhaps on account of the affair of Shechem, [Gen
34:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen034.htm#025.md), did not yet stand well in his
father's favour and affection; wherefore Judah being next, with the
consent of his brethren, undertakes to manage the affair with him, who
had doubtless an interest in him, as well as authority among his
brethren, and was a prudent man, and could speak well:

saying, the man did solemnly protest unto us; meaning Joseph, though he
then knew not that it was he; whom he calls "the man", not by way of
contempt, or as thinking and speaking meanly of him, but the reverse,
the great man, the honourable man, the governor of Egypt; and so the
Septuagint version adds, "the man, the lord of the land"; he in the
strongest terms, and in the most solemn manner, protested by the life of
Pharaoh:

saying, ye shall not see my face; with acceptance, should not be
admitted to come near him, or treat with him, and purchase any corn of
him:

except your brother be with you; their youngest brother Benjamin.

[Genesis 43:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 43:4</span></span>

If thou wilt send our brother with us,.... Give orders for his going
with us, and put him under our care:

we will go down and buy thee food; signifying, on the above condition,
that they were ready and willing to take a journey into Egypt, and buy
provisions for him and his family, otherwise not.

[Genesis 43:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 43:5</span></span>

But if thou wilt not send him, we will not go down,.... This they said
not as undutiful, and from a spirit of rebellion and disobedience to
their father, or of stubbornness and obstinacy, but because they durst
not go down, nor could they with any safety; they might expect to be
taken up as spies, and put to death as they were threatened; and
besides, it would be in vain, and to no purpose, since there was no
likelihood of succeeding, or of getting any provision:

for the man said unto us, ye shall not see my face, except your brother
be with you; which they repeat both for the confirmation of it, and as
an apology for themselves, to clear them from any charge of
unfaithfulness.

[Genesis 43:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 43:6</span></span>

And Israel said,.... In answer to the speech of Judah:

wherefore dealt ye so ill with me; had done that which brought so much
evil upon him, gave him so much grief and trouble, and threw him into
such perplexity and distress, that he knew not what to do, or course to
take:

as to tell the man whether ye had yet a brother? which he thought was
done imprudently and unadvisedly, and that there was no need of it;
which, had it not been done, would have prevented this anxiety of mind
he was now in, and the mischief he feared would follow.1

[Genesis 43:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 43:8</span></span>

And Judah said unto Israel his father, send the lad with me,

and we will arise and go,.... Directly to Egypt for corn; Judah calls
Benjamin a lad, because the youngest brother, and tenderly brought up by
his father, who had an affectionate fondness for him as if he had been a
child; otherwise he must be thirty two years of age, for he was seven
years younger than Joseph, who was now thirty nine years of age; yea,
Benjamin must have children of his own, who went with him and his father
into Egypt, [Gen 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021.md); for the
computation of Benjamin's age, see [Gen
30:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#022.md),

that we may live, and not die, both we, and thou, and also our little
ones; he argues, that if they with Benjamin went down to Egypt for corn,
there was a possibility, yea, a probability that they would all live,
even Benjamin also; but if not, they must all in course die, and
Benjamin likewise; and therefore it was most prudent and advisable, for
the sake of all their lives, of them and theirs, and for the sake of
Benjamin among the rest, for whom Jacob was so particularly concerned,
to let him go with them to Egypt for corn, since he must die if they did
not go, and he could but die if he did go; and there was great
likelihood, if not a certainty, he would not; at least Judah was
confident he would not, as appears by what follows.

[Genesis 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 43:9</span></span>

I will be surety for him,.... Engage for his safe return:

of my hand shall thou require him; I will be answerable for him:

if I bring him not to thee, and set him before thee: do not return him
from Egypt, and bring him to Canaan, into his father's house and
presence safe, and sound:

then let me bear the blame for ever; of persuading his father to let him
go with him; all this he said, to show what care he would take of him,
and what confidence he had that no evil would befall him, that he would
be returned with them in safety; which he might ground upon the
assurance that Joseph had given, that they should not die if they
brought their brother with them, [Gen
42:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#020.md); and perhaps Judah, as Schmidt
thinks, might be under a special instinct of divine Providence, which
directed him to say these things: and it may be added, that Jacob also
might be under a divine impulse, which influenced him to regard what
Judah said, or otherwise his suretyship was but a poor security, and of
little avail.

[Genesis 43:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 43:10</span></span>

For except we had lingered,.... Delayed going down to Egypt, through the
demur Jacob made of tending Benjamin with them:

surely now we had returned this second time; they would have made their
journey to Egypt, and returned again with their corn, and their brother
Benjamin too, as Judah supposed, before this time; so that by these
delays they were losing time, and involving themselves and families in
distress for want of corn.

[Genesis 43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 43:11</span></span>

And their father said unto them,.... Being in some measure convinced by
their reasonings, and in part at least reconciled to let Benjamin go
with them, there being nothing to be done, he perceived, unless he
consented to it:

if it must be so now, do this; if nothing else will do but Benjamin must
go, which after all he was reluctant to, then he advises them to do as
follows:

take of the best fruits in the land in your vessels; such as were the
peculiar produce of the land of Canaan, and the best of it; for which it
was most famous, and praised, as the word used signifies; these Jacob
advises to take and put into their sacks they carried to bring back
their corn in:

and carry down the man a present; the great man and governor of Egypt,
whose name was not known, little thinking it was his son Joseph; this he
proposed to be done, in order to procure his friendship, that he might
carry it kindly and respectfully to them, release Simeon, and send back
Benjamin with them. The present consisted of the following things:

a little balm: or rosin, of which there was great quantity in and about
Gilead; See Gill on [Jer 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022.md),

and a little honey; the land of Canaan in general is called a land
flowing with milk and honey; and some parts of it were famous for it, as
the, parts about Ziph, called from thence the honey of Ziphim (i): this
is the first time mention is made of "honey" in Scripture. Some say (k)
Bacchus was the inventor of it. Justin (l) makes a very ancient king of
a people in the country, now called Spain, to whom he gives the name of
Gorgoris, to be the first that found out the way of gathering honey; but
by this it appears to be of a more early date. Dr. Shaw (m) thinks, that
not honey, properly so called, is meant, but a kind of "rob" made of the
juice of grapes, called by the Arabs "dibsa", a word near in sound with,
and from the same root as this. And who further observes, that Hebron
alone (the place were Jacob now was) sends every year to Egypt three
hundred camel loads, i.e. near two thousand quintals of this rob: and
Leo Africanus says (n), there is but little honey to be found in Egypt,
wherefore it made this part of the present the more acceptable:

spices; of various sorts, a collection of them; though it is thought, by
Bochart and others, that the "storax" is particularly meant; the best of
that sort being, as Pliny (o) says in Judea. The Targum and Jarchi take
it to be "wax", as do also other Jewish writers:

and myrrh; the liquor called "stacte", that drops from the myrrh tree.
Some will have this "lot", as the word is, the same with "ladanum"; one
should rather think that it should be the lotus or lote tree, the fruit
of which, Pliny (p) says, is the size of a bean, and of a saffron
colour, and Herodotus (q) says, it is sweet like a date; but that it was
frequent in Egypt, and needed not be carried there. The Targum renders
it "chestnuts", and so Ben Melech, as it does what follows:

nuts, and almonds, the oil of nuts, and the oil of almonds: the former
design not common, but the pistachio nuts, as Jarchi observes from R.
Machir; and these, as Pliny (r) says, were well known in Syria, and were
good for food and drink, and against the bites of serpents; and, as
Bochart (s) observes, are frequently mentioned by naturalists along with
almonds, and as like unto them.

\(i\) Misn. Machshirin, c. 5. sect. 9. (k) "Et a Baccho mella reperta
ferunt", Ovid. Fast. l. 3. (l) E Trogo, l. 44. c. 4. (m) Travels, p.
339. No. 6. Ed. 2. (n) Descriptio Africae, l. 8. p. 682. (o) Nat. Hist.
l. 12. c. 25. (p) Ib. l. 13. c. 17. (q) Melpomene, sive, l. 4. c. 177.
Vid. Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 92. (r) Nat. Hist. l. 13. c. 5. (s) Canaan,
l. 1. c. 10. col. 389.

[Genesis 43:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 43:12</span></span>

And take double money in your hand,.... Than what they carried before,
either to buy as much more as they then did; or rather because of the
greater scarcity of corn, as Jarchi observes, which made it doubly
dearer; for this seems to be different from the money they are also bid
to take in return for that found in their sacks, which was a third
parcel, as follows:

and the money that was brought again in the mouth of your sacks, carry
it again in your hand; that it might be ready to pay upon demand, should
they be charged with nonpayment for the corn they had before:

peradventure it was an oversight; a mistake of the governors, or of
those that were under him, concerned in the sale of the corn, and
receiving money for it, or of Jacob's sons; he could not tell how it
was, but some way or other he supposed a mistake was made.

[Genesis 43:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 43:13</span></span>

Take also your brother,.... Their brother Benjamin, committing him into
their hands and to their care, hereby declaring his consent and
willingness that he should go with them:

and arise, go again to the man; the governor of Egypt, to buy corn of
him.

[Genesis 43:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 43:14</span></span>

And God Almighty give you mercy before the man,.... Who has the hearts
of all men in his hands, kings, princes, governors, even those who are
the most cruel and hardhearted, rough and severe in their tempers and
dispositions, and such an one they had represented this man to be; one
that had spoke roughly to them, and used them roughly: Jacob therefore
sent him a present to soften his mind, and now he puts up a prayer to
God, and dismisses his sons with his good wishes for them, that God
would incline the heart of the governor to show kindness to them, and
let them have corn, nor use any of them ill: particularly:

that he may send away your other brother and Benjamin; release Simeon,
and send him and Benjamin aiming with them when they returned:

if I be bereaved of my children, I am bereaved; this he said, not as
utterly despairing of their return, but as expressive of his patient
submission to the divine will, be it as it may be.

[Genesis 43:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 43:15</span></span>

And the men took the present,.... Their father directed them to:

and they took double money in their hand; besides what they found in
their sacks mouths, which they also carried with them:

and Benjamin; they took him likewise with their father's leave:

and rose up, and went down to Egypt, and stood before Joseph; presented
themselves to him, and their petitions for more corn, as well as to
answer to any questions that should be asked them.

[Genesis 43:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 43:16</span></span>

And when Joseph saw Benjamin with them,.... Whom he knew, though he had
not seen him twenty two years, and though he must be very much altered,
being but about ten years of age when Joseph was said into Egypt, yet
being with the rest of his brethren, whom he knew very well, concluded
it must be him:

he said to the ruler of his house; his steward, as be is after called,
not his son Manasseh, as the Targum of Jonathan:

bring these men home; to his own house, for Joseph was now at or near
the place where were the granaries of corn, and where that was said and
distributed:

and slay, and make ready; or "slay a slaughter" (t), that is, of beasts
for food; a sheep, or a lamb, or a calf, very probably, and order it to
be dressed, boiled or roasted, or both, that it might be fit for food:
wherefore Aben Ezra must be mistaken when [Gen
46:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#034.md); he says, that the Egyptians in
those times did not eat flesh, nor might any kill a sheep; for it cannot
be thought that Joseph could order a dinner for his brethren, to whom as
yet he did not choose to make himself known, in direct violation of the
customs and laws of Egypt, and who, it is plain by what follows, dined
as an Egyptian, and with the Egyptians, and not as an Hebrew, and with
his brethren as Hebrews; besides, for what purpose did Pharaoh get and
possess such herds and flocks of cattle, if not for food as well as
other uses? see [Gen 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#006.md); though in
later times they abstained from eating various animals, as Porphyry (u)
from Chaeremon relates, and particularly from sheep and goats, according
to Juvenal (x):

for these men shall dine with me at noon; which was the usual time of
dining with the eastern people, as it is now with us, though with the
Romans at evening.

\(t\) "macta mactationem", Drusius, Schmidt; "macta animalia", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator. (u) De abstinentia, l. 4. sect. 6, 7. (x)
"-----lanatis animalibus abstinet omnis Mensa, nefas illic foetus
jugulare capellae." Satyr 15. ver. 11, 12.

[Genesis 43:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 43:17</span></span>

And the man did as Joseph bade: and the man brought the men into
Joseph's house. Showed them the way to it, and introduced them into it,
and led them into some apartment in it, and ordered every thing to be
got ready for dinner as his master had bid him, being a diligent and
faithful servant: at old Cair is shown to travellers (y) the house of
Joseph in the tower, and a very surprising well, said to be made by him,
and here, they say; the granaries were, in which the corn was laid up.

\(y\) Radzivil, Thevenot, Le Brun & Lucas apud Jablonski de Terra
Goshen, Dissert. 5. sect. 6.

[Genesis 43:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 43:18</span></span>

And the men were afraid, because they were brought into Joseph's
house,.... It not being usual, as Jarchi observes, for those that came
to buy corn to lodge there, but at an inn in the city:

and they said, because of the money that was returned in our sacks at
the first time are we brought in; to examine and inquire of them how
they came to go away without paying for their corn, take up their money
again after they had laid it down, and take it away with them, and so
were guilty of tricking and defrauding, if not of theft:

that he may seek occasion against us: or "roll on us" (z); cast all the
shame on them, and leave the reproach and scandal of it on them:

and fall upon us; with hard words, and severe menaces, if not with
blows:

and take us for bondmen, and our asses; imprison them, which was the
punishment for fraud and theft, and take their asses as a forfeiture.

\(z\) "ut devolvat (hoc) in nos", Tigurine version.

[Genesis 43:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 43:19</span></span>

And they came near to the steward of Joseph's house,.... The same person
before called the ruler of his house, under whose direction they were;
just before they came to the house, as it seems by what follows, they
made up to him as having something to say to him:

and they communed with him at the door of the house; before they went
into it, being uneasy and eager to know what should be the meaning of
their being brought thither, which was unusual.

[Genesis 43:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 43:20</span></span>

And said, O sir,.... Or, "on me, my lord" (a), one said in the name of
the rest, perhaps Judah, on me let the blame lie, if guilty of rudeness
in making our address to thee; or as the Vulgate Latin version, "we
pray, sir, that thou wouldest hear us"; and so Jarchi and Aben Ezra say
the phrase is expressive of beseeching, entreating, and supplicating:

we came indeed down at the first time to buy food; not to spy the land
but to buy corn, and not to get it by fraud or tricking but by paying
for it the price that was required.

\(a\) "in me Domine mi", Montanus.

[Genesis 43:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">gen 43:21</span></span>

And it came to pass when we came to the inn,.... Upon the road, on the
first day's journey, to refresh themselves and their cattle:

that we opened our sacks; to give provender to our cattle; by which it
appears that they all did this, though it is only said of one of them at
the inn, and of all of them when they came home, [Gen
42:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#027.md),

and, behold, every man's money was in the mouth of his sack, our money
in full weight; nothing wanting of it; it being usual in those times to
pay money by weight, and not by the tale of pieces:

and we have brought it again in our hand; in order to pay it for the
corn we have had, having no design to defraud.

[Genesis 43:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">gen 43:22</span></span>

And other money have we brought down in our hands to buy food,....
Double money for a double quantity, or because the price of corn was now
doubled; and their bringing this besides the other showed their honest
and upright intentions:

we cannot tell who put our money in our sacks; we are quite ignorant of
it, and can by no means account for it, and therefore hope no blame will
be laid on us.

[Genesis 43:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">gen 43:23</span></span>

And he said, peace be unto you, fear not,.... Do not be uneasy and
disturbed, you have nothing to fear, you are in no danger:

your God, and the God of your father, hath given you treasure in your
sacks; the hidden treasure, as the word signifies, found in their sacks;
was there by the providence of God, so disposing the heart of Joseph to
order it to be put there, as the steward interpreted it; who by being
Joseph's family had got some knowledge of the true God, and of his all
wise and disposing Providence:

I had your money; he received it of them, which he acknowledges, and
that was sufficient to acquit them from guile and theft, though he does
not say that he put the money into their sacks, or by whose order it was
done:

and he brought Simeon out unto them; either out of prison, or out of
some other room to them, which was, no doubt, done by the direction of
Joseph.

[Genesis 43:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">gen 43:24</span></span>

And the man brought the men into Joseph's house,.... After the above
discourse had passed between them, and he had made their minds easy,
both with respect to the money, and by bringing Simeon unbound to them:

and gave them water, and they washed their feet; which was usually done
in the eastern countries after travelling, and when about to take a
meal, and was both for refreshment and cleanliness:

and he gave their asses provender; thus were they hospitably
entertained, they and all that belonged to them.

[Genesis 43:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">gen 43:25</span></span>

And they made ready the present against Joseph came at noon,.... They
took it out of their vessels or bags in which they brought it, having
unladen their asses, and disposed of it in a proper manner to present it
to him when he came home at noon to dine:

for they heard that they should eat bread there; dine there, bread being
put for all provision: this was told them, very probably, by the
steward, or by some of the servants in the house, or they overheard what
Joseph said to the steward, [Gen
43:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#016.md).

[Genesis 43:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">gen 43:26</span></span>

And when Joseph came home,.... In order to dine, it being noontime:

they brought him the present which was in their hand into the house;
everyone took a part of it in his hand, and brought it to Joseph in the
parlour where he was, and delivered it to him as a present from their
father, or from themselves, or it may be as from both:

and bowed themselves to him to the earth; in the most prostrate and
humble manner, now again fulfilling his dream, and more completely than
before, for now all his eleven brethren were together, signified by the
eleven stars in the dream, that made obeisance to him, see [Gen
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#009.md).

[Genesis 43:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">gen 43:27</span></span>

And he asked them of their welfare,.... Or "peace" (b), their
prosperity, especially of the health of their bodies, whether they were
well and in good health after so long a journey:

and said, is your father well, the old man of whom ye spake? when they
were with him before, and told him they were all the sons of one man,
who dwelt in Canaan:

is he yet alive? which he was very desirous of knowing; for, being
advanced in years, he might fear he was removed by death in the time
between their going and returning.

\(b\) "ad pacem", Montanus, "de pace", Vatablus, Drusius, Piscator,
Schmidt.

[Genesis 43:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">gen 43:28</span></span>

And they answered, thy servant our father is in good health, he is yet
alive,.... Which is an answer to both his questions; and by calling
their father Joseph's servant, he did obeisance to him in them, as well
as by sending a present to him, which they delivered as coming from him
his servant; and it is not improbable that Jacob sent his salutation to
him as his servant, and so that part of the dream of Joseph's was also
fulfilled, which represented the sun doing obeisance to him, [Gen
37:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#009.md),

and they bowed their heads, and made obeisance; a second time, as they
did, no doubt, at every time they gave answer to Joseph's questions; and
this is again observed, to show the full completion of the above dream.

[Genesis 43:29](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">gen 43:29</span></span>

And he lifted up his eyes and saw his brother Benjamin,.... He had seen
him before when his brethren first presented themselves to him, but then
took no particular and special notice of him, only gave him a side look
as it were, but now he looked wistly at him:

his mother's son; the son of Rachel his mother, and who was his only
brother by his mother's side, the rest, though his brethren, yet only by
his father's side, not his mother's sons:

and said, is this your younger brother, of whom ye spake unto me? he
knew he was the same, but was willing to have it from their mouths, to
lead on to what he had further to say:

and he said; after they had answered his question, and told him it was
he:

God be gracious unto thee, my son; speaking as a superior, a governor,
in which capacity he was a father to his inferiors; and as a man, a
relation, a brother, though not as yet discovered; he spoke in the most
tender and affectionate manner, and, as a religious good man, he wishes
the best thing he could for his brother, the grace and goodness of God;
and which may be understood in the largest and most expressive sense, as
including all good things, temporal, spiritual, and eternal.

[Genesis 43:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">gen 43:30</span></span>

And Joseph made haste,.... To get out of the room where he was with his
brethren as fast as he could:

for his bowels did yearn upon his brother; his passions grew strong, his
affections were raised, his heart was full of tenderness, and there was
such a flow of love and joy at the sight of his brother, and the little
conversation he had with him, that he was ready to burst out, and must
have discovered himself if he had not immediately turned and got out of
the room:

and he sought where to weep; a proper place to vent his passion in tears
of joy, and relieve himself

and he entered into his chamber, and wept there; where he could be the
most retired, and not likely to be overheard.

[Genesis 43:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">gen 43:31</span></span>

And he washed his face,.... From the tears on it, that it might not be
discerned that he had been weeping:

and went out; of his chamber into the room again, where his brethren
were:

and refrained himself; from weeping, or showing any excess of passion,
love, joy, &c.

and said, set on bread; gave orders to his servants to bring in dinner,
and set it upon the table; bread, as before, being put for all kind of
food.

[Genesis 43:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">gen 43:32</span></span>

And they set on for him by himself,.... A table was placed and
provisions set upon it in one part of the room for Joseph by himself;
which was done either because he was an Hebrew, and the Egyptians might
not eat with him, nor he with them; or rather for the sake of grandeur,
he being the next man in the kingdom to Pharaoh:

and for them by themselves; another table was placed and spread for
Joseph's brethren by themselves, the reason of which is after given:

and for the Egyptians, which did eat with him, by themselves; a third
table was laid for such Egyptian noblemen and others, who were at this
time Joseph's guests, or used to dine with him:

because the Egyptians might not eat bread with the Hebrews, for that is
an abomination unto the Egyptians; the reason of which, as given by the
Targums of Onkelos and, Jonathan, is, because the creatures the
Egyptians worshipped the Hebrews eat; but it is a question whether such
creatures as oxen, sheep, goats, &c. which were eaten by the Hebrews,
were so early worshipped by the Egyptians; though they were in later
times, and particularly the Apis or ox, which is supposed by many to be
worshipped on the account of Joseph, and so after his time; rather the
abhorrence the Egyptians had the Hebrews in was on account of their
being shepherds, on a political account, they having before this time
suffered much by the insurrections and rebellions of such sort of
persons among themselves, who set up a kingdom and kings of their own,
called the "Hycsi", or pastor kings: or else this difference made
between the Egyptians and Hebrews at eating, was not on account of what
they did eat, as of the certain rites and customs the Egyptians had
peculiar to themselves in dressing their food, and eating it; and
therefore would not eat with any of another nation; so that this was not
any particular distaste they had to the Hebrews, but was their usage
towards men of all nations; for so Herodotus says (c), that"no Egyptian,
man or woman, might kiss the month of a Greek, or use a knife, or spit,
or pot;''that is, a knife a Greek had cut anything with, or a spit he
had roasted meat on, or a pot he had boiled it in; and adds,"nor might
taste of the flesh of an ox, cut with the knife of a Greek.''And indeed
they would not eat nor converse with any of another religion (d), be
they who they would.

\(c\) Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 41. (d) Chaeremon apud Porphyr. de
abstinentia, l. 4. sect. 6.

[Genesis 43:33](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">gen 43:33</span></span>

And they sat before him,.... At a table, so placed that they were in his
sight, and he had a full view of them:

the firstborn according to his birthright, and the youngest according to
his youth; everyone according to his age, Reuben, the firstborn, first,
and so on to Benjamin the youngest: thus they placed themselves as they
used to be in their father's family, or they were so placed by Joseph;
and if this was the case, it may be a reason, and a principal one, of
what follows:

and the men marvelled one at another; not the Egyptians, the guests of
Joseph, seeing eleven brethren placed in this manner, and these being
Hebrews, taken so much notice of; but Joseph's brethren, who either
wondered at the manner of their being seated so regular, according to
their age; or at the honour done them to dine with the governor, and at
the grandeur of the entertainment, and at the separate manner in which
the governor, and the nobles of Egypt, sat at meals; or at what follows.

[Genesis 43:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">gen 43:34</span></span>

And he took and sent messes unto there from before him,.... The several
dishes were brought before him, who cut them up, and sent to everyone
their part and portion, as was usual in those times and countries, and
afterwards elsewhere (e), for the master of the family or feast to
divide the food into parts, and to give to every guest his part; and
these were called, from their being sent, "missus", and from whence
seems to be our English word "messes", here used:

but Benjamin's mess was five times so much as any of theirs; which was
done out of his great affection to him, being his own brother both by
father and mother's side; and, as some think, to try his brethren, how
they stood affected to Benjamin, and observe if this did not raise their
envy to him, as his father's particular respect to him had raised it in
them against himself; and that, if it should, he might provide for his
safety, lest they should use him in like manner as they had used him.
This undoubtedly was designed as a peculiar favour, and a mark of
special honour and respect, it being usual for princes to send messes
from their tables to such as they favoured; and particularly it was
usual with the Egyptians for their kings to have double messes more than
the rest, in honour of them, as Herodotus (f) relates: Benjamin's mess
consisted either of five parts, or it was five times bigger than what
was sent to the rest; not but that they had all what was sufficient;
there was no want to any, but great plenty of everything for them all;
nor was this designed Benjamin, that he should eat the larger quantity,
only to show him distinguishing respect:

and they drank, and were merry with him; after dinner they drank wine
liberally and plentifully, but not to excess and intemperance, yet so as
to be cheerful and in good spirits; their fears being all dissipated by
this generous entertainment they met with.

\(e\) Athenaei Deipnosophist. l. 1. (f) Erato, sive, l. 6. c. 57.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 44](gen044.md)

</div>
