<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen019)  [Next](gen021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 20:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 20

This chapter relates the removal of Abraham to Gerar, [Gen
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001.md); the king of Gerar's taking to
him Sarah, whom Abraham had called his sister, [Gen
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#002.md); who is rebuked of God for it in
a dream, [Gen 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003.md); for which he makes
an apology that is admitted, only he is ordered to restore to Abraham
his wife, [Gen 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004.md); and accordingly
early in the morning he called his servants, and acquainted them with
what had happened, [Gen 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008.md); and then
sent for Abraham, and expressed his resentment at his usage of him, [Gen
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#009.md); which Abraham defended as well
as he could, [Gen 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#010.md); the issue of
all which was, great kindness was shown to Abraham, and his wife
restored to him, though with a reproof to her from the king, [Gen
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014.md); upon which Abraham prayed for
the healing of Abimelech and his family, in which he was heard and
answered, [Gen 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017.md).

[Genesis 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 20:1</span></span>

And Abraham journeyed from thence towards the south country,.... He
returned from the plains or oaks of Mamre, where he had lived fifteen or
twenty years, into the more southern parts of the land of Canaan: the
reason of this remove is not certain; some think, because he could not
bear the stench of the sulphurous lake, the cities of Sodom and Gomorrah
were become; and others, because of the scandal of Lot's incest with his
daughters, which prejudiced the idolatrous people in those parts more
against the true religion; neither of which are likely, by reason of the
distance; but the better reason seems to be, that it was so ordered in
Providence that he should remove from place to place, that it might
appear that he was but a sojourner in the land:

and dwelt between Kadesh and Shur; two wildernesses, as Jerom says (y),
one of which joined to Egypt, to which the people of Israel went when
they passed over the Red sea, and the other, Kadesh, reached to the
desert of the Saracens. Onkelos and Jonathan paraphrase the words
between Rekam and Chagra, or Hagra, the same place where the angel of
the Lord met with Hagar at the well; see Gill on [Gen
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#007.md) and See Gill on [Gen
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#014.md),

and sojourned in Gerar; or Gerara, as Jerom (z) calls it,"from whence he
says the Geraritic country in his time beyond Daroma, or the south, had
its name, and was twenty five miles distance from Eleutheropolis to the
south, and was formerly the southern border of the Canaanites, and the
metropolis of Palestine.''According to the Samaritan version, Gerar is
the same with Ashkelon, which was afterwards, when aristocracy took
place in this country, one of the five lordships of the Philistines; and
so says Africanus (a); and that Gerar was in the country of the
Philistines, and Abimelech was king of them, is clear from [Gen
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#032.md). This place was about six miles
from Mamre (b), from whence Abraham removed.

\(y\) De loc. Heb. fol, 91. I. (z) De loc. Heb. fol. 91. I. (a) Apud
Syncell. Chronic. p. 100. (b) Bunting's Travels, p. 57.

[Genesis 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 20:2</span></span>

And Abraham said of Sarah his wife, she is my sister,.... This he gave
out in all conversation he came into, and said it to every one that
asked who she was, which was little better than a lie; it at least was
an equivocation and deception, and not at all justifiable, and tended to
expose his wife's chastity, and discovered a distrust of divine
Providence; the same infirmity be had given way to, and the same evil he
had fallen into in Egypt, [Gen 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#011.md),
and therefore was the more inexcusable now; good men not only fall into
sin, but have their relapses:

and Abimelech king of Gerar sent and took Sarah; having heard or seen
what a beautiful woman. Sarah was, though ninety years of age, having
never bore children; and understanding she was a single person, sent his
servants to take her, and bring her to his house, in order to be his
wife, which seems to be done with some kind of force; and it can hardly
be thought that Abraham and Sarah would freely agree to it, at least it
must be done with reluctance on their parts. Whether Abimelech was the
first king of Palestine of this name, is not certain; if he was, which
is not improbable, it became usual afterwards for the kings thereof to
be so called, as Pharaoh was a common name to the kings of Egypt; it
signifies "father" and "king", as kings should be the fathers of their
people.

[Genesis 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 20:3</span></span>

But God came to Abimelech in a dream by night,.... Put a dream into his
mind, by which he cautioned him against taking Sarah to be his wife; so
careful was the Lord that no wrong should be done to such a godly and
virtuous person, to which she was exposed through the weakness of her
husband. Aben Ezra wrongly interprets this of an angel, when it was God
himself:

and said unto him, behold, thou art but a dead man, for the woman which
thou hast taken; that is, God would punish him with death, unless he
restored the woman, whom he had taken, to her husband; not for any
uncleanness he had committed with her, but for taking her without her
free and full consent, and without inquiring more strictly into her
relation to Abraham, and connection with him, and for his impure and
unlawful desires after her, if persisted in:

for she is a man's wife, or "married to an husband" (c); and therefore
it was unlawful in him to take her to be his wife.

\(c\) "maritata marito", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator, Schmidt.

[Genesis 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 20:4</span></span>

But Abimelech had not come near her,.... Sarah had been put into an
apartment in his palace, and not yet admitted into his company, not at
least to his bed; he had not lain with her, which is the design of the
expression: the Septuagint version is, "had not touched her", as in [Gen
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006.md); which is another phrase
expressive of the same thing:

and he said, Lord, wilt thou slay also a righteous nation? meaning
either his family, the greater part of which were not accessory to this
affair; or rather his kingdom, as Aben Ezra, see [Gen
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#009.md); which though not a nation of
righteous men, in a strict sense, see [Gen
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#011.md); yet with regard to this
business of Sarah were no ways criminal: either God had threatened to
destroy his people, as well as himself, if he did not return Sarah to
her husband, or committed iniquity with her; or he knew that this had
been usual for people to suffer for the crimes of their governors, and
like a true father of his country shows an affectionate concern for
their welfare in the first place; for this may be the sense of the word
"also", on which an emphasis is put; wilt thou not only slay me, but
also a whole nation for my sake, a nation free from all fault and blame
in this matter? though some think he has reference to the destruction of
Sodom and Gomorrah, a recent action, and fresh in his mind; as if he
should say, thou hast justly destroyed a wicked people for their sins,
and wilt thou also destroy a nation that at least, in comparison of
them, is a just and righteous one?

[Genesis 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 20:5</span></span>

Said he not unto me, she is my sister?.... By this it appears, that
Abimelech had a personal conversation with Abraham, and inquired of him
about Sarah, who she was, and what relation she was to him, who told him
that she was his sister; and for the truth of this he appeals to the
omniscient God, who knew that Abraham had told him this:

and she, even she herself said, he is my brother; when Sarah was asked
what relation she stood in to Abraham, and he to her, she declared he
was her brother; so that Abimelech had reason to conclude, from what
both of them had said, that this was the truth of the matter, and
especially from what Sarah said, who he thought might be depended on,
and would speak out the whole truth on such an occasion:

in the integrity of my heart, and innocency of my hands, have I done
this; hereby declaring, that his design was not to defile the woman, and
to gratify his lust, but to take her to be his wife; and this he thought
to be no evil, though he had a wife, [Gen
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017.md); polygamy not being reckoned a
sin in those times; and that he had used no violence in taking her, they
both seemingly agreeing to it.

[Genesis 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 20:6</span></span>

And God said unto him in a dream,.... The same dream continued:

yea, or "also"

I know that thou didst this in the integrity of thy heart; not only thou
knowest, but I, who know all things, know and acknowledge that this was
so done by thee. Abimelech's plea is admitted, and a very great
testimony borne to his integrity in this matter; and throughout the
whole account he appears to be a man of great honour and uprightness,
especially in this affair, if not a good man:

for I also withheld thee from sinning against me; for had he committed
adultery with her, it had been not only a sin against her, and against
her husband, but against God being contrary to his will revealed in the
minds of men by the law and light of nature, before the law of Moses was
given: and indeed all sin against the neighbour is ultimately against
God, see [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004.md); and now from the
commission of this sin God restrained Abimelech, either by some impulse
upon his mind not to take her to be his wife as yet, or by throwing some
thing or other in the way of it, in his providence, or by inflicting
some disease upon him, which rendered him incapable of it, [Gen
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017.md),

therefore suffered I thee not to touch her; that is, to have carnal
knowledge of her, see [Co1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#001.md); as
there is nothing done but what is done by divine permission, so many
more evils would be committed than there are, were it not that men are
restrained from them by the power and providence of God, not suffering
them to do them; and in particular this sin was prevented, that it might
not in any respect be a doubtful point whether Isaac, whom Sarah had now
conceived, was a legitimate son of Abraham; and these expressions of
Abimelech not coming near her, [Gen
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#004.md); and not touching her as here,
are used for that purpose.

[Genesis 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 20:7</span></span>

Now therefore restore the man his wife,.... Which will be a full proof
and evidence to all of the integrity of thy heart, and the innocence of
thine hands, which thou pleadest, and which I own:

for he is a prophet; familiar with God, dear unto him, a friend of his,
to whom he communicates his secrets; is able to foretell things to come,
as well as to interpret the mind of God, and instruct in the knowledge
of divine things, all which agrees with Abraham's character; and he is
the first man that is dignified in Scripture with the title of a
prophet; so he is called in the Apocrypha:"Beware of all whoredom, my
son, and chiefly take a wife of the seed of thy fathers, and take not a
strange woman to wife, which is not of thy father's tribe: for we are
the children of the prophets, Noe, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: remember,
my son, that our fathers from the beginning, even that they all married
wives of their own kindred, and were blessed in their children, and
their seed shall inherit the land.'' (Tobit 4:12)Jarchi thinks this is
observed to encourage Abimelech to return his wife to him, because being
a prophet he knew he had not touched her, and therefore would receive
her more readily, and entertain no ill opinion of her; but rather it is
mentioned for the reason following:

and he shall pray for thee, and thou shalt live; it being one part of
the business of a prophet to pray for others, and make intercession for
them, especially in any distress or trouble, see [Jer
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#018.md). Prophets were praying persons,
had usually a great gift in prayer, and great power with God, and
prevailed with him for the good of others; and such an one was Abraham;
and it is here intimated, that upon the restoration of his wife to him,
as he was familiar with God, and had an interest with him, he would make
use of it, and pray for Abimelech, that whatsoever offence he had been
guilty of to God or men, it might be forgiven, and that he might be
healed of the disease with which he was smitten, and so recover of it,
and live in health and happiness:

and if thou restore her not, know thou, that thou shalt surely die,

thou, and all that are thine: if he proceeded to take her to be his
wife, and defile her, he is strongly assured that he should die, death
being the punishment for adultery before the law of Moses, see [Gen
38:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#024.md); and not only he, but all his
family, especially such who had been, or would be accessory to this
affair, and even all who might he justly punished of God for other sins
they had committed; and Abimelech being punished, both in his own
person, and in his servants and subjects, the greater his punishment
was, the greater abhorrence and detestation was shown to the sin he
would be guilty of, to deter him from which this threatening is given
out.

[Genesis 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 20:8</span></span>

Therefore Abimelech rose early in the morning,.... Awaking upon the
dream, could sleep no more, his thoughts running upon what had been said
to him by the Lord in it: wherefore as soon as it was light he rose from
his bed:

and called all his servants; his household servants, and particularly
his courtiers and counsellors, who had advised him to take Sarah for his
wife, and had been assisting in it:

and told all those things in their ears: how that God appeared to him in
a dream, and told him that Sarah, whom he had taken into his house, was
another man's wife, and that if he did not immediately return her to her
husband, he would die, and all that belonged to him:

and the men were sore afraid; lest they should be struck with death; and
perhaps they might call to mind the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah for
their sins, they had lately heard of, and might fear that some such
calamity would befall them.

[Genesis 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 20:9</span></span>

Then Abimelech called Abraham,.... Who might be in the king's palace,
being taken into it caressed by the king for the sake of Sarah:

and said unto him; not in a passion, as might have been expected, but in
a mild and gentle manner, yet with great strength of reasoning, and
making very just expostulations with him:

what hast thou done unto us? what evil to him, his family, and his
subjects? this was very probably said in the presence of his servants he
had called, and therefore the plural number is used:

and what have I offended thee, that thou hast brought on me, and on my
kingdom, a great sin? the sin of adultery, he had been in danger of
committing, which by the light of nature was known and acknowledged to
be a great sin, and therefore was avoided by Heathens, and prohibited
and punished by them; or else a "great punishment" (d), as death to him,
and all his subjects: and now Abimelech expostulates with him, and
desires to know what he had done to incur his displeasure, that he
should take such a method as this to avenge himself of him; he plainly
intimates that he was not conscious to himself that he had done any
thing to offend him; he had suffered him to come into his kingdom, and
sojourn in it, and used him well, and in no instance, as he knew of, had
done anything to affront him:

thou hast done deeds unto me that ought not to be done; in saying Sarah
was his sister, and persuading her to say the same, and so virtually
disowning his marriage with her, equivocating in this affair, and
dissembling truth, and thereby exposing the chastity of his wife, and
the king to the commission of sin with her; things that ought not to be
done by any man, and much less by a man professing religion and
godliness.

\(d\) "noxam magnam", Junius & Tremellius; "poenam peccati", Menochius;
so Abendana.

[Genesis 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 20:10</span></span>

And Abimelech said unto Abraham,.... Continuing his discourse with him:

what sawest thou, that thou hast done this thing? he desires to know
what he had observed, either in him or his people, that gave him any
reason to conclude that they were a lustful people, and would stick at
nothing to gratify their lusts, which put him upon taking such a method
to secure his life, lest they should kill him for his wife's sake.

[Genesis 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 20:11</span></span>

And Abraham said,.... In defence of himself, as well as he could:

because I thought; within himself, concluding from the general depravity
of the Canaanites, that this was the case of the inhabitants of Gerar:

surely the fear of God is not in this place; this is a certain truth,
which he thought might be depended upon, and taken for granted, since so
it was everywhere: or "only" (e), as the word used signifies; this was
the only thing he had to plead, that he verily thought with himself that
there was no true religion and godliness in Gerar: that the inhabitants
of it were without any fear of God before their eyes, or in their
hearts; and he knew, where this is the case, there is nothing to
restrain from the commission of the grossest sins:

and they will slay me for my wife's sake; that they might marry her, see
[Gen 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#012.md).

\(e\) "tantum", Montanus; so Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Drusius; so the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan, and Ben Melech.

[Genesis 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 20:12</span></span>

And yet indeed she is my sister,.... In the same sense as Lot was his
brother; for she was sister to Lot, and both were the children of Haran,
the brother of Abraham:

she is the daughter of my father, but not the daughter of my mother; she
was the daughter of his father, being his granddaughter, grandchildren
are sometimes called children, but not the daughter or granddaughter of
Abraham's mother; Terah having had two wives, by the one he had Haran,
the father of Sarah, and by the other Abraham. According to the Arabic
writers (f), Abraham and Sarah were the immediate children of Terah, but
by two mothers:"the mother of Abraham (they say) died, whose name was
Juna, and Terah married another wife, whose name was Lahazib, some say
Tahuitha, who bore him Sarah, afterwards married to Abraham; hence
Abraham said, she is my sister on my father's side, but not on my
mother's side:"

and she became my wife; as in those times it was judged lawful, and so
it has been accounted lawful in many nations to marry sisters on the
father's side, when those on the mother's were prohibited (g).

\(f\) Elmacinus, p. 51. Patricides, p. 17. apud Hottinger. Smegma
Oriental. p. 281. (g) Vid. Philo. de Special. Leg. p. 779. Clement.
Alex. Stromat. l. 2. p. 421.

[Genesis 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 20:13</span></span>

And it came to pass, when God caused me to wander from my father's
house,.... In Ur of the Chaldees, from whence God called him to go
forth; which laid him under an obligation to depart from thence, and
move from place to place, and go he knew not where, as in [Heb
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008.md); or "the Gods", as it is in the
plural number, and so the verb in construction with it; not the idol
gods, the gods of the Gentiles, as the Targum of Jonathan, who
interprets the words thus,"and it was when the worshippers of idols
sought to cause men to err, and I went from my father's house;''but the
true God, as Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Ben Melech acknowledge, and is by
many Christian interpreters understood of the three Persons in the
Godhead:

that I said unto her, this is thy kindness which thou shalt show unto
me; this I shall take as a favour done me, as an instance of tender
affection unto me:

at every place whither we shall come, say of me; or for the sake of me,
as Aben Ezra and Kimchi, in order to save me from the hands of wicked
men, whom he feared would slay him for her sake:

he is my brother; and so he hoped, instead of being ill used, he should
meet with favour and friendship on her account, being thus nearly
related to her: this he observes to Abimelech, to show that this was an
old agreement, near thirty years ago, when they first set out on their
travels, and was no new device and scheme which they pursued on account
of him and his people in particular; but what they had formerly agreed
upon should be said in all places wherever they came, and therefore
there was no intention to affront Abimelech; only it supposed they might
come into places where wicked men dwelt.

[Genesis 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 20:14</span></span>

And Abimelech took sheep, and oxen, and menservants, and womenservants,
and gave them unto Abraham,.... In a good measure satisfied with what
Abraham had said to excuse himself; and these gifts he gave unto him,
that he might, as Jarchi observes, pray and intercede for him, that he
and his family might be healed, having understood by the divine oracle
that he was a prophet, and if he prayed for him he would be restored to
health: and these were not given to bribe him to give his consent that
Sarah might be continued with him, since it follows:

and restored him Sarah his wife; untouched by him, as he was directed by
God to do.

[Genesis 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 20:15</span></span>

And Abimelech said, behold, my whole land is before thee,.... Instead of
bidding him be gone, and sending him away in haste out of his country,
as the king of Egypt did in a like case, he solicits his stay in it; and
to encourage him to it, makes an offer of his whole kingdom to him, to
choose which part of it he would to dwell in:

dwell where it pleaseth thee; if there was anyone part of it better than
another, or more convenient for him, his family and his flocks, he was
welcome to it.

[Genesis 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 20:16</span></span>

And unto Sarah he said, behold, I have given thy brother a thousand
pieces of silver,.... Or shekels of silver, as the Targums of Jonathan
and Jerusalem, which, if two shillings and sixpence of our money, amount
to one hundred and twenty five pounds; though perhaps little pieces of
silver, current in this country, may be meant, that were not worth so
much. Some think that the sheep, oxen, &c. Abimelech had given to
Abraham, were worth so many pieces of silver: but it rather seems that
he gave these over and above them, and chiefly for Sarah's use, as will
be observed hereafter; since the words are directed to her, and in which
there is a sharp cutting expression, calling Abraham her brother, and
not her husband, thereby putting her in mind and upbraiding her with her
equivocation and dissimulation:

behold, he is to thee a covering of the eyes, unto all that are with
thee; a protection of her person and chastity: so an husband, in our
language, is said to be a cover to his wife, and she under a cover: thus
Abraham being now known to be the husband of Sarah, would for the future
be a covering to her, that no one should look upon her, and desire her,
and take her to be his wife; and he would also be a protection to her
maidens that were with her, the wives of his servants, that these also
might not be taken from him: but it seems best to refer this to the gift
of the thousand pieces of silver, and read the words, "behold, this is
to thee (h) a covering of the eyes"; so the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem; for the words are a continued biting sarcasm on Sarah; as
Abimelech twits her with calling Abraham her brother in the preceding
clause, so in this he tells her that he had given him so much money to
buy her a veil with, and to supply her with veils from time to time to
cover her eyes, that nobody might be tempted to lust after her, and that
it might be known she was a married woman; for in these countries
married women wore veils for distinction, [Gen
24:65](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#065.md); and so not to be had by
another, nor would any be deceived by her; and not only was this money
given to buy veils for her, but for her female servants also that were
married, that they might be knows to be another's property; though this
latter phrase "unto", or "with all that are with thee" (i), may be
understood, not of persons, but of things, even of all the girls which
Abimelech had given her while in his house; these he did not, take back
again, but continued them with her, either for the above use, or
whatever she pleased; and the following phrase:

and with all other, as we render it, making a considerable stop, should,
according to the accents, be read with what follows thus, "and with all
this was she reproved" (k); so Aben Ezra; and so they are the words of
Moses, observing, that by and with all this that Abimelech had said and
done:

thus she was reproved; Sarah was reproved for saying that Abraham was
her brother: or the words may be rendered thus, "and so before all she
was reproved" (l); before her husband, and before Abimelech's courtiers,
and perhaps before her own servants; though Ainsworth, and others, take
them to be the words of Abimelech, and render them, "and all that", or
"all this is that thou mayest be rebuked" (m), or instructed; all that I
have said and done is for this end, that thou mayest be warned and be
careful for the future to speak out truth, without any equivocation, and
not call Abraham thy brother, when he is thy husband.

\(h\) , Sept. "hoe erit tibi", V. L. Schmidt; so Tigurine version,
Montanus, Jarchi & Ben Melech. (i) "cum omni quod tecum est", Schmidt.
(k) "et sic cum omnibus reprehensa est", Munster. (l) "Atque ita coram
omnibus increpata fuit", Noldii Concord. Ebr. Part. p. 314. No. 1219.
(m) "Atque haec omnia, ut erudita sis", Junius & Tremellius; "reprehensa
es", De Dieu.

[Genesis 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 20:17</span></span>

So Abraham prayed unto God,.... As the Lord had told Abimelech be would,
[Gen 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#007.md); he might pray for the
forgiveness of him and his wife, and might give thanks that Sarah had
been restored to him; but chiefly it was on account of Abimelech and his
family:

and God healed Abimelech, and his wife, and his maidservants: who by
reason of some disease were rendered unfit for and incapable of
cohabitation with their husbands, and they with them; but upon Abraham's
prayer for them, who was heard, they were healed, and the disorder
removed; the Targum of Jonathan is,"his wife and concubines;"

and they bare children; cohabited and conceived, and bare and brought
forth children, all which are comprehended in this expression.

[Genesis 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 20:18</span></span>

For the Lord had fast closed up all the wombs of the house of
Abimelech,.... With large tumours probably, so that they could not
cohabit with their husbands and conceive; nor could those that had
conceived bring forth: and this disorder they were smitten with:

because of Sarah Abraham's wife; who was taken into the house of
Abimelech, in order to be his; to rebuke and punish for which, and to
convince of the evil of it, and cause to abstain from it, this disorder
was inflicted on them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 21](gen021.md)

</div>
