<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Genesis Index](gen.md)  
  [Previous](gen022)  [Next](gen024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Genesis Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#001.md)

[Genesis](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">gen 23:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO GENESIS 23

This chapter treats of the age, death, and funeral of Sarah, and the
place of her interment: of her age, [Gen
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#001.md); of her death, [Gen
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#002.md); of the motion Abraham made to
the sons of Heth, to obtain a burial place among them, [Gen
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#003.md); of the answer of them to him,
giving him leave to bury in any of their sepulchres, [Gen
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#005.md); of a second motion of his to
them, to use their interest with Ephron the Hittite, to let him have the
cave of Machpelah for the above purpose, [Gen
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#007.md); of Ephron's consent unto it,
[Gen 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#010.md); of the purchase Abraham
made of it for four hundred shekels of silver, [Gen
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#012.md); and of its being secured unto
him, which he interred Sarah his wife, [Gen
23:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#017.md).

[Genesis 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">gen 23:1</span></span>

And Sarah was an hundred and seven and twenty years old,.... This
following immediately upon the account of the offering up of Isaac, led
many of the Jewish writers to conclude, that Isaac was when thirty seven
years of age, as he must be when Sarah his mother was one hundred and
twenty seven, for he was born when she was ninety years of age; but this
seems not to be observed on that account, but to give the sum of her age
at her death, since it follows:

these were the years of the life of Sarah; who, as it is remarked by
many interpreters, is the only woman the years of whose life are
reckoned up in Scripture.

[Genesis 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">gen 23:2</span></span>

And Sarah died in Kirjatharba,.... Which was so called, either, as
Jarchi says, from the four Anakims or giants that dwelt here, [Jos
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#013.md); or else, as the same writer
observes, from the four couple buried here, Adam and Eve, Abraham and
Sarah, Isaac and Rebekah, Jacob and Leah; but then it must be so called
by anticipation; rather, as Aben Ezra thinks, it had its name from Arba,
a great man among the Anakims, and the father of Anak, [Jos
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015.md); though some take it to be a
Tetrapolls, a city consisting of four parts; but be it as it will, here
Abraham and Sarah were at the time of her death; when they removed from
Beersheba hither is not said:

the same is Hebron, in the land of Canaan; so it was afterwards called:
here Abraham and Sarah had lived many years ago, see [Gen
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#018.md); and hither they returned, and
here they ended their days and were buried:

and Abraham came to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for her; Aben Ezra
observes, that, when Sarah died, Abraham was in another place, and
therefore is said to come to mourn for her; and the Targum of Jonathan
is,"and Abraham came from the mount of worship (Moriah), and found that
she was dead, and he sat down to mourn for Sarah, and to weep for
her.''Others (u) report, that, upon hearing of the offering up of Isaac,
she swooned away and died. But the meaning is, that he came from his own
tent to Sarah's, see [Gen 24:67](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#067.md), where
her corpse was, to indulge his passion of grief and sorrow for her;
which, in a moderate way, was lawful, and what natural affection and
conjugal relation obliged him to. The Hebrews (w) observe, that, in the
word for "weep", one of the letters is lesser than usual, and which they
think denotes, that his weeping for her was not excessive, but little;
but both phrases put together seem to denote that his sorrow was very
great; and the one perhaps may refer to his private, and the other to
his public mourning for her, according to the custom of those times.

\(u\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 32. Jarchi in loc. (w) Baal Hatturim in loc.

[Genesis 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">gen 23:3</span></span>

And Abraham stood up from before his dead,.... The corpse of Sarah, by
which he sat pensive and mourning, perhaps upon the ground, as was the
custom of mourners, [Job 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#013.md); where
having sat awhile, he rose up and went out of the tent, to provide for
the funeral of his wife as became him:

and spake unto the sons of Heth; the descendants of Heth the son of
Canaan, see [Gen 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#015.md); who were at
this time the inhabitants and proprietors of that part of the land where
Abraham now was: saying; as follows:

[Genesis 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">gen 23:4</span></span>

I am a stranger and a sojourner with you,.... Not a native of the place,
only dwelt as a sojourner among them for a time; but had not so much as
a foot of ground he could call his own, and consequently had no place to
inter his dead:

give me a possession of a buryingplace with you; not that he desired it
as a free gift, but that he might be allowed to make a purchase of a
piece of ground to bury his dead in; so the Targum of Jonathan,"sell me
a possession,'' &c. [Gen 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#009.md); and
this he was the rather desirous of, not only because it was according to
the rules of humanity, and the general custom of all nations, to provide
for the burial of their dead; but he was willing to have such a place in
the land of Canaan for this purpose, to strengthen his faith and the
faith of his posterity, and to animate their hope and expectation of
being one day put into the possession of it; hence the patriarchs in
later times, as Jacob and Joseph, were desirous of having their hones
laid there:

that I may bury my dead out of my sight; for, though Sarah was a very
lovely person in her life, and greatly desirable by Abraham, yet death
had changed her countenance and was turning her into corruption, which
rendered her unpleasant, and began to make her loathsome; so that there
was a necessity of removing her out of his sight, who before had been so
very agreeable to him; and this is the case of the dearest relation and
friend at death.

[Genesis 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">gen 23:5</span></span>

And the children of Heth answered Abraham,.... In a very civil and
respectful manner:

saying unto him, as follows:

[Genesis 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">gen 23:6</span></span>

Hear us, my lord,.... One of them spake in the name of the rest, who
calls Abraham not "our lord", but "my lord"; addressing him very
honourably, and desires he would hear what he had to say on the behalf
of others with himself; "hear us", representing not the body of the
common people, but the princes among them, the heads of their families:

thou art a mighty prince amongst us; though he was pleased to call
himself a stranger and a sojourner, yet they had an high opinion of him,
as a person of great wealth and substance, and of great power and
authority; and who lived like a prince, and was a potent one, having a
large train of servants under him: or, "a prince of God" (x), as it may
be rendered; one raised up to grandeur and dignity by him; with whom he
was, find in whose sight he had favour, and was very grateful and
acceptable; and by whom he was highly honoured, and had in great esteem
as a friend of his:

in the choice of our sepulchres bury thy dead; as they had many, every
family a distinct sepulchre for itself, they made offer of them to him,
to bury his dead in the choicest of them, the most grand and
magnificent, or in which of them soever he pleased; which was very kind,
generous, and respectful:

none of us shall withhold from thee his sepulchre, but that thou mayest
bury thy dead; there is not a man among us but what has such a regard
for thee, that he will not deny thee the use of his sepulchre to bury
thy dead in; and therefore need not scruple to make use of any that may
be judged most proper and convenient: no doubt the speaker full well
knew the mind of those in whose name he addressed Abraham.

\(x\) "princeps Dei", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Vatablus, Drusius, Schmidt, &c.

[Genesis 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">gen 23:7</span></span>

And Abraham stood up,.... For, having made his speech to the children of
Heth, he sat down waiting for an answer; or rather perhaps they obliged
him to sit down, out of reverence to so great a personage; and when they
had done speaking, he rose up:

and bowed himself to the people of the land; the principal of them, in
token of the grateful sense he had of the honour they had done him, and
of the great civility with which they had used him:

even to the children of Heth; this seems to be added to distinguish them
from the common people, and as an explanation of the preceding clause;
See Gill on [Gen 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#003.md).

[Genesis 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">gen 23:8</span></span>

And he communed with them,.... Entered into a discourse and conversation
with them upon the above subject:

saying, if it be your mind that I should bury my dead out of my sight;
that is, in some place belonging to them, otherwise they could have no
objection to the burying of his wife anywhere else: if now what they had
said were not spoken in a complaisant way, but it was their real mind
and will, and they were sincere and hearty in it, and very desirous of
obliging him with a place among them for the interment of his dead; then
he had this favour to ask of them:

hear me, and entreat for me to Ephron the son of Zohar; a principal man
among the Hittites, who had a field and a cave in it, near where Abraham
dwelt, and very convenient for him, and for this purpose of his now
under consideration: this man seems to be present at this time, as
appears from [Gen 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#010.md); but Abraham
did not think fit to address him himself, lest he should not so well and
so easily succeed; and therefore entreats the princes of Heth to unite
in a request to Ephron for the favour after mentioned, which he supposed
they would not be backward to, if they were hearty in this affair; and,
if Ephron was present, as he seems to be, it was a very handsome,
honourable, and modest address to him through his brethren, which he
could not with any politeness well withstand. The request follows:

[Genesis 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">gen 23:9</span></span>

That he may, give me the cave of Machpelah, which he hath,

which is in the end of his field,.... The Targum of Jonathan renders it,
"the double cave", and so do the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions;
and, according to Aben Ezra and Ben Melech, it was so called because
there was a cave within a cave in it; and, as Jarchi thinks, because it
was a house and chamber over it (y) or, as he adds, because it was fit
for couples, for two corpses to be laid in it; and the Jews say (z),
here Adam and Eve were buried, which made Abraham so desirous of having
it for a buryingplace: but it seems rather to be the proper name of a
place, and indeed of a tract of land, in which the field and the cave in
the corner of it lay, and which all belonged to Ephron; for both the
field and the cave in it are distinguished from Machpelah, in which they
were, and that from them, [Gen 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#017.md);
and it is highly probable, that this cave was never made use of before
for such a purpose as it was now sought for, since Abraham did not think
fit to accept of the offer made him of any of their sepulchres; and
chose rather that his dead should not lie with them, but in a separate
place, though among them, they being Heathens and idolaters, and
unacquainted with the resurrection of the dead, and would have no part
in the first resurrection, which Abraham believed and hoped for:

for as much money as it is worth he shall give it me, for a possession
of a buryingplace amongst you; or, "for full money" (a), that which is
full weight, for money was paid by weight in those times, as appears
from [Gen 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#016.md); or for the full price
and value of it: for, as Abraham did not desire to have it as a free
gift, so neither at an under price; he was very willing to give the full
worth of it; he did not ask it with any covetous view, or to encroach
upon them.

\(y\) So in T. Bab. Erubin, fol. 53. 1. (z) Pirke Eliezer, c. 20. & 36.
(a) "in vel pro argento pieno", Pagninus, Montanus, Schmidt.

[Genesis 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">gen 23:10</span></span>

And Ephron dwelt among the children of Heth,.... Or "sat" (b) among
them, in the present assembly of them; and, according to Jarchi, as
their president for the time on this occasion; but if so, Abraham would
have directed his speech to him: however, he was upon the spot, as
appears from what follows:

and Ephron the Hittite answered Abraham in the audience of the children
of Heth; he rose up in the assembly upon the mention of his name, and in
the hearing of the rest of the princes gave an answer himself to
Abraham's request:

even of all that went in at the gates of his city; the city of
Kirjatharba, afterwards called Hebron, [Gen
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#002.md), where he was born, or however
where he now lived; and perhaps it, or the greater part of it, was his
possession and property: it was now at one of the gates of this city,
where the assembly of the princes was held; it being usual to hold
assemblies on any business, or courts of judicature, in such places,
they being public, where multitudes resorted, or were continually
passing and repassing, and so had the opportunity of hearing, and of
being witnesses:

saying; as follows:

\(b\) Sept. "sedens", Montanus; "sedebat", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Drusius, Schmidt.

[Genesis 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">gen 23:11</span></span>

Nay, my lord, hear me,.... Or not so, my lord, as Aben Ezra paraphrases
it; not that he denied his request entirely, or refused him the cave at
any rate, but that he should not buy it of him, he would give it to him,
and therefore he desires he would hear what he had to say further:

the field give I thee, and the cave that is therein I give it thee;
which was more than Abraham asked to purchase; he only desired to have
the cave, which lay in one corner of the field, but Ephron proposes both
to give him the cave, and the field also:

in the presence of the sons of my people give I it thee; both field and
cave; three times he says, "I give it thee", to show that he freely gave
it, and that Abraham was welcome to it, and for the confirmation of the
grant:

bury thy dead; in the cave, at once, immediately, without any more ado.

[Genesis 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">gen 23:12</span></span>

And Abraham bowed down himself before the people of the land. Showing
hereby great respect, and giving much honour both to them and Ephron;
and signifying that he had something to say, and desired audience of
them, and humbly submitted to them what he should say.

[Genesis 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">gen 23:13</span></span>

And he spake unto Ephron in the audience of the people of the land,....
He addressed himself to Ephron who spoke last, with an audible voice, so
that all could hear him:

saying, but if thou wilt give it, I pray thee, hear me; the words are
very concise, and in the original text are only "if thou", and
differently supplied; by some, "if thou art he" (c), Ephron, whom it is
supposed Abraham knew not by face, or that he was present; which is not
likely, since Abraham had lived in those parts now so as to be well
known himself, and must know his neighbours; and had lived formerly
here, and could not but know so great a prince as Ephron, whose city he
dwelt in. The Targum of Jonathan is,"if thou art willing to do me a
kindness, hear me;''it will be taken as a favour to admit me to speak
once more, and to grant what shall be desired. Others read the words
thus,"if thou wilt hear me, or I pray thee hear me, or if thou, if (I
say) thou wilt hear me (d):''then follows his proposal:

I will give thee the money for the field; Abraham did not choose to
receive it as a free gift, but to make a purchase of it, that it might
be sure to him and his posterity; for though Ephron was now in this
generous mood, he might change his mind, or hereafter upbraid Abraham
with it, should he fall out with him, or his posterity might claim it
again, and dispute his right to it:

take it of me: the purchase money, the full worth of the field:

and I will bury my dead there, or "then will I bury", &c. (e); and not
before.

\(c\) "si tu is es", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so Ainsworth. (d)
"Auscultares", so Tigurine version; "si tu", Schmidt. (e) "et tum
sepeliam", Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "tunc",
Schmidt.

[Genesis 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">gen 23:14</span></span>

And Ephron answered Abraham, saying unto him. The following words:

[Genesis 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">gen 23:15</span></span>

My lord, hearken unto me,.... Since it is your mind to buy the field,
and not receive it as a gift, then hear what I have to say as to the
value of it:

the land is worth four hundred shekels of silver; which, reckoning a
shekel at two shillings and sixpence, comes to fifty pounds of our
money:

what is that betwixt thee and me? between two persons so rich, the sum
was trifling and inconsiderable, whether the one paid it, and the other
received it, or not; or between two such friends it was not worth
speaking of, it was no matter whether it was paid or not: or else the
sense is, between us both it is honestly worth so much; it is a good
bargain, and must be owned to be so, what is it? the sum is so small,
and it is so clearly the worth of it, that there needs no more to be
said about it:

bury therefore thy dead: in it, and give thyself no more trouble and
concern about it.

[Genesis 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">gen 23:16</span></span>

And Abraham hearkened unto Ephron,.... He agreed at once to give him the
sum proposed, judging it to be a moderate price between man and man, and
he was satisfied with it, and well content to pay him the money:

and Abraham weighed to Ephron the silver: for in those times money had
no mark or stamp upon it to show its value, and therefore was not told
by pieces, but weighed, by which its full worth was known; and that
Ephron might have his whole and just demand, the silver was weighed to
him:

which he had named, in the audience of the sons of Heth; who were
witnesses of the bargain, of the price set by Ephron, and of the payment
of it by Abraham:

four hundred shekels of silver: the sum before mentioned, [Gen
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#015.md),

current money with the merchant; such as was used by merchants in buying
and selling; such as they would receive, who knew the value of it, and
were careful not to take any that was bad; wherefore such as would pass,
with them would go anywhere, was current money; how all this is
consistent with what Stephen says; See Gill on [Act
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#016.md).

[Genesis 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">gen 23:17</span></span>

And the field of Ephron, which was in Machpelah,.... This clearly shows
that Machpelah is the proper name of a place or tract of ground, and not
an appellative, or to be rendered the double cave, since a field could
never be said to be in a cave: and yet some have been so stupid, as
Vatablus observes, as to render the words,"the field of Ephron, which
was in the double cave,''whereas, on the contrary, the cave was in that
field; and so the Vulgate version, to better sense, though not agreeably
to the Hebrew text,"the field of Ephron, in which was the double cave:"

which was before Mamre; or over against it, the place where Abraham
dwelt, which was in Hebron, [Gen
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#018.md),

the field, and the cave which was therein, and all the trees that were
in the field, that were in all the borders round about, were made sure;
or "rose", or "stood up" (f). Jarchi thinks the reason of this phrase,
or way of speaking, is, because this field, with all belonging to it,
came into the hands of a greater person; out of the hands of a private
man into the hands of a king; and so Abraham indeed is called by some
Heathen writers (g); but Aben Ezra and Ben Melech much better interpret
it,"it was confirmed and stood;''that is, it was ensured to him, and
remained with him, even that, and all upon it and in it, throughout the
whole circumference of it.

\(f\) Heb. "surrexit", Munster, Vatablus, Piscator; "stetit", Montanus,
Schmidt. (g) Nicolaus Damascenus apud Euseb. Praepar. l. 9. c. 6. p.
417. Justin. e Trogo, l. 38. c. 2.

[Genesis 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">gen 23:18</span></span>

Unto Abraham for a possession,.... To be enjoyed by him and his for
ever, as his own property, being purchased by his money:

in the presence of the children of Heth; they being witnesses of the
bargain, and of the payment of the money by Abraham, and of the
surrender of the field unto him, for his own use:

before all that went in at the gates of his city; not of Abraham's city,
for he had none, but of Ephron's city, which was Hebron, see [Gen
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#010.md); these are either the same with
the children of Heth, and so the clause is added by way of explanation,
and including all the inhabitants of the place; or else different from
them, they intending the princes of the people that composed the
assembly Abraham addressed, and these the common people, the inhabitants
of the place. Aben Ezra takes them to be the travellers that passed and
repassed through the gates of the city: however, the design of the
expression is to show in what a public manner this affair was
transacted, and that the field was made as firm and as sure to Abraham
as it could well be, no writings on such occasion being used so early.

[Genesis 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">gen 23:19</span></span>

And after this,.... After this affair was over, the bargain struck, the
money paid, and possession secured:

Abraham buried Sarah his wife in the cave of the field of Machpelah,

before Mamre; and here he himself was buried, and also Isaac and
Rebekah, and Jacob and Leah, [Gen
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#009). Benjamin of Tudela (h.md) says, in
his time (who lived in the latter end of the twelfth century), in the
field of Machpelah was a city or town, and in it a large temple called
Saint Abraham, where were shown the sepulchres of the six persons before
mentioned, and inscriptions over each of them, showing whose they were;
and that at the end of the field was the house of Abraham, and before
the house a fountain, and no other was suffered to be built there in
honour to Abraham:

the same is Hebron in the land of Canaan; that is, Mamre is the same
place which afterwards was called Hebron, a city in the land of Canaan,
in the tribe of Judah, about twenty two miles from Jerusalem to the
south, and was one of the cities of refuge. Hebron has the title of
Hhaleah, i.e. the chosen or beloved, among the Arabs, where the
(Maggarel Mamra) cave of Mamre or Machpelah is still shown, and is
always lighted up with lamps, and held in extraordinary veneration by
the Mahometans (i).

\(h\) Itinerarium, p. 48, 49. (i) Shaw's Travels, p. 339. Marg. Ed. 2.

[Genesis 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen023.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">gen 23:20</span></span>

And the field, and the cave that is therein, was made sure to Abraham
for a possession of a buryingplace, by the sons of Heth. Who were
witnesses of the transaction between Abraham and Ephron; and this was
further made sure by Sarah's being buried in it, which was taking
possession of it, for the use for which it was bought; and was a pledge
and earnest of the future possession of the land of Canaan by the seed
of Abraham: this was the first piece of ground in it possessed by
Abraham and his seed; and it being called the possession of a
buryingplace, shows that there is no contradiction between this and what
Stephen says, [Act 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#005.md); he had a
possession to bury in, but not to live upon; not any ground of his own
to till and sow, or build upon.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Genesis Chapter 24](gen024.md)

</div>
