<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hebrews Index](heb.md)  
  [Previous](heb007)  [Next](heb009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001.md)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HEBREWS 8

The apostle observing that the priesthood of Christ is the sum of what
he had treated of in the preceding chapter, proceeds to show the
superior excellency of it in other instances, particularly in the place
where Christ now officiates, which is in heaven; he being set down at
the right hand of God there, and so was a minister of the sanctuary, and
true tabernacle pitched by God, and not man; whereas the priests of
Aaron's line only ministered on earth, and in the typical sanctuary and
tabernacle, [Heb 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001.md) and after he had
observed that Christ must have something to offer, meaning his body, to
answer to the gifts and sacrifices priests were ordained to offer, [Heb
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#003.md) he proves the necessity of his
ministering in heaven, because if he was on earth he would not be a
priest, a complete one, and would have been useless and needless, [Heb
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#004.md) and besides, it was proper that he
should go up to heaven, and minister there, as the antitype of the
priests, who, to the example and shadow of heavenly things, served in
the tabernacle which was made by Moses, by the order of God, and
according to the pattern showed him in the Mount, [Heb
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005.md) and that the ministry of Christ in
the true sanctuary is much more excellent than the ministry of the
priests in the shadowy one, is evident from his being the Mediator of a
better covenant, [Heb 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006.md) and that the
covenant he is the Mediator of is the better covenant, appears froth the
better promises of which it consists, and from the faultiness of the
former covenant, [Heb 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006.md) and that
that was faulty, and succeeded by another, he proves from a passage in
[Jer 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031.md) in which mention is made of
a new covenant, and as distinct from that made with the Jewish fathers,
and violated by them; and several of the promises of this new and second
covenant are rehearsed, and which manifestly appear to be better than
what were in the former, [Heb 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008.md) from
all which the apostle concludes, that a new covenant being made, the old
one must be antiquated; and that whereas it was decaying and waxing old,
it was just ready to vanish away, [Heb
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013.md).

[Hebrews 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">heb 8:1</span></span>

Now of the things which we have spoken this is the sum,.... The scope
and drift, the compendium and substance; or the principal of what has
been said in or from [Psa 110:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#004.md) and
has been discoursed of in the three preceding chapters, is the
priesthood of Christ:

we have such an high priest; as is described in the foregoing discourse,
and in the following words: Christ is a priest, an high priest, and the
saints' high priest; they are not without one under the Gospel
dispensation; and Christ is he, and always continues, in whose sacrifice
and intercession they have a share:

who is set on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the
heavens; he is "set", whereas the Levitical priests stood; which shows
that he has done his work, and that with acceptance; and is in a state
of ease and rest; and is possessed of honour, glory, majesty, and
authority, and which continue: the place where he is set is, "on the
right hand of the throne of the Majesty"; the same with the right hand
of God; for by the throne of the Majesty is meant God the Father, in his
royal glory and dignity; so Tiphereth, one of the ten numbers in the
Jews' Cabalistic tree, whose name is Jehovah, is called , "the throne of
glory" (c); so angels are called thrones, [Col
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#016.md) but God is a throne of majesty
superior to them; and at his right hand sits Christ the great high
priest; which is expressive of his high honour, glory, and power, and
even of his equality with God: the phrase, "in the heavens", may refer
both to God the throne of majesty, who is there, and to Christ the high
priest, who is passed into them, and received by them, and sits there.

\(c\) Lex. Cabal. p. 483.

[Hebrews 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">heb 8:2</span></span>

A minister of the sanctuary,.... The heavenly one, so called, in
allusion to the holy of holies, the type of it; and because it is truly
an holy place; and which Christ sanctifies and prepares for his people
by his presence and intercession: or "of the Holy Ones", or "saints";
who are sanctified or set apart by God, the Father, to whom Christ is
made sanctification, and who are made holy by the Spirit of God; to
these Christ is a minister; he was so in his prophetic office, to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel; and in his priestly office, to all
the chosen ones, when on earth, offering himself a sacrifice for them,
and now he is a minister to them in heaven, interceding for them; and in
his kingly office, governing, protecting, and defending them: or "of
holy things"; to his people, such as the gifts of his Spirit, grace, and
all supplies of it, and at last glory; and for them, presenting their
sacrifices of prayer and praise to God, which become acceptable to him
through his powerful mediation:

and of the true tabernacle which the Lord pitched, and not man; by which
is meant, not heaven, the same with the sanctuary, for this would be an
unnecessary tautology, and an explanation of a word by another more
obscure; nor is there any reason why it should be added, "which the Lord
pitched, and not man"; since everyone must believe that heaven is made
by God alone; but rather the church of Christ, which is sometimes called
a tabernacle, and is a true one, of which the tabernacle of Moses was a
type, and is of God's building, and where Christ ministers, being the
high priest over the house of God; though it is best to interpret it of
the human nature of Christ, in which he tabernacled among men, and which
was typified by the tabernacle of Moses, and therefore is called the
"true" one, in distinction from that; for as there God dwelt, and his
glory was seen, and he granted his presence to his people, and the
sacrifices were brought and offered up there, and to this the people
looked when at a distance, and this appeared very coarse without, but
within full of holy things; so in Christ's human nature the fulness of
the Godhead dwells bodily; here the glory of God is seen, even in the
face of Jesus; and through him God vouchsafes communion with his people;
and by him the sacrifices of prayer and praise are offered up; and to
him do the saints look for the acceptance of them; and though in the
days of his flesh he looked very mean and despicable, yet was full of
grace and truth, and of all the gifts of the Spirit: and the human
nature of Christ was not of man; it was not propagated by human
generation, but was produced through the power of the Holy Ghost; and in
this tabernacle Christ ministered when on earth, and now ministers in
heaven.

[Hebrews 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">heb 8:3</span></span>

For every high priest is ordained to offer gifts and sacrifices,.... See
Gill on [Heb 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#001.md).

wherefore it is of necessity that this man have somewhat also to offer;
or this person; for the word "man" is not in the text, and seems not so
proper a word to be supplied, since it was his human nature that it was
necessary he should have to offer; he was a person, and existed as a
divine person antecedent to his assumption of human nature: as God, he
had nothing to offer, or that was capable of being offered; something to
offer as a sacrifice was necessary to him as a priest, but not any thing
was proper to him; Levitical sacrifices would not do, these could not
take away sin; besides, the great high priest was not of the tribe of
Levi, nor of the order of Aaron, and therefore could not offer these. An
angelic nature would have been improper, that is not capable of dying;
and the offering up of such an one would have been of no service to men,
for whom priests are ordained; but an human nature is meant, and which
it was necessary Christ should have, and offer, for it is for men that
he became an high priest; it was human nature that had offended God, and
satisfaction must be made in that nature; and this was capable of
suffering and dying; yet not human nature under any consideration was
necessary for him to have and offer; not merely as in a state of
innocence, without any infirmity, nor as sinful, yet as perfect as to
parts and qualities; and a nature, and not a person, was necessary to be
had, and to be taken into close and inseparable union to his divine
person; and of this there was a necessity, not absolute, or a necessity
of coaction and force: Christ was not forced unto it; but on the foot of
his suretyship engagements, and because of making satisfaction for the
sin of man, it was necessary; otherwise Christ voluntarily engaged to be
a priest, and willingly became man, and freely offered himself, soul and
body, in the room and stead of his people.

[Hebrews 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">heb 8:4</span></span>

For if he were on earth, he should not be a priest,.... The Socinians
from hence attempt to prove that Christ was not a priest, and did not
offer sacrifice on earth; whereas his coming into the world, and his
appearance in human nature, was in the character of a priest, and to
qualify himself for one; his death was his sacrifice, which was on
earth; and he never offered but one sacrifice; and it was after he had
offered himself that he went to heaven; so the sacrifices under the law
were first offered, before their blood was carried within: but the
meaning is, either if "that" was on earth, namely, what it was necessary
he should have to offer; if his human nature had been earthly, had been
of men, had come by ordinary generation, he had not been properly, only
typically a priest, at most; and had been no better than the typical
ones; yea, he would have been needless, nay, might not have offered, not
being of Levi's tribe, and could not have existed as a priest with the
sons of Aaron; but he had his human nature in another way, through the
power of the Holy Ghost from above, and therefore is said to come from
above, from heaven, and to be the Lord from heaven: or the sense is, if
he was on earth, and had not died, he had not been a priest; and if he
had died and remained under the power of death, he had been a priest of
no account and use; and had he rose again and remained on earth, without
going to heaven, with his blood and sacrifice, he had not been a perfect
priest; if Christ had remained on earth, the Levitical priesthood had
remained, and so he would have been no priest, since two priesthoods
could not have subsisted together. The Levitical priesthood was in force
while Christ was on earth; Christ's priesthood was not perfected on
earth; the Levitical priesthood remaining while he was on earth, proves
he was not then a perfect priest, or had not completed his priesthood;
had he been so, that would not have subsisted; it was necessary
therefore that Christ should enter into the holy place, to put an end to
the Levitical priesthood: moreover, if he had remained on earth, he had
been needless;

seeing that there are priests that offer gifts according to the law;
there were priests when Christ was upon earth; their work was to offer
gifts the people brought, and sacrifices for sin, and that according to
the law of Moses, which till the death of Christ was in full force.

[Hebrews 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">heb 8:5</span></span>

Who serve unto the example and shadow of heavenly things,.... Things
respecting the person, office, and grace of Christ; the priests
themselves were types of him; the places they ministered in were an
exemplar of the heavenly places, as the word may be rendered, where
Christ is; and the things they ministered were shadows of the good
things which are by Christ; and the shadows were mere representations;
dark, obscure, glimmering ones, and were fleeting and transitory:

as Moses was admonished of God; by an oracle; he was a peculiar
favourite of God, and was the mediator between God and the people of
Israel, and what he received was oracle wise; what he delivered to the
people was what he received from God; and what was thus delivered ought
to be received as from God: and this admonition or oracle was given him

when he was about to make the tabernacle; the Levitical one, with
everything appertaining to the worship of God in it: this is ascribed to
Moses, though it was made by others, because it was by his direction,
and under his care and oversight; and he had this admonition at the
beginning of it; and at the finishing of it he looked upon it, and saw
that it was all done as the Lord had commanded; [Exo
25:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#040.md),

for see, saith he, that thou make all things according to the pattern
showed to thee in the Mount; Moses was taken up into a mountain with
God, even Mount Sinai; and while he was there, a pattern was given him
of the tabernacle and all its utensils; this was not a device of his
own, but was shown him by God; and this pattern reached to every
particular thing; and great care and circumspection were used that the
most minute thing answered to it. The Jews think this pattern was given
him by the ministry of angels; Gabriel, they say (f), girt himself with
a girdle, and showed to Moses the work of the candlestick; and they
further say, that an ark of fire, and a table of fire; and a candlestick
of fire, descended from heaven, and Moses saw them, and made according
to them: from whence it may be observed that the tabernacle, and
tabernacle worship, were of divine institution; the ceremonious rites of
the Jews were not, as some have affirmed, borrowed from the Egyptians;
nor were they given as diversions to that people, nor only to preserve
them from idolatry, and keep them separate from others, but were
designed to lead them to Christ, whom they were typical of; wherefore
the abuse, and not the use of them, were condemned under the former
dispensation; though they were to continue no longer than till Christ
came, and suffered and died; and now they are abolished: moreover, it
may be gathered from hence, that whatever is done in a way of religious
worship, should be according to a divine rule; a church of Christ ought
to be formed according to the primitive pattern, and should consist, not
of all that are born in a nation, province, or parish; nor should all
that are born of believing parents be admitted into it; no unholy,
unbelieving, and unconverted persons, only such as are true believers in
Christ, and who are baptized according as the word of God directs; the
officers of a church should be only of two sorts, bishops, elders,
pastors or overseers, and deacons; the ordinances are baptism, which
should only be administered to believers, and by immersion, and the
Lord's supper, of which none should partake, but those who have tasted
that the Lord is gracious; and this should be performed as Christ
performed it, and as the Apostle Paul received it from him; the
discipline of Christ's house should be regarded, and all the laws of it
carefully and punctually in execution; and a conversation becoming the
Gospel should be attended to.

\(f\) T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 29. 1.

[Hebrews 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">heb 8:6</span></span>

But now hath he obtained a more excellent ministry,.... Christ has a
ministry, he is the minister of the sanctuary, [Heb
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002.md) he has "obtained" this ministry of
his Father; he was called unto it and engaged in it by him; and he has
"now" obtained it; for though he was called to it from eternity, it was
in time he came an high priest of good things, to come; and his ministry
is

a more excellent one than that of the priests, who offered gifts
according to the law and served to the example and shadow of heavenly
things; as abundantly appears from the preceding chapter, and from this,
as well, as from what follows:

by how much also he is the Mediator of a better covenant; the covenant
of grace, as administered under the Gospel dispensation; which is not
only better than the covenant of works, that being conditional, this
absolute; that stood on the foot of works, this on the foot of grace,
and is established in Christ; that being broken and made void, this
continues; and not only better than the covenant of the Levitical
priesthood, which was but a typical one, and is now ceased, but also
than the covenant of grace, as administered under the legal
dispensation; being better than that, as to the manner of its
manifestation, which is more full and clear; and as to the extent of its
administration, reaching to Gentiles as well as Jews; and as to the
ratification of it by the blood of Christ, called from thence the blood
of the everlasting covenant; and as to the promises of it, here said to
be better:

which was established upon better promises; which are not now delivered
out as before, under the figure of earthly and temporal things; nor
under a condition to be performed nor confined to a particular people
and nation; and which are attended with a greater measure of the Spirit,
to open and apply them; and are all secured in Christ Jesus, and
confirmed by his blood: and now of this covenant Christ is the
"Mediator"; a mediator is of more persons than one, and of these at
variance; and he is a middle person between both; and his business is to
bring both parties together, and make peace between them: the two
parties in this case are God and man, set at a distance from each other
by the sin of man, whereby man is become enmity to God; Christ is the
Mediator between God and man, a middle person between both, being both
God and man, the daysman, who lays his hands on both; who brings men to
God that were afar off, and makes peace for them by the blood of his
cross, and satisfies the justice of God, which he has done by the
sacrifice of himself; and now appears in the presence of God for them,
and intercedes for them, and applies the blessings of the covenant to
them by his Spirit, and keeps and preserves them safe to his everlasting
kingdom; and for this office he is every way fit, and in this he excels
the Levitical priests, and has a ministry superior to theirs, since he
is such a Mediator, and a Mediator of such a covenant,

[Hebrews 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">heb 8:7</span></span>

For if that first covenant had been faultless,.... Not the covenant of
works; that was made in paradise, this on Mount Sinai; that was made
with Adam and his posterity, this with the Jews only; that had no
mediator, this had one, Moses; that was not dedicated with blood, this
was; that had no forgiveness of sin in it, this had; under that saints
are not, but they were under this; to be under that was no privilege,
but to be under this it was, as to the Israelites, who on this account
were preferable to all other nations: nor is the pure covenant of grace
as administered under the Gospel, meant; for though that was first made,
yet is the second in administration; that includes the elect of God
among the Gentiles, this only the Jews; that is made only with them, and
is made known to them whom God calls by his grace in time, this was made
with good and bad; that was of pure grace, this required works in order
to life and the enjoyment of its blessings; that is an everlasting
covenant, this is done away; and the one is manifestly distinguished
from the other in this chapter: but the covenant here designed is the
covenant of grace, as administered under the legal dispensation, and
which was a typical one; the people with whom it was made were typical
of the true Israel of God; the blessings promised in it were shadows of
good things to come; the works it required were typical of Christ's
obedience to the law, in the room and stead of his people, by which he
fulfilled it; the sacrifices on which it was established were types of
the sacrifice and death of Christ; the mediator of it. Moses, was a type
of Christ, the Mediator of the new covenant; and it was confirmed by the
blood of beasts, which was typical of the blood of Christ: this covenant
was not "faultless", but was faulty or blameworthy; not that there was
anything sinful and criminal in it, but it was deficient; there was a
weakness in it; its sacrifices could not make men perfect, nor take away
sin; there wanted a larger supply of the grace of the Spirit to write
the law of God upon the heart, and to enable men to keep it; there was
not in it so full a revelation of the mind and will of God, and of his
love and grace, as has since been made; nor did it exhibit a free and
full pardon for all sins, unclogged of every condition; the persons that
were under it were faulty; hence it follows, that God found fault with
them, they could not answer the requirements and end of it: had it been
faultless,

then should no place have been sought for the second; the covenant of
grace unveiled in the Gospel dispensation, called the better testament,
the better covenant, and the new covenant; in order to, introduce which,
the first was removed, that this might succeed it; just as because there
was no perfection by the Levitical priesthood, it became necessary that
another priest should arise, of another order.

[Hebrews 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">heb 8:8</span></span>

For finding fault with them,.... Both with the covenant, which had its
faults, and with the people who continued not in it, and were therefore
disregarded by the Lord, [Heb 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009.md)

he saith, behold, the days come (saith the Lord) when I will make a new
covenant with the house of Israel, and with the house of Judah; the
words are cited from [Jer 31:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#031.md) in
which God promises a "new covenant"; so called, not because newly made;
for with respect to its original constitution, it was made from
eternity; Christ the Mediator of it, and with whom it was made, was set
up from everlasting; and promises and blessings of grace were put into
his hands before the world began: nor is it newly revealed, for it was
made known to Adam, and in some measure to all the Old Testament saints,
though it is more clearly revealed than it was; but it is so called in
distinction from the former administration of it, which is waxen old,
and vanished away; and with respect to the order of succession, it
taking place upon the former being removed; and on account of the time
of its more clear revelation and establishment being in the last days;
and because of its mode of administration, which is different from the
former, in a new way, and by the use of new ordinances; and because it
is always new, its vigour and efficacy are perpetual; it will never be
antiquated, or give place to another; and it provides for, and promises
new things, a new heart, a new spirit, &c. to which may be added, that
it is a famous, excellent covenant, there is none like it; just as an
excellent song is called a new song. The persons with whom this covenant
is promised to be made, are the houses of Israel and Judah; which being
literally taken, had its fulfilment in the first times of the Gospel,
through the ministry of John the Baptist, Christ, and his apostles, by
whom this covenant was made known to God's elect among the twelve
tribes; but being mystically understood, includes both Jews and
Gentiles, the whole Israel of God; Israel not after the flesh, but after
the Spirit; such as were Jews inwardly; God's elect of every nation: the
word rendered, "I will make", signifies, I will consummate, or finish,
or end, or fulfil it; which shows the perfection of this covenant, and
the imperfection of the former; and that what was typified in the first
is fulfilled in this; and that it is now established and ratified by
Christ; and is so finished, as to the manifestation and administration
of it, that there will be no alteration made in it, nor any addition to
it: the time of doing all this is called "the days to come"; the last
days, the days of the Messiah, which were future in Jeremiah's time: and
a "behold" is prefixed to the whole, as a note of attention, this being
an affair of great moment and importance; and as a note of
demonstration, or as pointing to something that was desired and
expected; and as a note of admiration, it containing things wonderful
and marvellous.

[Hebrews 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">heb 8:9</span></span>

Not according to the covenant that I made with their fathers,.... The
ancestors of the Jews at Mount Sinai:

in the day when I took then, by the hand to lead them out of the land of
Egypt; which is mentioned, not only to observe the time when the former
covenant was made with the Israelites, which was just upon their
deliverance out of Egypt; but also to show their weakness and inability
to have delivered themselves, and the tenderness of God towards them;
they were like children, they could not help themselves when God took
them by the hand, and brought them forth with an outstretched arm; and
likewise to expose their ingratitude, and vindicate his conduct towards
them:

because they continued not in my covenant; though they promised, at the
reading of it, that all that the Lord had said, they would hear and do;
but their hearts were not right with God, and they were not steadfast in
his covenant, and therefore their carcasses fell in the wilderness:

and I regarded them not, saith the Lord; the words in [Jer
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032.md) are very differently rendered in
our translation, "although I was an husband unto them": and so it
becomes an aggravation of their sin of ingratitude, in not continuing in
his covenant: in the margin it is rendered interrogatively, "should I
have continued an husband unto them?" that is, after they had so treated
him, no; as if he should say, I will not behave towards them as such; I
will reject them, and disregard them. The Chaldee paraphrase is just the
reverse of the apostle's translation, "and I was well pleased with
them": some render them, "I ruled over them", as a lord over his
servants, in a very severe manner. Others, observing the great
difference there is between the Hebrew text, and the apostle's version,
have supposed a different Hebrew copy from the present, used by the
Septuagint, or the apostle, in which, instead of it was read either or
but there is no need of such a supposition, since Dr. Pocock (g) has
shown, that in the Arabic language, signifies to loath and abhor, and so
to disregard; and Kimchi (h) relates it as a rule laid down by his
father, that wherever this word is used in construction with it is to be
taken in an ill part, and signifies the same as "I have loathed"; in
which sense that word is used in [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008.md) and so here, I have loathed them,
I abhorred them, I rejected them, I took no care of them, disregarded
them, left their house desolate, and suffered wrath to come upon them to
the uttermost.

\(g\) Not. Miscell. in Port. Mesis, p. 9. (h) In Jer. xxxi. 32. & Sepher
Shorashim, rad.

[Hebrews 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">heb 8:10</span></span>

For this is the covenant that I will make with the house of Israel,....
That is, this is the sum and substance of the covenant, which God
promised to make with, or to make manifest and known to his chosen
people, the true Israelites, under the Gospel dispensation; or the
following are the several articles of that covenant, he proposed to
consummate or finish, as before:

after those days, saith the Lord; after the times of the Old Testament,
when the Messiah shall be come, and the Gospel day shall take place. So
the Jews (i) apply these days, when they represent the Israelites saying
to Moses, O that he (God) would reveal (himself or will) to us a second
time! O that he would kiss us with the kisses of his mouth, and that the
doctrine of the law was fixed in our hearts; when he (Moses) said to
them, this is not to be done now, but , in the time to come, (i.e. in
the times of the Messiah,) as it is said, [Jer
31:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#033.md).

I will put my law, &c. and so (k) they are elsewhere applied to the same
times. And the first article in it is,

I will put my laws into their mind, and write them in their hearts; by
the laws of God are meant not the precepts of the ceremonial law, which
were now abrogated, but either the moral law, and its commands; which is
a transcript of the divine nature, was inscribed on Adam's heart in
innocence, and some remains of it are even in the Gentiles, but greatly
obliterated through the sin of man; and there is in men naturally a
contrary disposition to it; in regeneration it is reinscribed by the
Spirit of God; and great respect is had to it by regenerate persons, in
which lies one part of their conformity to Christ: or else, since the
word "law" signifies sometimes no other than a doctrine, an instruction,
the doctrines of grace, of repentance towards God, of faith in Christ,
and love to him, and every other doctrine may be intended; and the
tables where, according to the tenor of this covenant, these are put and
written, are two tables, as before, the "mind" and "heart"; but not two
tables of stone, on which the law of Moses was written, partly that it
might not be lost, through defect of memory, and partly to denote the
firmness and stability of it, as also to point at the hardness of man's
heart; but the fleshly tables of the heart; not that part of our flesh
that is called the heart; but the souls of men, such hearts as are
regenerated and sanctified by the Spirit of God, and such minds as are
renewed by him: and the "putting" of them into the mind, designs the
knowledge of them, which God gives; as of the moral law, of its
spirituality and perfection, showing that there is no life and
righteousness by it, that it is fulfilled by Christ, and is a rule of
conversation to the saints; and of all other laws, ordinances, and
doctrines of Christ: and the "writing" them in, or on the heart, intends
a filling the soul with love and affection to them, so that it regards
them singly and heartily; and a powerful inclination of the heart to be
subject to them, through the efficacious grace of God; and which is done
not with the ink of nature's power, but with the Spirit of the living
God, [Co2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#003.md).

And I will be to them a God; not in such sense as he is the God of all
mankind, or as he was the God of Israel in a distinguishing manner, but
as he is the God of Christ, and of all the elect in him; and he is their
God, not merely as the God of nature and providence, but as the God of
all grace; he is so in a covenant way, and as in Christ, and by virtue
of electing grace, and which is made manifest in the effectual calling;
and as such, he has set his heart on them, and set them apart for
himself; he saves them by his Son, adopts and regenerates them,
justifies and sanctifies them, provides for them, protects and preserves
them; and happy are they that are interested in this blessing of the
covenant, which is preferable to everything else; they have everything,
and can want no good thing; they need fear no enemy; all things work
together for their good; and God continues to be their God in life and
in death; so that they may depend on his love, be secure of his power,
expect every needful supply of grace, and to be carried through every
duty and trial, and to share in the first resurrection, and to enjoy
eternal happiness:

and they shall be to me a people; not in such sense as all mankind are,
or the Jews were in a more peculiar respect, but as all God's elect are,
whether Jews or Gentiles; and who are such whom God has loved with a
special love, has chose in Christ, and given to him, and with whom he
has made a covenant in him; whom Christ saves from their sins by his
blood, and calls them by his grace and Spirit, and who give up
themselves to him; these are a distinct and peculiar people, a people
near unto the Lord, and who are all righteous in Christ, and are made
willing in the day of his power on their souls.

\(i\) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 3. 2. (k) Midrash Kohelet, fol. 64. 3.

[Hebrews 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">heb 8:11</span></span>

And they shall not teach every man his neighbour,.... The Alexandrian
copy reads, "citizen"; that is, fellow citizen; and so the Syriac and
Arabic versions: "and every man his brother, saying, know the Lord":
this is not to be understood, so as to set aside the external and public
ministry of the word, which is a standing ordinance of God under the
Gospel dispensation; or even the, private instructions of saints one to
another, in Christian conversation, whereby they may build up one
another in their most holy faith; but the sense is, that men should not
only teach, but the Spirit of God should teach with them, and by them;
and it stands opposed to particular and pretended revelations, and
especially to magisterial dictates; and denotes the abundance of
knowledge that should be in Gospel times, which should not be restrained
to particular persons, and sets of men, but should be shared by all
believers, more or less:

for all shall know me, from the least to the greatest; from babes to
fathers in Christ; not with a natural, but with a spiritual knowledge;
not with general knowledge of him, that he is, but with a special
knowledge of him, that he is theirs; not with a legal, but with an
evangelical knowledge; not with the knowledge of him in, and through the
creatures, but in Christ; and that not speculative, but experimental;
such as is attended with faith in him, fear of him, love to him, and a
cheerful obedience to his will: the knowledge of the Lord, under the New
Testament dispensation, is greater than under the former dispensation;
the subject matter of it is more distinct; God is more known in the
persons of the Father, Son, and Spirit, in the perfections of his
nature, in his titles and characters, and in his Son; the manner of it
is more clear, open, and perspicuous; the persons to whom it is
communicated are more numerous; it is not restrained to Jews, but is
given to the Gentiles; and all this owing to a greater effusion of the
Spirit; see [Jo1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md).

[Hebrews 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">heb 8:12</span></span>

For I will be merciful to their unrighteousness,.... That is, sin; for
all unrighteousness is sin, being contrary to the justice of God, and
his righteous law: and the phrase is expressive of God's forgiveness of
it, which is a very considerable article of the covenant of grace; mercy
is the spring and original of pardon; it is what God delights in, and
therefore he pardons freely; it is large and abundant, and hence he
pardons fully; and this lays a foundation for hope in sensible sinners:
and the way and means, in and by which God pardons, is the propitiatory
sacrifice of his Son; and the word here rendered "merciful", signifies
"propitious"; God pardons none but those to whom he is pacified, or
rendered propitious by Christ; there is no mercy, nor pardon, but
through him; he pardons on the foot of reconciliation and satisfaction
for sin by Christ; so that forgiveness of sin is an act of justice, as
well as of mercy; or it is an act of mercy streaming through the blood
and sacrifice of Christ.

And their sins and their iniquities will I remember no more; by which
are meant all kind of sin, original and actual; sins before and after
conversion; every sin but that against the Holy Ghost, and that God's
covenant people are never guilty of; these God remembers no more; he
casts them behind his back, and into the depths of the sea, so that when
they are sought for, they shall not be found; God will never charge them
with them, or punish them for them: this is another phrase to express
the forgiveness of sins, and distinguishes the new covenant from the old
one, or the former dispensation; in which, though there were many
typical sacrifices, and a typical removal of sin, yet there was a
remembrance of it every year.

[Hebrews 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">heb 8:13</span></span>

In that he saith a new covenant,.... In the above prophecy, [Heb
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#008.md)

he hath made the first old; this naturally follows from hence; if the
second is new, the first must be old; which is called so, not on account
of its date and duration; for the covenant of grace itself is older than
this mode of administration of it, and the manifestation of that to the
patriarchs was before this covenant, and so was the covenant of works
before it; but on the account of its faultiness and deficiency, its
weakness, and unprofitableness, and especially its being antiquated, and
made to give way to another.

Now that which decayeth and waxeth old is ready to vanish away; the
apostle argues from the first covenant, being old, to its being near to
dissolution, or a disappearance; and the dissolution or disappearance of
this covenant was gradual; it began when the Chaldeans seized the land
of Canaan; and the ark, an eminent type of Christ, being wanting in the
second temple, gave a hint of its waxing old; and both the civil and
ecclesiastical government of the Jews were in great confusion under the
second temple, at least towards the close of it; and even before the
times of Christ, John the Baptist came, and proclaimed the near approach
of the Messiah, and his kingdom: this covenant was of right abolished at
the time of Christ's death; upon his ascension the Spirit was given, and
the Gospel published among all nations, by which it more and more
disappeared; and in fact it quite vanished away, when the city and
temple of Jerusalem were destroyed, which was in a little time after the
writing of this epistle; so that the apostle, with great propriety,
says, it is "ready to vanish away".

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 9](heb009.md)

</div>
