<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hebrews Index](heb)  
  [Previous](plm001)  [Next](heb001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hebrews Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

[Hebrews](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">heb 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HEBREWS

That this epistle was written very early appears from hence, that it was
imitated by Clement of Rome, in his epistle to the Corinthians, who took
whole sentences out of it; and therefore it could not be a new work, as
Eusebius (a) observes: it has been denied to be authentic by some
heretics, as the Marcionites and Arians, but has been generally received
as such by the orthodox: some indeed doubted of it, because it was not
received by the Roman church, as an epistle of the Apostle Paul (b);
though others, who have thought it was not his, as Origen, yet looked
upon it as genuine (c). It has been ascribed to different persons, as to
Barnabas, to Apollos, to Luke the Evangelist, and to Clement of Rome,
but without any just reason. Clement of Alexandria, a very ancient
writer, asserts it to be the Apostle Paul's (d); and his name stands in
the title of it, in all R. Stephens's exemplars, and in all Beza's
copies, excepting one, and so it does in the Vulgate Latin and Arabic
versions; and that it is his, is highly probable from the agreement
there is between this, and other epistles of his; compare [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002) with [Col
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#015) and [Heb
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#012) with [Co1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#001) and [Heb
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#001) with [Co1
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#024) and [Heb
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#007) with [Th1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011), and [Heb
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#009) with [Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014) and [Heb
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#018) with [Co2
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012) and [Heb
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#020) with [Rom
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#013) and many other places; and also
from the order and method of it, first treating of doctrines, and then
proceeding to practical exhortations, which is the common form of Paul's
epistles: to which may be added various circumstances; as that it was
written from Italy, where Paul was a prisoner; and the mention the
author of it makes of his bonds, and of Timothy, as well known unto him,
who was Paul's companion; besides, the token of his epistles appears in
this, namely, his usual salutation to the churches; see [Heb
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#023). But above all, the testimony of
the Apostle Peter is greatly in favour of its being his, [Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015) from whence it clearly appears,
that the Apostle Paul did write an epistle to the Hebrews; for to them
Peter wrote; see [Pe1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001) and what
epistle could it be but this? and what Peter refers to is to be found in
it; see [Heb 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025) and which is
written with great wisdom; in none of Paul's epistles is there a greater
discovery of his knowledge of divine mysteries than in this; and in it
also are things hard to be understood, [Heb
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#011). The common objections to its
being his are, its not bearing his name, the diversity of its style, and
the author of it seeming to be not an apostle, but a disciple of the
apostle's: as to his not setting his name to it, the reasons might be,
because he was the apostle of the Gentiles, and not so much of the Jews;
and because of the prejudice of the Jews against him, both believers,
and unbelievers; wherefore had his name been to it, it might have
prevented the usefulness of it to the one, and have stirred up the rage
of the other: as to the difference of style, different subjects require
a different style; and yet in many things there is a likeness, as before
observed: and as to the author's not being an apostle, which is
concluded from [Heb 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#003) the word "us"
there is to be understood of the believing Hebrews, the disciples of the
apostle, and not inclusive of the author, by a figurative way of
speaking often used by Paul; and besides, the apostle received a
confirmation of the Gospel from Ananias, who might have been an hearer
of Christ, though he was at first taught it by Christ himself; add to
this, that whoever was the writer of it, it was written before the
destruction of Jerusalem, and when several of the apostles were living,
and therefore he could never design by those words to put himself in a
succeeding generation. The persons to whom this epistle was written were
Hebrews, or Jews; so called, as some think, from the name of Abraham,
the father of them; or, as others, from his passing over the river
Euphrates, when he came out of Chaldea into Palestine. So Abram the
Hebrew, in [Gen 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#013) is by the
Septuagint rendered, perathv, "one that passes over", taking it to come
from the word rbe, which signifies to "pass over"; with this compare
[Jos 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#003) and this is the opinion of
some of the Jewish Rabbins (e); though it seems rather that they were
called so from Heber, who lived at the time of the confusion of
languages; see [Gen 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#021). And this is
the sense of many Jewish writers, ancient and modern, of Josephus (f),
of Jonathan ben Uzziel (g), of R. Nehemiah (h), of Aben Ezra (i), and
Kimchi (k), and others; [Co2 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#022).
And these were the Hebrews that dwelt in the land of Judea, and
particularly at Jerusalem; nor were they the unbelieving inhabitants of
those parts, but believers in Christ, who were embodied in a Gospel
church state, It was a tradition of the ancients (l), that this epistle
was written originally in Hebrew, and was translated into Greek, either
by Luke the Evangelist, or by Clement of Rome. But for this there is no
foundation; no Hebrew copy can be produced; Munster's edition of it in
Hebrew is a translation from the Greek, in which it was, no doubt,
originally written, that being the common language, and well known to
the Jews; and which appears from the citations in it out of the Old
Testament, which are made, not from the Hebrew text, but from the Greek
version; and besides, had it been written in Hebrew, the writer would
not have interpreted the Hebrew words, Melchizedek and Salem, as he
does, in [Heb 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#001). The time of its
writing was before the destruction of Jerusalem, which in this book is
signified by the coming of the Lord, and the day approaching; and after
Timothy was released from prison, and some time within the two years of
his own imprisonment at Rome; when he hoped for a release, as his
epistles to the Philippians and to Philemon show. Dr. Lightfoot places
it in the year 62, and in the eighth of Nero. And the occasion and
design of it is, to set forth the superior excellency of Christ to
angels and men, to Moses, to Joshua, to Aaron, and his sons, and the
preferableness of his priesthood and sacrifice to the Levitical
priesthood and its sacrifices; to teach the Hebrews the true knowledge
of the mysteries of their law; to point out to them the design, use, and
abrogation of its ceremonies; and to prepare them for what afflictions
and persecutions they would be called to endure for Christ; and to
exhort them to perseverance, and to strengthen them against apostasy, as
well as to instruct them in the various duties of religion.

\(a\) Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 38. (b) lb. c. 3. & l. 6. c. 20. (c) Eccl.
Hist. l. 6. c. 25. (d) Ib. c. 14. (e) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 42. fol. 37.
3. Jarchi in Gen. x. 21. & xiv. 13. (f) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 6. sect. 4. (g)
Targum in Gen. x. 21. (h) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 42. fol. 37. 3. (i) In
Gen. x. 21. & in Jonam, 1. 9. (k) Sepher Shorashim, rad. rbe (l) Euseb.
Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 14. Hieronymi Catalog. Script. Eccl. sect. 15. fol.
91. Tom. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hebrews Chapter 1](heb001)

</div>
