<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](dan012)  [Next](hos001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HOSEA

This book, in the Hebrew Bibles, at least in some copies, is called
"Sopher Hosea", the Book of Hoses; and, in the Vulgate Latin and Arabic
versions, "the Prophecy of Hoses": and, in the Syriac version, "the
Prophecy of Hoses the Prophet". It is the first of the twelve lesser
prophets, so called, not because they were of less value, credit, and
authority, than the other prophets; but because of their smallness in
bulk; and which, as Kimchi says, upon the authority of their Rabbins,
were put together in one book, that no one of them might be lost,
because of their smallness; and Josephus (a) reckons them but as one
book; and they are quoted in the New Testament under the name of the
Book of the Prophets (b). This prophet was one of them, and therefore
placed here; though, as Kimchi, in his preface to this book, and R.
David Ganz (c), observe, his prophecy was before the prophecy of Isaiah;
and yet he was not the first of these minor prophets, as to order of
time; not only Jonah, but Joel and Amos, were before him; and so they
are placed by some writers; according to Mr. Whiston (d), he began to
prophesy about the year of the world 3196 A.M. and 808 B.C. Mr. Bedford
(e) places him in 804 B.C. His name is the same with Joshua and Jesus,
and signifies a saviour; and he was not only, as all the true prophets
of the Lord and faithful ministers of the word are, the means and
instruments in the hand of God of saving people; but he was a type of
Christ the Saviour, as well as prophesied concerning him, and salvation
by him. Of his parentage, and the time of his prophesying, see [Hos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001), by which it appears that he lived
in several reigns, and to a very great age. He chiefly prophesied
against the ten tribes of Israel; reproved them for their sins; exhorted
them to repentance; threatened them with destruction in case of
impenitence; and comforted the truly godly with the promise of the
Messiah, and of the happy state of the church in the latter day. His
style, is short and concise; in some places sententious, and without
connection, obscure and difficult of interpretation; and in others very
pathetic and moving. Of the divine inspiration and authority of this
book there is no room to doubt; since passages out of it are quoted and
referred to by Christ and his apostles; by Christ himself, [Mat
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013) [Pe1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#010) There are some things said of the
descent, death, and burial of this prophet, not to be depended on.
Pseudo Epiphanius (f) and Isidorus (g) say he was of the tribe of
Issachar, and born in Belomoth or Bethlemoth; and that he died in peace,
and was buried in his own country; but, according to a tradition of the
Jews (h), he died in Babylon, and was buried in Tzapheth, a city in
upper Galilee; but all this is uncertain, and not very probable, and is
of no importance to be known.

\(a\) Contr. Apion. l. 1. c. 8. (b) Acts vii. 42. (c) Tzemach David,
fol. 12. 2. (d) Chronological Tables, cent. 7. (e) Scripture Chronology,
B. 6. ch. 2. p. 645. (f) De Prophet. Vit. &c. c. 11. (g) De Vita & Mort.
Sanct. c. 41.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 1](hos001)

</div>
