<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos000)  [Next](hos002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO HOSEA 1

After the general inscription of the book, in which the author, penman,
and time of this prophecy, are expressed, [Hos
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001), the people of Israel are reproved
for their idolatry, under the representation of a harlot the prophet is
bid to marry, which he is said to do, [Hos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002), and their ruin and destruction
are foretold in the names of the children he had by her, and by what is
said on the occasion of the birth of each, [Hos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004), but mercy and salvation are
promised to Judah, [Hos 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007) and the
chapter is concluded with a glorious prophecy of the conversion of the
Gentiles, and the calling of the Jews in the latter day; and of the
union of Judah and Israel under one Head and Saviour, Christ; and of the
greatness and glory of that day, [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010).

[Hosea 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 1:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord that came unto Hosea,.... Whose name is the same
with Joshua and Jesus, and signifies a saviour; he was in some things a
type of Christ the Saviour, and prophesied of him, and salvation by him;
and was the instrument and means of saving men, as all true prophets
were, and faithful ministers of the word are: to him the word of the
Lord, revealing his mind and will, was brought by the Spirit of God, and
impressed upon his mind; and it was committed to him to be delivered
unto others. This is the general title of the whole book, showing the
divine original and authority of it:

the son of Beeri; which is added to distinguish him from another of the
same name; and perhaps his father's name was famous in Israel, and
therefore mentioned. The Jews have a rule, that where a prophet's
father's name is mentioned, it shows that he was the son of a prophet;
but this is not to be depended upon; and some of them say that this is
the same with Beerah, a prince of the Reubenites, who was carried
captive by Tiglathpileser king of Assyria, [Ch1
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#006), but the name is different; nor
does the chronology seem so well to agree with him; and especially he
cannot be the father of Hosea, if he was of the tribe of Issachar, as
some have affirmed:

in the days of Uzziah, Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah, and
in the days of Jeroboam the son of Joash, king of Israel; from whence it
appears that Hosea prophesied long, and lived to a great age; for from
the last year of Jeroboam, which was the fifteenth of Uzziah, to the
first of Hezekiah, must be sixty nine years; for Jeroboam reigned forty
one years, and in the twenty seventh of his reign began Uzziah or
Azariah to reign over Judah, and he reigned fifty two years, [Kg2
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#023), so that Uzziah reigned thirty
seven years after the death of Jeroboam, through which time Hosea
prophesied; Jotham after him reigned sixteen years, and so many reigned
Ahaz, [Kg2 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#023), so that without
reckoning any part, either of Jeroboam's reign, or Hezekiah's, he must
prophesy sixty nine years, and, no doubt, did upwards of seventy, very
probably eighty, the Jews say ninety; and allowing him to be twenty four
or five years of age when he begun to prophesy, or only twenty (for it
is certain he was at an age fit to marry, as appears by the prophecy),
he: must live to be upwards of a hundred years; and in all probability
he lived to see not only part of Israel carried captive by
Tiglathpileser, which is certain; but the entire destruction of the ten
tribes by Shalmaneser, which he prophesied of. Jeroboam king of Israel
is mentioned last, though prior to these kings of Judah; because Hosea's
prophecy is chiefly against Israel, and began in his reign, when they
were in a flourishing condition. It appears from hence that Isaiah,
Amos, and Micah, were contemporary with him; see [Isa
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001), within this compass of time Hosea
prophesied lived Lycurgus the famous lawgiver of the Lacedemonians, and
Hesiod the Greek poet; and Rome began to be built.

\(h\) Shalsheleth Hakabala, fol. 12. 1.

[Hosea 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 1:2</span></span>

The beginning of the word of the Lord by Hosea,.... Or "in Hosea" (i);
which was internally revealed to him, and was inspired into him, by the
Holy Ghost, who first spoke in him, and then by him; not that Hosea was
the first of the prophets to whom the word of the Lord came; for there
were Moses, Samuel, David, and others, before him; nor the first of the
minor prophets, for Jonah, Joel, and Amos; are by some thought to be
before him; nor the first of those contemporary with him, as the Jewish
writers interpret it, which is not certain, at least not all of them;
but the meaning is, that what follows is the first part of his prophecy,
or what it began with; by which it appears he was put upon hard service
at first, to prophesy against Israel, an idolatrous people, and to do it
in such a manner as must be disagreeable to a young man:

and the Lord said to Hosea, go, take thee a wife of whoredoms and
children of whoredoms; a woman given to whoredom, a notorious strumpet,
one taken out of the stews, and children that were spurious and
illegitimate, not born in lawful wedlock. Some think this was really
done; that the prophet took a whore, and cohabited with her, or married
her which, though forbidden a high priest, was not forbid to a prophet;
and had it been against a law, yet the Lord commanding it made it
lawful, as in the cases of Abraham's slaying his son, and the Israelites
borrowing jewels of the Egyptians; but this seems not likely, since it
would not only look like countenancing whoredom, which is contrary to
the holy law of God; but must be very dishonourable to the prophet, and
render him contemptible to the people; and, besides, would not answer
the end proposed, to reprove the spiritual adultery or idolatry of
Israel, but rather serve to confirm in it; for how should that appear
criminal and abominable to them, which was commanded the prophet by the
Lord? others think that the woman he is bid to marry, though before
marriage a harlot, was afterwards reformed; but this is directly
contrary to [Hos 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#001) and besides, the
children born of her, whether reformed or not, yet in lawful wedlock
could not be called children of whoredom; nor would the above end be
answered by it, since such a person would be no fit representative of
Israel committing spiritual adultery or idolatry, and continuing in it;
and moreover, whether this or the former was the case, the prophecy must
be many years delivering; it must be near a year before the first child
was born, and the same space must be between the birth of each; so that
here must be a long and frequent interruption of the prophecy, which
does not seem likely: nor is it probable that he took his own wife,
which is the opinion of others, and gave her the character of a whore,
and his children with her, and called them children of whoredom, in
order to represent and reprove the idolatry of Israel: what Maimonides
(k), and the Jewish writers in general, give into, is more agreeable,
that this was all done in the vision of prophecy; that it so seemed to
the prophet in vision to be really done, and so he related it to the
people; but this is liable to objection, that such an impure scene of
things should be represented to the mind of the prophet by the Holy
Spirit of God; nor can the relation of it be thought to have any good
effect upon the people, who would be ready to mock at him, and reproach
him for it. It seems best therefore to understand the whole as a
parable, and that the prophet, in a parabolical way, is bid to represent
the treachery, unfaithfulness, and spiritual adultery of the people of
Israel, under the feigned name of an unchaste woman, and of children
begotten in fornication; and to show unto them that their case was as if
he had taken a woman out of the stews, and her bastards with her; or as
if a wife married by him had defiled his bed, and brought him a spurious
brood of children. So the Targum interprets it,

"go, prophesy a prophecy against the inhabitants of the idolatrous city,
who add to sin:''

for the land hath committed great whoredom, departing from the Lord; or

"for the inhabitants of the land erring, erred from the worship of the
Lord,''

as the Targum; that is, the inhabitants of the land of Israel have
committed idolatry, which is often in Scripture signified by adultery
and whoredom; as an adulterous woman deals treacherously with her
husband, so these people had dealt with God, who stood in such a
relation to them; see [Jer 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#001), this
interprets the parable, and shows the reason of using the following
symbols and emblems.

\(i\) , Sept.; in Hosea, V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Drusius, Tarnovius.
(k) Moreh Nevochim, par. 2. 46. Aben Ezra & Kimchi in loc.

[Hosea 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 1:3</span></span>

So he went and took Gomer the daughter of Diblaim,.... In the course of
prophesying he made mention of this person, who was a notorious common
strumpet; and suggested hereby that they were just like her; or these
were fictitious names he used to represent their case by Gomer signifies
both "consummation" and "consumption" (l); and this harlot is so called,
because of her consummate beauty, and her being completely mistress of
all the tricks of one; or, being consummately wicked, a perfect whore,
common to all; and because her ruin and destruction, persisting in such
practices, were inevitable, and so a fit emblem of the present and
future condition of Israel. Diblaim may be considered either as the name
of a man, a word of the same form with Ephraim; or of a woman, the
mother of Gomer; or else of a place, the wilderness of Diblath, [Eze
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze006.htm#014) and signifies "a cake of dried
figs" (m); which, in that country, was reckoned delicious eating; and so
denotes, either that both the sin and ruin of this people were owing to
their luxury, or indulging themselves in carnal pleasures, through the
great affluence they were possessed of; or that their original was from
a wilderness, and for their sins should be reduced to a desolate state
again:

which conceived and bare him a son; whose name, and what he was an
emblem of, are declared in the following verse. The Targum is,

"and he went and prophesied over them, that if they returned, it should
be forgiven them: but, if not, as fig tree leaves drop off, so should
they; but they added, and did evil works.''

\(l\) A rad. "perfecit, desiit", Gussetius. (m) Vox "significat massas
ficuum compressarum et siccatarum", Rivetus, Tarnovius.

[Hosea 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 1:4</span></span>

And the Lord said unto him call his name Jezreel,.... Which some
interpret the "seed of God", as Jerom; or "arm of God", as others; and
Kimchi applies it to Jeroboam the son of Joash, who was strong, and
prospered in his kingdom; but it rather signifies "God will sow", or
"scatter" (n); denoting either their dissension among themselves; or
their dispersion among the nations, which afterwards came to pass; and
so the Targum, "call their name scattered"; and alluding also to the
city of Jezreel, where some of the idolatrous kings of Israel lived, and
where much blood had been shed, which should be avenged, as follows:

for yet a little while, and I will avenge the blood of Jezreel upon the
house of Jehu; not the blood of Naboth the Jezreelite, that was shed by
Ahab; but the blood of Joram the son of Ahab, and seventy other sons of
his, and all his great men, kinsfolks and priests, shed by Jehu in this
place; and though this was done according to the will of God, and for
which he received the kingdom, and it was continued in his family to the
fourth generation; yet, inasmuch as this was not done by him from a pure
and hearty zeal for the Lord and his worship, and with a sincere view to
his glory, but in order to gain the kingdom, increase his power, and
satiate his tyranny and lust; and because, though he destroyed one
species of idolatry, the worship of Baal, yet he continued another, the
worshipping of the calves at Dan and Bethel, and regarded not the law of
the Lord, and so his successors after him; and were the means of causing
many to sin, and so consequently of the ruin of many souls, whose blood
would be required of them, which some take to be the meaning here; this
is threatened; see [Kg2 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#024). It may
be observed, that God sometimes punishes the instruments he makes use of
in doing his work; they either over doing it, exercising too much
cruelty; and not doing it upon right principles, and with right views,
as the kings of Assyria and Babylon, [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005). It is here said to be but a
little while ere this vengeance would be taken, it being at the latter
end of Jeroboam's reign when this prophecy was delivered out; and his
son Zachariah, in whom the kingdom as in his family ceased, reigned but
six months, being conspired against and slain by Shallum, who reigned in
his stead, [Kg2 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008). The Targum is,

"for yet a little while I will avenge the blood of those that worship
idols which Jehu shed in Jezreel, whom he slew because they served Baal;
but they turned to err after the calves which were in Bethel; therefore
I will reckon that innocent blood upon the house of Jehu:''

and will cause to cease the kingdom of the house of Israel; that is, in
the family of Jehu; Zachariah the son of the then reigning prince being
the last, and his reign only the short reign of six months; unless this
has reference to the utter cessation of this kingdom as such in the
times of Hoshea by Shalmaneser king of Assyria, [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006).

\(n\) A rad. "seminavit, disseminavit", Schmidt.

[Hosea 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 1:5</span></span>

And it shall come to pass at that day,.... When the Lord shall take
vengeance on the family of Jehu, and deprive them of the kingdom of
Israel, and shall punish the idolatrous kings that succeed:

that I will break the bow of Israel in the valley of Jezreel; of which
valley see [Jos 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016). It is now
called the plain of Esdraelon; as it is in the Apocrypha:

"And to those among the nations that were of Carmel, and Galaad, and the
higher Galilee, and the great plain of Esdrelom,'' (Judith 1:8)

the great plain of Esdraelon; according to Adrichomius, (o) it is two
miles broad, and ten miles long; its soil exceeding rich and fruitful,
and abounding with grain, wine, and oil; all travellers agree they never
saw the like: one says (p) of this plain or valley, formerly the lot of
the tribe of Issachar, this is the most fertile portion of the land of
Canaan, where that tribe might well be supposed to have "rejoiced in
their tents", [Deu 33:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#018), at present,
indeed, it is not manured, as another traveller (q) observes, and yet
very fruitful; who says, it is of a vast extent, and very fertile, but
uncultivated, only serving the Arabs for pasturage; and, according to
the same writer, the ancient river Kishon runs through the middle of it:
from the largeness of it, it is frequently called by writers the great
plain or valley; and sometimes, from the places near it, or on it, the
great plain of Legio, the great plain of Samaria, the great plain or
valley of Megiddo, [Ch2 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#022), and the
great plain of Esdraelon, and here the valley of Jezreel; Jezreel or
Esdraela being situated in this great plain or valley between
Scythopolis and Legio, a very large village, as Jerom says (r) it was in
his days; and also on this passage observes, that Jezreel, from whence
this valley had its name, is now near Maximianopolis, and was the
metropolis of the kingdom of Samaria, near which were very large plains,
and a valley of a very great length, extending more than ten miles: here
Ahab had a palace in his days, near to which was Naboth's vineyard, and
where God revenged his blood: this city is called by Josephus (s) Azare
and Azarus, or Izarus; and in the times of Gulielmus Tyrius (t) it went
by the name of Little Gerinum. The "bow" is put for all instruments of
war, and everything in which confidence was put, which was weakened or
removed from them: this refers either to Menhchem's slaughter of
Shallum, and wasting some parts of the land of Israel, [Kg2
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#014), or rather it may be to a battle
fought between Hoshea king of Israel and Shalmaneser king of Assyria in
this valley, which was not far from Samaria; in which the former was
defeated, and the latter, having the victory, proceeded to Samaria,
besieged and took it, [Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006) though
of the action the Scripture is silent; but it is not improbable. The
Targum is,

"I will break the strength of the warriors of Israel in the valley of
Jezreel;''

which seems to confirm the same conjecture. Some render it, "because of
the valley of Jezreel" (u); that is, because of the idolatry, bloodshed,
and other sins, committed there.

\(o\) Theatrum Terrae Sanctae, p. 35, 37. (p) Dr. Shaw's Travels, tom.
2. c. 1. p. 275. Ed. 2. (q) Maundrell's Journey from Aleppo, &c. p. 57.
Ed. 7. (r) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 92. I. (s) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 13.
sect. 6, 8. (t) Tyr. Hist. l. 22. c. 26. (u) "propter vallem Jisreelis",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,

[Hosea 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 1:6</span></span>

And she conceived again, and bare a daughter,.... One of the weaker sex;
denoting the weaker state of the kingdom of Israel after Jeroboam, as
Kimchi thinks; Zachariah his son reigning but six months, and Shallum
the son of Jabesh, his successor, reigned but one month, [Kg2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#008),

and God said unto him, call her name Loruhamah; which signifies, "she
hath not obtained mercy": and what follows explains it to the same
sense. The Targum is,

"and they added and did evil works; and he said unto him call their
name, who obtained not mercy by their works:''

for I will no more have mercy upon the house of Israel; as he had
heretofore, sparing them time after time, though they continued to sin
against him; but now he would spare them no longer, but deliver them up
into the hands of their enemies, as he did a part of them, first into
the hands of Tiglathpileser king of Assyria, and then to Shalmaneser,
[Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029), otherwise, in the latter
day, mercy will be shown them again, especially in a spiritual way, when
they shall be converted, and believe in Christ, and all Israel shall be
saved, as well as possess their own land again; see [Hos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010),

but I will utterly take them away; out of their land, from being a
kingdom and nation, which was done by Shalmaneser, another king of
Assyria, [Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006), or, "bringing I
will bring into them", or "against them" (w); that is, an enemy, the
same king of Assyria: or, "but forgetting I will forget them" (x), as
some render it, and remember them no more, till the fulness of time
comes: or, "through pardoning I have pardoned", or "spared them" (y);
that is, in times past. The Targum is,

"but if they return, pardoning I will pardon them;''

which will be done in the latter day.

\(w\) "adducendo adducam contra cos", Munster; "importando importabo
eis", Drusius; so Kimchi and Ben Melech. (x) "Obliviscendo obliviscar
eorum", V. L. Pagninus. (y) "Quamvis omnino condonaverim eis", Piscator;
"quamvis haetenus condonando condonaverim eis", so some in Drusius.

[Hosea 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 1:7</span></span>

But I will have mercy on the house of Judah,.... The two tribes of Judah
and Benjamin, which retained the true worship of God among them; see
[Hos 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#012) and though they often
sinned against the Lord, he showed them mercy, and spared them longer
than the ten tribes; and though he suffered them to be carried captive
into Babylon, he returned them again after seventy years: this is
mentioned as an aggravation of the punishment of Israel, that Judah was
spared, when they were not; and to show that God will have a people to
seek and serve him, and, when he rejects some, he will make a reserve of
others:

and will save them by the Lord their God; by his own arm and power, and
not theirs, or any creature's; nor by any warlike means or instruments
whatever, as follows:

and will not save them by bow, nor by sword, nor by battle, by horses,
nor by horsemen: which may respect either the deliverance of the Jews
from the invasion and siege of Sennacherib's army; which was done
without shooting an arrow, or drawing the sword, or engaging in a
pitched battle, or by a cavalry rushing into his camp, discomfiting his
army, and pursuing them; but by an angel sent from heaven, which in one
night destroyed a hundred and fourscore and five thousand, [Kg2
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035) or else refers to Cyrus being
stirred up by the Lord to issue forth a proclamation, giving liberty to
the Jewish captives to go free, without price or reward; and so was
brought about, not by the might and power of man, but by the Spirit of
the Lord; see [Ezr 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001) though a
greater salvation is pointed at, or at least shadowed forth, by this,
even the spiritual and eternal salvation of God's elect by Christ; which
is the fruit of mercy, and not the effect of the merits of men; is
obtained not by human power, or by man's righteousness; but by the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is Jehovah our righteousness, the Lord God of his
people; who stands in a relation to them prior to his being the Saviour
of them; to which work and office he is equal, being the eternal
Jehovah, and the true and living God. So the Targum,

"and I will save them by the Word of the Lord their God;''

the eternal Word, that was with God, is God, and became incarnate, God
in our nature.

[Hosea 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 1:8</span></span>

Now when she had weaned Loruhamah,.... That is, when Gomer had weaned
her daughter of this name, [Hos 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#006).
This some interpret of the people of Israel being deprived of the word
and ordinances, compared to milk and breasts, having a famine of them;
and so were like children weaned from the milk, and drawn from the
breasts; though others think this is expressive of the patience of God
in bearing with this people, after he had before threatened them with
the subversion of their kingdom and state; and even after the prophecy
had took place in part, in causing the kingdom to cease in the house of
Jehu, he bore with them about forty years before they were entirely
carried captive; suckling and weaning, before the conception and birth
of another child, denoting some stop and stay; but rather this intends
the taking away some part of the land of Israel, as a child when weaning
is taken away from its mother; and may respect the carrying captive many
of the Israelites in divers parts, particularly out of Gilead, Galilee,
and Naphtali, by Tiglathpileser king of Assyria, [Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029). This cannot be understood of
the captivity of the Jews in Babylon, as Cocceius; for this is a
resumption and continuation of the prophecy concerning the ten tribes,
after inserting a promise of the salvation of Judah, in the preceding
verse:

she conceived and bare a son: according to Kimchi, as the weaning of
Loruhamah points at the times of weakness, from Zachariah the son of
Jeroboam to the times of Pekahiah, when the reigns were short and
troublesome; so this son conceived and born represents the state of the
nation in the times of Pekah; who reigned twenty years, and was too
powerful for the kingdom of Judah, slew multitudes of them, and carried
others captive, and assisted Rezin king of Syria against Ahaz king of
Judah: but, according to the series of the prophecy, it seems best to
agree with the times of Hoshea king of Israel, who was not so bad as
some of his predecessors; was a man of spirit and courage; cast off the
Assyrian yoke, and neglected to give presents to the king of Assyria;
and Samaria in his time held out a three years' siege against that king,
[Kg2 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001). The Targum is,

"and the generation of them who are carried captive among the nations
are found not to have obtained mercy by their works, but they added and
did evil works.''

[Hosea 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 1:9</span></span>

Then said God, call his name Loammi,.... Which Aben Ezra interprets of
the children of the ten tribes horn in captivity, who never returned;
but it rather signifies the ten tribes themselves, who were carried
captive and had this name given them for the reason following:

for ye are not my people; though he had chosen them to be his people
above all people, and had distinguished them from others by various
blessings and privileges; yet they did not behave as such to him; they
did not serve, obey, and worship him, but the calves at Dan and Bethel;
and therefore did not deserve the name of his people: hence he says,

and I will not be your or "yours" (a); that is, as we supply it, and so
Aben Ezra, "your God"; will not behave toward you as such; will not take
you under my care and protection, or continue you in your land, and in
the enjoyment of the blessings of it; will not be your King, patron, and
defender, but give you up into the hands of your enemies. This respects
the captivity of the ten tribes by Shalmaneser, [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006). The Targum is,

"for ye are not my people; because ye do not confirm the words of my
law, my word shall not be your help.''

\(a\) "non ero vester", Pagninus; "nec ego sum futurus vester", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[Hosea 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 1:10</span></span>

Yet the number of the children of Israel shall be as the sand of the
sea, which cannot be measured nor numbered,.... Though called Loammi,
and rejected from being the people of God; yet there is a time when
their number, according to the promise made to Abraham, shall be as the
sand of the sea, and the stars of heaven; which, as the one cannot be
measured, the other cannot be numbered; which was to be not at the
return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity, when some of the ten
tribes of Israel returned with them, as Theodoret and others think; for
they were but few that then returned: but rather at the first times of
the Gospel, when multitudes that came from various parts of the world
were converted at the day of Pentecost, and greater numbers; who were
met with in the ministry of the word, in the various parts of the world,
where they were dispersed, and the Gospel came, to whom Peter and James
wrote their epistles; and not these only are meant, but the vast numbers
of Gentiles, who were effectually called by grace everywhere, and were
true Israelites, the spiritual seed of Abraham; and to whom the Apostle
Paul applies these words, producing them as a testimony of the election
and calling, not of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also, [Rom
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#024), and which will have a further
accomplishment in the latter day, when the fulness of the Gentiles will
be brought in, the Jews will be converted, and all Israel saved, [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025), then the numbers of the Israel
of God, both of Jews and Gentiles, will be as the sand of the sea
indeed!

and it shall come to pass, that in the place where it was said unto
them, ye are not my people, there it shall be said unto them, ye are the
sons of the living God; that is, in such places where it used to be
said, here live Pagans, Turks, or Jews, who worship not the true God, or
at lease not aright, nor believe in Christ, and profess his name; "there
it shall be said to them", by the Lord himself, by his Spirit witnessing
their relation to them, and by all good men, and even by the world in
general; not only that they are "the people of God", but have a superior
privilege, a greater character, and a higher relation, the sons of the
living God; the sons of God, not by nature, as Christ; nor by creation,
as angels; nor by office, as civil magistrates; or by profession merely,
as nominal Christians; but by adopting grace; which exceeds all other
blessings, even of sanctification and justification; makes men
honourable; is attended with various privileges, and always continues.
The epithet "of the living God" is not without cause put; it stands in
opposition to dead idols before worshipped by some who will now be the
children of God; and who, as he has life in himself, gives it to others;
to all natural life and breath, and to his children spiritual and
eternal life; and, as he lives forever, so shall they his sons likewise.
The Targum is,

"and it shall be in the place where they have been carried captive, when
they transgressed the law; and it was said to them, ye are not my
people; there they shall be converted and increased (or made great); and
it shall be said to them, O ye people of the living God.''

[Hosea 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 1:11</span></span>

Then shall the children of Judah and the children of Israel be gathered
together,.... Not at the return from the Babylonish captivity; for,
though some of the ten tribes might be mixed with the Jews when they
went into captivity, and came out with them, and others might join them
from the various nations where they had been dispersed; yet they did not
gather together with them in a body, only the tribes of Judah and
Benjamin, those were the chief; of the children of Israel, but few, [Ezr
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#005). Some refer this to the first
times of the Gospel, when the Galileans were gathered to Christ by his
ministry, who inhabited the countries where some of the tribes of Israel
dwelt; and who might, at least some of them, descend from them: and when
those in Jerusalem and in Judea, who also believed in Christ, united
with them in their profession of him, and in affection to one another;
or to the time of Christ's death, by which the whole Israel of God, who
were scattered abroad, were gathered together in one; and even Jews and
Gentiles were made one body, and one new man in Christ, the partition
wall being broken down: or to the times of the apostles, who were
successful in the conversion and gathering of many of the Jewish nation,
and also of the Samaritans; and of forming churches in Judea and Samaria
under one head, in whom they agreed; and likewise of many others, both
Jews and Israelites, in the various parts of the world, where they
carried the Gospel; and who coalesced with the believing Gentiles in one
church state, under Christ their head: though it seems best to interpret
this of the latter day, when the children of Israel and Judah shall join
together in seeking the Lord their God, and the true Messiah, and shall
be turned, and gathered to him; when they shall be no more two kingdoms
or two nations, but be one under the Messiah, who shall he their King
and Prince; when all their animosities shall be laid aside, and they
shall no more envy or vex one another; but shall meet together in the
same church state, and worship the Lord with one shoulder and consent,
being of one mind and sentiment in religious things, and when all Israel
shall be saved, [Jer 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#004) [Isa
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#013)

and appoint themselves one head; not Sennacherib, as Aben Ezra, very
absurdly; nor Hezekiah, nor Josiah, as others; nor Elijah the prophet,
as some in Kimchi; nor Zerubbabel, to which the Targum seems to incline,
paraphrasing it,

"one head of the house of David;''

but better, as Jarchi, David their King; that is, the Messiah, as Kimchi
and Ben Melech expressly interpret it; and so Abarbinel (b), though he
understands it of the Messiah the son of Joseph; and undoubtedly the
same is meant by the one head, as David their King and Prince, [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005) even Christ, who is the Head of
angels, yea, the Head of every man, but in a special and peculiar sense
the head of the body, the church; he is the federal and representative
Head of his people, both in eternity and in time; and in such sense a
Head to them, as a king is head of his subjects, a husband of his wife,
a father of his family, and a master of his servants; and also as a
natural head is to its body, of the same nature with it; in union to it;
lives the same life; is above it, and more excellent than it: a perfect
Head Christ is, there being nothing wanting in him as such; he has his
eyes set upon his people; his ears are open to their cries; he smells a
sweet saviour of rest in their persons and services; he tastes and eats
their pleasant fruits, and feels all their infirmities, troubles and
afflictions; and has a tongue to speak a word in season for them: there
are no vicious humours in this Head to affect the body; no deformity in
it, and all fulness therein to supply its wants; he is an everliving and
everlasting Head, and the one, and only one; there is no other, neither
the pope of Rome, nor any other; nor will true Israelites acknowledge
any other: and though this Head is of God the Father's appointing, who
has given him to be the Head; set him as King over Sion; raised him up
to be a Prince and a Saviour; yet he is also of the saints' choosing and
appointing; they approve of him as such, embrace him, own him, and
submit to him, as the Jews will at the last day, though their
forefathers have rejected him:

and they shall come up out of the land; not of Israel, as Schmidt, who
interprets this of the apostles going out from thence, and spreading the
Gospel in the world; but out of each of the lands and countries where
Israel and Judah have been dispersed, and return to their own land; see
[Jer 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#018). So the Targum,

"and they shall come up out of the land of their captivity:''

or it may be understood, figuratively and spiritually, of their coming
up out of their captivity to sin, Satan, the law, and the world, as well
as out of their present temporal captivity:

and out of the earth (c), as it were, as it may be rendered; out of
their earthly state, from the graves of sin, leaving their earthly
affections, and becoming spiritual and heavenly minded; willing to quit
all that is dear unto them, even the country in which they were born and
long lived, to follow Christ their Head and King:

for great shall be the day of Jezreel; or, though great has been or is
the day of Jezreel (d); though it has been a great and long day of
trouble and affliction to them, signified by Jezreel; see [Hos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004), yet all these good things
promised shall surely be accomplished: indeed the day of Jezreel may be
taken in a good sense, not for a time of dispersion and distress, but of
great comfort, joy, and happiness; the word signifying, according to
some, the seed of God, or the arm of God: and Jerom applies it to
Christ, the seed of God; and the whole Gospel dispensation may be called
his day, the day of salvation, the joyful day the Lord has made: or
rather by Jezreel, the seed of God, are meant his spiritual offspring,
the children of Judah and Israel; who shall now be gathered, by the arm
of God, his powerful and efficacious grace, and that in large numbers,
so that great will be their day; so the Targum paraphrases it,

"for great will be the day of their gathering.''

It respects the latter day glory, when will be the conversion of the
Jews, and the bringing in of the fulness of the Gentiles; when there
will be great peace and prosperity; great love and unity; great holiness
and purity; great light and knowledge; great enjoyment of God, and of
the presence of the Redeemer great glory upon the churches, and upon
that a defence: in short, all the great and glorious things spoken of
will now be completed; perfect deliverance from all afflictions and
troubles; an entire destruction of all enemies; and a full enjoyment of
the word and ordinances, in the purity of them, and large conversions
everywhere.

\(b\) Mashmiah Jeshuah, fol. 53. 3. (c) "e terra". (d) "quamvis"; so
some in Drusius, Rivet.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 2](hos002)

</div>
