<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Hosea Index](hos.md)  
  [Previous](hos004)  [Next](hos006.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001.md)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HOSEA 5

The design of this chapter is to expose the sins of Israel and of Judah,
and to declare the judgment of God upon them for them. Men of all ranks
in Israel are summoned to attend to the charge brought against then, and
the sentence on them, [Hos 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001.md). The
charge exhibited is, that they were guilty of in, hating men to the
slaughter of idolatrous sacrifices, though they had been sufficiently
rebuked and corrected, [Hos 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001.md); of
both corporeal and spiritual adultery, whereby they were defiled, and
which was well known to the Lord, [Hos
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#003.md); of obstinate persistence in
impenitence, owing to the efficacy of an unclean spirit in them, and
their want of the knowledge of God, [Hos
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#004.md); of open pride, which stared them
in the face, and for which they fell into calamities, and Judah with
them, and should not be able with all their sacrifices to find favour
with God, who had withdrawn himself from them, [Hos
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#005.md); also of treacherous dealing with
the Lord by their spiritual adultery, and begetting strange children,
[Hos 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#007.md); next their punishment is
denounced, of which notice was to be given them by the sound of the
trumpet, as an alarm of war, or as calling for mourning, [Hos
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008.md); since Ephraim would become
desolate, of which notification had been made among the tribes, [Hos
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#009.md); and wrath would be poured out in
great abundance on the princes of Judah, who were very wicked men, [Hos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#010.md); and Ephraim would be oppressed
and broken by the judgment of God, who would be as a moth unto them, and
also rottenness to Judah, because they followed the commandments of men,
[Hos 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#011.md); and, what was still more
provoking, when they were sensible of their calamities and distresses,
they sought not help from the Lord, but from men that could do them no
good; and therefore he threatens to be as a devouring lion to them, [Hos
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013.md); and yet the chapter concludes
with a promise of the conversion of these people, after the Lord had
dealt with them in an angry manner, [Hos
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#015.md).

[Hosea 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 5:1</span></span>

Hear ye this, O priests,.... Though idolatrous ones, who called
themselves priests, and were reckoned so by others, though not of the
tribe of Levi, but such as Jeroboam had made priests, or were their
successors; and there might be some of the family of Aaron and tribe of
Levi, that might continue in the cities of Israel, and who gave in to
the idolatrous worship of those times. Some render it "princes" (c) and
the word signifies both:

and hearken, ye house of Israel; not the kingdom of Judah, as Kimchi,
for this is manifestly distinguished from Israel in this chapter; nor
the sanhedrim, to which sense Aben Ezra seems to incline; but the ten
tribes, the whole kingdom of Israel, the common people in it:

and give ye ear, O house of the king; of the king of Israel, who, at
this time, is thought to be Menahem; the royal family, the princes of
the blood, and all that belonged to the king's court; all of every
office, priestly or kingly, of every rank, high and low, are called upon
to hearken to what is about to be said, both concerning their sin and
punishment:

for judgment is toward you: either to know and do that which is just and
right; it belonged to the priests to know and teeth divine judgment, to
instruct the people in the knowledge of the judgments, statutes, and
laws of God; and it belonged to, the king to execute human judgment, to
do justice and judgment according to the laws of God, and of the realm;
and it belonged to the people to attend to both: so the Targum,

"does it not "belong" to you to know judgments?''

or rather this is to be understood of punitive justice and judgment, of
the sentence of condemnation, or denunciation of punishment for sin: the
reasons of which follow,

because ye have been a snare on Mizpah, and a net spread upon Tabor;
these were two high mountains in the land of Israel; the former was near
Hermon and Lebanon, and the same with Gilead, [Jos
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#003.md); the latter was a mountain in
Galilee, between Issachar and Zebulun, six miles from Nazareth: it was,
according to Joseph ben Gorion (d) almost four miles high, had on the
top of it a plain of almost three miles; the true Josephus (e) says is
was three and a quarter miles; See Gill on [Jer
46:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#018); the Jews (f.md) have a tradition,
that Jeroboam set spies upon these mountains at the time of the solemn
feasts, to watch who went to them out of Israel, and to inform against
them; but these could not command all the roads leading to Jerusalem. It
may be these mountains were much infested with hawkers and hunters, to
which there may be an allusion; and the sense be, ye priests, people,
and king, are like to those that set snares and nets on those hills, as
they to ensnare and catch creatures, so ye to ensnare and draw men into
idolatrous practices; or rather, since there is no note of comparison,
the meaning is, that they set up altars, and offered sacrifices on these
hills, and thereby ensnared not only those of their own tribes, but drew
and enticed many of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin to fall in with the
same idolatrous practices.

\(c\) "significat sacerdotes et principes", vid. 2 Sam. viii. 18.
"Sacerdotes ac domum regis", i.e. "regem cum principibus et aulicis",
Liveleus. (d) Hist. Heb. l. 4. c. 25. p. 635. (e) De Bello Jud. l. 4. c.
1. sect. 9. (f) Jarchi ex Tanehuma, Abendana ex Midrash.

[Hosea 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 5:2</span></span>

And the revolters are profound to make slaughter,.... The revolters are
the king, priests, and people, who had revolted from the true worship
and ways of God unto idolatry. These formed deep laid schemes, and took
crafty methods, like hawkers; who lay themselves flat upon the ground to
manage their snares and nets, and observe the creatures that fall into
them, and take them, and whom they artfully decoy, to which the allusion
is; and that either to slay those who would not comply with their false
worship; or rather to multiply the sacrifices of slain beasts, and offer
them with a great show of devotion and religion, and thereby beguile,
entice, and ensnare simple and unwary souls; so the Targum,

"they sacrifice to idols abundantly;''

and which, in the sight of God, was mere slaughter and butchery:

though I have been a rebuker of them all; king, priests, and prophets;
those idolaters, revolters, or worshippers of Baal, as Aben Ezra calls
them: this is to be interpreted either of the prophet, who had freely,
faithfully, and openly reproved all orders of men for their departure
from God and his worship, and for their idolatrous practices; or of the
Lord himself, which comes to the same sense, who had rebuked them by his
prophets, and corrected them by his judgments, but to no purpose: and
therefore they could not plead ignorance, or excuse themselves upon that
account.

[Hosea 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 5:3</span></span>

I know Ephraim, and Israel is not hid from me,.... Though they may cover
their designs from men, and seek deep to hide their counsel from the
Lord, and make plausible pretences for what they do, and put on an
appearance of religion; yet God, who knows all men, and their hearts,
cannot be deceived; he judges not according to outward appearance; all
things are naked and open to him; nor can any hide themselves from him;
he knows their persons, intentions, and designs, as well as actions.
Kimchi interprets Ephraim of Jeroboam, the son of Nebat, who was of that
tribe; others, of the tribe itself, and Israel of the other nine tribes;
others take Ephraim for the ten tribes, and Israel for the two tribes:
but it is best to understand Ephraim and Israel of the same, even of the
ten tribes; whose works, as the Targum paraphrases it, the Lord knew,
particularly what follows:

for now, O Ephraim, thou committest whoredom; both corporeal and
spiritual adultery, which frequently went together, as observed in the
preceding chapter: the Lord knew their corporeal whoredom, though ever
so secretly committed, and their spiritual adultery or idolatry, under
all the specious pretences of worshipping him; which was an abhorrence
to him, as well as a pollution to them:

and Israel is defiled; with the same sins; for all sin is of a defiling
nature, and especially those mentioned, which defile body and soul, and
render men loathsome and abominable in the sight of God.

[Hosea 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 5:4</span></span>

They will not frame their doings to turn unto their God,.... Either
their evil doings; they will not leave, as the Targum and Jarchi (g);
their evil ways and worship, their adultery and idolatry; which was
necessary to repentance and true conversion to God, whom they yet
professed to be their God, though they had so sadly departed from him:
or their good works; they did not choose to do them, which were leading
steps to repentance and conversion, or fruits and evidences of it: they
had no mind to repent of their sins, and turn from them to the Lord;
they had no thought, care, or concern, about these things, but
obstinately persisted in their sins and in their impenitence: their
wills were wretchedly depraved and corrupted; their hearts hard,
perverse, and obstinate; they had no will to that which is good:

for the spirit of whoredom is in the midst of them; an unclean spirit,
that prompts them to and pushes them on to commit corporeal and
spiritual whoredom; the bias and inclination of their minds were this
way which put them upon such evil practices; the spirit of error, which
caused them to err, as the Targum and Kimchi; the lying spirit in the
false prophets which encouraged them therein; and even himself, the
spirit that works in the children of disobedience:

and they have not known the Lord; ignorance of God, his nature and
perfections, his will, word, and worship, was the cause of their
idolatry, and other sins; see [Hos
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#001.md); and this was wilful and affected
ignorance; they knew not, nor would they understand: they rejected the
knowledge of God, and the means of it; so the Targum,

"and they sought not instruction (or doctrine) from the Lord.''

\(g\) So R. Sol. Urbin. fol. 68. 2.

[Hosea 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 5:5</span></span>

And the pride of Israel doth testify to his face,.... Or, "does" or
"shall answer to his face" (h); contradicts him, convicts him, and fills
him with shame; the pride of his heart, and of his countenance, and
which appears in all his actions, and which is open and manifest to all,
shall stare him in the face, and confound him; even all the sinful
actions done by him in a proud and haughty manner, in contempt of God
and of his laws, shall fly in his face, and fill him with dread and
horror. The Targum is,

"the glory of Israel shall be humbled, and they seeing it:''

instead of greatness, glory, and honour, they formerly had, they shall
be in a mean low condition, even in their own land, before they go into
captivity; and which their eyes shall behold, as Kimchi explains the
paraphrase; and to this sense Jarchi and Aben Ezra incline; and so read
the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions. Some understand this of God
himself, who, formerly, at least, was the pride, glory, and excellency
of Israel; of whom they were proud, and boasted, and gloried in; even he
shall be a swift witness against them: and

therefore shall Israel and Ephraim fall in their iniquity; that is, the
ten tribes shall fall by and for their iniquities, such as before
mentioned, into ruin and misery; it has respect to their final
destruction and captivity by the Assyrians; they first fell into sin,
and then by it into ruin: see [Hos
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#001.md);

Judah also shall fall with them; the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin,
as they fell into idolatry, and were guilty of the same crimes, so
should be involved in the same or like punishment, though not at the
same time; for the Babylonish captivity, in which Judah was carried
captive, was many years after Israel was carried captive by the
Assyrians: unless this is to be understood of the low, afflicted, and
distressed condition of Judah, in the times of Ahaz, by Tiglathpileser,
king of Assyria, who had a little before carried captive part of Israel,
and by others; and in which times Judah fell into idolatrous practices,
and fell by them; see [Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029.md).

\(h\) "respondebit", Montanus, Zanchius, Tarnovius, Rivet, Schmidt;
"respondit", Cocceius.

[Hosea 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 5:6</span></span>

They shall go with their flocks and with their herds to seek the
Lord,.... Not only the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, to whom Kimchi,
Aben Ezra, and Abarbinel, restrain the words; but the ten tribes of
Israel also, who, when in distress, and seeing ruin coming upon them,
should seek the Lord; seek help from him against their enemies, and the
pardon of their sins; seek his face and favour, and to appease his
wrath, by bringing a multitude of sacrifices out of their flocks and
herds; such a number of them, as if they brought all their flocks and
herds with them; but not with true repentance for their sins, nor with
faith in the great sacrifice, which legal sacrifices, rightly performed,
prefigured. Kimchi refers this to the times of Josiah; but, as it
respects Israel as well as Judah, it seems to design some time a little
before the ruin of them both:

but they shall not find him; shall not find grace and mercy with him; he
will not be favourable to them, will not afford them any help, but give
them up to utter ruin and destruction; as he did Israel at the Assyrian
captivity, and Judah at the Babylonish captivity:

he hath withdrawn himself from them; the glory of the Lord departed from
them; his Shechinah, or divine Majesty, as the Targum, removed from
them, because of their idolatry, and other sins; they sought him not
where and while he was to be found; and therefore, when they sought him,
found him not, because he had withdrawn his presence from among them,
being provoked by their iniquities.

[Hosea 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 5:7</span></span>

They have dealt treacherously against the Lord,.... Which was the reason
of his departure from them; as a woman deals treacherously with her
husband when she is unfaithful to him, and commits adultery; so Israel
and Judah dealt treacherously with the Lord, who stood in the relation
of a husband to them in covenant, by committing idolatry;

for they have begotten strange children; either of strange women, the
daughters of idolatrous Heathens they married, so the Targum, Jarchi,
and Kimchi; or rather their natural children, though born of Israelitish
or Jewish parents, both such; yet being educated by them in an
idolatrous way, and brought up in the commission of the evils their
parents were guilty of, are said to be strange children to the Lord,
alienated from him and his worship, and as such to be begotten:

now shall a month devour them with their portions; the Jews understand
this literally of the month Ab, the time of Jerusalem's destruction, so
Jarchi and R. Jeshuah in Aben Ezra and Ben Melech; or the month Tammuz,
in which the city was broke up, and the month Ab, in which it was
destroyed, as Kimchi; or rather, which is also a sense he mentions, it
signifies a short time, a very little while before the destruction
should come; and compares it with [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008.md); though, according to the Targum,
it is to be understood of every month; and so denotes the continual
desolation that should be made, until they were utterly destroyed; but
others seem better to interpret it of their new moon, or first day of
the month, which they observed in a religious way, by offering
sacrifice, &c. and on which they depended; but this should be so far
from being of any service to them, that it should turn against them;
and, because of the idolatry committed in them, the Lord would hate
them, and destroy them on account of them; even their farms, and fields,
and vineyards, which were their portions and inheritances; see [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013.md); unless it is rather to be
understood of the parts of the beasts slain in sacrifice on those days,
to appease the Lord; which would be so far from doing it, that they
would provoke him yet more to wrath, and slay them.

[Hosea 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 5:8</span></span>

Blow ye the cornet in Gibeah, and the trumpet in Ramah,.... As an alarm
of war, to give notice that the enemy is at hand, just ready to invade
the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, and bring destruction upon them;
according to the Targum, the words are directed to the prophets,

"O ye prophets, lift up your voice like a trumpet;''

to declare to the people of Judah their sins and transgressions, and the
punishment that would be inflicted on them for them; or it may be, this
is a call of the people to fasting, mounting, and lamentation, as in
[Joe 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md). Gibeah is the same which is
called "Gibeah of Saul", [Sa1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#004.md); it
being the birth place of that prince; and which Josephus (i) calls
Gabathsaoule, and interprets it the hill of Saul, and says it was
distant from Jerusalem about four miles; though elsewhere (k) he
represents it as but two and a half miles; perhaps in the latter place
there is a corruption in the number; for, according to Jerom, it was
near Ramah, which was seven miles from Jerusalem; he says it is called
also "Gibeah of Benjamin", [Sa1 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#002.md);
because it was in that tribe, as was also Ramah; which, according to
Eusebius (l), was six miles from Jerusalem; these were near to each
other; see [Jdg 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#013.md); so that the
calamity threatened is what respects the two tribes:

cry aloud at Bethaven; the same with Bethel, or a place near unto it, in
the tribe of Benjamin, or on the borders of Ephraim; see [Hos
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015.md). According to the above writer
(m), it lay about twelve miles from Jerusalem; in the way to Sichem; and
being upon the borders both of Benjamin and Ephraim, it sometimes
belonged to Israel, and sometimes to Judah; see [Ch2
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#019.md); and seeing, as Jerom observes,
that Benjamin was at the back of it (for where the tribe of Benjamin
ended, not far in the tribe of Ephraim, according to him, was this city
built), it therefore very beautifully follows,

after thee, O Benjamin; that is, either the enemy is after thee, O
Benjamin, is just at hand, ready to fall upon thee, and destroy thee, as
Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben Melech; or rather, after the trumpet is blown in
Gibeah and Ramah, cities which belonged to Benjamin, let it he blown,
either in Bethaven, on the borders of Benjamin and Ephraim; or let it be
blown in the tribe of Judah, so that all the twelve tribes may have
notice, and prepare for what is coming upon them.

\(i\) De Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 2. sect. 1. (k) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2. sect.
8. (l) Apud Reland Palestina Illustrata, l. 3. tom. 2. p. 963. (m) Apud
Reland. ib. p. 637.

[Hosea 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 5:9</span></span>

Ephraim shall he desolate in the day of rebuke,.... The country of the
ten tribes shall be laid desolate, the inhabitants of them destroyed
either by the sword, or famine, or pestilence, and the rest carried
captive, as they were by Shalmaneser; and this was the day of the Lord's
rebuke and chastisement of them: or of the reward of their sins, as the
Targum, when the Lord punished them for them; and this is what the
trumpet was to be blown for, in order to give notice of, or to call for
mourning on account of it:

among the tribes of Israel have I made known that which shall surely be;
this desolation was foretold by the prophets, and published in all the
tribes of Israel, as what should certainly come to pass; and therefore
they could not plead ignorance of it, or say they had no notice given
them, or they would have repented of their sins. The Targum is,

"in the tribes of Israel I have made known the law;''

so Jarchi; which they transgressed, and therefore were made desolate; or
the word of truth, as Kimchi; the true and faithful word, that if they
walked in his ways, hearkened unto him, it would be well with them; but,
if not, he would destroy their land, and carry them captive.

[Hosea 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 5:10</span></span>

The princes of Judah were like them that remove the bound,.... Or
landmark, which to do was contrary to the law, [Deu
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#014.md); and has always been reckoned a
heinous sin among all nations, and is only done by such who have no
regard to right and wrong, and by them secretly; and such were the
kings, princes, and nobles of Judah; they secretly committed the
grossest iniquities, yea, were abandoned to their vile lusts, and could
not be contained within any bounds. The "caph" here used is, according
to Kimchi and Ben Melech, not a note of similitude, but of certainty;
and then the sense is, that the princes of Judah did remove the bound;
either, in a literal sense, by force and violence seized on the
possessions and inheritances of their neighbours which lay next to
theirs; or, in a figurative sense, they broke through all bounds and
limits, and transgressed the laws of God and men, being not to be
restrained by either:

therefore I will pour out my wrath upon them like water; in great
abundance, and with such force and vehemence, as not to be stopped, but
utterly destroy; like a flood of water, which overflows the banks, or
breaks them down, and carries all before it; or like the flood of water
that came upon the earth, and carried off the world of the ungodly; in
like manner should the wrath of God be poured down from heaven upon
these princes without measure, exceeding all bounds, in just retaliation
for their removing the bounds of their neighbours, or transgressing the
laws of God: this was fulfilled either in the times of Ahaz, when Rezin
king of Syria, and Pekah king of Israel, as well as Tiglathpileser king
of Assyria, greatly afflicted Judah, [Ch2
28:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#001.md); or at the time of the Babylonish
captivity.

[Hosea 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 5:11</span></span>

Ephraim is oppressed, and broken in judgment,.... Here the prophet again
returns to the ten tribes, who were oppressed and broken, either by
their own judgments, as the Targum; by the tyranny of their kings, and
the injustice of their judges, who looked only for the mammon of
unrighteousness; or by the judgment of their enemies, the Assyrians, the
taxes they laid upon them, the devastations they made among them, and by
whom, at last, they were carried captive; or by the judgments of God
upon them; for all the enemy did was by his permission, and according to
his will:

because he willingly walked after the commandment; not after the
commandment of God, but after the commandment of men, as Aben Ezra; or
after the commandment of the prophets of Baal, as Jarchi; or after the
commandment of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, as Kimchi, by worshipping the
calves at Dan and Bethel he set up there.

[Hosea 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hos 5:12</span></span>

Therefore will I be unto Ephraim as a moth,.... Which eats garments,
penetrates into them, feeds on them privately, secretly, without any
noise, and gradually and slowly consumes them; but at last utterly, that
they are of no use and profit: this may signify the various things which
befell the ten tribes in the reigns of Zachariah, Shallum, Menahem,
Pekahiah, and Pekah, which secretly and gradually weakened them; and the
utter consumption of them in the times of Hoshea by Shalmaneser:

and to the house of Judah as rottenness; as rottenness in the bones,
[Pro 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro012.htm#004.md); which can never be got out
or cured; or as a worm that eats into wood, as Jarchi interprets it; and
gets into the very heart of a tree, and eats it out: thus the Lord
threatens the house of Judah, or the two tribes, with a gradual, yet
thorough, ruin and destruction.

[Hosea 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hos 5:13</span></span>

When Ephraim saw his sickness, and Judah saw his wound,.... That their
civil state were in a sickly condition, very languid, weak, feeble, and
tottering, just upon the brink of ruin; see [Isa
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#006.md);

then went Ephraim to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb; that is, the
ten tribes, or the king of them, went and met the Assyrian king; and
Judah the two tribes, or the king of them, sent ambassadors to King
Jareb; which sense the order of the words, in connection with the
preceding clause, seems to require: by the Assyrian and King Jareb we
are to understand one and the same, as appears from the following words,
"yet could he not heal &c.", whereas, if they were different, it would
have been expressed, "yet could they not heal &c.", and the king of
Assyria is meant, who: also is called King Jareb, or rather king of
Jareb (n); see [Hos 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#006.md); for this
does not seem to be the name of the king of Assyria himself; though it
may be that Pul, or Tiglathpileser, or Shalmaneser, might have more
names than one, whoever is meant; but rather it is the name of some
place in Assyria, as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech, from which the
country may be here denominated; though the Targum takes it to be, not
the proper name of a man or place, but an appellative, paraphrasing it,

"and sent to the king that shall come to avenge them;''

and so other interpreters (o) understand it, rendering it, either the
king that should defend, as Tremellius; or the king the adversary, or
litigator, as Cocceius, Hillerus (p), and Gussetius (q); a court
adversary, that litigates a point, contends with one, and is an advocate
for another; or, as Hiller elsewhere (r) renders it, the king that lies
in wait: this was fulfilled with respect to Ephraim, when Menahem king
of Israel, or the ten tribes, often meant by Ephraim, went and met Pul
king of Assyria, and gave him a thousand talents to depart out of his
land; perceiving his own weakness to withstand him, and in order to
strengthen and confirm the kingdom in his hand, [Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019.md); or when Hoshea king of Israel
gave presents to Shalmaneser king of Assyria, and became a servant to
him, till he could get stronger, and shake off his yoke, [Kg2
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#003.md); and with respect to Judah it had
its accomplishment when Ahaz king of Judah sent messengers to
Tiglathpileser king of Assyria to come and help him against the kings of
Syria and Israel, finding he was not strong enough to oppose them
himself, [Kg2 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007.md); now all this was
highly provoking to the Lord, that when both Israel and Judah found
themselves in a weak condition, and unable to resist their enemies,
instead of seeking to him for help they applied to a foreign prince, and
which proved unsuccessful to them:

yet could he not heal you, nor cure you of your wound; but, on the
contrary, afflicted them, hurt and destroyed them; there being a
"meiosis" in the words, which expresses less than is designed; for
though, with respect to Ephraim or Israel, Pul king of Assyria desisted
from doing any damage to Israel, yet a successor of his, TiglathPileser,
came and took several places of Israel, and carried the inhabitants
captive; and at last came Shalmaneser, and took Samaria, the metropolis
of the land, and carried all the ten tribes captive, [Kg2
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029.md); and so, with respect to Judah,
Tiglathpileser, whom Ahaz sent unto for help, not only did not help and
strengthen him, but afflicted him, [Ch2
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#020.md); thus when sensible sinners see
their spiritual maladies, and feel the smart of their wounds, and make a
wrong application for relief, to their tears, repentance, and
humiliation, and to works of: righteousness, or to anything or person
short of Christ the great Physician, they meet with no success, find no
relief until better directed.

\(n\) "ad regem", Jarchi, Zanchius, Liveleus, Drusius; so Luther in
Tarnovius. (o) "altorem", V. L. "qui eum vindicaret", Tigurine version;
"propugnaturum", Junius & Tremellius; "qui litigaret", Piscator. (p)
Onomast. Sacr. p. 219. (q) Ebr. Comment. p. 780. (r) Onomast. Sacr. p.
430.

[Hosea 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 5:14</span></span>

For I will be unto Ephraim as a lion, and as a young lion to the house
of Judah,.... Being provoked by their above conduct and behaviour in
seeking to others, and not to him, for help, he threatens to punish them
in a more public and severe manner; not be to them only as a moth and
rottenness, but as a lion, and as a young lion, creatures strong and
fierce, that destroy and devour all that come into their hands, and from
whom there is no deliverance: thus the Lord was both to Israel and
Judah, by means of the Assyrians and Babylonians; the former are
compared to a lion, that devoured Israel; and the latter to a young
lion, that broke the bones of Judah; see [Jer
50:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#017.md); and last of all by means of the
Romans, especially to Judah:

I, even I, will tear and go away; as a lion tears its prey in pieces it
seizes upon, and goes away, and leaves it torn, having satisfied itself;
and is in no fear of being pursued, or any vengeance taken on him for
what he has done; so the Lord would destroy Israel and Judah, and leave
them in their ruinous state, none being able to rise up and avenge their
cause. The "I" is doubled, to express the certainty of it:

I will take away, and none shall rescue him; as the lion, having glutted
itself with its prey, takes the rest away, and carries it to its den,
where none dare come and take it from him; so the Lord signifies, that
those of Israel and Judah that perished not by the sword of the enemy,
or by famine or pestilence, should be carried captive, and none should
be able to return them till he pleases: under the wrath and displeasure
of God, and under this tearing, rending, and afflictive dispensation,
they now are, and will continue till the time of their conversion.

[Hosea 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hos 5:15</span></span>

I will go and return to my place,.... Leave the countries of Israel and
of Judah, where he had used to grant his gracious and spiritual presence
unto his people, and watched over them, and cared for them, and bestowed
many favours on them, and go up to heaven, the place of his more
glorious presence, as the Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, interpret it; and
there, as it were, shut himself up, particularly with respect to these
people, as if he had no more thought of them, or concern for them: this
is to be understood in a sense becoming and agreeable to the
omnipresence of God:

till they acknowledge their offence, and seek my face; till the
Israelites acknowledge their idolatry, and the Jews their disbelief and
rejection of the Messiah, and all other sins; till they ingenuously
confess themselves to be guilty, or know and acknowledge they have
sinned, as the Targum; and then humbly seek the face and favour of God,
the remission of their sins from him, and acceptance with him:

in their affliction they will seek me early; in the morning, betimes,
early, and earnestly; which affliction may be understood both of the
Assyrian and Babylonish captivity; or rather of their present affliction
toward the close of it, when they shall be sensible of their sins, and
confess them, and look to him whom they have pierced, and mourn, and
seek for pardon, righteousness, and salvation, from him; and so all
Israel shall be saved, of whose conversion this is a prophecy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 6](hos006.md)

</div>
