<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Hosea Index](hos)  
  [Previous](hos008)  [Next](hos010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Hosea Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001)

[Hosea](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">hos 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO HOSEA 9

This chapter is an address to Israel or the ten tribes, and contains
either a new sermon, or is a very considerable part of the former upon
the same subject, the sins and punishment of that people. It begins with
an instruction to them, not to rejoice in their prosperity, as others
did; since it would soon be at an end, because of their idolatry, which
was everywhere committed, and for which they expected a reward of
temporal good things, [Hos 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001); but,
on the contrary, they are threatened with famine, with want both of corn
and wine, [Hos 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#002); and with an
ejection out of their land into foreign countries; where they should be
obliged to eat things unclean by their law, [Hos
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003); and where their sacrifices and
solemnities should be no more attended to, [Hos
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004); yea, where their carcasses should
fall and be buried, while their own country and houses lay waste and
desolate, [Hos 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006); for, whatsoever
their foolish and mad prophets said to the contrary, who pretended to be
with God, and know his will, and were a snare to them that gave heed
unto them, and brought hatred on them, the time of their punishment
would certainly come, [Hos 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007); and
their iniquities would be remembered and visited; seeing their
corruptions were deep, like those that appeared in Gibeah, in the days
of old, [Hos 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#009); they acting the same
ungrateful part their fathers had done, of whom they were a degenerate
offspring, [Hos 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010); wherefore for
these, and other offences mentioned, they are threatened with being
bereaved of their children, and drove out of their land, to wander among
the nations, [Hos 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#011).

[Hosea 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">hos 9:1</span></span>

Rejoice not, O Israel, for joy, as other people,.... But rather mourn
and lament, since such a load of guilt lay upon them, and they had so
highly provoked the Lord to anger by their sins, and punishment would
quickly be inflicted on them; and though they might be now in
prosperity, through Jeroboam's success against their enemies, who by his
victories had enlarged their border; yet they should not rejoice at it,
as other people used to do on such occasions, by illumination of houses,
making fires in the streets, feasting, and the like, since this
prosperity would be but short lived: or if it was on account of the
league made by Menahem with the king of Assyria, this would not last
long; or on account of a good harvest, they need not so much rejoice as
they that rejoice in harvest, since there would quickly be a famine
among them: or rather it may respect rejoicing at their idols, and in
their idolatrous worship, as other people, which is forbidden; such as
instituting plays to the honour of them, making feasts before them, and
dancing about them; whatever others might do, who knew not the true God,
had not his law before them, nor his prophets sent to them to make known
his will; who had been brought up in idolatry, adhered to their gods,
and never forsook them; it ill became Israel to do the like. So the
words may be rendered, "rejoice not, O Israel", at an idol (q), or
idols, "as other people", idolatrous ones; the word signifies
"similitude" (r) or "likeness", which an idol is:

for thou hast gone a whoring from thy God; playing the harlot with many
lovers; committing adultery with stocks and stones; worshipping idols,
and so departing from God, the true God, they had professed to be their
God, their God in covenant; who stood in the relation of a husband to
them, but they proved treacherous to him, and were guilty of spiritual
adultery, which is idolatry; and therefore had no cause to rejoice as
other nations that never left their gods, but to take shame to
themselves, and mourn over their sad departure; see [Hos
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#003);

thou hast loved a reward upon every corn floor; alluding to the hire of
a harlot, prostituting herself for it on a corn floor, or any where
else, and that for a measure of corn, or for bread: it may point either
at their giving the times of their corn floors to their idols, instead
of giving them to the Lord; or to their ascribing their plenty of corn,
and all good things to their worship of them, which they called their
rewards, or hires their lovers gave them, [Hos
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#005); or to their erecting of altars on
their corn floors; as David erected one to the true God on the threshing
floor of Araunah, [Sa2 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2024.htm#024); and
which they might do, either by way of thanksgiving for a good harvest,
which they imputed to them; or in order to obtain one, but in vain, as
follows. The Targum is,

"for you have erred from the worship of your God; you have loved to
serve idols on all, corn floors.''

\(q\) "super similitudine, seu idolo" Schmidt. (r) signifies a likeness
of age, stature, and complexion, in Dan. i. 10. an idol is the
similitude or likeness of anything in heaven or is earth, Exod. xx. 4.

[Hosea 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">hos 9:2</span></span>

The floor and the winepress shall not feed them,.... Though their
expectations from their worship of idols were large, they should find
themselves mistaken; for there would not be a sufficiency of corn on the
floor, nor of wine in the press, to supply them with what was necessary
for their sustenance; either through a blight upon their fields and
vineyards, or through the invasion of an enemy, treading them down, and
spoiling and foraging them: or else supposing a sufficient quantity of
corn and wine got in; yet those blessings should be either turned into
curses, or carried off by the enemy, that they should do then, no good;
or if they enjoyed them, yet they should receive no nourishment from
them; but should become lean, and look like starved and famishing
creatures in the midst of plenty; by all which it would appear that
their idols could neither give them a sufficiency of provisions, nor
make those nourishing to them they had:

and the new wine shall fail in her; in the congregation or land of
Israel: or, "shall lie to her" (s); shall not answer their expectations,
but disappoint and deceive them; whereas they expected great plenty from
the promising prospect of the vines, these by one means or another
should be destroyed, so that they would yield but little, and balk them;
see [Hab 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017).

\(s\) "mentietur in ea", Pagninus, Montanus, Zanchius; "mentietur isti",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Liveleus, Schmidt.

[Hosea 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">hos 9:3</span></span>

They shall not dwell in the Lord's land,.... The land of Israel, or
Canaan; which, though all the earth is the Lord's, was peculiarly his;
which he had chosen for himself, and for this people; where he had his
temple, and caused his Shechinah or divine Majesty to dwell in a very
special manner, and where his worship and service were performed. So the
Targum calls it the land of the Shechinah or majesty of the Lord.
Sometimes it is called Immanuel's land, where the Messiah Immanuel, God
with us, was to be born, and dwell, and where he did. Kimchi wrongly
interprets this of Jerusalem only; and others of Judea; but it designs
the whole land of promise, which God save by promise to the fathers of
this people, and put them in the possession of, the tenure of which they
held by their obedience; but they not living according to will, and in
obedience to his laws, who was Lord of the land, sole Proprietor and
Governor of it, he turned them out of it, and would not suffer them to
continue any longer in it; and which was a great punishment indeed, to
be driven out of such a land, a land flowing with milk and honey, and
where they had been favoured with privileges and blessings of every
kind;

but Ephraim shall return to Egypt; or the ten tribes; that is, some of
them, who should flee thither for refuge and sustenance; when the
Assyrian should invade their land, and besiege Samaria, they should go
thither again, where their ancestors had formerly been in a state of
bondage: this is prophesied of them, [Deu
28:68](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#068);

and they shall eat unclean things in Assyria; that is, Ephraim or the
ten tribes, the far greater part of there, should be taken captive, and
carried into Assyria, and there eat food which by their law was unclean,
as things sacrificed to idols, swine's flesh, and many others; or food
that was not fit for men to eat, which nature abhorred; such bread as
Ezekiel was bid to make and eat, [Eze
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze004.htm#009). This may be understood even of
them that went to Egypt for help against the Assyrians, or for shelter
from them, or for food to eat in the time of famine; who should be
brought back again, and carried into Assyria, and there live a miserable
and an uncomfortable life; who had been used to enjoy corn and wine, and
plenty of all good things, to which these unclean things may be opposed.

[Hosea 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">hos 9:4</span></span>

They shall not offer wine offerings to the Lord,.... This is either a
threatening of the cessation of sacrifices, being carried into Assyria,
a strange land, where it was not lawful to offer sacrifice, there being
no temple nor altar to offer in or at; and so as they would not offer to
the Lord when they should, now they shall not if they would: or this
respects not, the future time of their exile, but their present time
now, as Kimchi observes; and so is a reproof of their present
sacrifices, which are forbidden to be observed; because they were
offered not in faith, nor in sincerity, but hypocritically, and before
their calves: besides, the future tease is sometimes put for the
present; and this way goes Schmidt;

neither shall their sacrifices be pleasing unto him; unto the Lord, if
they were offered; and is a reason why they should not, because
unacceptable to him, and that for the reasons before mentioned:

their sacrifices shall be unto them as the bread of mourners: all that
eat thereof shall be polluted; as all that ate of the bread of such who
were mourning for their dead, that partook of their funeral feasts, or
ate bread with them at any time during their mourning, were defiled
thereby, according to the Levitical law, and were unqualified for
service, [Lev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#001); so the sacrifices
of these people being offered up with a wicked mind instead of atoning
for their sins, more and more defiled them; and, instead of being
acceptable to God, were abominable to him:

for their bread for their soul shall not come into the house of the
Lord; in the captivity there was no house of the Lord for them to bring
it into; and, when in their own land, they did not bring their offerings
to the house of the Lord at Jerusalem, as they should have done, but
offered them before their calves at Dan and Bethel; and which is the
thing complained of, that the bread for their souls, that is, the
offerings accompanied with the "minchah", or bread offering, for the
expiation of the sins of their souls, were not brought into the house of
the Lord (the future for the present); or else, this being the case,
their sacrifices were reckoned by the Lord as no other than common
bread, which they ate for the sustenance of their lives.

[Hosea 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">hos 9:5</span></span>

What will ye do in the solemn day, and in the day of the feast of the
Lord? Since their sacrifices now were so disagreeable and displeasing to
the Lord, and so unavailable to themselves, what would they do when in
captivity, "in the solemn day", the seventh day of the week, appointed
by the Lord for rest and religious worship; and in the first day of the
month, which also was to be solemnly observed, by offering sacrifice,
&c. and on feast days of the Lord's instituting, as the feasts of the
passover, pentecost; and tabernacles? seeing those that carried and held
them captive would not allow them time for such solemnities; nor would
they be furnished with proper sacrifices; nor could they be accommodated
with a proper place to offer them at; nor be able, in a strange land,
and under hardships and miseries, to express that joy that is suitable
to such occasions: thus should they learn, by sad experience, the want
of those means and opportunities of serving the Lord, which in their own
land they rejected and despised. Jarchi and Kimchi interpret this of the
destruction of Israel, and of punishment inflicted on them at the time
appointed by the Lord; and which would be a solemn time, a feast with
the Lord, to which he should invite their enemies, and they should spill
their blood as the blood of sacrifices; and when he would display the
glory of his justice, truth, and faithfulness, before all the world. And
it is asked, what will you do then? whither will you flee for help? or
what sacrifice can you offer up to the Lord to atone for sin, or appease
his wrath? will you be able to rejoice then? no, your joy will be turned
into mourning; see [Isa 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#003).

[Hosea 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">hos 9:6</span></span>

For, lo, they are gone, because of destruction,.... That is, many of the
people of Israel were gone out of their own land to others, particularly
to Egypt, because of the destruction that was coming upon them, and to
avoid it; because of the Assyrian army which invaded their land, and
besieged Samaria, and threatened them with entire destruction; and upon
which a famine ensued, and which is thought by Kimchi to be here
particularly meant;

Egypt shall gather them up: being dead; for they shall die there,
perhaps by the pestilence, and never return to their own country, as
they flattered themselves; and they shall make preparations for their
funeral:

Memphis shall bury them; or they shall be buried there; which was a
principal city in Egypt, here called Moph, in [Isa
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#013), Noph. It was the metropolis of
upper Egypt, and the seat of the Egyptian kings. In it, as Plutarch says
(t), was the sepulchre of Osiris; and some say its name so signifies.
Near to it were the famous pyramids, as Strabo (u) says, supposed to be
built for the sepulchre of them. Herodotus (w) places these pyramids at
Memphis, and says there were three of them; the largest had several
subterraneous chambers in it; the next in size had none; the smallest
was covered with Ethiopic marble. Strabo, in the place referred to,
speaks of many pyramids near it, of which three were very remarkable,
and expressly says they were the burying places of the kings. Diodorus
(x) agrees with these, as to the number of them, but places them fifteen
miles from Memphis. Pliny (y) places them between Memphis and the Delta,
six miles from Memphis; pretty near to which is Strabo's account, who in
the above place says, they stood forty furlongs, or five miles, from the
city. Near it was the lake of Charon or Acherusia, over which he ferried
dead bodies from Memphis to the pyramids, or to the plains of the
mummies, the Elysian fields. Now since this was so famous for the
burying places of kings, there may be an allusion to it in this
expression. Here also were buried their deities, the Apis or ox when it
died;

the pleasant places for their silver, nettles shall possess them; such
beautiful edifices as were made for the repositories or treasure houses
for their silver; or were built or purchased at great expense of silver;
or were decorated with it; now should lie in ruins, and be like a waste,
desert, and desolate place, all overrun with nettles, and uninhabited:

briers shall be in their tabernacles; their dwelling houses, which being
demolished, briers shall grow upon the ground where they stood, and
overspread it; another token of desolation. The Targum interprets it of
living creatures, beasts of prey, that should dwell there; wild cats
particularly.

\(t\) De Iside & Osir. p. 359. (u) Geograph. l. 17. p. 555. (w) Euterpe,
sive l. 2. c. 8. 126, 127. (x) Bibliothec. l. 1. p 57. (y) Nat. Hist. l.
36. c. 12.

[Hosea 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">hos 9:7</span></span>

The days of visitation are come, the days of recompense are come,.... In
which the Lord would punish the people of Israel for their sins, and
reward them in a righteous manner, according as their evil works
deserved; which time, being fixed and appointed by him, are called
"days"; and these, because near at hand, are said to be "come"; and this
is repeated for the certainty of it:

Israel shall know it; by sad experience, that these days are come; and
shall acknowledge the truth of the divine predictions, and the
righteousness of God in his judgments. Schultens (z), from the use of
the phrase in the Arabic language, interprets it of Israel's suffering
punishment; with which agrees the Septuagint version, "Israel shall be
afflicted", or it shall go ill with him; and to the same purpose the
Arabic version:

the prophet is a fool; so Israel said, before those days came, of a true
prophet of the Lord, that he was a fool for prophesying of evil things,
but now they shall find it otherwise. So the Targum,

"they of the house of Israel shall know that they who had prophesied to
them were true prophets;''

but rather this is to be understood of false prophets, who, when the day
of God's visitation shall come on Israel in a way of wrath and
vengeance, will appear both to themselves and others to be fools, for
prophesying good things to them, when evil was at hand:

the spiritual man is mad; he that was truly so, and prophesied under the
inspiration of the Spirit of God, was accounted a madman for speaking
against the idolatry of the times, and foretelling the judgments of God
that would come upon the nation for it; but now it would be manifest,
that not he, but such who pretended to be spiritual men, and to be
directed and dictated by the Spirit of God, when they promised the
people peace, though they walked after the imagination of their hearts,
were the real madmen; who pursued the frenzies and fancies of their own
minds, to the deception of themselves and the people, and called these
the revelations of God, and pretended they came from the Spirit of God:

for the multitude of thine iniquities, and the great hatred; that is,
either those evil days came upon them for their manifold sins and
transgressions, which were hateful to God, and the cause of his hatred
of them; or they were suffered to give heed to those foolish and mad
prophets, because of their many sins, especially idolatry; and because
of their great hatred of God, and of his true prophets, and of his laws
and ordinances, of his word, will, and worship, and of one another, God
gave them up to a reprobate mind, to a judicial blindness and hardness
of heart, to believe a lie, and whatsoever those false prophets declared
unto them, because they did not like to retain him in their knowledge,
to walk according to his law, and to believe his prophets. The Targum
is,

"but the false prophets besotted them, so as to increase thy
transgression, and strengthen thine iniquities.''

\(z\) Animadv. Philol. in Job, p. 78.

[Hosea 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">hos 9:8</span></span>

The watchman of Ephraim was with my God,.... Formerly the watchmen of
Ephraim, or the prophets of Israel, were with the true God, whom the
prophet calls his God; as Elijah and Elisha, who had communion and
intimacy with him; had revelations and instructions from him; and were
under the direction and inspiration of his Spirit, and prophesied in his
name things according to his will, and for the good of his people: or
"the watchman of Ephraim should be with my God"; on his side, and
promote his worship and service, his honour and interest; and give the
people warning from him, having heard the word at his mouth: but now
they were not with him, nor for him, nor did as they should: or one that
bore this character of a watchman in the ten tribes, pretended to be
such a one, and would be thought to be with God, and to have his mind
and will, and to be sincere for his glory:

but the prophet is a snare of a fowler in all his ways; the false
prophet, the same with the watchman, instead of guiding and directing
Ephraim in the right way in which he should go, lays snares for him in
all the ways he takes, to lead him wrong, and draw him into sin,
particularly into idolatry, both by his doctrine and example:

and hatred in the house of his God; and so became detestable and
execrable it the house of his own god, the calf at Bethel, in the temple
there: prophesying such things as in the event prove false, and drawing
into such practices as brought on ruin and desolation. The Targum
interprets it, of laying snares for their prophets, their true prophets;
and Kimchi and Jarchi of slaying Zechariah the prophet in the temple.

[Hosea 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">hos 9:9</span></span>

They have deeply corrupted themselves, as in the days of Gibeah,.... Not
the false prophets and watchmen only; but rather Ephraim, or the ten
tribes, through their means became extremely corrupt in principle and
practice; they had most sadly degenerated, and were deeply sunk and
immersed in all manner of wickedness, and rooted in it, and continued
obstinate and incorrigible, so that there was no hope of reformation
among them; they had got to as great a pitch of wickedness, and were
guilty of the like uncleanness, lewdness, barbarity, and cruelty, as
were acted by the men of Gibeah, with respect to the Levite and his
concubine, [Jdg 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001); for Gibeah of
Benjamin is here meant, where the people asked a king, and rebelled
against the words of the prophet, as some in Jarchi interpret it:

therefore he will remember their iniquity, he will visit their sins:
that is, God, my God, as the prophet calls him in [Hos
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#008), will not forgive and forget their
sins; pardon being often expressed by a non-remembrance of sins; but
will make inquiry after them, and visit them in a way of wrath and
vengeance, and punish for them as they deserve: they being obstinate and
impenitent, and persisting in their sins, like the men of Gibeah and
Benjamin.

[Hosea 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">hos 9:10</span></span>

I found Israel like grapes in the wilderness,.... Not Jacob or Israel
personally, with the few souls that went down with him into Egypt; for
these died in Egypt, and never returned from thence, or came into the
wilderness to be found; nor Israel in a spiritual sense, the objects of
electing, redeeming, and calling grace; though it may be accommodated to
them, who in their nature state are as in a wilderness, in a forlorn,
hopeless, helpless, and uncomfortable condition; in which the Lord finds
them, seeking them by his Son in redemption, and by his Spirit in the
effectual calling; when they are like grapes, not in themselves, being
destitute of all good, and having nothing but sin and wickedness in
them; for, whatever good thing is in them at conversion, it is not
found, but put there; but the simile may serve to express the great and
unmerited love of God to his people, who are as agreeable to him as
grapes in the wilderness to a thirsty traveller; and in whom he takes
great delight and complacency, notwithstanding all their sinfulness and
unworthiness; and bestows abundance of grace upon them, and makes them
like clusters of grapes indeed; and such were many of the Jewish
fathers, and who are here intended, even the people of Israel brought
out of Egypt into the wilderness of Arabia, through which they travelled
to Canaan: here the Lord found them, took notice and care of them,
provided for them, and protected them, and gave them, many tokens of his
love and affection; see [Deu 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#010);
and they were as acceptable to him, and he took as much delight and
pleasure in them, as one travelling through the deserts of Arabia, or
any other desert, would rejoice at finding a vine laden with clusters of
grapes. The design of this metaphor is not to compare Israel with
grapes, because of any goodness in them, and as a reason of the Lord's
delight in them; for neither for quantity nor quality were they like
them, being few, and very obstinate and rebellious; but to set forth the
great love of God to them, and his delight and complacency in them;
which arose and sprung, not from any excellency in them, but from his
own sovereign good will and pleasure; see [Deu
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#006);

I saw your fathers as the first ripe in the fig tree at her first time;
the Lord looked upon their ancestors when they were settled as a people,
in their civil and church state, upon their being brought out of Egypt,
with as much pleasure as a man beholds the first ripe fig his fig tree
produces after planting it, or the first it produces in the season, the
fig tree bearing twice in a year; but the first is commonly most
desired, as being most rare and valuable; and such were the Israelites
to the Lord at first, [Mic 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic007.htm#001). This
is observed, to aggravate their ingratitude to the Lord, which soon
discovered itself; and to suggest that their posterity were like them,
who, though they had received many favours from the Lord, as tokens of
his affection to them, and delight in them; yet behaved in a most
shocking and shameful manner to him:

but they went to Baalpeor: or "went into Baalpeor" (a); committed
whoredom with that idol, even in the wilderness where the Lord found
them and showed so much regard to them; this refers to the history in
[Num 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001). Baalpeor is by some
interpreted "the lord" or "god of opening": and was so called, either
from his opening his mouth in prophecy, as Ainsworth (b) thinks, as
Nebo, a god of Babylon, had his name from prophesying; or from his open
mouth, with which this idol was figured, as a Jewish writer (c)
observes; whose worshipper took him to be inspired, and opened their
mouths to receive the divine afflatus from him: others interpret it "the
lord" or "god of nakedness"; because his worshippers exposed to him
their posteriors in a shameful manner, and even those parts which ought
to be covered; and this is the sense of most of the Jewish writers. So,
in the Jerusalem Talmud (d), the worship of Peor is represented in like
manner, and as most filthy and obscene, as it is by Jarchi (e), who
seems to have taken his account from thence; and even Maimonides (f)
says it was a known thing that the worship of Peor was by uncovering of
the nakedness; and this he makes to be the reason why God commanded the
priests to make themselves breeches to cover their nakedness in the time
of service, and why they might not go up to the altar by steps, that
their nakedness might not be discovered; in short, they took this Peor
to be no other than a Priapus; and in this they are followed by many
Christians, particularly by Jerom on this place, who observes that
Baalpeor is the god of the Moabites, whom we may call Priapus; and so
Isidore (g) says, there was an idol in Moab called Baal, on Mount Fegor,
whom the this call Priapus, the god of gardens; but Mr. Selden (h)
rejects this notion, and contends that Peor is either the name of a
mountain, of which Isidore, just now mentioned, speaks; see [Num
23:28](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#028); where Baal was worshipped, and
so was called from thence Baalpeor; as Jupiter Olympius, Capitolinus,
&c. is so called from the mountains of Olympus, Capitolinus, &c. where
divine honours are paid him; or else the name of a man, of some great
person in high esteem, who was deified by the Moabites, and worshipped
by them after his death; and so Baalpeor may be the same as "Lord Peor";
and it seems most likely that Peor is the name of a man, at least of an
idol, since we read of Bethpeor, or the temple of Peor, in [Deu
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#006);

and separated themselves unto that shame; they separated themselves from
God and his worship, and joined themselves to that shameful idol, and
worshipped it, thought by many, as before observed, to be the Priapus of
the Gentiles, in whose worship the greatest of obscenities were used,
not fit to be named: so that this epithet of shame is with great
propriety given it, and aggravates the sin of Israel, that such a people
should be guilty of such filthy practices; though Baal, without
supposing him to he a Priapus, may be called "that shame", for Baal and
Bosheth, which signifies shame, are some times put for each other; so
Jerubbaal, namely Gideon, is called Jerubbesheth, [Jdg
8:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#035); and Eshbaal appears plainly to
be the same son of Saul, whose name was Ishbosheth, [Ch1
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#033); and Meribbaal is clearly the
same with Mephibosheth [Ch1 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#034); yea,
it may be observed that the prophets of Baal are called, in the
Septuagint version of [Kg1 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#025); ,
"the prophets of that shame"; every idol, and all idolatry being
shameful, and the cause of shame, sooner or later, to their worshippers;
especially when things obscene were done in their religious rites, as
were in many of the Heathens in which the Jews followed them; see [Jer
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#024);

and their abominations were according as they loved: or, "as they loved
them", the daughters of Moab; for it was through their impure love of
them that they were drawn into these abominations, or to worship idols,
which are often called abominations; or, as Joseph Kimchi reads the
words, and gives the sense of them, "and they were abominations as I
loved them"; that is, according to the measure of the love wherewith I
loved them, so they were abominations in mine eyes; they were as
detestable now as they were loved before.

\(a\) "ingressi sunt", Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin, Drusius. (b)
Annotations on Numb. xxv. 3. (c) Racenatensis in Capito, apud Drusium in
loc. (d) T. Hieros. Sanhedrin, fol. 28. 4. (e) Perush in Numb. xxv. 3.
(f) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c. 45. p. 477. (g) Origin. l. 8. c. 11. p.
70. (h) De Dis Syris, Syntagma 1. c. 5. p. 162, 163. See Cumberland's
Sanchoniatho, p. 73, &c.

[Hosea 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">hos 9:11</span></span>

As for Ephraim, their glory shall flee away like a bird,.... That is,
suddenly, swiftly, and irrecoverably, and never return more; which some
understand of God their glory, and of his departure from them, as in
[Hos 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#012); others of their wealth and
riches, and whatever was glorious and valuable among them, which should
fly away from them in a moment, when taken and carried captive; rather
their numerous posterity, in which they were very fruitful, according to
their name, and in which they gloried, as children are the glory of
their parents, [Pro 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006); which sense
agrees with what follows, and which explains the manner of their fleeing
away, and the periods of it:

from the birth, and from the womb, and from the conception; that is,
some of them, as soon as they were born; others while in the womb, being
abortives; or, however, when they should, or as soon as they did, come
from thence; and others, as soon as conceived, never come to any thing;
or not conceived at all, as Kimchi interprets it, the women being
barren.

[Hosea 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">hos 9:12</span></span>

Though they bring up their children,.... Though this be the case of
some, as to be conceived, carried in the womb to the full time, and be
born, and brought up to a more adult age, and appear very promising to
live, and perpetuate the names of their fathers and their families:

yet will I bereave them; their parents of them, by the sword, famine,
pestilence, or by carrying them captive into a foreign country:

that there shall not be a man left; in the whole land of Israel, but all
shall be destroyed, or carried captive; or, "from men" (i); that is,
either from being men, as the Targum; though they are brought up to some
ripeness, and a more adult age than others, yet arrive not to such a
time and age as to be called men, as Kimchi observes; or from being
among men, being either taken away by death, or removed from the society
of men to live among beasts, and to he slaves like them:

yea, woe also to them, when I depart from them; withdraw my presence,
favour, and protection from them; or remove my Shechinah from them, as
the Targum; and leave them to the spoil and cruelty of their enemies,
which would be a greater calamity and judgment than the former. The
Septuagint, and so Theodotion, render it, "woe is to them, my flesh is
of them"; which some of the ancients interpret of the incarnation of
Christ, not considering that the words are spoken of Ephraim, or the ten
tribes; whereas the Messiah was to spring, and did, from the family of
David, and tribe of Judah.

\(i\) "ab homine", Montanus, Tigurine version, Schmidt; "ut non sint
homines", Pagninus.

[Hosea 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">hos 9:13</span></span>

Ephraim, as I saw Tyrus, is planted in a pleasant place,.... That is,
either as the city of Tyre, a very famous city in Phoenicia, was
situated in a very pleasant place by the sea, and abounded in wealth and
riches, and was well fortified, and seemed secure from all danger, and
from all enemies; so Ephraim or the ten tribes, the kingdom of Israel,
were in like circumstances, equal to Tyre, as the Targum paraphrases it,
in prosperity and plenty; yet as the prophet in the vision of prophecy
saw that Tyre, notwithstanding all its advantages by power and wealth,
by art and nature, would be destroyed, first by Nebuchadnezzar, and then
by Alexander; so by the same prophetic spirit he saw that Ephraim or the
ten tribes, notwithstanding their present prosperity, and the safety and
security they thought themselves in, yet should be given up to ruin and
destruction by the hand of the Assyrians; or it may be rendered thus,
"Ephraim as", or "when I saw it, unto Tyre" (k); reaching unto that
place, and bordering upon it, as part of the ten tribes did; I saw it, I
observed it, took a survey of it, and I perceived it was "planted in a
pleasant place"; like a tree planted in a fruitful soil, well rooted,
and in a flourishing condition; so were they, abounding with all good
things, and having a numerous offspring; from all which they promised
themselves much happiness for ages to come:

but Ephraim shall bring forth his children to the murderer; to sacrifice
them to Mo, as some; so the Targum,

"they of the house of Ephraim have sinned in slaying their children to
the service of idols;''

with which Jarchi agrees; but rather the sense is, with Kimchi, and
others, when their enemies shall come against them, as the Assyrian
army, they shall go out with their sons to fight with them, and these
shall be destroyed and murdered by them; it will be like leading lambs
to the slaughter to be butchered and devoured by them.

\(k\) "quando vidi usque ad Tyrum", Schmidt.

[Hosea 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">hos 9:14</span></span>

Give them, O Lord: what wilt thou give them?.... The prophet foreseeing
the butchery and destruction of their children, his heart ached for
them; and, to show his tender affection for this people, was desirous of
putting up a supplication for them; but was at a loss what to ask, their
sins were so many, and so aggravated, and the decree gone forth for
their destruction: or, "give them what thou wilt give them" (l); so
Jarchi, Kimchi, and Abarbinel, what thou hast threatened before to give
them, [Hos 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#011); do not give them to
be butchered and murdered before the eyes of their parents by their
enemies; but rather let them die in the womb, or as soon as born; so it
follows:

give them a miscarrying womb and dry breasts; the latter being a sign of
the former, as physicians observe; or the words may be rendered
disjunctively, give them one, or the other; that is, to the wives of the
people of Israel, if they conceive, let them miscarry, prove abortive,
rather than bring forth children to be destroyed in such a cruel manner
by murderers; or if they bear them to the birth, and bring them forth,
let their breasts be dried up, and afford no milk for their nourishment;
and so die for lack of it, rather than fall into the hands of their
merciless enemies: thus, of two evils, the prophet chooses and prays for
the least. Some interpret this as a prediction of what would be, or an
imprecation of it; but it rather seems a pathetic wish, flowing from the
tender affection of the prophet, judging such a case to be preferable to
the former; see [Luk 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#029); though the
other sense seems best to agree with what follows, and which is favoured
by the Targum,

"give thou, O Lord, the recompence of their works; give them a
miscarrying womb and dry breasts.''

\(l\) "da eis quod daturus es", Junius & Tremellius, Vatablus, Grotius;
"da illis id quod dabis", Schmidt.

[Hosea 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">hos 9:15</span></span>

Ah their wickedness is in Gilgal,.... A place in the ten tribes, where
the covenant of circumcision was renewed in Joshua's time; the first
passover was kept in the land of Canaan, and the people of Israel ate
the firstfruits of the land; where the tabernacle was for a while, and
sacrifices were offered up to the Lord: but now things were otherwise;
all manner of iniquity was committed in it, especially idolatry; for
which it was chosen by idolaters, because it had formerly been famous
for religious worship: here, though not to the exclusion of other
places, as Dan and Bethel, was the above sin committed; here it begun
and spread itself, and had the measure of it filled up; here began the
first departure from the Lord, rejecting him, and asking a king in the
days of Samuel, as Kimchi and Abarbinel observe; and here were high
places and altars erected for idolatry; and this is now the reason of
the above threatenings of God, and the predictions of the prophet.
Grotius thinks there is a mystical sense in the words, and that they
have reference to the sin of the Jews in crucifying Christ on Golgotha;
which, in the Syriac language, is the same with Gilgal; but both the
people spoken of, and the place, are different:

for there I hated them; or "therefore" (m), because they sinned so
greatly against him in a place where they had formerly worshipped him;
their sacrifices there, instead of being acceptable, were the more
abominable to him, as they were offered there where his tabernacle once
was, and sacrifices were offered to him according to his will:

for the wickedness of their doings I will drive them out of mine house;
not out of the house of my sanctuary, or the temple, as the Targum;
unless this is to be understood of losing the opportunity of going to
the temple at Jerusalem, which those of the ten tribes had while they
were in their own land, which the few godly persons among them then
took, and made use of; but now their idolatry increasing in Gilgal, and
other places, they should be carried captive; and, if they would, could
not go up to the house of the Lord, and worship him there: or rather
this may design, either the visible church of God, out of which they
would be now ejected; or their native country, where they had been, as
the family and household of God; but now should be so no more, but, as
afterwards said, wanderers among the nations, and no more reckoned as
belonging to the Lord, and under his paternal care and protection:

I will love them no more; which is not to be understood of the special
love and favour the Lord bears to his own people in Christ, which is
everlasting and unchangeable; but of his general and providential favour
and regard unto these people, which he had manifested in bestowing many
great and good things upon them; but now would do so no more; he would
do nothing to them, or for them, that looked like love, or be
interpreted of it, but all the reverse; and, by his behaviour to them,
show that they were the objects of his aversion and hatred; and this was
to continue, and has continued, and will continue unto the time of their
conversion in the latter day, when "all Israel shall be saved", [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026);

all their princes are revolters; from God and his worship, who should
have set a good example to the people; and since these were perverse and
rebellious against God, it is no wonder that the people in general
apostatized. This is to be understood of their king as supreme, and all
subordinate rulers; of their judges and magistrates of every order; of
all their governors, both civil and ecclesiastic; and not at Gilgal
only, but in all the land. There is an elegant play on words (n) in the
original, the beauty of which cannot be expressed in the translation.

\(m\) "ideo", Rivet. (n) "Sharehem Sorerim".

[Hosea 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">hos 9:16</span></span>

Ephraim is smitten,.... The people of the ten tribes, the kingdom of
Israel, who had been like a tree planted in a pleasant place, [Hos
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#013); and were in very flourishing
circumstances in the times of Jeroboam the second; but now were like a
tree smitten with thunder and lightning, or hail stones, and beat to
pieces; or with the heat of the sun, or with blasting winds, or by
worms; as in the succeeding reigns, by the judgments of God upon them;
by civil wars, conspiracies, and murders among themselves; and by the
exactions of Pul and depredations of Tiglathpileser kings of Assyria;
and quickly would be smitten again; the present being put for the
future, because of the certainty of it, as usual in prophetic writings;
or be utterly destroyed by Shalmaneser, and be no more a kingdom:

their root is dried up; like the root of a tree that has no sap and
moisture in it, and can communicate none to the body and branches of the
tree, which in course must die. This may be understood of their king,
princes, nobles, and chief men, the support and strength of the nations;
and of parents and heads of families, cut off by one judgment or
another:

they shall bear no fruit; as a tree thus smitten, and its root dried up,
cannot; so neither, this being their case, there would be none to beget,
nor any to bear children, and bring them forth; called the fruit of the
womb, in allusion to the fruit of trees:

yea, though they bring forth; though some of them should be spared,
women with their husbands, and should procreate children:

yet will I slay even the beloved fruit of their womb; their children
they should bring forth, on whom their affections were strongly set; and
the rather, as they were but few, and from whom they had raised
expectations of building up their families; even these the Lord would
stay, or suffer to be slain, either by the sword of the enemy, or by
famine, or by pestilence, or by some disease or another; so that there
should be no hope of a future posterity, at least of no great number of
them.

[Hosea 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">hos 9:17</span></span>

My God will cast them away,.... With loathsomeness and contempt, having
sinned against him, and done such abominable things; cast them out of
their own land, as men not fit to live in it; cast them out of his
sight, as not able to endure them; cast them away, as unprofitable and
good for nothing; reject them from being his people; no more own them in
the relation they had stood in to him; nor show them any more favour, at
least until the conversion of them in the times of the Messiah. These
are the words of the prophet, who calls the Lord his God, whom he
worshipped, by whom he was sent, and in whose name he prophesied; and
this in opposition to, and distinction from Israel, who worshipped other
gods, and who had cast off the true God, and were now, or would be, cast
away by him, and so no longer their God:

because they did not hearken unto him; to his word, as the Targum; to
him speaking by his prophets; to the instructions, admonitions,
threatenings, and predictions delivered to them from him; they did not
obey his law, regard his will, or attend his worship; which was the
cause of the rejection of them, and a just one:

and they shall be wanderers among the nations; being dispersed by the
Assyrians in the several nations of the world, where they were fugitives
and vagabonds; as their posterity are to this day.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Hosea Chapter 10](hos010)

</div>
