<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa014)  [Next](isa016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 15:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 15

This chapter is a prophecy of the destruction of the Moabites; two of
their principal cities are mentioned as made desolate, [Isa
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001) the inhabitants in divers places
are represented as weeping and mourning, and showing various signs of
it, [Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002) yea, not only the common
people, but the armed soldiers also, [Isa
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004) nay, even the prophet himself,
[Isa 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005) the reasons of which were
the great drought, so that there were no grass, nor green thing, [Isa
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#006) the carrying away of their good
things, either by themselves or others, [Isa
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007) the flight and cry of the people
to the very borders of the land, [Isa
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#008) and the great effusion of blood,
[Isa 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#009).

[Isaiah 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 15:1</span></span>

The burden of Moab,.... A heavy, grievous prophecy, concerning the
destruction of Moab. The Targum is,

"the burden of the cup of cursing, to give Moab to drink.''

This seems to respect the destruction of it by Nebuchadnezzar, which is
prophesied of in [Jer 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#001) for that
which was to be within three years, [Isa
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#014) looks like another and distinct
prophecy from this; though some think this was accomplished before the
times of Nebuchadnezzar, either by Shalmaneser king of Assyria, some
time before the captivity of the ten tribes, as Vitringa and others; or
by Sennacherib, after the invasion of Judea, so Jarchi.

Because in the night Ar of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence;
this was a chief city in Moab, perhaps the metropolis of it; see [Num
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#028). Kimchi conjectures it to be the
same with Aroer, which was by the brink of the river Arnon, [Deu
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#036), [Deu
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#012) and is mentioned with Dibon, as
this, in [Num 32:34](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#034) of which notice is
taken, and not of Ar, in [Jer 48:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#019).
Some versions take Ar to signify a "city", and render it, "the city of
Moab", without naming what city it was; and the Targum calls it by
another name, Lahajath; but, be it what city it will, it was destroyed
in the night; in such a night, as Kimchi interprets it; in the space of
a night, very suddenly, when the inhabitants of it were asleep and
secure, and had no notice of danger; and so the Targum adds,

"and they were asleep.''

Some have thought this circumstance is mentioned with a view to the
night work, that work of darkness of Lot and his daughter, which gave
rise to Moab; however, in a night this city became desolate, being taken
and plundered, and its inhabitants put to the sword, and so reduced to
silence; though the last word may as well be rendered "cut off" (n),
utterly destroyed, being burnt or pulled down; two words are made use
of, to denote the utter destruction of it:

because in the night Kir of Moab is laid waste, and brought to silence;
either in the same night, or rather in another. Kir, another city of
Moab, met with the same fate as Ar. This is called Kirhareseth, and
Kirharesh, in [Isa 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007) and so
Kirheres in [Jer 48:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#031) called Kir of
Moab, to distinguish it from Kir in Assyria, [Amo
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#005) and Kir in Media, [Isa
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#006).

\(n\) "succisus", Pagninus, Montanus; "excisa", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator. So Ben Melech interprets it by

[Isaiah 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 15:2</span></span>

He is gone up to Bajith,.... That is, Moab; the king or people of Moab,
particularly the inhabitants of the above cities. Bajith signifies
house; and here a house of idolatry, as Kimchi interprets it; it was an
idol's temple, very likely the temple of their god Chemosh, the same
which is called Bethbaalmeon, [Jos
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017) "the house of Baal's
habitation", and is mentioned with Dibon and Bamoth, as here; hither the
Moabites went in their distress, to lament their case, ask advice, make
supplication, and offer sacrifice:

and to Dibon, the high places, to weep; Dibon was another city of Moab,
[Num 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#030) where probably were high
places for idolatrous worship, and from whence it might have the name of
Dibonhabbamoth, as it may be here called; or since there was such a
place in Moab as Bamoth, here rendered "high places", it may be taken
for a proper name of a place, [Num
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#020) and the rather, since mention is
made of Bamothbaal along with Dibon, and as distinct from it, [Jos
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#017) and Jarchi interprets the words
thus,

"and the men of Dibon went up to Bamoth to weep.''

Kimchi takes all three to be places of idolatrous worship, and which is
not unlikely.

Moab shall howl over Nebo, and over Medeba; two cities in the land of
Moab, now taken, plundered, and destroyed; the former of these, Nebo,
had its name either from the Hebrew word "naba", to prophesy, because of
the prophecies or oracles which is thought were delivered here from the
Heathen priests, as from their deities; and among the Chaldeans there
was a god of this name, [Isa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001) or
from the Arabic word "naba" (o), to be eminent, and so had its name from
its height; near to it was a mountain of the same name, where Moses had
a view of the land of Canaan, and died, [Deu
32:49](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#049) of this city see [Num
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003). Jerom says (p), that in his time
a desert place called Naba was showed, eight miles distant from the city
Esbus (Heshbon, [Isa 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004)) to the
south. The latter of these, Medeba, is mentioned in [Num
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#030) this city is by Ptolemy (q)
called Medava. Josephus (r) speaks of it as a city of Moab, in the times
of Alexander and Hyrcanus; so that if it was now destroyed, it was built
again: and Jerom (s) says of it, that in his days it was a city of
Arabia, retaining its ancient name, near Esebon, or Heshbon.

On all their heads shall be baldness; that is, on the heads of the
Moabites, especially the inhabitants of these cities that survived the
destruction, who through sorrow and distress, and as a token of
mourning, tore off the hair of their heads, which caused baldness, or
else shaved it:

and every beard cut off; with a razor, which makes it probable that the
hair of the head was tore off; both these used to be done as signs of
mourning and lamentation, even shaving of the head and beard, [Job
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020).

\(o\) "editus, elatus fuit", Golius, col. 2287. Castel. col. 2182. (p)
De locis Hebraicis, fol. 93. H. (q) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17. P. 137. (r)
Antiqu. l. 13. c. 15. sect. 4. & l. 14. c. 1. sect. 4. (s) De locis
Hebraicis, fol. 93. D.

[Isaiah 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 15:3</span></span>

In their streets they shall girt themselves with sackcloth,.... Instead
of their fine clothes, with which they had used to deck themselves,
being a very proud people; see [Isa
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#006) this was usual in times of
distress on any account, as well as a token of mourning for the dead;
see [Joe 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#008). The word for "streets"
might be rendered "villages", as distinct from cities, that were
"without" the walls of the cities, though adjacent to them; and the
rather, seeing mention is made of streets afterwards:

on the tops of their houses; which were made flat, as the houses of the
Jews were, on which were battlements, [Deu
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008) hither they went for safety from
their enemies, or to see if they could spy the enemy, or any that could
assist them, and deliver them; or rather, hither they went for devotion,
to pray to their gods for help; for here it was usual to have altars
erected, to burn incense on to their deities; see [Kg2
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#012) and in such places the people of
God were wont to pray, [Act 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#009),

and in their streets; publicly, as well as privately, where they ran up
and down to get from the enemy, and save themselves:

everyone shall howl, weeping abundantly: or, "descending with weeping":
the tears running down his cheeks in great abundance, so that his whole
body was as it were watered with them; or the meaning may be, that
everyone that went up to the temples of the idols, and to the high
places, [Isa 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002) or to the roofs of
the houses, as here, to pray the assistance of their gods, should come
down weeping and howling, having no success.

[Isaiah 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 15:4</span></span>

And Heshbon shall cry, and Elealeh,.... Two other cities in the land of
Moab. The first of these was the city of Sihon king of the Amorites, who
took it from the Moabites, [Num 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#025)
it came into the hands of the Reubenites, [Num
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003) and afterwards was again
possessed by the Moabites, [Jer 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#002).
Josephus (t) calls it Essebon, and mentions it among the cities of Moab;
it goes by the name of Esbuta in Ptolemy (u); and is called Esbus by
Jerom (w), who says it was a famous city of Arabia in his time, in the
mountains over against Jericho, twenty miles distant from Jordan; hence
we read of the Arabian Esbonites in Pliny (x). Elealeh was another city
of Moab, very near to Heshbon and frequently mentioned with it, [Isa
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#009). Jerom says (y) that in his time
it was a large village, a mile from Esbus, or Heshbon. By these two
places are meant the inhabitants of them, as the Targum paraphrases it,
who cried for and lamented the desolation that was coming, or was come
upon them:

their voice shall be heard even unto Jahaz; sometimes called Jahazah,
[Jos 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#018) it was a frontier town, at
the utmost borders of the land, [Num
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#023) hence the cry of the inhabitants
of the above cities is said to reach to it, which expresses the utter
destruction that should be made; see [Jer
48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034) this is thought to be the same
place Ptolemy (z) calls Ziza. Jerom (a) calls it Jazza, as it is in the
Septuagint here, and says that in his time it was shown between Medaba
and Deblathai.

Therefore the armed soldiers of Moab shall cry out; not as when they go
to battle, with courage and cheerfulness, as some have thought; but
through fear, and as in great terror and distress; and so it signifies,
that not only the weak and unarmed inhabitants, men and women, should be
in the utmost confusion and consternation, but the soldiers that should
fight for them, and defend them; who were accoutred, or "harnessed", as
the word signifies, and were "girt" and prepared for war, as the Targum
renders it; even these would be dispirited, and have no heart to fight,
but lament their sad case:

his life shall be grievous to everyone; the life of every Moabite would
be a burden to him; he would choose death rather than life; so great the
calamity: or the life of every soldier; or "his soul shall cry out",
grieve or mourn for "himself" (b); for his own unhappy case; he shall
only be concerned for himself, how to save himself, or make his escape;
having none for others, for whose defence he was set, and for whom he
was to fight; but would have no concern for his king or country, only
for himself.

\(t\) Antiqu. l. 13. c. 15. sect. 4. (u) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17. P. 137.
(w) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 90. M. (x) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 11. (y) De
locis Hebraicis, fol. 90. M. (z) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17. p. 137. (a) De
locis Hebraicis, fol. 92. F. (b) "anima ejus vociferabit sibi", Pagninus
& Montanus.

[Isaiah 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 15:5</span></span>

My heart shall cry out for Moab,.... These seem to be the words of the
prophet, pitying them as they were fellow creatures, though enemies;
which shows humanity in him, and signifies that their calamities were
very great, that a stranger should be concerned for them, and such to
whom they had been troublesome; so Jarchi understands it, who observes
the difference between the true and false prophet, particularly between
Isaiah and Balaam; but others, as Kimchi, interpret it of the Moabites
themselves, everyone expressing their concern for the desolation of
their country; and so the Targum,

"the Moabites shall say in their hearts:''

his fugitives shall flee unto Zoar; a city where Lot fled to, when he
came out of Sodom, to which it is thought the allusion is, see [Gen
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#020) the meaning seems to be, that
those that escaped out of the above cities, when taken and destroyed,
should flee hither for safety: the words may be supplied thus, "his
fugitives" shall cry out "unto Zoar"; that is, those that flee from
other places shall cry so loud as they go along, that their cry shall be
heard unto Zoar, [Jer 48:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#034),

an heifer of three years old; which is not to be understood of Zoar in
particular, or of the country of Moab in general, comparable to such an
heifer for fatness, strength, beauty, and lasciviousness; but of the cry
of the fugitives, that should be very loud and clamorous, like the
lowing of an ox, or an heifer in its full strength, which is heard a
great way; see [Sa1 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#009). Dr. Lightfoot
(c) conjectures that "Eglath Shelishiah", translated an heifer of three
years old, is the proper name of a place; and observes, that there was
another place in this country called Eneglaim, [Eze
47:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze047.htm#010) which being of the dual number,
shows that there were two Egels, in reference to which this may be
called the "third" Eglath; and so the words may be rendered, "his
fugitives shall flee unto Zoar, unto the third Eglath"; and he further
conjectures, that this may be the Necla of Ptolemy (d), mentioned by him
in Arabia Petraea, along with Zoara; and also to be the Agella of
Josephus (e), reckoned with Zoara and Oronai, and other cities of Moab:

for by the mounting up of Luhith with weeping shall they go it up; which
seems to have been a very high place, and the ascent to it very great;
and as the Moabites went up it, whither they might go for safety, they
should weep greatly, thinking of their houses and riches they had left
to the plunder of the enemy, and the danger of their lives they were
still in. This place is thought by some to be the same with the Lysa of
Ptolemy (f); Josephus (g) calls it Lyssa; Jerom (h) says in his time it
was a village between Areopolis and Zoara, and went by the name of
Luitha; it is mentioned in [Jer 48:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#005),

for in the way of Horonaim they shall raise up a cry of destruction; of
Moab, and the several cities of it; or "of breaking", of breaking down
of walls and of houses. The Targum is,

"the cry of the broken (or conquered) in battle;''

whose bones are broken, or however their strength, so that they are
obliged to surrender; or a "broken cry", such as is made when there is a
multitude of people together, and in great distress. The word Horonaim
is of the dual number, and signifies two Horons, the upper and the
lower, as say Kimchi and Ben Melech; which is true of Bethhoron, if that
was the same place with this, [Jos
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#003). By Josephus (i) it is called
Oronas and Oronae; it is taken by some to be the Avara of Ptolemy (k);
it seems, by the Targum, that as Luhith was a very high place, this lay
low, since it renders it,

"in the descent of Horonaim;''

to which its name agrees, which signifies caverns; and mention is made
of Bethhoron in the valley, along with Bethnimrah (l).

\(c\) See his Works, vol. 2. p. 502. (d) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17. (e)
Antiqu. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 4. (f) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17. p. 137. (g)
Antiqu. l. 14. c. 1. sect. 4. (h) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 93. A. (i)
Antiqu. l. 13. c. 15. sect. 4. & l. 14. c. 1. sect. 4. (k) Geograph. l.
5. c. 17. p. 137. (l) T. Hieros. Sheviith, fol. 38. 4.

[Isaiah 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 15:6</span></span>

For the waters of Nimrim shall be desolate,.... Or dried up, through a
great drought that should come upon the land at this time; or being
defiled with the blood of the slain, as Jarchi: it may denote the well
watered pastures about Nimrim, that should become the forage of the
enemy, and be trodden under foot by its army, or be forsaken by the
proprietors of them. Josephus (m) speaks of fountains of hot water
springing up in the country of Peraea, where Nimrim was, of a different
taste, some bitter, and others sweet; which, Dr. Lightfoot (n) suggests,
might be these waters of Nimrim; and, according to the Jerusalem Talmud
(o), Bethnimrah was in that part of the country which was called the
valley, and so was very fruitful with springs of water. The word is in
the plural number, and may design more places of the same name; and we
read of Nimrah and Bethnimrah, [Num
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#003). Jerom (p) calls it Nemra, and
says it was a large village in his time; it seems to have its name from
panthers or leopards, of which there might be many in these parts:

for the hay is withered away, the grass faileth, there is no green
thing; by which it seems that the desolation spoken of was not merely
through the forage and trampling of the enemy's army, but by a drought.

\(m\) De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 6. sect. 3. Ed. Hudson. (n) Ut supra (See
his Works, vol. 2.) p. 50. (o) T. Hieros. Sheviith, fol. 38. 4. (p) De
locis Hebraicis, fol. 93. I.

[Isaiah 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 15:7</span></span>

Therefore the abundance they have gotten, and that which they have laid
up,.... The great substance which the Moabites had got, and hoarded up:

shall they carry away to the brook of the willows; either the Moabites
should carry their substance to some brook, it may be near Nimrim, where
many willows grew, and cast it into the brook, or lay it by the brook
side, in some private place, or under and among the willows, to preserve
it from the enemy; or else the meaning is, that their enemies should
take what they had with a great deal of labour got, and with a great
deal of care had laid up, and carry it to the brook of the willows, some
place without the city, and there divide it; or to the valley of the
Arabians (q), as some render it, some part of Arabia lying between Moab
and Babylon, whither they might carry it, in order to the conveyance of
it into their own country at a proper time: it may be observed, that the
country of Moab came after this into the hands of the Arabians; and,
according to Jerom, the valley of Arabia lay in the way from Moab to
Assyria; but it may be rendered "the valley of the willows", and design
the land of Babylon, or Babylon itself, which was built in a plain, or
on a flat by the river Euphrates, out of which many canals and rivulets
were cut and derived, near to which willows in great abundance grew; as
they usually do in marshy and watery places; hence the Jews in Babylon
are said to hang their harps upon the willows which were by its rivers;
so Jarchi thinks the land of Babylon is meant, and compares it with [Psa
137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001) which sense is approved of by
Bochart and Vitringa. The Septuagint version is,

"I will bring upon the valley the Arabians, and they shall take it;''

and the Targum is,

"their border, which is by the western sea, shall be taken from them.''

\(q\) "in vallem Arabum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius.

[Isaiah 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 15:8</span></span>

For the cry is gone found about the borders of Moab,.... The cry of
destruction and howling because of it; the places mentioned, as is
observed by some, being upon the borders of the land. Heshbon was on the
north east, Elealeh on the north west, Jahaz on the south west, Horonaim
further west, Zoar the utmost west, and the places following seem to be
upon the borders likewise:

the howling thereof unto Eglaim; which word signifies a border, and so
the Arabic word Agalon; some take it to be the same with the brooks of
Arnon, [Num 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#013) said so be the
border of Moab:

and the howling thereof unto Beerelim; the same with Beer, [Num
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#016) called Beerelim, or "the well of
the mighty ones", being dug by the princes of Israel, [Num
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#018).

[Isaiah 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 15:9</span></span>

For the waters of Dimon shall be full of blood,.... Of the slain, as the
Targum adds. This was a river in the land of Moab, as say Jarchi and
Kimchi; it had its name from the blood of the slain, Some take it to be
the name of a city, and the same with Dibon, [Isa
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa015.htm#002) but, because of the abundance of
blood shed in it, got this new name; and the Vulgate Latin version here
calls it Dibon; and the Syriac version Ribon; and the Arabic version
Remmon:

for I will bring more upon Dimon; or "additions" (r), not merely add
blood to the waters of the river, as Jarchi and Kimchi; but bring
additional evils and plagues, as Aben Ezra. The Targum interprets it,

"the congregation of an army;''

but what these additions were are explained in the next clause:

lions upon him that escapeth of Moab, and upon the remnant of the land;
or a "lion" (s); the meaning is, that such who escaped the sword should
be destroyed by lions, or other beasts of prey, which was one of the
Lord's four judgments, [Eze 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#021). The
Targum is,

"a king shall ascend with his army, and so spoil the remainder of their
land;''

and Aben Ezra interprets it of the king of Assyria; and Jarchi of
Nebuchadnezzar, who is called a lion, [Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007) and the sense is thought to be
this, that whom Sennacherib king of Assyria should leave, Nebuchadnezzar
should destroy. The Septuagint and Arabic versions render the last
clause, "the remnant of Adama", a city of Moab; so Cocceius.

\(r\) "addita", Pagninus, Montanus; "additiones", Vatablus;
"additamenta", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (s) "leonem", Pagninus,
Montanus, &c.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 16](isa016)

</div>
