<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa057)  [Next](isa059) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 58](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 58:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 58

From the wicked and antichristian party the prophet is bid to turn to
the professors of the true religion, and openly, boldly, and sharply,
reprove them for their sins, particularly their hypocrisy and formality
in worship, [Isa 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001), who yet were
angry, and complained that the Lord took no notice of their religious
services, particularly their fasting, which is put for the whole; the
reason of which was, because they did not fast aright; it was attended
with much cruelty, strife, and wickedness, and only lay in external
appearances, [Isa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003), when they are
directed how to keep a fast, and are shown what a true fast is, and what
works and services are acceptable to God, [Isa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006) on doing of which, light, health,
prosperity, and hearing of their prayers, are promised, provided the
yoke of oppression is taken away, and compassion shown to the poor, [Isa
58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008), yea, a very fruitful and
flourishing estate of the soul is promised, and a rebuilding of waste
places, delight in the Lord, and great honour and dignity; so be it that
the sabbath of the Lord, or public worship, is attended to in a proper
manner, [Isa 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011).

[Isaiah 58:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 58:1</span></span>

Cry aloud, spare not, lift up thy voice like a trumpet,.... These words
are directed to the prophet; and so the Targum expresses it,

"O prophet, cry with thy throat;''

and so it is in the original, "cry with the throat" (d), which is an
instrument of speech; and it denotes a loud, strong, vehement cry, when
a man exerts his voice, and as it were rends his throat, that he may be
heard; as well as it shows the intenseness of his spirit, and the
vehemence of his affections, and the importance of what he delivers; and
this the prophet is encouraged to do, and "spare not", the voice,
throat, or his lungs, nor the people neither he was sent unto; or,
"cease not", as the Targum, refrain not from speaking, "cease not
crying"; so Ben Melech: "lift up thy voice like a trumpet"; like the
voice or sound of a trumpet, which is heard afar, and gives an alarm;
and to which the Gospel ministry is sometimes compared, [Isa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013) all which shows the manner in
which the ministers of the word should deliver it, publicly, boldly,
with ardour and affection; and also the deafness and stupidity of the
people which require it:

and show my people their transgression, and the house of Jacob their
sins; by whom are meant the professing people of God, the present
reformed churches, as distinguished from the antichristian ones, spoken
of in the preceding chapter; who yet are guilty of many sins and
transgressions, which must be showed them, and they must be sharply
reproved for; and particularly their coldness and deadness, formality
and hypocrisy in religious worship; their "works not being perfect"
before God, or sincere and upright, as is said of the Sardian church,
which designs the same persons, [Rev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#001). In the Talmud (e) the words are
thus paraphrased, "shew my people their transgression"; these are the
disciples of the wise men, whose sins of error or ignorance become to
them presumptuous ones; "and the house of Jacob their sins"; these are
the people of the earth, or the common people, whose presumptuous sins
become to them as sins of ignorance.

\(d\) "clama in gutture", Pagninus, Montanus; "exclama gutture", Junius
& Tremellius; "exclama pleno gutture", Piscator; "clama pleno gut ture",
Cocceius. (e) T. Bab. Metzia, fol. 33. 2.

[Isaiah 58:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 58:2</span></span>

Yet they seek me daily,.... Which may be considered as an acknowledgment
of their external piety; or as a caution to the prophet not to be
imposed upon by outward appearances; or as a reason why they should be
rebuked sharply: they sought the Lord, either by prayer, or in the
ministry of the word; they sought doctrine, as the Targum; they sought
him, and that every day, or, however, every Lord's day; and yet they did
not seek him with that diligence and intenseness of spirit, with their
whole hearts, cordially and sincerely, as they ought to have done; they
sought themselves, and the honour of men, rather than the Lord and his
glory:

and delight to know my ways; not only his ways of creation and
providence, but of grace; and also the ways which he prescribes and
directs his people to walk in; not that they had a real delight in them,
or in the knowledge of them, or such a delight as truly gracious souls
have when they have the presence of God in them; are assisted by his
Spirit; have their hearts enlarged with his love; find food for their
souls, and have fellowship with the saints; but this delight was only
seeming, and at most only in the knowledge and theory of these ways, but
not in the practice of them; see [Eze
33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031),

as a nation that did righteousness: in general appeared to be outwardly
righteous; had a form of godliness, and name to live, and yet dead, and
so destitute of any works of true righteousness, at best only going
about to establish a righteousness of their own:

and forsook not the ordinance of their God; the ordinance of assembling
together in general; any of the ordinances of God in particular;
hearing, reading, singing, praying, especially the ordinance of the
supper, constantly attended to by them; see [Luk
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#026),

they ask of me the ordinances of justice; not of justice between man and
man, but of righteousness and religion with respect to God; they ask
what are the ordinances of the Gospel, and the rules of worship and
discipline, and whether there are any they are ignorant of; suggesting
they were desirous of being instructed in them, and of complying with
them:

they take delight in approaching to God; there is no right approaching
God but through Christ, and gracious souls take a real delight in this
way; but the approaching here is only in an external manner, by the
performance of outward duties; and the delight is not in God, and
communion with him; but in the service, performed as a work of their
own, in which they trust, and in what they expect as the reward of it.

[Isaiah 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 58:3</span></span>

Wherefore have we fasted, say they, and thou seest not?.... Our fasting;
takest no notice of it; expresses no approbation of it, and pleasure in
it: this is put for all religious services, being what was frequently
performed under the Old Testament, not only at certain times appointed
by the Lord, but on other occasions, and of their own fixing; in which
they put their confidence, and often boasted of, [Luk
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012), "wherefore have we afflicted
our soul", by fasting, "and thou takest no knowledge?" of that, nor of
us, and dost not save us from our enemies, and deliver us from our
troubles, and bestow favours on us: they had a high opinion of their own
performances, and thought that God must have likewise; and were
displeased that he showed no more regard unto them:

behold, in the day of your fast you find pleasure; this, and what
follows in the two next verses, are an answer to their questions, and
give reasons why the Lord took no more notice of their fasting, or of
their services; because they were not done aright, they found their own
pleasure in them; not that they indulged to bodily recreations and
carnal delights, but they gratified the inward desires of the flesh,
malice, envy, and the like; and they pleased themselves with their own
duties, and fancied they procured the favour of God by them:

and exact all your labours; of their servants, or their money of their
debtors; they grieved and afflicted their debtors, by demanding their
debts of them, as Jarchi interprets it; and that in a very rigorous
manner, requiring whole and immediate payment; or, as it is usual with
establishments, they require an exact conformity to their manner of
service, worship, and discipline.

[Isaiah 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 58:4</span></span>

Behold, ye fast for strife and debate,.... Brawling with their servants
for not doing work enough; or quarrelling with their debtors for not
paying their debts; or the main of their religion lay in contentions and
strifes about words, vain hot disputations about rites and ceremonies in
worship, as is well known to have been the case of the reformed
churches:

and to smite with the fist of wickedness; their servants or their
debtors; or rather it may design the persecution of such whose
consciences would not suffer them to receive the doctrines professed; or
submit to ordinances as administered; or comply with rites and
ceremonies enjoined by the said churches; for which they have smitten
their brethren that dissented from them with the fist, or have
persecuted them in a violent manner by imprisonment, confiscation of
goods, &c.; all which is no other than a fist of wickedness, and highly
displeasing to God, and renders all their services unacceptable in his
sight; see [Mat 24:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#049),

ye shall not fast as ye do this day; or, "as this day"; after this
manner; this is not right:

to make your voice to be heard on high; referring either to their noisy
threatening of their servants for not doing their work; or their
clamorous demands upon their debtors; or to their loud prayers, joined
with their fasting, which they expected to be heard in the highest
heaven, but would be mistaken; for such services, attended with the
above evils, are not wellpleasing to God.

[Isaiah 58:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 58:5</span></span>

Is it such a fast that I have chosen?.... That is, can this be thought
to be a fast approved of by me, and acceptable to me, before described,
and is as follows:

a day for a man to afflict his soul? only to appoint a certain day, and
keep that, by abstaining from bodily food, and so for a short time
afflict himself; or only after this manner to afflict himself, and not
humble himself for his sins, and abstain from them, and do the duties of
justice and charity incumbent on him:

is it to bow down his head as a bulrush; when it is moved with the wind,
or bruised, or withered; as if he was greatly depressed and humbled, and
very penitent and sorrowful. The Syriac version renders it, "as a hook";
like a fish hook, which is very much bent; so Jarchi interprets the
word:

and to spread sackcloth and ashes under him? which were ceremonies used
in times of mourning and fasting; sometimes sackcloth was put on their
loins, and ashes on their heads; and sometimes these were strewed under
them, and they laid down upon their sackcloth, which, being coarse, was
uneasy to them, and rolled themselves in ashes, as expressive of their
meanness and vileness:

wilt thou call this a fast, and an acceptable day to the Lord? does this
deserve the name of a fast? or can it be imagined that such a day so
spent, can be agreeable to God? that such persons and services will be
accepted of by him? or that hereby sin is atoned for, and God is well
pleased, and will show his favour and good will, and have respect to
such worshippers of him? no, surely.

[Isaiah 58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 58:6</span></span>

Is not this the fast that I have chosen?.... Which God has appointed, he
approves of, and is well pleasing in his sight; these are works and
services more agreeable to him, which follow, without which the rest
will be rejected:

to loose the bands of wickedness; which some understand of combinations
in courts of judicature to oppress and distress the poor; others of
bonds and contracts unjustly made, or rigorously demanded and insisted
on, when they cannot be answered; rather of those things with which the
consciences of men are bound in religious matters; impositions upon
conscience; binding to the use of stinted forms, and to habits in divine
worship, which the word of God has not made necessary:

to undo the heavy burdens. The Septuagint render it, "dissolve the
obligations of violent contracts"; such as are obtained by violence; so
the Arabic version; or by fraud, as the Syriac version, which translates
it, bonds of fraud. The Targum is,

"loose the bonds of writings of a depraved judgment;''

all referring it to unjust bonds and contracts in a civil sense: but
rather it regards the loosing or freeing men from all obligation to all
human prescriptions and precepts; whatever is after the tradition of
men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after Christ; so the
traditions of the Scribes and Pharisees are called "heavy burdens,
grievous to be borne", [Mat 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#004) these
should not be laid and bound on men's shoulders, but should be done and
taken off of them, as well as all penal laws with which they have been
enforced:

and to let the oppressed go free; such as have been broken by
oppression, not only in their spirits, but in their purses, by mulcts
and fines, and confiscation of goods; and who have been cast into
prisons, and detained a long time in filthy dungeons; and where many
have perished for the sake of religion, even in Protestant countries:

and that ye break every yoke; of church power and tyranny; everything
that is not enjoined and authorized by the word of God; every yoke but
the yoke of Christ; all human precepts, and obedience to them; all but
the commands of Christ, and obedience to them; no other yoke should be
put upon the neck of his disciples but his own.

[Isaiah 58:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 58:7</span></span>

Is it not to deal thy bread to the hungry?.... Or "to break" (f) it,
divide it, and communicate it to them; that which is "bread", food fit
to eat, wholesome and nourishing; which is thine, and not another's;
which thou hast saved by fasting, and therefore should not be laid up,
but given away; and that not to the rich, who need it not, but to the
hungry and necessitous: and this may be understood of spiritual bread,
of imparting the Gospel to such who are hungering and thirsting after
righteousness, which to do is an acceptable service to God; and not to
bind and oppress men's consciences with burdensome rites and ceremonies
of men's own devising. These are husks, and not bread.

And that thou bring the poor that are cast out to thy house; poor
ministers, cast out of the church, cast out of their livings, cast out
of their houses, cast out of the land; and other Christian exiles for
conscience sake; poor travellers and wanderers, as the Targum, obliged
to flee from persecution into foreign countries, and wander about from
place to place, having no certain dwelling place; these take into your
house, and give them lodging: so some have entertained angels unawares,
as Abraham and Lot, as indeed the faithful ministers of Christ are: or,

the poor rebels (g); for the word has this signification; such who have
been accused and attainted as rebels; who have been charged with being
rebels to church and state, though the quiet in the land, and so have
been forced to flee and hide themselves; do not be afraid to receive
them into your houses, though under such an imputation:

when thou seest the naked, that thou cover him; the naked Christian
especially; not entirely so, but one that is thinly clothed, whose
clothes are scarce anything but rags, not sufficient to keep him warm,
or preserve him from the inclemencies of the weather; put a better
garment upon him, to cover him with:

and that thou hide not thyself from thine own flesh; meaning not only
those "near akin" (h), though more especially them; but such as are in
the same neighbourhood, of the same country; and indeed all men are of
one blood, and so are the same flesh; and from persons in distress, and
especially such as are of the household of faith, of the same religion,
that support the same Protestant cause, though differing in some lesser
matters, a man should not hide himself, or turn his eyes from, or refuse
to relieve them, or treat them with disdain and contempt; see [Gal
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#010).

\(f\) "nonne ut frangas?" Pagninus; "nonne frangere?" Montanus. (g) Heb.
"rebellatos, expulsos tanquam rebelles", Piscator; "qui persecutionem
patiuntur", Vitringa. (h) "a cognatis tuis", Vatablus. So R. Sol. Urbin.
Ohel Moed, fol. 85. 1.

[Isaiah 58:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 58:8</span></span>

Then shall thy light break forth as the morning,.... Through thick
clouds, or the darkness of the night, suddenly, swiftly, irresistibly,
and increase more and more, till it is perfect day. This is to be
understood best of temporal and spiritual prosperity, especially the
latter, which will attend the churches of the Reformation, when a spirit
of persecution is laid aside, and a spirit of love commences, which will
be in the Philadelphian church state; and it particularly respects the
glorious light of the Gospel, which will break forth very clearly, and
shine out in all the world; and the light of joy, peace, and comfort,
which will attend it, in the hearts of the Lord's people; see [Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001),

and thine health shall spring forth speedily; as the herbs and grass out
of the earth, by clear shining after rain; by which is meant the
healthful and sound state of the church in the latter day, when all
divisions shall be healed; contentions and animosities cease; sound
doctrine preached; the ordinances administered according to their
original institution; true discipline restored; and all the parts of
worship performed, according to the rule of the divine word; and so the
souls of men, under all these means, be in thriving and flourishing
circumstances:

and thy righteousness shall go before thee; not the external
righteousness of the saints, or works of righteousness done by them;
these do not go before them, at least to prepare the way for them into a
future state of happiness, but follow after, [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013), rather the righteousness of
Christ imputed to them, and so theirs; or Christ their righteousness,
the sun of righteousness, that arises upon them with healing in his
wings, and from whom they have the health before mentioned; he goes
before his people by way of example, as a guide to direct them, and as
the forerunner of them, and whose righteousness will introduce them into
the heavenly glory. Though perhaps the meaning here is, that their
righteousness, in the latter day glory, shall be very manifest, both
their righteousness before God, and before men; which will, as it were,
visibly walk before them, make way for them, and protect them; see [Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021),

and the glory of the Lord shall be thy reward, the glorious power and
providence of God, preserving his people; or the glorious Lord himself,
our Lord Jesus Christ, the brightness of his Father's glory, he, as the
word may be rendered, "shall gather thee" (i); he gathers his people to
himself; he protects and defends them; he takes care of the weak and
feeble, and that are straggling behind; and he brings them up, being the
reward, and saves them. The phrase denotes a glorious state of the
church in the latter day, when the glory of the Lord will be risen on
his church, and abide upon it, and upon all that glory there shall be a
defence; see [Isa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001).

\(i\) "colliget te", V. L. Munster, Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine
version.

[Isaiah 58:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 58:9</span></span>

Then shall thou call, and the Lord shall answer,.... A spirit of grace
and supplication will be poured out upon the people of God; they will
then pray without a form, and call upon the Lord in sincerity and truth,
with faith and fervency; and the Lord will hear and answer them, and
plentifully bestow his favours on them, so that they will have no reason
to complain, as in [Isa 58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003),

thou shalt cry, and he shall say, here I am; he will immediately appear
to the help and relief of his people; they shall have his presence with
them, to comfort and refresh them, to support and supply them, to
protect and defend them:

if thou take away from the midst of thee the yoke; of human inventions,
doctrines, rites and ceremonies, as in [Isa
58:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#006), "the putting forth of the
finger"; pointing at those that could not comply with them, by way of
scorn and derision, as puritans, schismatics, &c. and persecuting them
for it; and so is the same with smiting with the fist of wickedness,
[Isa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#004); when this deriding and
persecuting spirit is done away, then, and not till then, will the
prayers of a people be heard, though under a profession of religion, and
under the Protestant name: and speaking vanity; which also must be taken
away, or desisted from; even speaking false doctrines, as the Syriac
version; or which profits not, as the Vulgate Latin version; profane and
vain babblings, [Ti2 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#014), and
threatening words, to such who will not receive them.

[Isaiah 58:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 58:10</span></span>

And if thou draw out thy soul to the hungry,.... Not only deal out thy
bread, but thy soul also, to him; that is, give him food cheerfully,
with a good will, expressing a hearty love and affection for him; do it
heartily, as to the Lord; let thy soul go along with it; and this is
true of affectionate ministers of the Gospel, who not only impart that,
but their own souls also, [Th1 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1002.htm#008),

and satisfy the afflicted soul; distressed for want of food; not only
give it food, but to the full; not only just enough to support life, but
to satisfaction; or so as to be filled with good things, or however a
sufficiency of them:

then shall thy light rise in obscurity, and thy darkness be as the
noonday; in the midst of darkness of affliction, or desertion, the light
of prosperity and joy shall spring up, and a dark night of sorrow and
distress become a clear day of peace and comfort; see [Psa
112:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#004), at evening time it shall be
light, [Zac 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#007).

[Isaiah 58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 58:11</span></span>

And the Lord shall guide thee continually,.... With his counsel, by his
word, and by his Spirit, and that night and day; as he guided the
Israelites through the wilderness with the pillar of cloud by day, and
the pillar of fire by night: or, "cause thee to rest" (k); from
adversity, from persecution; to have spiritual rest in Christ now, and
eternal rest hereafter:

and satisfy thy soul in drought; or, "in drynesses" (l); in an exceeding
dry time; when in a dry and thirsty land; when thirsting after Christ
and his grace, Christ and his righteousness; after more knowledge of
him, communion with him, and conformity unto him; after the word and
ordinances; after the presence of God in them; and after more spiritual
light, knowledge, and experience:

and make fat thy bones; with the good report of the Gospel, [Pro
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#030) that is, quicken, comfort,
refresh, and strengthen the soul, and make it fat and flourishing in
spiritual things, by means of Gospel ordinances. The Targum is,

"and shall quicken thy body with life everlasting;''

or give rest to thy bones, as others (m):

and thou shalt be like a watered garden; like a "garden", the church of
Christ is separated from others, by electing, redeeming, and efficacious
grace; and like a "watered" one, watered by the Lord himself, and the
dews of his grace, and by the ministry of the word; whereby the plants
that are planted in it thrive and flourish, lift up their heads, shoot
up and grow, and bring forth fruit:

and like a spring of water, whose waters fail not; as there is in every
believer a well of living water springing up unto everlasting life, not
of themselves, but from Christ, and which is very abundant, and never
fails; so there is in the church a spring of the living waters of Gospel
doctrines, and of Gospel ordinances; here runs the river of divine love,
which makes glad the city of God; here Christ is the fountain of
gardens; and here the Spirit and his graces are communicated; all which
remain, and never fail; see [Psa 87:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#007).

\(k\) "requiem tibi dabit", V. L. (l) "in siccitatibus", Pagninus,
Montanus, Vatablus, Vitringa; "in summa ariditate", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator. Abendana observes, that some interpret the word in the sense
of purity, and understand it of the delight of the soul, in the world of
souls, where the Lord leads them continually, and satisfies them with
pure light, which is the brightness of the Shechinah, or divine Majesty.
(m) R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed, fol. 55. 2.

[Isaiah 58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 58:12</span></span>

And they that shall be of thee shall build the old waste places,.... As
the cities in Israel and Judea, which had been long laid waste by the
Assyrians and Chaldeans, were rebuilt by those of the Jewish nation, who
returned from the captivity of Babylon, to which there is at least an
allusion; and as the church of God, the tabernacle of David, which was
fallen down, and had lain long in ruins, through corruptions in doctrine
and worship, to the times of Christ, when the apostles, who were of the
Jews, those wise masterbuilders, were instruments of raising it up
again, and repairing its ruins: so, in the latter day, "the waste places
of the world" (n), as the words may be rendered, shall be built by a set
of men, that shall be of the church of God, who shall be instruments in
his hand of converting many souls, and so of peopling it with
Christians; such places as before were desolate, where before there was
no preaching of the word, no administration of ordinances, nor any
Gospel churches:

thou shalt raise up the foundations of many generations; either such
foundations as have been razed up, and lay so for ages past; or raise up
such as shall continue for generations to come. It may allude to the
raising the foundations of the city and temple of Jerusalem; but rather
refers to the founding of churches in Gospel times, which, as it was
done in the first times of it by the apostles in the Gentile world, so
shall be again in the latter day, which will continue for many ages:

and thou shalt be called the repairer of the breach, and the restorer of
paths to dwell in; that is, the church and her builders, that shall be
of her, shall be so called; the Jews and Gentiles will be converted in
great numbers, and coalesce in the same Gospel church state, and so the
breach between them will be repaired. Christians of various
denominations, who now break off and separate one from another, will be
of the same sentiment and judgment in doctrine and discipline; they
shall see eye to eye, and cement together, and all breaches will be made
up, and there will be no schism in the body; and they shall dwell
together in unity, and walk in the same paths of faith and duty, of
truth and holiness; and such who will be the happy instruments of all
this will have much honour, and be called by these names.

The Targum is,

"they shall call thee one that confirms the right way, and converts, the
ungodly to the law.''

\(n\) "desolata seculi", Munster, Vatablus, Vitringa; "deserta seculi",
Pagninus, Montanus.

[Isaiah 58:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 58:13</span></span>

If thou turn away thy foot from the sabbath,.... From walking and
working on that day; or withdrawest thy mind and affections from all
worldly things; the affections being that to the mind as the feet are to
the body, which carry it here and there. The time of worship, under the
Gospel dispensation, is here expressed in Old Testament language, as the
service of it usually is in prophetic writings; though its proper name
is the Lord's day, [Rev 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#010), and is
here instanced in, and put for all religious institutions and services
to be attended unto, and which will be with greater strictness in the
times referred to:

from doing thy pleasure on my holy day; that is, if thou turnest away,
or dost abstain from doing thine own servile work, the business of thy
calling; which may be agreeable for the sake of the profit of it; or
from recreations and amusements, which may be lawfully indulged on
another day:

and call the sabbath a delight, the holy of God, and honourable; take
delight and pleasure in the service of it; in all the duties of
religion, private and public, to be observed on that day; in reading and
hearing the word, and meditation on it; in prayer, and in attendance on
all ordinances; and reckon it as separated for holy use and employment,
and on that account honourable; and so have it in high esteem, and
desire the return of it, and not think the service of it long and
tedious, when enjoyed, and wish it was over: or, "for the Holy One of
God, and honourable"; that is, for the sake of Christ, the Holy One of
God, in both his natures, and honourable in his person and office;
accounting the sabbath a delight, in remembrance of the great work of
redemption and salvation wrought out by him:

and shall honour him, not doing thine own ways, nor finding thine own
pleasure, nor speaking thine own words; honour the Lord on that day, by
not attending to any secular business, or walking abroad in the fields,
to the neglect of private duties or public worship; by not seeking the
gratification of the fleshly and sensual part, or indulging to those
things which are agreeable to it; and by not speaking such words, or
talking of such things, as relate to worldly affairs, or the things of
civil life, but walking in the ways of the Lord, doing those things
which are well pleasing in his sight, and conversing about spiritual and
heavenly things; by such means God is honoured on his own day; and the
reverse of this is a dishonouring him. The Jews (o) make this honour to
lie chiefly in wearing other clothes on this day than on a weekday, and
not walking as on other days, or talking as on them; yet they allow of
thoughts, though not of words, about worldly things.

\(o\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 113. 1, 2. & 119. 1. & 150. 1.

[Isaiah 58:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 58:14</span></span>

Then shalt thou delight thyself in the Lord,.... In his perfections; in
his omnipotence, omniscience, omnipresence, eternity, immutability,
holiness, justice, truth, and faithfulness; in his wisdom, love, grace,
and mercy, especially as displayed in Christ, and salvation by him; in
the relations he stands in to his people, as their covenant God and
Father, and in what he is to them, their shield and exceeding great
reward, their portion and inheritance; in his works of creation,
providence, and grace; in his word, the Gospel, the truths, doctrines,
and promises of it; in his ways and worship: in his ordinances and
commandments; in communion with him, and with his people; in all which,
abundance of delight, pleasure, and satisfaction, is found by those who
know him in Christ, have tasted that he is gracious; who have some
likeness to him, love him, and are the objects of his love and delight:

and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth; to live
above the world, and to have their conversation in heaven; to be in the
utmost safety, and enjoy the greatest plenty, especially of spiritual
things: or to be superior to the men of the world, even the highest of
them; to have power and authority in the earth, as the saints will have
in the latter day; particularly this will be true when the mountain of
the Lord's house is established upon the top of the mountains, [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002),

and feed thee with the heritage of Jacob thy father: the Jewish writers
inquire why Jacob is mentioned, and not Abraham nor Isaac; and answer,
as in the Talmud (p), not Abraham, of whom it is written, "arise, walk
through the land in the length of it", &c. [Gen
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#017), nor Isaac, of whom it is
written, "for unto thee, and to thy seed, will I give all these
countries", &c. [Gen 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#003), but Jacob,
of whom it is written, "and thou shalt spread abroad to the west, and to
the east, and to the north, and to the south", &c. [Gen
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#014) expressing the larger extent of
the inheritance; so Jarchi and Samson account for it; but Kimchi gives a
better reason, because the sons of Jacob, and not Ishmael the son of
Abraham, nor Esau the son of Isaac, inherited the land of Canaan: but
rather the reason is, because he is the father of all true Israelites,
who are, as he was, wrestling and prevailing; these the Lord feeds with
spiritual provisions here, and glory hereafter; which the good things of
the land of Canaan, the inheritance of Jacob and his sons, were a type
of: and perhaps this may have respect to the conversion of the Jews,
when they shall return to their own land, and enjoy the good things of
it, as well as all spiritual blessings:

for the mouth of the Lord hath spoken it; who is faithful to his
covenant, true to his word; cannot lie, will never deceive; performs
whatsoever he has promised, being able to do it; and therefore it may be
depended upon that all this shall be as he has said.

\(p\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol 118. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 59](isa059)

</div>
