<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa006)  [Next](isa008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 7

This chapter contains a prophecy of the preservation of the kingdom of
Judah, from its enemies; a confirmation of it by a sign; and a
prediction of various calamities that should come upon it, antecedent to
the accomplishment of that sign. The enemies of Judea are named, and the
besieging of Jerusalem by them, and the date of it, which was without
effect, are mentioned, [Isa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001) the
fear and dread which seized the house of David upon the news of this
confederacy, [Isa 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002) the orders given
by the Lord to the Prophet Isaiah, to take with him his son, and meet
Ahaz, at a certain place pointed at, [Isa
7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003) whose errand was to comfort him,
and exhort him to be quiet and easy; since the conspiracy formed against
him should be fruitless, and the kingdom of Israel should be broken to
pieces, [Isa 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004) after which the king
is put upon asking a sign of the Lord, for the confirmation of it; which
he refusing to do, under a pretence of tempting the Lord, is reproved;
and a sign nevertheless is given; which is that of the birth of the
Messiah of a virgin, who would be truly God, as his name Immanuel shows,
and truly man, as his birth, his food, and gradual knowledge of good and
evil, prove, [Isa 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#010) yea, it is
suggested that the deliverance of Judea from the two kings of Syria and
Israel should be very speedy; even before the young child Isaiah had
with him was capable of knowing to refuse evil, and chose good, [Isa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016) but as a chastisement of the
house of David for their incredulity in this matter, and slight of the
divine goodness, various things are threatened to befall them, before
the birth of the Messiah; even such as had not been since the revolt of
the ten tribes; as that their enemies, the Assyrians and others, should
come upon them in great numbers, and fill all places, so that they would
be in the utmost distress, and not be able to escape, [Isa
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017) there would be a great
consumption of men of all sorts, high and low, signified by shaving off
the hair of the head, beard, and feet; so that the few that remained
would enjoy plenty, [Isa 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020) and for
want of men to till the land, it would be covered with thorns and
briers; and because of wild beasts, the few men in it would be obliged
to defend themselves with bows and arrows, [Isa
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#023) and yet, after this, the land
should become fruitful again, before the Messiah's coming, [Isa
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#025), as some interpret it.

[Isaiah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 7:1</span></span>

And it came to pass in the days of Ahaz the son of Jotham, the son of
Uzziah king of Judah,.... Here begins a new prophecy under the reign of
another king; who, though a wicked king, had religious ancestors; and
who are mentioned, not, as the Jewish writers (u) generally say, because
it was owing to their worthiness that the enemies of Ahaz could not
prevail against him; but because it was under these kings the prophet
had prophesied: what is contained in the first five chapters were
delivered in the times of Uzziah; and the vision in the sixth was in the
times of Jotham, in the beginning of his reign; and what is said here,
and in some following chapters, was in the time of Ahaz; so that this is
mentioned to fix and carry on the date of the prophecy:

that Rezin the king of Syria, and Pekah, the son of Remaliah king of
Israel, went up towards Jerusalem to war against it; at the latter end
of Jotham's reign, and the beginning of Ahaz's; these two separately
came up against Judah, and greatly distressed and afflicted the kingdom,
slew many, and carried others captive, [Kg2
15:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#037) but afterwards, in the third (w)
or fourth (x) year of Ahaz, as it is said, they joined together to
besiege Jerusalem, which this refers to, [Kg2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005),

but could not prevail against it; or "he could not"; that is, according
to Aben Ezra, the king of Israel, Pekah, the son of Remaliah; but,
according to Kimchi, it was Rezin king of Syria, who, he says, was the
principal in the war, and brought Pekah along with him; but it may very
well be understood of them both, since in [Kg2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#005), the plural number is used; "and
they could not"; and so the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Oriental
versions here.

\(u\) Jarchi & Kimchi in loc. & Yalkut Simeoni, ex Bereshit Rabba, sect.
63. fol. 54. 4. (w) Yalkut Simeoni in loc. (x) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 23.
p. 85. Jarchi in ver. 14.

[Isaiah 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 7:2</span></span>

And it was told the house of David,.... Ahaz, and his family, the
princes of the blood, his court and counsellors; who had intelligence of
the designs and preparations of the Syrians and Israelites against them:

saying, Syria is confederate with Ephraim; the ten tribes; or the
kingdom and king of Israel. Some render it, "Syria led"; that is, its
army "unto Ephraim" (y); marched it into the land of Israel, and there
joined the king of Israel's army; others, as the Vulgate Latin version,
"Syria rests upon Ephraim" (z); depends upon, trusts in, takes heart and
encouragement from Ephraim, or the ten tribes, being his ally. The
Septuagint version is, "Syria hath agreed with Ephraim"; entered into a
confederacy and alliance with each other; which is the sense of our
version; and is confirmed by the Targum, which is,

"the king of Syria is joined with the king of Israel:''

and his heart was moved, and the heart of his people, as the trees of
the wood are moved with the wind; the metaphor denotes the strength and
force of the confederate armies, comparable to a strong, blustering,
boisterous wind; see [Isa 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002) and the
weakness of the king and people of Judah, who were like to trees shaken
by the wind; and also the fear they were possessed with, partly through
consciousness of guilt, and partly through distrust of divine power and
Providence; and also on account of what they had suffered already from
these powerful enemies, when they attacked them singly; and therefore
might much more dread them, as they were combined together against them;
see [Ch2 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005).

\(y\) "duxit exercitum", Tigurine version. (z) "Syria quievit super
Ephraim", Forerius, Cocceius; "Syria acquiescit in Ephraimo", Piscator.

[Isaiah 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 7:3</span></span>

Then said the Lord unto Isaiah,.... The prophet, the inspired penman of
these prophecies, that go by his name; what follows, the Lord said unto
him in vision, or by an articulate voice, or by an impulse on his mind:

go forth now to meet Ahaz; the prophet was in the city of Jerusalem, and
Ahaz was without, as appears by the place after mentioned, where he was
to meet him; perhaps Ahaz was at his country house, which, upon the news
brought him of the designs of his enemies, he leaves, and betakes
himself to Jerusalem, his metropolis, and fortified city, where he might
be more safe; or he had been out to reconnoitre the passes about
Jerusalem, and give orders and directions for the strengthening and
keeping of them:

thou, and Shearjashub thy son: whose name signifies "the remnant shall
return", and who was taken with the prophet, to suggest either that the
remnant that were left of the former devastations by those two kings
ought to return to the Lord by repentance; or that though the people of
Judah should hereafter be carried captive by the Assyrians, yet a
remnant should return again. The Targum interprets this not of Isaiah's
natural son, but of his disciples; paraphrasing it thus,

"thou, and the rest of thy disciples, who have not sinned, and are
turned from sin:''

at the end of the conduit of the upper pool; for there was an upper pool
and a lower one; see [Isa 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#009) this
was outside the city, and is the same place where Rabshakeh afterwards
stood, and delivered his blasphemous and terrifying speech, [Kg2
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017),

in the highway of the fuller's field; where they washed and dried their
garments, and whitened them; the pool, conduit, and field, being fit for
their purpose.

[Isaiah 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 7:4</span></span>

And say unto him, take heed, and be quiet,.... Or "keep" thyself, not
within the city, and from fighting with his enemies, but from unbelief,
fear, and dread; or, as the Septuagint version, "keep" thyself, "that
thou mayest be quiet" (a); be easy, still, and silent, and see the
salvation of God: the Jewish writers interpret the first word of resting
and settling, as wine upon the lees: see [Jer
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#011),

fear not; this explains the former:

neither be fainthearted; or "let thy heart soft" (b), and melt like wax,
through dread and diffidence:

for the two tails of these smoking firebrands: meaning the two kings of
Syria and Israel: and so the Targum,

"for these two kings, who are as smoking firebrands;''

a metaphor used to express the weakness of these princes, their vain
wrath and impotent fury, and the short continuance of it; they being
like to firebrands wholly burnt and consumed to the end; a small part
remaining, which could not be laid hold upon to light fires or burn
with, and that only smoking, and the smoke just ready to vanish.

For the fierce anger of Rezin with Syria, and of the son of Remaliah;
this shows who are meant by the two firebrands, Rezin king of Syria, and
Pekah king of Israel; and what by the smoke of them, their fierce anger;
which, though it seemed to threaten with utter destruction, in the
opinion of Ahaz and his court, was only like the smoke of a firebrand
burnt to the end, weak and vanishing.

\(a\) Sept.; "observa ut sis quieto animo", Vatablus. (b) "ne
mollescas", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Isaiah 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 7:5</span></span>

Because Syria, Ephraim, and the son of Remaliah,.... Not that there were
three parties in the counsel and confederacy against Judah, only two,
the kingdoms of Syria and Ephraim, or Israel; the king of the former is
not mentioned at all, and the latter only as if he was the son of a
private person, which is purposely done by way of contempt:

have taken evil counsel against thee: which is expressed in the next
verse;

saying; as follows.

[Isaiah 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 7:6</span></span>

Let us go up against Judah, and vex it,.... By besieging or distressing
it; or "stir it up" to war, as Jarchi interprets it:

and let us make a breach therein for us; in the walls of the city of
Jerusalem, and enter in at it; the Targum is,

"let us join, and put it to us;''

and so Jarchi, let us level it with us, as this valley, which is even:
the sense may be, let us make a breach and division among them, and then
part the kingdom between us (c); or if we cannot agree on that, let us
set up a king of our own, as follows:

and set a king in the midst of it, even the son of Tabeal; which Jarchi,
by a situation of the alphabet the Jews call "albam", makes it to be the
same with Remala, that is, Remaliah; and so supposes, that the intention
was to set Pekah, son of Remaliah, king of Israel, over Judah; but it is
not reasonable to think that the king of Syria should join in such a
design; and besides, the method of interpretation, Aben Ezra says, is
mere vanity; and whose sense of the words is much preferable, taking
Tabeal to be the name of some great prince, either of Israel or of
Syria; and so Kimchi thinks that he was a man of the children of
Ephraim, whom they thought to make king in Jerusalem. The Targum
understands not any particular person, but anyone that should be thought
proper; and paraphrases it thus,

"let us appoint a king in the midst of it, who is right for us,''

or pleases us; the name seems to be Syriac, see [Ezr
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#007). Dr. Lightfoot thinks it is the
same with Tabrimmon, the name of some famous family in Syria. One
signifies "good God": and the other "good Rimmon", which was the name of
the idol of the Syrians, [Kg2 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#018).

\(c\) So Noldius, Elr. Concord. Part. p. 62. renders its "let us divide
it among us".

[Isaiah 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 7:7</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord GOD, it shall not stand,.... That is, the counsel
they had taken against Judah to vex it, make a breach in it, and set a
king of their own liking over it; so the Septuagint and Arabic versions
render the words, "that counsel shall not stand"; the counsel of God
shall stand, but not the counsel of men, when it is against him, [Pro
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#021),

neither shall it come to pass; or "shall not be"; so far from standing,
succeeding, and going forward, till it is brought to a final
accomplishment, it should not take footing, or have a being.

[Isaiah 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 7:8</span></span>

For the head of Syria is Damascus,.... Damascus was the metropolis of
Syria, the chief city in it, where the king had his palace, and kept his
court; of which See Gill on [Gen 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#002),
[Act 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#002),

and the head of Damascus is Rezin; he was king of it, as of all Syria;
the meaning is, that Syria, of which Damascus was the principal city,
was the only country that Rezin should govern, his dominion should not
be enlarged; and Ahaz, king of Judah, might assure himself that Rezin
should never possess his kingdom, or be able to depose him, and set up
another; and as for Ephraim or Israel, the ten tribes, they should be so
far from succeeding in such a design against him, that it should befall
them as follows:

and within threescore and five years shall Ephraim be broken, that it be
not a people; which is by some reckoned, not from the time of this
prophecy, that being in the third or fourth year of Ahaz, who reigned in
all but sixteen years; and in the ninth of Hosea king of Israel, and in
the sixth of Hezekiah king of Judah, Samaria was taken, and Israel
carried captive into Assyria, [Kg2
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006) which was but about eighteen or
nineteen years from this time: some think indeed the time was shortened,
because of their sins; but this does not appear, nor is it probable: and
others think that it designs any time within that term; but the true
meaning undoubtedly is, as the Targum renders it,

"at the end of sixty and five years, the kingdom of the house of Israel
shall cease.''

This is commonly reckoned by the Jewish writers (d) from the prophecy of
Amos, who prophesied two years before the earthquake in Uzziah's time,
concerning the captivity both of Syria and Israel, [Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001), [Amo
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/amo007.htm#011) which account may be carried
either through the kings of Judah or of Israel; Jarchi goes the former
way, reckoning thus,

"the prophecy of Amos was two years before Uzziah was smitten with the
leprosy, according to [Amo 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001). Uzziah
was a leper twenty five years, lo, twenty seven. Jotham reigned sixteen
years, Ahaz sixteen, and Hezekiah six; as it is said, "in the sixth year
of Hezekiah (that is, the ninth year of Hoshea king of Israel) Samaria
was taken", [Kg2 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#010) lo, sixty five
years.''

So Abarbinel; but Kimchi goes another way, which comes to the same,
reckoning thus,

"the prophecy of Amos, according to computation, was in the seventeenth
year of Jeroboam, son of Joash, king of Israel, how is it? Jeroboam
reigned forty one years, Menahem ten, so there are fifty one; Pekahiah
the son of Menahem two, so fifty three; and Pekah twenty, so seventy
three; and Hoshea the son of Elah nine, and then Israel were carried
captive, so there are eighty two: take out of them seventeen (the years
of Jeroboam before the prophecy), and there remain sixty five, the
number intended; for we do not reckon the six months of Zechariah, and
the month of Shallum.''

Cocceius reckons from the death of Jeroboam, who died in the forty first
year of his reign, and in the fifteenth of Uzziah, so that there
remained thirty seven years of Uzziah; in the twentieth of Jotham, that
is, in the fourth after his death, Hoshea son of Elah was made king,
this was the twelfth of Ahaz, [Kg2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030) and in the ninth of Hoshea,
Samaria was taken, and Israel carried captive. But Junius and Tremellius
are of a different mind from either of these, and think the prophecy
wholly respects time to come; they observe, that

"Isaiah in these words first shows, that the kingdom of Syria should be
immediately cut off, and the king should die, which at furthest must
needs happen four years after; so (say they) we may suppose that these
things were said by the prophet in the first year of Ahaz; thence, from
the destruction of the Syrians, to the full carrying captive of the
Israelites, or from the time of this prophecy, sixty five years must
have run out; for although the kingdom of Israel was abolished in the
sixth year of Hezekiah, yet Israel did not immediately cease to be a
people when only some part of it was carried away; but they entirely
ceased to be a people when new colonies were introduced by Esarhaddon,
the son of Sennacherib, and all the Israelites were forced into bondage,
which the Samaritans explain, [Ezr 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ezr004.htm#002)
wherefore so we fix the series of the times, from the fourth year of
Ahaz, in which the kingdom of Syria fell, unto the end, are eleven
years, Hezekiah reigned twenty nine years, so the last translation of
the Israelites was in the twenty fifth year of Manasseh's reign; but if
you begin from the time of the prophecy; the thing will fall upon the
twenty first or twenty second of Manasseh's reign; at which time
perhaps, as some say, Manasseh was carried captive into Babylon.''

And of this mind was the learned Dr. Prideaux (e), who observes, that in
the twenty second year of Manasseh, Esarhaddon prepared a great army,
and marched into the parts of Syria and Palestine, and again added them
to the Assyrian empire; and adds,

"and then was accomplished the prophecy which was spoken by Isaiah in
the first year of Ahaz against Samaria, that within threescore and five
years Ephraim should be absolutely broken, so as from thenceforth to be
no more a people; for this year being exactly sixty five years from the
first of Ahaz, Esarhaddon, after he had settled all affairs in Syria,
marched into the land of Israel, and there taking captive all those who
were the remains of the former captivity (excepting only some few, who
escaped his hands, and continued still in the land), carried them away
into Babylon and Assyria; and then, to prevent the land becoming
desolate, he brought others from Babylon, and from Cutha, and from
Havah, and Hamath, and Sephervaim, to dwell in the cities of Samaria in
their stead; and so the ten tribes of Israel, which had separated from
the house of David, were brought to a full and utter destruction, and
never after recovered themselves again.''

And this seems to be the true accomplishment of this prophecy; though
the sense of the Jewish writers is followed by many, and preferred by
Noldius; so that there is no need with Grotius and Vitringa to suppose a
corruption of the text. Gussetius (f) fancies that signifies twice six,
that is, twelve; as twice ten, or twenty; and so five, added to twelve,
makes seventeen; and from the fourth of Ahaz, to the taking of Samaria,
was about seventeen years.

\(d\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 28. p. 85. Aben Ezra in loc. (e) Connection,
&c. par, 1. B. 1. p. 30. Bishop Usher, Annal. Vet. Test. A. M. 3327. (f)
Comment Ebr. p. 892.

[Isaiah 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 7:9</span></span>

And the head of Ephraim is Samaria,..... Samaria was the metropolis or
chief city of Ephraim, or the ten tribes of Israel:

and the head of Samaria is Remaliah's son; Pekah, son of Remaliah, was
king of Samaria, as of all Israel. The sense is, that, until the sixty
five years were ended, there should be no enlargement of the kingdom of
Israel; Judah should not be added to it; Samaria should continue, and
not Jerusalem be the metropolis of it; and Pekah, during his life,
should be king of Israel, but not of Judah.

If ye will not believe; the Targum adds,

"the words of the prophet;''

surely ye shall not be established, or remain (g); that is, in their own
land, but should be carried captive, as they were after a time; or it
is, "because ye are not true and firm"; in the faith of God, as Kimchi
interprets it; or, "because ye are not confirmed" (h); that is, by a
sign; wherefore it follows:

\(g\) "non permanebitis", V. L. Cocceius. (h) "Quod non confirmamini",
Junius & Tremellius.

[Isaiah 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 7:10</span></span>

Moreover the Lord spake again unto Ahaz,.... By the prophet Isaiah:

saying; as follows:

[Isaiah 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 7:11</span></span>

Ask thee a sign of the Lord thy God,.... For though Ahaz was a wicked
man, yet the Lord was his God, as he was the God of the people of Israel
in general, as a nation; and knowing his unbelief and diffidence of his
word unto him, offers to confirm it by a sign or miracle:

ask it either in the depth, or in the height above, in earth, or in
heaven: so the Targum,

"ask that a miracle may be done for thee upon earth, or that a sign may
be shown thee in heaven;''

either that the earth might gape and open its mouth, as in the days of
Moses; or that the sun might stand still, as in the times of Joshua; or
that a dead man might be raised out of the depth of the earth; or that
there might be some strange appearances in the heavens.

[Isaiah 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 7:12</span></span>

But Ahaz said, I will not ask,.... That is, a sign or miracle to be
wrought; being unwilling to take the advice to be still and quiet, and
make no preparation for war, or seek out for help from the Assyrians,
and to rely upon the promise and power of God, and therefore chose not
to have it confirmed by a sign; adding as an excuse,

neither will I tempt the Lord, by asking a sign; suggesting that this
was contrary to the command of God, [Deu
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#016) so pretending religion and
reverence of God; whereas, to ask a sign of God, when it was offered,
could not be reckoned a tempting him; but, on the contrary, to refuse
one; when offered, argued great stubbornness and ingratitude, as Calvin
well observes.

[Isaiah 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 7:13</span></span>

And he said,.... That is, the Prophet Isaiah; which shows that it was by
him the Lord spoke the foregoing words:

hear ye now, O house of David; for not only Ahaz, but his family,
courtiers, and counsellors, were all of the same mind with him, not to
ask a sign of God, nor to depend upon, his promise of safety, but to
seek out for help, and provide against the worst themselves. Some think
that Ahaz's name is not mentioned, and that this phrase is used by way
of contempt, and as expressive of indignation and resentment:

is it a small thing for you to weary man; meaning such as himself, the
prophets of the Lord; so the Targum,

"is it a small thing that ye are troublesome to the prophets;''

disturb, grieve, and vex them, by obstinacy and unbelief:

but will ye weary my God also? the Targum is,

"for ye are troublesome to the words of my God;''

or injurious to them, by not believing them; or to God himself, by
rejecting such an offer of a sign as was made to them.

[Isaiah 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 7:14</span></span>

Therefore the Lord himself shall give you a sign,.... Whether they would
ask one or not; a sign both in heaven and earth, namely, the promised
Messiah; who being the Lord from heaven, would take flesh of a virgin on
earth; and who as man, being buried in the heart of the earth, would be
raised from thence, and ascend up into heaven; and whose birth, though
it was to be many years after, was a sign of present deliverance to
Judah from the confederacy of the two kings of Syria and Israel; and of
future safety, since it was not possible that this kingdom should cease
to be one until the Messiah was come, who was to spring from Judah, and
be of the house of David; wherefore by how much the longer off was his
birth, by so much the longer was their safety.

Behold, a virgin shall conceive, and bear a son; this is not to be
understood of Hezekiah, the son of Ahaz, by his wife, as some Jewish
writers interpret it; which interpretation Jarchi refutes, by observing
that Hezekiah was nine years old when his father began to reign, and
this being, as he says, the fourth year of his reign, he must be at this
time thirteen years of age; in like manner, Aben Ezra and Kimchi object
to it; and besides, his mother could not be called a "virgin": and for
the same reason it cannot be understood of any other son of his either
by his wife, as Kimchi thinks, or by some young woman; moreover, no
other son of his was ever lord of Judea, as this Immanuel is represented
to be, in [Isa 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008) nor can it be
interpreted of Isaiah's wife and son, as Aben Ezra and Jarchi think;
since the prophet could never call her a "virgin", who had bore him
children, one of which was now with him; nor indeed a "young woman", but
rather "the prophetess", as in [Isa
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#003) nor was any son of his king of
Judah, as this appears to be, in the place before cited: but the Messiah
is here meant, who was to be born of a pure virgin; as the word here
used signifies in all places where it is mentioned, as [Gen
24:43](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#043) and even in [Pro
30:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#019) which is the instance the Jews
give of the word being used of a woman corrupted; since it does not
appear that the maid and the adulterous woman are one and the same
person; and if they were, she might, though vitiated, be called a maid
or virgin, from her own profession of herself, or as she appeared to
others who knew her not, or as she was antecedent to her defilement;
which is no unusual thing in Scripture, see [Deu
22:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#028) to which may be added, that not
only the Evangelist Matthew renders the word by "a virgin"; but the
Septuagint interpreters, who were Jews, so rendered the word hundreds of
years before him; and best agrees with the Hebrew word, which comes from
the root which signifies to "hide" or "cover"; virgins being covered and
unknown to men; and in the eastern country were usually kept recluse,
and were shut up from the public company and conversation of men: and
now this was the sign that was to be given, and a miraculous one it was,
that the Messiah should be born of a pure and incorrupt virgin; and
therefore a "behold" is prefixed to it, as a note of admiration; and
what else could be this sign or wonder? not surely that a young married
woman, either Ahaz's or Isaiah's wife, should be with child, which is
nothing surprising, and of which there are repeated instances every day;
nor was it that the young woman was unfit for conception at the time of
the prophecy, which was the fancy of some, as Jarchi reports, since no
such intimation is given either in the text or context; nor did it lie
in this, that it was a male child, and not a female, which was
predicted, as R. Saadiah Gaon, in Aben Ezra, would have it; for the sign
or wonder does not lie in the truth of the prophet's prediction, but in
the greatness of the thing predicted; besides, the verification of this
would not have given the prophet much credit, nor Ahaz and the house of
David much comfort, since this might have been ascribed rather to a
happy conjecture than to a spirit of prophecy; much less can the wonder
be, that this child should eat butter and honey, as soon as it was born,
as Aben Ezra and Kimchi suggest; since nothing is more natural to, and
common with young children, than to take down any kind of liquids which
are sweet and pleasant.

And shall call his name Immanuel; which is, by interpretation, "God with
us", [Mat 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#023) whence it appears that
the Messiah is truly God, as well as truly man: the name is expressive
of the union of the two natures, human and divine, in him; of his office
as Mediator, who, being both God and man, is a middle person between
both; of his converse with men on earth, and of his spiritual presence
with his people. See [Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014).

[Isaiah 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 7:15</span></span>

Butter and honey shall he eat..... As the Messiah Jesus no doubt did;
since he was born in a land flowing with milk and honey, and in a time
of plenty, being a time of general peace; so that this phrase points at
the place where, and the time when, the Messiah should be born, as well
as expresses the truth of his human nature, and the manner of his
bringing up, which was in common with that of other children. signifies
the "cream of milk", as well as "butter", as Jarchi, in [Gen
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#008), observes; and milk and honey
were common food for infants:

that he may know to refuse the evil, and choose the good; meaning not
knowledge of good and bad food, so as to choose the one, and refuse the
other; but knowledge of moral good and evil; and this does not design
the end of his eating butter and honey, as if that was in order to gain
such knowledge, which have no such use and tendency; but the time until
which he should live on such food; namely, until he was grown up, or
come to years of discretion, when he could distinguish between good and
evil; so that as the former phrase shows that he assumed a true body
like ours, which was nourished with proper food; this that he assumed a
reasonable soul, which, by degrees, grew and increased in wisdom and
knowledge; see [Luk 2:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#052). should be
rendered, "until he knows"; as in [Lev
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#012) which the Chaldee paraphrase of
Onkelos renders, "until it was declared to them"; and so the Targum
here,

"butter and honey shall he eat, while or before the child knows not, or
until he knows to refuse the evil, and choose the good.''

[Isaiah 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 7:16</span></span>

For before the child shall know to refuse the evil, and choose the
good,.... This may be understood of Isaiah's child, Shearjashub, he had
along with him, he was bid to take with him; and who therefore must be
supposed to bear some part, or answer some end or other, in this
prophecy; which it is very probable may be this, viz. to assure Ahaz and
the house of David that the land which was abhorred by them should be
forsaken of both its kings, before the child that was with him was grown
to years of discretion; though it may be understood of any child, and so
of the Messiah; and the sense be, that before any child, or new born
babe, such an one as is promised, [Isa
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#014), arrives to years of discretion,
even in the space of a few years, this remarkable deliverance should be
wrought, and the Jews freed from all fears of being destroyed by these
princes:

the land that thou abhorrest shall be forsaken of both her kings;
meaning not the land of Judea, now distressed by them, which they should
leave; for that could not be said to be abhorred by Ahaz, or the house
of David; but the land of Israel and Syria, called one land, because of
the confederacy between the kings of them, Rezin and Remaliah's son,
which Ahaz and his nobles abhorred, because of their joining together
against them; and so it was, that in a very little time both these kings
were cut off; Pekah the son of Remaliah was slain by Hoshea the son of
Elah, who reigned in his stead, [Kg2
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#030) and Rezin was slain by the king
of Assyria, [Kg2 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#009).

[Isaiah 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 7:17</span></span>

The Lord shall bring upon thee,.... These words are directed to Ahaz;
and show, that though he and his kingdom would be safe from the two
kings that conspired against him, yet evils should come upon him from
another quarter, even from the Assyrians he sent to for help, and in
whom he trusted; in which the Lord himself would have a hand, and permit
them in his providence, in order to chastise him for his unbelief,
stubbornness, and ingratitude in refusing the sign offered him, and for
his other sins; and the calamities threatened began in his time; and
therefore it is said, "upon thee"; for Tilgathpilneser, king of Assyria,
to whom he sent for help, instead of helping and strengthening him,
distressed him, [Ch2 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#020),

and upon thy people, and upon thy father's house; so in the reign of his
son Hezekiah, Sennacherib, king of Assyria, invaded the land of Judah,
took all its fenced cities, excepting Jerusalem, and came up even to
that, [Kg2 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#013) and in the times of
Zedekiah, Nebuchadnezzar, king of Babylon, came up against Jerusalem,
and destroyed it, and carried the people of Judah captive, [Kg2
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#001) and these are the evil days, the
days of affliction and adversity, here threatened:

days that have not come, from the day that Ephraim departed from Judah:
meaning the revolt of the ten tribes from the house of David, in the
times of Rehoboam, [Kg1 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#016) which
was a day of great adversity, a great affliction to the house of Judah;
and there had been several evil days since, and that very lately; as
when the king of Syria came into the land, and carried away great
multitudes captives to Damascus; and when Pekah, king of Israel, slew in
Judah, on one day, a hundred and twenty thousand valiant men, and
carried captive two hundred thousand women, sons and daughters, with a
great spoil, [Ch2 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#005) and yet these
were not to be compared with the calamitous times yet to come:

even the king of Assyria; or "with the king of Assyria", as the Vulgate
Latin version renders it; rather the meaning is, that those days of
trouble should come by the king of Assyria (i), as they did. The
Septuagint version renders it, "from the day that Ephraim took away from
Judah the king of the Assyrians"; and the Syriac and Arabic versions,
just the reverse, "from the day that the king of the Assyrians", or
"Assyria, carried away Ephraim from Judea"; neither of them right.

\(i\) "per regem Assyriae", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; and which is
preferred by Noldius, Ebr. Concord. Part. p. 120, No. 616.

[Isaiah 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 7:18</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day,.... the time when those evil days
before spoken of should take place:

that the Lord shall hiss for the fly that is in the uttermost part of
the rivers of Egypt; or flies, as the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic
versions render it; the Egyptians, so called because their country
abounded with flies; and because of the multitude of their armies, and
the swiftness of their march; this seems to have had its accomplishment
when Pharaohnechoh king of Egypt slew Josiah, put his son Jehoahaz, that
reigned after him, in bands, placed Eliakim his brother in his stead,
and made the land of Judah tributary to him, [Kg2
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029) though some think either the
Edomites or Philistines, that bordered on Egypt, are meant; who in
Ahaz's time invaded Judah, and brought it low, [Ch2
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#017) or else the Ethiopians, that
inhabited on the furthermost borders of Egypt, and the rivers of it; who
either came up separately against Judah, or served under Nebuchadnezzar;
see [Isa 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#001),

and for the bee that is in the land of Assyria; the Assyrian army, so
called because the country abounded with bees; and because of the number
of their armies, their military order and discipline, and their hurtful
and mischievous nature. The Targum paraphrases the whole thus,

"and it shall be at that time that the Lord shall call to a people,
bands of armies, of mighty men, who are numerous as flies, and shall
bring them from the ends of the land of Egypt; and to mighty armies, who
are powerful as bees, and shall bring them from the uttermost parts of
the land of Assyria:''

hissing or whistling for them denotes the ease with which this should be
done, and with what swiftness and readiness those numerous and powerful
armies should come; and the allusion is to the calling of bees out of
their hives into the fields, and from thence into their hives again, by
tinkling of brass, or by some musical sound, in one way or another.

[Isaiah 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 7:19</span></span>

And they shall come,.... The Egyptian and Assyrian armies, when the Lord
calls for them in his providence, and his time is come to make use of
them as a scourge to his people:

and shall rest all of them in the desolate valleys: made so by war; this
is said in allusion to flies and bees resting on trees and flowers; and
signifies that these armies, after long and tedious marches, should all
of them, without being diminished by the way, enter the land of Judea,
fill all places, and take up their abode there for a while:

and in the holes of the rocks. Kimchi thinks that the former phrase
designs cities in valleys, and this fortified cities which are upon
rocks:

and upon all thorns, and upon all bushes; in allusion to flies and bees.
Kimchi interprets this of unwalled towns and villages. The Targum of the
whole verse is,

"and they shall all of them come and dwell in the streets of the cities,
and in the clifts of the rocks, and in all deserts full of sedges, and
in all houses of praise.''

The sense is, that they should be in all cities, towns, and villages,
whether fortified or not, and in all houses of high and low, rich and
poor, in cottages and in palaces; there would be no place free from
them, nor no escaping out of their hands.

[Isaiah 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 7:20</span></span>

In the same day shall the Lord shave with a razor that is hired,....
Meaning the Assyrian monarch, whom he would use as an instrument in his
hand to spoil and cut off the people of the Jews; who is compared to a
"razor" for sharpness; and for the thorough work, and utter ruin and
destruction, he should be the means of; and called a "hired" one, either
in reference to the present Ahaz sent to the king of Assyria, by which
he prevailed upon him to come and help him against the kings of Syria
and Israel, [Kg2 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007) or to a reward
given by the Lord to Nebuchadnezzar for the service in which he employed
him, see [Eze 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#018),

namely, by them beyond the river; not Nile, but Euphrates; even the
Assyrians, Chaldeans, and Babylonians, who lived on the other side that
river; which, with what follows, explains the simile of the razor:

by the king of Assyria; who ruled over those beyond the river:

the head, and the hair of the feet; and it shall also consume the beard;
signifying that as a razor cuts off the hair entirely where it is
applied, and leaves nothing behind, whether of the head, beard, or feet,
or privy parts, which are meant by the latter; so the king of Assyria
should carry all clean off captive out of the land of Judea; king,
princes, nobles, and common people; those of the highest, and of the
middling, and of the lowest class. The Targum is,

"in that time the Lord shall slay them as one is slain by a sharp sword,
by clubs, and by saws, by those beyond the river, and by the king of
Assyria; the king, and his army, and even his rulers, together shall he
destroy.''

So Jarchi explains it. Several of the Jewish writers, as Aben Ezra,
Abarbinel, and Kimchi (k), explain this of the Angel of the Lord
destroying Sennacherib's army, when before Jerusalem, in Hezekiah's
time; so the latter interprets it: "the head"; the heads of his armies:
"the hair of the feet"; the multitude of the people: "the beard"; the
king, who died, not in the camp, but was killed by his sons in his own
land; but this is not a prophecy of the destruction of the Assyrian
army, but of the Jewish people by it; and the whole denotes the mean and
low condition, the state of slavery and bondage, the Jews should be
brought into; of which the shaving of the hair is the symbol; it was
usual to shave the head and hair of such as were taken captive, as a
sign of reproach and servitude; see [Sa2
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#004) (l).

\(k\) Vid. T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 95. 2. and 96. 1. (l) Vid. Lydium de
re militari, l. 6. c. 6. p. 238, 239. & Noldium, No. 937.

[Isaiah 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 7:21</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day,.... Not in the days of Hezekiah,
after the destruction of Sennacherib's army, when there followed great
fruitfulness and plenty, [Isa 37:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#030) as
Kimchi and Jarchi interpret it; but in the days of Nebuchadnezzar, after
the destruction of Jerusalem, when some poor men were left in the land
to till it, [Jer 39:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#010) for of these,
and not of rich men, are the following words to be understood:

that a man shall nourish a young cow and two sheep; this seems to denote
both the scarcity of men and cattle, through the ravages of the army of
the Chaldeans; that there should not be large herds and flocks, only a
single cow, and two or three sheep; and yet men should be so few, and
families so thin, that these would be sufficient to support them
comfortably.

[Isaiah 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 7:22</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, for the abundance of milk that they shall
give,.... The cow and the two sheep, having large pastures, and few
cattle to feed upon them, those few would give such abundance of milk,
that the owner of them would make butter of it, and live upon it, having
no occasion to eat milk; and there being few or none to sell it to:

he shall eat butter; the milk producing a sufficient quantity of it for
himself and his family:

for butter and honey shall everyone eat that is left in the land:
signifying that though they would be few, they would enjoy a plenty of
such sort of food as their small flocks and herds would furnish them
with, and the bees produce. The Targum and Jarchi interpret this of the
righteous that shall be left in the land; but it is rather to be
extended unto all, righteous and unrighteous.

[Isaiah 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 7:23</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day; that every place shall be,....
Barren and unfruitful, for want of men to till the ground:

where there were a thousand vines at a thousand silverlings; which were
so good, as to be sold or let out for so many silver shekels (m); or the
fruit of them came to such a price; see [Sol
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#011),

it shall even be for briers and thorns; for want of persons to stock the
ground and cultivate it.

\(m\) Which was about two shillings and sixpence of our money.

[Isaiah 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 7:24</span></span>

With arrows and with bows shall men come thither,.... For fear of wild
beasts, serpents, and scorpions, as Jarchi; or in order to hunt them, as
others; or because of thieves and robbers, as Aben Ezra:

because all the land shall become briers and thorns; among which such
creatures, and such sort of men, would hide themselves.

[Isaiah 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 7:25</span></span>

And on all hills that shall be digged with the mattock,.... Which could
not be ploughed with a plough, but used to be dug with a mattock or
spade, and then sowed with corn:

there shall not come thither the fear of briers and thorns; where thorns
and briers used not to grow, and where there was no fear or danger of
being overrun with them, as the vineyards in the valleys and champaign
country; yet those places should become desolate in another way; or
rather, there shall be now no fences made of briers and thorns, which
deter cattle from entering into fields and vineyards thus fenced:

but it shall be for the setting forth of oxen, and for the treading of
lesser cattle; there being no fence of briers and thorns to keep them
out, cattle both of the greater and lesser sort should get into the
corn, and feed upon it, and make such places desolate, where much pains
were taken to cultivate them. The Targum is,

"it shall be for a place of lying down of oxen, and for a place of
dwelling of flocks of sheep;''

not for pastures, but for folds for them; though the Septuagint, Vulgate
Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions, suggest these places should become
pastures; and therefore some understand this as a prophecy of a change
in the country for the better, and of the great fruitfulness of it after
the Jews' return from the Babylonish captivity.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 8](isa008)

</div>
