<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa063)  [Next](isa065) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 64](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 64:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 64

The prayer of the church is continued in this chapter; in which she
prays for some visible display of the power and presence of God, as in
times past, [Isa 64:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001), and the rather,
since unheard of and unseen things were prepared by the Lord for his
people; and it was his usual way to meet those that were truly
religious, [Isa 64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004), and she
acknowledges her sins and transgressions; the imperfections of her own
righteousness, and remissness in duty, [Isa
64:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#005), pleads relation to God, and
implores his mercy, [Isa 64:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008),
represents the desolate condition of Judea, Zion, Jerusalem, and the
temple, and entreats divine commiseration, [Isa
64:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#010).

[Isaiah 64:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 64:1</span></span>

O that thou wouldst rend the heavens, that thou wouldst come down,....
Before, the church prayed that the Lord would look down from heaven and
behold, [Isa 63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015), now that he would
open the heavens, and descend from thence; not by change of place, for
he fills heaven and earth with his presence; but by some visible display
of his power, in destroying her enemies, and delivering her from them.
Some take this to be a prayer for the first coming of Christ from heaven
to earth, by his incarnation, in order to redeem and save his people;
and others that it is for his second coming to judgment, to take
vengeance on his adversaries, when his wrath will burn like fire; but
rather it is for his spiritual coming, to avenge his church and people
on antichrist, and the antichristian states. She had seen him, as a
triumphant conqueror, stained with the blood of his enemies; and now she
prays for the accomplishment of what she had seen in vision and
prophecy:

that the mountains might flow down at thy presence; kings and princes of
the earth, and kingdoms and states governed by them, compared to
mountains for their seeming firmness and stability; yet these will melt
like wax, and flow like water, tremble and disappear at the presence of
the King of kings, when he comes forth in his great wrath against them;
as it is explained in the next verse,

that the nations may tremble at thy presence; see [Rev
16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#020). Here ends the sixty third
chapter in the Targum.

[Isaiah 64:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 64:2</span></span>

As when the melting fire burneth,.... Or, "the fire of melting" (k); a
strong vehement fire, as Kimchi, such as is used under a furnace for
melting metals; though De Dieu thinks a slow gentle fire is intended,
such as is sufficient to keep the liquor boiling; which he concludes
from the use of the word in the Arabic language, which, according to an
Arabic lexicographer (l) he quotes, so signifies; and to the same
purpose Hottinger (m), by the help of the Arabic language, interprets
the word of a small low noise, the hissing of a boiling pot; though, as
Vitringa observes, could it be granted, which can not, that a slow fire
raises great bubbles in water, such as when it boils; yet the fire, with
which God consumes his enemies, in a figurative sense, is represented as
most vehement and noisy. It seems much better, with R. Jonah, quoted by
Kimchi, to understand it of "dry stubble", which makes a great blaze and
noise, and causes water to boil and rise up in bubbles; and with this
agree some other versions, which render it by "bavins" (n), dry sticks
and branches of trees; which being kindled,

the fire causeth the waters to boil; as the fire, under the pot, causes
the waters to boil in it; the church here prays that the wrath of God
might break forth upon his and her enemies, like fire that melts metals,
and boils water. The figures used seem to denote the fierceness and
vehemency of it. The Targum is,

"as when thou sendedst thine anger as fire in the days of Elijah, the
sea was melted, the fire licked up the water;''

as if the allusion was to the affair in [Kg1
18:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#038), but rather the allusion is, as
Kimchi and others think, to the fire that burnt on Mount Sinai, when the
Lord descended on it, and the cloud which flowed with water, as the
above writer supposes, and which both together caused the smoke:

to make thy name known to thine adversaries; his terrible name, in the
destruction of them; his power and his glory:

that the nations may tremble at thy presence; as Sinai trembled when the
Lord was on it; and as the antichristian states will when Christ
appears, and the vials of his wrath will be poured out; and the Lord's
people will be delivered, and the Jews particularly converted.

\(k\) "ignis liquefactionum", Calvin, Vatablus; "igne liquationum",
Cocceius. (l) Eliduri in Lexico Arabico tradit "significare quemvis
lenem et submissum strepitum", De Dieu. (m) "Quemadmodum accenso igne
fit lenis submissusque strepitus, sibilus et stridor ferventis ollae, et
ignis excitat bullas", Hottinger. Smegma Orientale, I. 1. c. 7. p. 146.
(n) "Quemadmodum conflagrante igne cremia", Junius & Tremellius; "nam
quum accendit ignis cremia", Piscator; "sicut ardente igne ex
ramalibus", Grotius; "ut ignis cremia consumens strepero motu exsilit",
Vitringa.

[Isaiah 64:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 64:3</span></span>

When thou didst terrible things, which we looked not for, thou camest
down,.... Referring to the wonderful things God did in Egypt, at the Red
sea, and in the wilderness, and particularly at Mount Sinai, things that
were unexpected, and not looked for; then the Lord came down, and made
visible displays of his power and presence, especially on Mount Sinai;
see [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018),

the mountains flowed down at thy presence; not Sinai only, but others
also; Kimchi says Seir and Paran; [Jdg
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#004).

[Isaiah 64:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 64:4</span></span>

For since the beginning of the world men have not heard, nor perceived
by the ear,.... Not only the things unexpected, undesired, and
undeserved, had been done for the Lord's people of old; but there were
other things, unheard of and unseen, which God, in his secret counsels,
had prepared for them; and for which reason his appearance in his
providential dispensations was the more to be desired and entreated. The
Apostle Paul has cited this passage in [Co1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#009) and applied it to Gospel times,
and to evangelical truths, which are not discoverable by the light of
nature; had there not been a revelation from God, the ears of men had
never heard them, nor the eyes of men ever seen them:

neither hath the eye seen, O God, besides thee; and though there is a
revelation made, yet, unless God gives men eyes to see, and ears to
hear, divine truths will remain unknown to them; and those who have
knowledge of them, it is but imperfect; perfect knowledge of them is
reserved to another state. These are mysteries and, though revealed,
remain so; the modes of them being unknown, or the manner how they are
is inscrutable; such as the mode of each Person's subsisting in the
Trinity; and how the two natures, human and divine, are united in the
person of Christ. Moreover, under the Old Testament dispensation, these
things were not so clearly revealed as now; they were the fellowship of
the mystery hid in God, the treasure of Gospel truths hid in the field
of the Scriptures; they were wrapped up in the dark figures and shadows
of the ceremonial law, and expressed in obscure prophecies; they were
kept secret since the beginning of the world, from ages and generations
past, and, not so made known, as now, to the holy apostles and prophets;
a more full and clear knowledge of them was reserved to Gospel times.
This may also include the blessings of grace, more peculiarly prepared
and provided for the church of Christ under the Gospel dispensation,
especially in the latter part of it, as the promise of the Spirit; more
spiritual light and knowledge; peace in abundance, and such as passeth
all understanding; and particularly what will be enjoyed in the personal
reign of Christ, described in so pompous a manner, [Rev
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001) and it may be applied to the
glories of the future state, which are such as the eye of man has never
seen, nor his ear heard; and, as the apostle adds, have not entered into
the heart of man to conceive of; and, as Jarchi paraphrases the words
here,

"the eye of any prophet hath not seen what God will do for him that
waits for him, except thine eyes, thou, O God;''

having cited a passage of their Rabbins out of the Talmud (o), which
interprets the words of the world to come,

"all the prophets say, they all of them prophesied only of the days of
the Messiah; but as to the world to come, eye hath not seen, &c.''

Some read the words, "neither has the eye seen God besides thee who will
do for him that waiteth for him" (p); that is, none besides thee, O
Christ, who lay in the bosom of the Father, and was privy to all, [Joh
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018), what

he hath prepared for him that waiteth for him; the apostle quotes it,
"for them that love him"; which describes the same persons; for those
that wait for the Lord love him, and those that love him will wait for
him; as Old Testament saints did for the first coming of Christ, and as
New Testament saints now wait on him, in the ministry of his word and
ordinances, for his spiritual presence, and also are waiting for his
second coming, and for the ultimate glory; and for such persons unseen
and unheard of things are prepared in the counsels and purposes of God,
and in the covenant of his grace; Christ, and all things with him; the
Gospel, and the truths of it, ordained before the world was; and all the
blessings of grace and glory. The Targum is,

"and since the world was, ear hath not heard the voice of mighty deeds,
nor hearkened to the speech of trembling; nor hath eye seen, what thy
people saw, the Shechinah of the glory of the Lord, for there is none
besides thee, what thou wilt do to thy people, the righteous, who were
of old, who wait for thy salvation.''

\(o\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 63. 1. & Sanhedrin, fol. 99. 1. (p) "nono
oculus vidit Deum praeter te, faciat expectanti ipsum", Montanus; "qui
faciat sic expectanti se", Pagninus, Munster.

[Isaiah 64:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 64:5</span></span>

Thou meetest him that rejoiceth,.... Not in a carnal way, nor in a
sinful manner, nor in a hypocritical one, or in vain boastings, all such
rejoicing is evil: but in the Lord, in the person of Christ; in the
greatness, glory, and fullness of his person; at the promise, and in the
view, of his coming in the flesh, as Abraham did; in the grace of God
displayed in him, and in hope of the glory of God by him; such a frame
of spirit is agreeable to the Lord:

and worketh righteousness; a truly gracious soul is not idle, but works;
not in his own strength, nor for life, or anything but what is just and
right; no man indeed can work out a perfect righteousness, nor should
men attempt to work out one for justification before God; but should lay
hold by faith on the righteousness of Christ, which is the evangelical
and best way of working righteousness; and such do works of
righteousness in faith, which is doing them in the best manner, and the
course of life of such is righteous; and these are regarded by the Lord,
especially such who rejoice to work righteousness, or do it, in a
cheerful joyful manner, which perhaps is the sense of the words: now
such the Lord "meeteth", or has been used to meet, in former ages, in
all generations, even in a way of love, grace, and mercy; and prevents
them with the blessings of his goodness; indulges them with communion
with himself through his Son, typified by the mercyseat; and at the
throne of his grace, and in his house and ordinances. The Jewish
commentators understand this phrase in a different manner. R. Jonah and
Jarchi interpret it of God's meeting the righteous, and removing them
out of the world by death, according to [Kg1
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#025) and Aben Ezra of his receiving
their prayers and intercessions for others, according to [Isa
47:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#003). Kimchi joins both senses
together,

"the righteous, who were doing thy commandments with joy, are not now in
the world, to stand in the gap for us.''

Those that remember thee in thy ways; they remember there is a God, and
worship him; the perfections of his nature, and adore them; his works of
providence, and admire them; and his blessings of grace and goodness,
and are thankful for them: they remember him "in his ways"; in the ways
of his providence, which are unsearchable, and past finding out; in the
ways of his grace and mercy, so the Targum; or "for" or "because" (q) of
these, and praise his name; and in the ways of his commandments, which
they observe.

Behold, thou art wroth, and we have sinned; or because we have sinned
(r); as for us, we have sinned, and justly incurred the displeasure of
God; and it is no wonder he hides his face from us, and does not meet
us, as he has been used to meet his people formerly. The people of God
sin, and this is taken notice of by him, and resented; and which is the
cause of all their afflictions, in which the Lord appears to be "wroth"
with them; not that he is properly so, for afflictions to them are not
in vindictive wrath; but he seems to be wroth with them, he carries it
towards them as if he was, when he chastises them, and hides his face
from them. In those is continuance, and we shall be saved: or "in these
we have been of old" (s); that is, in these sins; we are old sinners,
sinners in Adam, sinners from our birth, and so in these sins is
continuance: saints indeed do not continue in a course of sin, yet sin
continues in them, and they are continually sinning in thought, word, or
deed; yet nevertheless there is salvation from all their sins in Christ,
in whom they shall be saved: or there is continuance in works of
righteousness, and in the cheerful performance of them; the principle of
well doing continues in believers, which is the grace of God, and
spiritual strength, by which they do well; and through the grace of
Christ they persevere in faith and holiness, and, persevering herein,
shall be saved. Or rather there is continuance in the ways of God, in
the ways of his grace and mercy; in them there is constancy, perpetuity,
and eternity, as the word signifies; his love is an everlasting love;
his mercy is from everlasting to everlasting, and endures for ever; he
is unchangeable in his grace and promises, and hence his people shall
not be consumed in their sins by his wrath, but shall be everlastingly
saved; which is entirely owing to his permanent and immutable grace, and
not to their works of righteousness, as appears by what follows.

\(q\) "propter vias tuas", Piscator. (r) "quia vel nam peccavimus",
Vatablus, Grotius, Forerius, Gataker. So some in Munster, "vau", is
often causal. (s) "in his peccatis consenuimus", Tigurine version some
in Munster; "in ipsis peccatis semper fuimus", Forerius.

[Isaiah 64:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 64:6</span></span>

But we are all as an unclean thing,.... Or "we have been" (t); so all
men are in a state of nature: man was made pure and holy, but by sinning
became impure; and this impurity is propagated by natural generation,
and belongs to all, none are free from it; and there is no cleansing
from it but by the grace of God and blood of Christ: all are not
sensible of it; some are, as the church here was, and owns it, and the
universality of it, and compares herself and members to an "unclean
thing", on account of it; so men, defiled with sin, are compared to
unclean creatures, dogs, and swine, and to unclean persons; to such as
are covered with loathsome diseases, and particularly to leprous
persons, and who may be chiefly intended here; they being defiled and
defiling, loathsome and abominable, their disease spreading and
continuing, and incurable by physicians; hence they were separated from
the company of men; and the words may be rendered, "as an unclean
person" (u), as such were by the law: or we are, in our own sense and
apprehension of things; and this may respect not only the impurity of
nature, but a general corruption in doctrine and manners among the
professors of religion; such as was in the Jewish church about the time
of Christ's coming.

And all our righteousnesses are as filthy rags; which is to be
understood not of the righteousness of some persons in the church, which
lay in outward rites, ceremonies, and sacrifices, which were no
righteousness before God, and could not take away sin; and were indeed
on many accounts, as they were performed, loathsome and abominable; see
[Isa 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#011), or of others that lay in
outward legal duties and works of the law, which were not done from
right principles, as well as not perfect; and so, because of the
impurity, imperfection, pride, and vanity, that appeared in them, were
abominable to the Lord: but of the righteousnesses of the church
herself; not of the righteousness of Christ, which was made hers by
imputation; for this is not rags, but a robe, the best robe, and wedding
garment; much less filthy, but pure and spotless, beautiful and
glorious, as well as a proper covering; but then, though this is the
church's, and all true believers', by gift, by imputation and
application, yet its is properly Christ's and is in him, and is opposed
to their own righteousness; which is what is intended here, even the
best of it; such works of righteousness as are done by them in the best
manner; they are "rags", not whole, but imperfect, not fit to appear in
before God, and by which they cannot be justified in his sight; they are
"filthy" ones, being attended with imperfection and sin; and these
conversation garments need continual washing in the blood of Jesus; this
is the language not of a natural man, or of a Pharisee, but of a
sensible sinner, a truly gracious soul. The words may be rendered, "as a
menstruous cloth" (w), as some; or "as a garment of spoil or prey" (x),
as Aben Ezra, rolled in blood, either in war, or by a beast of prey; or
as a foul plaster or cloth taken off a sore, with purulent matter on it
(y), as others; or any other impure and nauseous thing. Hottinger (z)
thinks the word has some affinity with the Arabic which signifies
"running water", such as the water of a fountain or well; so that the
sense may be, that the church's righteousness was like a cloth, so
polluted and spotted that it could not be washed out clean but with
clear and running water; and, in every sense in which it may be taken,
it serves to set forth the impurity and imperfection of the best
righteousness of men, and to show that their works are not the cause of
salvation, the church had an assurance of in the preceding verse:

and we all do fade as a leaf; or "fall" (a) as one; as leaves in autumn:
this is to be understood of a great part, and perhaps of the greater
part, of the visible members of the church; not of true believers and
real members, for these are rooted in the love of God, and in Christ,
and have the root of the matter in them, the true grace of God; and
therefore, though they meet with many blustering storms, yet do not cast
their leaf of profession; indeed there may be, as there often are,
decays and declensions in them; but rather this is to be interpreted of
carnal professors, with which, at this time, the church abounded, who
had no true grace in them; and so dropped their profession, and became
like trees whose fruit withered, were without fruit; or like trees, in
the fall of the year, which are without fruit, and shed their leaves,
[Jde 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#012),

and our iniquities, like the wind, have taken us away; as a leaf falling
from the tree is carried away with the wind, which it is not able to
withstand; so formal and carnal professors are carried away, through
their sins, with the wind of persecution, and apostatize: or rather for
their sins the Jews were carried captive, as before, to Babylon; so now
by the Romans into various countries, where they are dispersed at this
day; to which this passage may have some respect. "Iniquities" are put
for the punishment of them; so the Targum,

"and, because of our sins, as the wind we are taken away.''

\(t\) "fuimus", V. L. Montanus. (u) "ut immundus", V. L. Montanus,
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "tanquam impuruss", Cocceius, Vitringa,
(w) "ut vestimentum menstruatum, sive menstruatae", Drusius; a
"removit", so V. L. Syr. and Ar. "ut vestis remotionum", Cocceius. (x)
"Vestes praedae", Forerius; a "praeda", Gen. xlix. 27. (y) Pittacium,
Grotius. So Kimchi, whose interpretation and sense of the word is
preferred by Gussetius, Ebr. Comment. p. 581. (z) Smegma Orientale, I.
1. c. 7. p. 181. (a) "et decidimus", V. L. So Ben Melech interprets it
of falling.

[Isaiah 64:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 64:7</span></span>

And there is none that calleth upon thy name,.... Upon the Lord himself,
who is gracious and merciful, omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent,
and all sufficient, a God hearing and answering prayer, and the Father
of his people; all which should engage to call upon him: or, "there is
none that prays in thy name", as the Targum; none that prays to God in
the name of his Son, the only Mediator between God and men; he is the
way of access to the Father; his name is to be used and made mention of
in prayer; acceptance is only through him, and all favours are conveyed
by him; see [Joh 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#013), not that there
were absolutely none at all that prayed to God, and called upon or in
his name, but comparatively they were very few; for that there were some
it is certain, since this very complaint is made in a prayer; but the
number of such was small, especially that prayed in faith, in sincerity,
with fervency and importunity; and, when this is the case, it is an
argument and evidence of great declension:

that stirreth up himself to take hold of thee; to exercise faith on God,
as their covenant God; to lay hold on the covenant itself, the blessings
and promises of it, and plead them with God: or to pray unto him, which
is a wrestling with him, when faith lays hold upon God, and will not let
him go without the blessing; and is an entreaty of him not to depart
when he seems to be about it; or a detaining of him, as the disciples
detained Christ, when he seemed as if he would go from them; and is also
an importunate desire that he would return when he is departed; and an
earnest request not to strike when his hand is lifted up: faith in
prayer does, as it were, take hold of the hands of God, and will not
suffer him to strike his children; just as a friend lays hold on a
father's hand when he is about to give his child a blow with it for his
correction; and such is the amazing condescension of God, that he
suffers himself to be held after this manner; see [Gen
32:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#026), now, to "stir up" a man's self
to this is to make diligent use of the means in seeking the Lord;
particularly a frequent use of the gift of prayer, and a stirring of
that up; a calling upon a man's soul, and all within him, to engage
therein; to which are opposed slothfulness, &c. cold, lukewarm,
negligent performance of duty, which is here complained of; there were
none, or at least but few, that stirred up or "aroused" (b) themselves.
God's professing people are sometimes asleep; and though it is high time
to awake out of sleep, yet no one arouses himself or others.

For thou hast hid thy face from us: or removed the face of thy
Shechinah, or divine Majesty from us, as the Targum; being provoked by
such a conduct towards him, as before expressed: for it may be rendered,
"therefore thou hast hid"; &c.; or "though", or "when" (c), this was the
case, yet no man sought his face and favour, or entreated he would
return again:

and hast consumed us because of our iniquities; by the sword, famine,
pestilence, and captivity.

\(b\) "seipsum exsuscitat", Forerius; "excitans se", Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius. So the Targum, "that awakes". (c) "quamvis", Gataker; "cum",
Junius & Tremellius; "quando", Forerius.

[Isaiah 64:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 64:8</span></span>

But now, O Lord, thou art our father,.... Notwithstanding all that we
have done against thee, and thou hast done to us, the relation of a
father continues; thou art our Father by creation and adoption; as he
was in a particular manner to the Jews, to whom belonged the adoption;
and therefore this relation is pleaded, that mercy might be shown them;
and so the Targum,

"and thou, Lord, thy mercies towards us "are" many (or let them be many)
as a father towards "his" children.''

We are the clay, and thou our potter: respecting their original
formation out of the dust of the earth; and so expressing humility in
themselves, and yet ascribing greatness to God, who had curiously formed
them, as the potter out of the clay forms vessels for various uses: it
may respect their formation as a body politic and ecclesiastic, which
arose from small beginnings, under the power and providence of God; see
[Deu 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006),

and we all are the work of thy hand; and therefore regard us, and
destroy us not; as men do not usually destroy their own works: these
relations to God, and circumstances in which they were as creatures, and
as a body civil and ecclesiastic, are used as arguments for mercy and
favour.

[Isaiah 64:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 64:9</span></span>

Be not wroth very sore, O Lord,.... They knew not how to deprecate the
displeasure of God entirely; having sinned so greatly against him, they
were sensible they deserved his wrath; but entreat it might not be hot
and very vehement, and carried to the highest pitch, which would be
intolerable:

neither remember iniquity for ever; to afflict and punish for it, but
forgive it, for not to remember sin is to forgive it; and not inflict
the deserved punishment of it, but take off and remove the effects of
divine displeasure, which as yet continued, and had a long time, as this
petition suggests; and therefore suits better with the present long
captivity of the Jews than their seventy years' captivity in Babylon.

Behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy people; look upon all our
troubles and distresses, and upon us under them, with an eye of pity and
compassion; and consider that we are thy people, not only by creation,
but by covenant and profession; even everyone of us; or we are all the
people thou hast, the Jews looking upon themselves to be the special and
peculiar people of God, and the Gentiles as having no claim to such a
relation; this is the pure spirit of Judaism. The Targum is,

"lo, it is manifest before thee that we are all of us thy people.''

[Isaiah 64:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 64:10</span></span>

Thy holy cities are a wilderness,.... Meaning either Zion, the city of
David, and Jerusalem; the one called the upper, the other the lower
city; now uninhabited, and a mere wilderness: or else the other cities
of Judea, in which were formerly synagogues for religious service, and
in which dwelt many godly families where the worship of God was kept up;
but now a desert, at least quite devoid of true religion and godliness.

Zion is a wilderness, Jerusalem a desolation; which are either
explanative of the holy cities in the preceding clauses, or are
mentioned as distinct from them; the account proceeding from the lesser
to the metropolitan cities, which fared no better than they did, but
equally lay desolate; and which fulfilled the prophecy in [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012) and was the case of those cities,
at the destruction of them by Titus; and to this day are in a ruinous
condition in the hands of the Turks.

[Isaiah 64:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 64:11</span></span>

Our holy and our beautiful house,.... Meaning the temple, the house of
God, as Aben Ezra: called "holy", because dedicated to holy uses; where
the holy sacrifices were offered up, the holy service of God performed;
and where the holy God granted his presence, and where were the symbols
of it: and "beautiful", in its building, as the first temple was that
was built by Solomon; but here the second temple is meant, built by
Zerubbabel, which being repaired and beautified by Herod, was a very
beautiful building; and the Jews say (d), that

"he who has not seen the building of Herod has never seen a beautiful
building;''

or it may be rendered, "the house of our holiness, and of our glory"
(e); where their holy services were performed, and which was the glory
of their nation, and on which they gloried and boasted:

where our fathers praised thee: with psalms and songs; the singers in
the temple, as Aben Ezra; and the priests and all the people also, who,
by their various services, as well as songs, gave praise and glory to
God in this place; they do not mention their own services and praises,
which they had been very negligent of, or not sincerely performed; but
their fathers, which had been acceptable to the Lord, and therefore
would bear mentioning when theirs would not: now this place, in which
the glory of God and the interest of his people were concerned,

is burnt up with fire; this is true, as Kimchi observes, both of the
first and second temple; the first was burnt with fire by Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon, [Jer 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013), and the
second by the Romans under Titus the man emperor, as Josephus (f)
relates:

and all our pleasant things are laid waste; their pleasant land, and
pleasant cities, and especially Jerusalem, the palaces of their princes
and nobles, and all the riches and grandeur of them, the temple, and all
the rich vessels and utensils in it.

\(d\) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 4. 1. & Succa, fol. 51. 2. (e) "domus
sanctitatis nostae, et gloriae nostrae", Calvin, Junius & Tremellius,
Forerius. (f) De Bello Judaeorum, l. 6. c. 4. sect. 2.

[Isaiah 64:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa064.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 64:12</span></span>

Wilt thou refrain thyself for these things, O Lord?.... From delivering
us out of our troubles and miseries, and taking vengeance on our
enemies, and showing thy zeal for thine own glory; or, as Kimchi
paraphrases it,

"how canst thou contain thyself for these things, and not have mercy?''

how canst thou bear to see Judea, and all its cities, a wilderness;
Jerusalem, and the temple of it, in ruins?

wilt thou hold thy peace? or, "be silent"; and not plead thine own
cause, and the cause of thy people?

and afflict us very sore? exceedingly, even to extremity; or for ever,
as the Targum, thinking it long, as well as heavy. Jerom observes, that
the Jews say these words in their synagogues every day; which show that
they look upon this prophecy to respect their present case.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 65](isa065)

</div>
