<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa020)  [Next](isa022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 21:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 21

This chapter contains prophecies against Babylon, Idumea, and Arabia.
The prophecy against Babylon is called "the burden of the desert of the
sea"; whose enemies are described by the fierce manner of their coming,
and by the land from whence they came, [Isa
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001) which vision being declared to
the prophet, is called a grievous one; what made it so was treachery
among themselves; and the Medes and Persians are invited to besiege
them, [Isa 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002) their terror and
distress upon it are represented by the pains of a woman in travail,
whom the prophet personates, [Isa 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003)
and by the methods they took to defend themselves, to which they were
alarmed, when in the greatest security and jollity, [Isa
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005) all which is illustrated by the
vision of the watchman, who saw the Medes and Persians on the march,
signified by a chariot and a couple of horsemen, who declares the fall
of Babylon, and the destruction of its gods, [Isa
21:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006) which would issue in the good and
comfort of the church and people of God, [Isa
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010) then follows the prophecy
against Idumea, which consists of a question put to the watchman, and
his answer to it; to which an exhortation is added, [Isa
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011) and the chapter concludes with
another prophecy against Arabia: the calamities threatened are lodging
in a forest, thirst, famine, and fleeing from the sword [Isa
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013), and the time is fixed when all
this should be, by which their glory would fail, and the number of their
archers and mighty men be lessened; for the confirmation of which the
divine testimony is annexed, [Isa
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#016).

[Isaiah 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 21:1</span></span>

The burden of the desert of the sea,.... That this is a prophecy of the
destruction of Babylon is clear from the express mention both of the
Medes and Persians, by whom it should be, and of Babylon itself, and its
fall, [Isa 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002) which, though
prophesied of before, is here repeated, partly for the certainty of it,
and partly for the comfort of the people of the Jews, who would be
captives in it, and so break off and prevent their confidence in a
nation that would be ruined; and perhaps this prophecy might be
delivered out about the time or on account of Merodach king of Babylon
sending letters and a present to Hezekiah, who showed to his messengers
all his treasures. Babylon is here called "the desert of the sea", not
because it was a desert land, for it was a very fruitful one; or because
it would be laid desolate, and become as a wilderness; but either
because there was one between that and the countries of Media and
Persia, as Kimchi, from whence its destroyers would come; or rather,
because it was, as the word may be rendered, a "plain", for so the land
of Chaldea was, and the city of Babylon particularly was built in a
plain, [Gen 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#002) and because this
country abounded with pools and lakes, which with the Hebrews are called
seas; and especially since the city of Babylon was situated by the river
Euphrates, which ran about it, and through it and which therefore is
said to dwell upon many waters, [Jer
51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013) hence it has this name of the
desert of the sea; besides, Abydenus (l), from Megasthenes, informs us,
that all the places about Babylon were from the beginning water, and
were called a sea; and it should be observed that mystical Babylon is
represented by a woman in a desert, sitting on many waters, which are
interpreted of a multitude of people and nations, [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001) and some here by "sea" understand
the multitude of its riches, power, and people. The Targum is,

"the burden of the armies, which come from the wilderness, as the waters
of the sea;''

understanding it not of Babylon, but of its enemies and invaders, as
follows:

as whirlwinds in the south pass through; and nothing can hinder them,
such is their force and power; they bear all before them, come suddenly,
blow strongly, and there is no resisting them; see [Zac
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#014),

so it cometh from the desert; or "he", that is, Cyrus; or "it", the army
under him, would come with like irresistible force and power as the
southern whirlwinds do, which come from a desert country; at least that
part of it in which their soldiers were trained up, and which in their
march to Babylon must come through the desert, that lay, as before
observed, between that and their country, and through which Cyrus did
pass (m):

from a terrible land; a land of serpents and scorpions, as Jarchi; or a
land afar off, as Kimchi and Ben Melech; whose power and usage, or
customs, were not known, and so dreaded, as the Medes and Persians were
by Nitocris queen of Babylon, who took care to preserve her people, and
prevent their falling into their hands. The Targum is,

"from a land in which terrible things are done.''

\(l\) Apud Euseb. Prepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 41. (m) Xenophon.
Cyropaedia, l. 5. c. 5, 6.

[Isaiah 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 21:2</span></span>

A grievous vision is declared unto me,.... The prophet; meaning the
vision of Babylon's destruction, which was "hard", as the word
signifies, and might seem harsh and cruel; not to him, nor to the Jews,
but to the Chaldeans:

the treacherous dealer dealeth treacherously, and the spoiler spoileth;
that is, according to Jarchi, one treacherous dealer deals treacherously
with another, and one spoiler spoils another; the Medes and Persians
deal treacherously with and spoil the Babylonians, who had dealt
treacherously with and spoiled other nations: and to this sense some
read the words, "the treacherous dealer hath found a treacherous dealer,
and the spoiler one that spoileth" (n): some take it to be a
compellation of the Medes and Persians, calling upon them, under these
characters, to go up and besiege Babylon, as, "O treacherous dealer, O
spoiler" (o); though the words may be understood of the perfidy and
treachery of the Babylonians, of which they had been frequently guilty,
and which is given as a reason of their fall and ruin; or rather they
suggest the treacherous means by which they should be ruined, even by
some from among themselves; particularly, history (p) informs us, that
Gobrias and Gadates, two noblemen of the king of Babylon, being used ill
by him, revolted from him, and joined with Cyrus; and when the river
Euphrates was drained, went at the head of his army in two parties, and
guided them into the city, and took it; or rather Belshazzar king of
Babylon himself is meant, who acted, and continued to act, most
impiously and wickedly: and therefore,

go up, O Elam; or Elamites, as the Targum and Septuagint; see [Act
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009) these were Persians, so called
from Elam, a province in Persia; who are here called upon by the Lord of
armies, through the mouth of the prophet, to go up to war against
Babylon; and these are mentioned first, because Cyrus, who commanded the
whole army, was a Persian: or if Elam is taken for a province, which was
indeed subject to Babylon, of which Shushan was the capital city, [Dan
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#002) the governor of it, Abradates,
revolted from the Babylonians, and joined Cyrus, and fought with him
(q):

besiege, O Media; or, O ye Medes, join with the Persians in the siege of
Babylon; as they did:

all the sighing thereof have I made to cease; either of the army of the
Medes and Persians, who, by reason of long and tedious marches, frequent
battles, and hard sieges, groaned and sighed; but now it would be over
with them, when Babylon was taken; or of the Babylonians themselves, who
would have no mercy shown them, nor have any time for sighing, being cut
off suddenly, and in a moment; or rather of other people oppressed by
them, and particularly the Lord's people the Jews, who had been in
captivity for the space of seventy years, during which they had sighed
and groaned, because of the hardships they endured; but now sighing
would be at an end, and they should have deliverance, as they had, by
Cyrus the Persian. The sighing is not that with which they sighed, but
which they caused in others.

\(n\) "praevaricator prevaricatorem et vastator, vastatorem sub.
inveniet"; so some in Vatablus; also Gataker. (o) "O perfide, perfidus;
O vastator, vastator", De Dieu. (p) Xenophon. Cyropaedia, l. 4. c. 24.
l. 5. c. 11. & l. 7. c. 23. (q) Ib. l. 6. sect. 7, 8, 9, 26. & l. 7.
sect. 4, 8.

[Isaiah 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 21:3</span></span>

Therefore are my loins filled with pain,.... As a woman at the time of
childbirth, as the following words show: these words are spoken by the
prophet, not with respect to himself, as if he was pained at heart at
the prophecy and vision he had of the ruin of Babylon, since that was a
mortal enemy of his people; and besides, their sighing being made to
cease could never be a reason of distress in him, but of joy: these
words are spoken by him in the person of the Babylonians, and
particularly of Belshazzar their king:

pangs have taken hold upon me, as the pangs of a woman that travaileth;
which come suddenly and at once, are very sharp and strong, and
inevitable, which cannot be escaped; so the sudden destruction of the
wicked, and particularly of antichrist at the last day, and the terror
that shall attend it, are expressed by the same metaphor, [Th1
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002),

I was bowed down at the hearing of it; distorted and convulsed; not the
prophet at the hearing of the prophecy, but Belshazzar, whom he
personated, at hearing that Cyrus had entered the city, and was at the
gates of his palace:

I was dismayed at the seeing of it; the handwriting upon the wall, at
which his countenance changed, his thoughts were troubled, his loins
loosed, and his knees smote one against another, [Dan
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#006).

[Isaiah 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 21:4</span></span>

My heart panted,.... Fluttered about, and could hardly keep its place:
or, "my mind wandered" (r); like a person in distraction and confusion,
that knew not what to think say or do:

fearfulness affrighted me; the terror of Cyrus's army seized him, of its
irruption into the city, and of his being destroyed by it; the writing
on the wall threw him into a panic, and the news of the Medes and
Persians being entered the city increased it:

the night of my pleasure hath he turned into fear unto me; in which he
promised himself so much pleasure, at a feast he had made for his
princes, wives, and concubines; either in honour of his god, as some
think (s), being an annual one; or, as Josephus ben Gorion (t) says, on
account of the victory he had obtained over the Medes and Persians; and
so was quite secure, and never in the least thought of destruction being
at hand; but in the midst of all his revelling, mirth, and jollity, the
city was surprised and taken, and he slain, [Dan
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#001). So mystical Babylon, in the midst
of her prosperity, while she is saying that she sits a queen, and knows
no sorrow, her judgment and plagues shall come upon her, [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007).

\(r\) "erravit cor meum", Montanus; "errat animus meus", Junius &
Tremellius; "errat cor meum", Piscator. (s) Vid. Herodot. l. 1. c. 191.
Xenophon. l. 7. c. 23. (t) L. 1. c. 5. p. 24. Ed. Braithaupt.

[Isaiah 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 21:5</span></span>

Prepare the table,.... Set it, spread it, furnish it with all kind of
provisions, as at a feast; and such an one Belshazzar made, the night
the city was taken: these words are directed to him by his courtiers or
queen, as represented by the prophet, in order to remove his fears; see
[Dan 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#010),

watch in the watchtower; this is said to his servants, his soldiers, or
sentinels, that were placed on watchtowers to observe the motions of the
enemy, who were ordered on duty, and to be on guard, that he and his
nobles might feast the more securely; and all this being done, a table
furnished, and a guard set, he, his nobles, and all his guests, are
encouraged to "eat" and "drink" liberally and cheerfully, without any
fear of the Medes and Persians, who were now besieging the city; when,
at the same time, by the Lord it would be said,

arise, ye princes; not, ye nobles of Babylon, from your table, quit it,
and your feasting and mirth:

and anoint the shield; prepare your arms, see that they are in good
order, get them in readiness, and defend your king, yourselves, and your
city, as some; but the princes of the Medes and Persians, Cyrus and his
generals, are bid to take their arms, and enter the city while indulging
themselves at their feast: it was usual to anoint shields, and other
pieces of armour, partly that they might be smooth and slippery, as
Jarchi, that so the darts of the enemy might easily slide off; and
partly for the polishing and brightening of them, being of metal,
especially of brass; so the Targum,

"polish and make the arms bright;''

see [Sa2 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#021). Aben Ezra understands
the words as an exhortation to the princes, to arise and anoint Darius
king, in the room of Belshazzar slain; the word "shield" sometimes
signifying a king, for which he mentions [Psa
84:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa084.htm#009) so Ben Melech; but they are a
call of the prophet, or of the Lord, to the princes of the Medes and
Persians, to take the opportunity, while the Babylonians were feasting,
to fall upon them; and the words may be rendered thus (u),

"in or while preparing the table, watching in the watchtower, eating and
drinking, arise, ye princes, and anoint the shield;''

which was done by their servants, though they are called upon.

\(u\) "disponendo, mensam, speculando speculam, comedendo, bibendo,
surgite principes, ungite clypeum", Montanus; and to the same sense
Grotius.

[Isaiah 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 21:6</span></span>

For thus hath the Lord said unto me,.... This is a confirmation of the
above prophecy from the Lord himself, he showing to the prophet, in a
visionary way, the ruin of Babylon, and the means and instruments of it:

go, set a watchman; not Habakkuk, as Jarchi; nor Urias, as the
Septuagint; nor Jeremiah, as others; but himself, who, in a way of
vision, represented a watchman on the walls of Babylon; and which was no
way unsuitable to his character and office as a prophet:

let him declare what he seeth; what he sees coming at a distance, or at
hand, let him faithfully and publicly make it known: these are not the
words of the king of Babylon to one of his watchmen; but of the Lord of
hosts to his prophet.

[Isaiah 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 21:7</span></span>

And he saw a chariot with a couple of horsemen,.... The drivers of it,
or the riders in it; perhaps meaning Cyrus and Darius:

a chariot of asses, and a chariot of camels; by the former may be meant
the Persians, who very much used mules or asses; and the Medes by the
latter, who abounded in camels: the words are in the singular number,
and may be rendered, "a rider of an ass, and a rider of a camel" (w);
and so may describe the couple of riders along with the chariot, which
may signify the whole army of the Medes and Persians, chariots being
much used in war; and the rider of the ass or mule may design Cyrus, who
was called a mule, because of his mixed descent, being a Persian by his
father, and a Mede by his mother's side; so the oracle of Apollo told
the Babylonians, that their city should stand, until a mule was king of
the Medes; and the rider of the camel may point at Darius:

and he hearkened diligently with much heed; the watchman that was set to
watch used the utmost attention to what he saw, and listened diligently
to the noise of this chariot and horsemen, as they came nearer.

\(w\) , , Sept.; "ascensorem asini, et ascensorem cameli", V. L. "unum
equitantium in asinis, alterum equitantium in camelis", Piscator.

[Isaiah 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 21:8</span></span>

And he cried, a lion,.... That is, the watchman cried, a lion, or that
he saw a lion; not Uriah the priest, as the Septuagint; nor Habakkuk, as
some Jewish writers; but Cyrus, at the head of the Persian and Median
armies, compared to a lion for his fierceness, courage, and strength;
see [Ti2 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017) a type of Christ, the
Lion of the tribe of Judah, by whom antichrist, or mystical Babylon,
will be destroyed, [Rev 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005). The
Targum is,

"the prophet said, the voice of armies, coming with coats of mail, as a
lion.''

Aben Ezra interprets it, the watchman cried as a lion, with a great
voice; upon sight of the chariots and horsemen, he lifted up his voice,
and roared like a lion, to express the terror he was in, and the
greatness of the calamity that was coming upon the city.

I stand continually upon the watchtower in the daytime: so that nothing
could escape his notice:

and I am set in my ward whole nights: which expresses his diligence,
vigilance, and constancy, in the discharge of his duty; and therefore
what he said he saw might be depended on.

[Isaiah 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 21:9</span></span>

And, behold, here cometh a chariot of men,.... Or "of a man" (x); a
chariot with a man in it, Cyrus or Darius:

with a couple of horsemen; the army of the Medes and Persians, with
their two leaders or generals, as before; only now seen nearer the city,
just entering into it; for so the word may be rendered, "goeth", or "is
gone in a chariot", &c.:

and he answered, and said; either the watchman, upon seeing the chariot
and horsemen go into the city; or one of the horsemen that went in; so
the Syriac and Arabic versions; or rather the prophet, and the Lord by
him:

Babylon is fallen, is fallen: which is repeated to show the certainty of
it. The same words are used of the fall of mystical Babylon, [Rev
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008). The Targum is,

"it is fallen, and also it shall be, that Babylon shall fall;''

that is, a second time, and hereafter: and so Jarchi and Kimchi
interpret it of two falls, one by the Medes and Persians, and the other
by the hand of heaven, or God himself: literal Babylon fell by the
former; mystical Babylon will fall by the latter, even by the breath of
Christ's mouth, and the brightness of his coming:

and all the graven images of her gods he hath broken unto the ground;
either Cyrus or Darius, who might do this, not from any detestation of
them, but for the sake of the gold, and silver, and riches, that were
about them; or rather the Lord by them, and so put an end to idolatry;
as will be, when mystical Babylon is destroyed.

\(x\) "currus viri", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Isaiah 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 21:10</span></span>

O my threshing, and the corn of my floor,.... Which may be understood
either of the Babylonians, now threshed or punished by the Lord, and
whom he had made use of as instruments for the punishment of others; or
rather of the people of the Jews, whom the prophet calls "his", as being
his countrymen, to whom he was affected, and with whom he sympathized;
and besides, he speaks in the name of the Lord; or it is the Lord that
speaks by him, calling the church of the Jews his floor, and the people
his corn, which were dear and valuable to him, as choice grain, wheat,
and other things; and therefore, though he threshed or afflicted them,
it was for their good, to purge and cleanse them, and separate the chaff
from them; and indeed it was on their account, and for their good, that
all this was to be done to Babylon, before predicted; where they were,
as corn under the threshing instrument, greatly oppressed and afflicted,
but now should be delivered; for the confirmation of which it is added:

that which I have heard of the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel, have I
declared unto you; the preceding prophecy was not a dream of his, but a
vision from the Lord of hosts; it was not devised by him, but told him
by the Lord, and that for the good and comfort of the people of Israel,
whose covenant God he was; and the prophet acted a faithful part, in
delivering it just as he received it, which might be depended on.

[Isaiah 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 21:11</span></span>

The burden of Dumah,.... Whether this prophecy concerns the Edomites or
Idumeans, or whether the Arabians, particularly the Dumean Arabians, is
a question, since Dumah was a son of Ishmael, [Gen
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#014) and there was a place in Arabia
called Dumatha (y); and Aben Ezra and Kimchi interpret it here of Dumah
the son of Ishmael; but inasmuch as mention is made of Seir, a mountain,
which belonged to the Edomites, [Gen
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008) and a distinct prophecy
afterwards follows concerning Arabia, it is more generally thought that
Dumah signifies Edom or Idumea; the Septuagint version renders it, the
vision of Idumea; and the Arabic version calls it, a prophecy concerning
Edom and Seir; and Jarchi, by Dumah, understands Edom; and Kimchi
himself observes, that in a book of R. Meir's, it was found written,

"the burden of Duma, the burden of Edom.''

Jerom says, Duma is not the whole province of Idumea, but a certain
country in it, that lay to the south, twenty miles distant from a city
of Palestine, in his days called Eleutheropolis; and further observes,
that some of the Hebrews read "Roma" for "Duma", and suppose that the
Roman empire is designed; and certain it is, that nothing is more common
with them than to call the Roman empire, and Rome itself, by the name of
Edom, and the Romans, or Christians, Edomites (z):

he calleth to me out of Seir; a mountain inhabited by the Edomites, the
posterity of Esau, so called from Seir the Horite, [Gen
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008). The Targum understands this of
God calling from heaven to the prophet to prophesy; and Jarchi of an
angel, or a prophet out of Seir, calling to God, who he supposes is
meant by the watchman; but it seems best to interpret it of an Edomite,
or an inhabitant of Mount Seir, calling to the watchman, and saying, as
follows:

watchman, what of the night? watchman, what of the night? what time of
night is it? what o'clock is it? how much of the night is gone, and what
remains to come? it is the business of watchmen to give or tell the time
of night: or, "what from the night?" (a) what has happened since it was
night? hast thou observed nothing? is not the enemy nigh, or danger at
hand? or, "what" sayest thou "concerning the night?" the night of
darkness, affliction, and distress, in which we are, when will it be
over? the question is repeated, as is usual with persons in a panic, and
fearing the watchman should not hear them the first time; or it may
denote one coming after another in a fright, asking the same question.
Some, by the watchman, understand God himself, as Jarchi and Abarbinel,
who is Israel's keeper, [Psa 121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004)
where the same word is used as here; and well agrees with God, who is
the keeper and preserver of all men in a way of providence; and of his
own people in a way of grace; and who, as he watches over the evil of
sin, to bring the evil of affliction or punishment for it; so he watches
over his, to do good unto them; and, as the times and seasons are in his
power only, and are known by him, it is most proper to apply unto him.
Others think Christ is meant, as Cocceius; and so the Jews say (b), this
is Metatron the keeper of Israel, which with them is one of the names of
the Messiah; and to whom this character of a watchman agrees, as he is
the shepherd of his flock, and the keeper of his people; and who, as the
omniscient God, knows all things that are, and shall be, and which will
quickly come to pass: though it may be best of all to understand it of a
prophet or prophets, who were called watchmen under the Old Testament,
[Isa 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#006) as ministers of the word are
under the New, in allusion to shepherds and watchmen of cities; and
whose business it is, as to show sinners the danger of their ways, and
to arouse sleepy saints, so to give the time of night, that the churches
of Christ may know whereabout they are. Now let it be observed, that
this prophecy may refer to the times when Dumah, Edom, or Idumea, was
possessed by the Jews, according to the prophecy in [Num
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#018) as it was before the coming of
Christ; Herod, an Idumean, was upon the throne of Judea when he came, at
which time the Jews and Idumeans were mixed together; and the latter, at
least many of them, embraced the Jewish religion (c), and so had
knowledge of the Messiah and his coming, after which they may be thought
to be inquiring here. The Mosaic dispensation was a night season, there
was much obscurity in it, the shadows of darkness were stretched out on
it; and though there was the moon of the ceremonial law, and there were
the stars the prophets, yet the sun of righteousness was not risen; and
it was a time of gross darkness with the Gentile world: now one or more
of these proselyted Idumeans, or of the Jews among them, may be supposed
to be inquiring of the prophet or prophets of the Lord in their time,
how much of this night was gone, when it would be over, or the Messiah
would appear, and bring in the morning, and make the bright day of the
Gospel dispensation. And again, as Edom and Seir were typical of Rome
Papal, or the Romish antichrist, the person calling out to the watchman
may design such of the people of God in the midst of them, for which see
[Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004) who, sensible of the night
of darkness they are in, are looking for and inquiring after latter day
light and glory. The Targum of the whole verse is,

"the burden of the cup of curse, to give Dumah to drink: to me he calls
out of heaven, prophet, declare unto them the prophecy; prophet, declare
unto them what shall hereafter come to pass.''

\(y\) Vid. Hiller. Onomasticon Sacr. p. 797. (z) Vid. Buxtorf. Lexic.
Talmud. col. 30, 31, &c. (a) "quid accidit ex quo nox est?" Vatablus.
(b) Zohar in Exod. fol. 54. 2. (c) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 13. c. 9. sect. 1.
Ed. Hudson.

[Isaiah 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 21:12</span></span>

The watchman said, the morning cometh, and also the night,.... Not only
a morning, but a night; and as sure as the morning comes, so shall the
night; there wilt be a constant succession of morning and night; as a
morning of prosperity, so a night of adversity: the morning of the
Gospel dispensation was coming on, or of Christ's coming in the flesh,
which was attended with joy and cheerfulness; like the morning, it
dispersed the shadows of the law, introduced light, which gradually and
irresistibly spread itself over the Gentile world; but then followed a
night of darkness to the Jews, blindness happened to them, which still
continues; and to the Arabians, Saracens, and Turks, when the bottomless
pit was opened by Mahomet, which let out smoke and locusts in the
eastern part of the world; and to the western part, when the Romish
antichrist established himself as universal bishop: a morning came on
again at the Reformation, and a night will follow, which is now begun;
it is already a time of darkness, coldness, sleepiness, and of error and
heresy, which will issue in an eventide, in a dark night: if it be asked
what time it is with us, or how far we are gone toward the night? the
answer is, we are in and toward the close of the Sardian church state;
we are in the twilight, or in that part of time which is neither day nor
night, [Zac 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#006) the slaying of the
witnesses is yet to come, which, with the general spread of Popery all
over Christendom, will make it entire night; after which will come on
the morning of the spiritual reign of Christ, when the light of the
Gospel will be spread everywhere, and joy and gladness will attend the
saints in all places; and it will be a time of great prosperity, both
spiritual and temporal; which will be succeeded by another night of
coldness, deadness, and carnal security, and will last till the second
and personal coming of Christ; which will bring on the morning of a
glorious resurrection to the saints, after which there will be no more
night to them, though there will be an eternal one to the wicked. The
Targum is,

"the prophet said, there is a reward for the righteous, and punishment
for the wicked;''

and so the Jews elsewhere (d) interpret it of the morning of redemption
to the righteous, and of the night of darkness to the wicked; or, as
they sometimes express it (e), the morning is for the righteous, and the
night for the wicked; the morning for Israel, and the night for the
nations of the world. Dumah they sometimes (f) make to be the angel
appointed over spirits, who they suppose gather together, and say to
him, "watchman", &c.

if ye will inquire, inquire ye; seriously and in good earnest,
diligently and constantly, with all humility and reverence, by prayer to
God and by searching the Scriptures, and by application to the watchmen,
the ministers of the word, who make it their business to study it, and
have the mind of Christ:

return, come; return by repentance, and come to God, who receives
backsliders, heals their backslidings, and loves them freely; or, "come
again", to the watchman, and to the Lord, and renew your inquiries till
you get satisfaction.

\(d\) Gloss. in T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 94. 1. & in Bava Kama fol, 3. 2.
(e) T. Hieros. Taaniot, fol. 64. 1. & Kimchi in loc. (f) T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 94. 1.

[Isaiah 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 21:13</span></span>

The burden upon Arabia,.... Which lay heavy upon it, as a burden upon a
beast; or "concerning" it, or "against" it, as Kimchi notes; which
Arabia, or what part thereof, is meant, may be gathered from the names
after mentioned. The Targum is,

"the burden of the cup of cursing, to give the Arabians to drink.''

Ben Melech says, these are the Arabians that dwell in the wilderness:

in the forest in Arabia shall ye lodge; not in their tents and huts,
which they had used to carry with them, and set up where they pleased;
since now in their fright and flight they would leave them behind them,
and so be obliged to take up their lodging in woods and forests; perhaps
the desert of Arabia Petraea is meant:

O ye travelling companies of Dedanim; or Dedanites; these were Arabians
that descended from Jokshan, a son of Abraham by Keturah, [Gen
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#003) who were either shepherds, who
went in companies together with their flocks, and moved from place to
place for the sake of pasture; or rather were merchants, who went in
caravans and troops with their merchandise from one country to another;
see [Eze 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#015) and who, because of the
ravages of the enemy, would be glad of a lodging in the woods for
security.

[Isaiah 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 21:14</span></span>

The inhabitants of the land of Tema,.... This country had its name from
Tema, one of the sons of Ishmael, [Gen
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#015). The Targum calls it the land of
the south, as if it was Teman. These people were Arabians, and are here
said to assist their countrymen, the Dedanites, in distress:

brought water to him that was thirsty; as travellers are wont to be,
especially in a desert land, and when fleeing from an enemy; in which
circumstances the travelling companies of Dedanim now were:

they prevented with their bread him that fled; gave it to him, being
hungry and necessitous, without asking for it. Now all this seems to
show what calamities should come upon the inhabitants of some parts of
Arabia; that they should lodge in a forest, be hungry and thirsty, and
flee before their enemy, as follows.

[Isaiah 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 21:15</span></span>

For they fled from the swords,.... Of their enemy, whom they could not
withstand; perhaps the Assyrian army:

from the drawn sword; just ready to be sheathed in them:

and from the bent bow; just going to let the arrow fly at them:

and from the grievousness of war: too heavy for them to bear.

[Isaiah 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 21:16</span></span>

For thus hath the Lord said unto me,.... The prophet; which confirms
what is before said, as well as assures the accomplishment of what
follows:

within a year, according to the years of an hireling; that is, exactly
and precisely, as soon as ever the year is come to an end; for the
hireling, when his year is up, instantly demands dismissal from his
service, or his wages, or both. The time is to be reckoned from the
delivery of this prophecy; and so the calamity predicted was brought
upon them by the Assyrians, perhaps under Sennacherib, when he invaded
the cities of Judah, and might take Arabia in his way; less time is
allowed than was the Moabites, who suffered by the same hand; see [Isa
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#014),

and all the glory of Kedar shall fail; these were another sort of
Arabians, as the Targum calls them: they descended from Kedar, a son of
Ishmael, [Gen 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#013) their "glory" were
their multitude, their riches and substance, and which chiefly lay in
their flocks; for the sake of which they moved from place to place for
pasture, and dwelled in tents, which they carried with them, and pitched
where it was most convenient for them; hence they were called Scenites;
see [Psa 120:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#005).

[Isaiah 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 21:17</span></span>

And the residue of the number of archers,.... Or of "bow" (g), for
"bows": that is, of men that use the bow, or are expert at it, as the
Kedarenes were, both for taking wild beasts, and fighting with men, in
which they followed their original ancestor Ishmael, [Gen
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#020) the number of these archers it
seems had been great, but would be lessened by the calamity threatened;
and those that would escape that, and be preserved from it, should be
lessened still, as follows:

the mighty men of the children of Kedar shall be diminished; their
military men, the most expert at the use of the bow, and the most
valiant and courageous; the few of those that were left, and did not
fall by the sword of the Assyrians, should gradually diminish, and be
fewer and fewer:

for the Lord God of Israel hath spoken it; who cannot lie, nor will
repent, and whose word never fails, what he has said he will do, nor
will he alter the thing that is gone out of his lips; and he is spoken
of as the God of Israel, because it was to the Israelites that this was
said, and for their sakes; either because these Arabians some way or
other were injurious to them, or they had put some confidence in them.
The Targum is,

"because by the word of the Lord God of Israel it is so decreed.''

\(g\) "numeri arcus", Montanus, Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 22](isa022)

</div>
