<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa045)  [Next](isa047) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 46](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 46:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 46

This chapter contains a prophecy of the taking of Babylon by Cyrus, and
of the deliverance of the Jews; who are encouraged to expect the divine
protection, and a continuance of it; are dehorted from idolatry, and
directed to look to the Lord alone for righteousness and salvation. The
taking of Babylon is signified by the demolition of its idols, which
become the plunder of the enemy, and by the carrying of the inhabitants
of it captive, [Isa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001). Then follows
a promise of grace and mercy to the remnant of Israel that should now be
delivered; that the Lord, who had cared for them from the infancy of
their state, would not leave them in their declining times, [Isa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003), when they are dehorted from the
worship of idols, from the consideration of the matter of which they
were made, as silver and gold; from their being the works of men's
hands; and from their inability to move themselves, or help others; and
from the Lord being the true God, as appears by his omnipotence and
omniscience, [Isa 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005). A description
is given of Cyrus, who should be the instrument of the Jews' deliverance
from Babylon, [Isa 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011). And the
chapter is concluded with an address to the stout hearted and
unrighteous Jews, to observe the righteousness and salvation which were
brought near and set before them, [Isa
46:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#012).

[Isaiah 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 46:1</span></span>

Bel boweth down, Nebo stoopeth,.... These are names of the idols of
Babylon. Bel is by some thought to be the contraction of Baal, the god
of the Phoenicians, called by them Beel; so "Beelsamin" (h), in the
Phoenician language, is Lord of heaven: but rather this is the Belus of
the Babylonians, who was a renowned king of them, and after his death
deified; whom Nebuchadnezzar, according to Megasthenes (i), calls Belus
his progenitor, and by whom Babylon was walled about. This idol is, no
doubt, the same with Jupiter Belus, who had a temple in Babylon with
gates of brass, and which was in being in the times of Herodotus (k), as
he reports. This name is sometimes taken into the names of their kings,
as Belshazzar or Beltesbazaar. Nebo was another of their idols, an
oracular one, from whom, by its priests, prophesies of things future
were pretended to be given out; for it may have its name from "to
prophesy", and answers to the Apollo or Mercury of other nations. The
Alexandrian copy of the Septuagint has very wrongly, instead of it,
Dagon the god of the Philistines; and so the Arabic version "Dsagon".
This name Nebo was also taken into the names of the kings of Babylon, as
Nabonassar, Nabopalassar, Nebuchadnezzar, and others. As Bel is the same
with Belus, so Nebo is the same with Beltis, the queen Megasthenes or
Abydenus speaks of in the same place; and Bel may design the sun, and
Nebo the moon, which may have its name from "to bud forth", or "make
fruitful", as the moon does; see [Deu
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#014). It is said of both these
deities, that they "stooped" or "bowed down"; being taken down from the
high places where they were set upright, and looked grand and majestic,
and where they might be seen and worshipped by the people. Jarchi gives
the words another sense, that it represents in a sarcastic way these
idols, as through fear, in a like condition that men are in, in a fit of
the colic, who not being able to get to the solid stool, are obliged to
bend their knees, and ease themselves as they can (l). Aben Ezra seems
to refer to the same signification of the word, when he says the sense
was well known, but it was not fit to write it. The prophet goes on in
the derision of these idols:

their idols were upon the beasts, and upon the cattle; that is, being
taken down, and broke to pieces for the sake of the silver, and gold,
and brass that were about them, or they were made of, they were put into
sacks by the Persians, and laid upon camels, and mules, and horses, and
transported into Media and Persia. Jarchi interprets it, their idols are
like to beasts, which defile themselves with their dung as they do; and
so the Targum renders it,

"their images are "in" the likeness of serpents and beasts.''

These were the forms of them:

your carriages were heavy loaden, they are a burden to the weary beast;
this seems to be spoken to the Persians, who loaded their carriages, and
their beasts, with this lumber, that their wagons were ready to break
down, and their cattle groaned under the weight of it; a sarcastic jeer
at the idols which were become the plunder and prey of the soldiers. It
was usual at the taking of cities to demolish the idols of them; and
this was typical of the demolition of Heathen idols, and the cessation
of Heathen oracles in the Gentile world, through the spread of the
Gospel in it, in the first times of Christianity.

\(h\) Sanchoniatho apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 1. c. 10. p. 34. (i)
Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 4. l. p. 456. (k) Clio, sive l.
1. c. 181. Vid. Pausan. Messen. p. 261. (l) Vid. gloss. in T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 63. 2.

[Isaiah 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 46:2</span></span>

They stoop, they bow together,.... Either the beasts under their
burdens, or other idols besides those mentioned; or rather the
Babylonians themselves, who were obliged to submit to the conquerors:

they could not deliver the burdens; the idols could not save themselves
from being laid as burdens upon the beasts, any more than they could
save their worshippers: so the Targum understands this and the preceding
clause of them;

"they are cut off, and cut to pieces together, they could not deliver
those that carried them;''

or else the Babylonians are designed, who could not save their gods from
being used in this shameful manner:

but themselves are gone into captivity, or "their souls" (m); what were
as dear to them as their own souls, their idols; to whom also souls may
be ascribed by way of derision, being inanimate as well as irrational;
and it is not unusual for idols to be said to be carried captive; hence
those words of Tertullian, "manent et simulachra caplira": or rather the
Babylonians, who went into captivity themselves, and so could not save
their idols: thus they who had led captive the Jews are led captive
themselves; and thus it will be with mystical Babylon, [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010).

\(m\) "et animae eorum", V. L. Munster, Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius.

[Isaiah 46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 46:3</span></span>

Hearken unto me, O house of Jacob,.... The Jews, the descendants of
Jacob:

and all the remnant of the house of Israel; those that remained of the
ten tribes that had been carried captive long ago. These may, in a
spiritual sense, design those who are Israelites indeed; the household
of the God of Jacob; the chosen of God, and called; the remnant
according to the election of grace:

which are borne by me from the belly, which are carried from the womb:
here the Lord distinguishes himself from the idols of the Babylonians;
they were laid as burdens upon beasts, and bore and carried by them; but
the Lord is born and carried by none, but bears and carries his people.
The allusion is to tender parents that have compassion on their children
as soon as born, and take care of them, and bear them in their bosoms,
and carry them in their arms; and may have respect, in the literal
sense, to the infant state of the Jews, both as a church and
commonwealth, when the Lord took pity on them, and care of them, and
bore them as a father bears his son; and bore with their manners too,
and carried them all the days of old through the wilderness to Canaan's
land; see [Num 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#012). It may be
applied to the care of God in the preservation of men by his providence,
especially his own people, whose God he is from their mother's belly;
who takes them under his protection as soon as born, and carries them
through every state of infancy, youth, manhood, and old age, and never
leaves nor forsakes them; see [Psa
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#010), and with great propriety may be
applied to regenerate persons, who, as soon as born again, are regarded
by the Lord in a very visible, tender, and compassionate manner; he
"bears" them in his bosom, and on his heart; he bears them in his arms;
he puts his everlasting arms underneath them; he bears with them, with
all their weakness and infirmities, their peevishness and frowardness;
he bears them up under all their afflictions, and sustains all their
burdens; he bears them through and out of all their troubles and
difficulties: he "carries" them, in like manner, in his bosom, and in
his arms; he "carries" them into his house, the church, which is the
nursery for them, where they are nursed and fed, and have the breasts of
consolation drawn out to them; he carries on the good work of grace in
them; he carries them through all their trials and exercises safe to
heaven and eternal happiness; for they are poor, weak, helpless
creatures, like newly born babes, cannot go alone, but must be bore up
and carried.

[Isaiah 46:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 46:4</span></span>

And even to your old age I am he,.... The same he ever was, the eternal
and unchangeable Jehovah; the same in his love and affections; in his
sympathy and care; in his power and protection; in his promises, truth,
and faithfulness to his people, in their last days, as at the first
moment of their conversion; and therefore they are safe; see [Psa
102:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#027),

and even to hoar hairs will I carry you (n); which is doing more than
the most tender parent does, or can, or need to do! God will not leave
his people in the decline of life, when pressing infirmities are upon
them, and they stand in as much need as ever of being bore up,
supported, and carried: wherefore it follows,

I have made; these persons, not merely as creatures, but as new
creatures; they are formed for myself; they are my sons and daughters,
the works of my hands: I have an interest in them,

therefore I will bear, even I will carry: from the first of their
regeneration, to their entrance into glory; See Gill on [Isa
46:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#003);

And will deliver you; out of all affliction; out of all temptations; out
of the hand of every enemy; from a final and total falling away; from a
body of sin and death; from death eternal, and wrath to come; and even
at last from the grave and all corruption.

\(n\) This seems to express more than old age, as Ben Melech observes
hence the Jews say, a man sixty years old is come to old age, and one of
seventy to hoary hairs.

[Isaiah 46:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 46:5</span></span>

To whom will ye liken me?.... Was it lawful that any likeness might be
made, which yet is forbidden, [Exo
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004) what likeness could be thought
of? is there any creature in heaven or earth, among all the angels or
sons of men, to whom God can be likened, who has done such works of
power, and acts of grace, as to care and provide not only for the house
of Israel, from the beginning of their state to the close of it, but for
all his creatures from the beginning of life to the end thereof, yea,
from the beginning of the world to the end of it, and has shown such
special grace and goodness to his chosen people, in such a kind and
tender manner?

And make me equal; or any equal to him in power and goodness, since all
are but worms, dust, and ashes, as the small dust of the balance, yea,
as nothing in comparison of him.

And compare me, that we may be like? which is impossible to be done; for
what comparison or likeness can there be between the Creator and a
creature, between an infinite, immense, and eternal Being, possessed of
all perfections, and a finite, frail, imperfect one? see [Isa
40:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#018). To pretend to frame a likeness
of such a Being, is to act the absurd and stupid part the Heathens do,
described in the following verses.

[Isaiah 46:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 46:6</span></span>

They lavish gold out of the bag,.... As if it was of no value and
account; that is, the Heathen idolaters, some of them, who are
excessively devoted to idolatry; these, being rich, take out their bags
of gold, and give it in a very profuse manner to a workman to make a
golden image for them, not caring what it cost them; such an one was
that which Nebuchadnezzar made, sixty cubits high, and six broad, [Dan
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#001) see an instance of profuseness
this way in the Israelites themselves, [Exo
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#002).

And weigh silver in the balance; or "with a reed" (o). Others, though
idolaters, yet less devoted to idolatry, and more tenacious of their
money, make silver do for a god, and weigh it out to the workman, that
it be made of such a weight, and no more, and that they might not be
cheated of their silver; or they weighed it to pay the workman for his
workmanship. Money formerly was not coined and stamped, so not numbered
by pieces, but weighed.

And hire a goldsmith, and he maketh it a god; a "finer" or "founder",
with whom they agree for such a sum of money, and he, of the gold or
silver that is put into his hands, makes a god: he casts and moulds it
into such a form or shape that is agreed upon, and this is called a god;
though nothing but a piece of gold or silver fashioned by art and man's
device, and the work of his hands:

they fall down, yea, they worship; the god they made; both the
artificer, and he that employed him, fall down upon their knees, or
their faces, and pay divine worship add adoration to the idol; though
the one knew it was made of his own gold or silver, and the other knew
it to be the workmanship of his hands. Worshipping is more than falling
down, as Ben Melech observes, and therefore it is said, yea, they
worship.

\(o\) "in calamo", Pagninus, Montanus. The bar of the balance on which
they hang the scales with threads, Ben Meleck says is called the "reed".
So Vatablus.

[Isaiah 46:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 46:7</span></span>

They bear him upon the shoulder, they carry him,.... That is, the idol;
men carry him upon their shoulders in procession, and expose him to the
view and veneration of the people, just as the host is carried in
procession by the Papists; or the idol being made, the workman or his
men lift it up, for it cannot lift up itself, and take it upon their
shoulders, and carry it home to the proprietor:

and set him in his place; in his house, if an household god: or in the
temple, church, or place of public worship, if designed for that:

or cause him to rest under him (p), or "in his place"; under the roof of
his house or temple; a jeer upon him, as if he was weary of his long
journey, though carried. Here again the idols are distinguished from the
true God, and he from them; they are on men's shoulders, and set in a
certain place, but he carries all his people, and is not limited to, or
included in any place:

and he standeth, and from his place he shall not remove; the idol being
set in his place stands fast, being nailed; he stands upright as a palm
tree, and can never stir from the place where he is, to help any of his
worshippers, in whatsoever distress they may be; nor can he get out of
the way of any danger to which he may be exposed; if the temple or
house, in which he is, is on fire, or overflowed with water, or broke
into by thieves, he cannot move out of his place, and escape the danger;
a fine deity to be worshipped indeed! see [Isa
44:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#013).

Yea, one shall cry unto him, yet can he not answer; as Baal's priests
and worshippers cried to him, but no voice was heard, nor answer
returned, [Kg1 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#026) for though they
have ears, they hear not, and mouths, yet they speak not, [Psa
115:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa115.htm#005).

nor save him out of his trouble; that is, the idol cannot save the
idolatrous worshipper out of his distress, which has caused him to cry
unto him; see [Isa 45:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#020).

\(p\) "et quiescere eum faciunt suo loco", Musculus.

[Isaiah 46:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 46:8</span></span>

Remember this,.... Or "these things", as the Syriac version, concerning
the matter of which, and the manner in which idols are made; their
impotency to move themselves, and their inability to help their
votaries, and the difference between them and the true God:

and show yourselves men; and not brutes, as the makers and worshippers
of images are, or show themselves as if they were; who unmanly
themselves, and act contrary to the natural reason of mankind: or "be ye
strong" (q); so the Targum and Jarchi; fortify yourselves against all
temptations to idolatry, and against all the arguments and persuasions
of idolaters; or "burn ye" (r) or "be ye inflamed", so Rabenu Hal and
Joseph Kimchi; that is, blush and be ashamed at such sottishness and
stupidity, as men when they are ashamed look as if their faces were
inflamed; so the Vulgate Latin version renders it, "be ye confounded"
(s); or the sense is, be fervent in spirit, be fired (t) with zeal for
God and his glory, and with indignation against such gross idolatry:

bring it again to mind, O ye transgressors; of the law of God, in this
instance of idolatry; meaning either the Babylonians, or rather the
Jews, who had been drawn in by them to idolatrous practices; calling
upon them to return to their senses; to use and exercise their reason;
to recollect and reconsider things, and observe and repent of the folly
and wickedness they had been guilty of.

\(q\) "roborat vos", Pagninus, Tigurine version; so Ben Melech
interprets the word. (r) Ardete, "comburite vos", some in Vatablus. (s)
"Confundamini", V. L. "et erubescite", Calvin. (t) "Incendimini sive
corripimini zelo", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 46:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 46:9</span></span>

Remember the former things of old,.... The things that were from the
beginning, or the ancient things done by the Lord, whether as the
effects of power, wisdom, and goodness, or in wrath, or in mercy; such
as the creation of the heavens, and the earth, and all things in them;
the destruction of the old world, and of Sodom and Gomorrah; the
bringing of Israel out of Egypt through the Red sea and wilderness, to
Canaan's land, and all the wondrous things then done for them; which are
so many proofs of the true deity of the God of Israel, in opposition to
the idols of the Gentiles:

for I am God, and there is none else; as he must needs be what did the
above things:

I am God, and there is none like me; for greatness or goodness, or that
has done the like things; not one of the gods of the Gentiles.

[Isaiah 46:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 46:10</span></span>

Declaring the end from the beginning,.... The end of the Jewish state,
both as a church, and a commonwealth, from the first settlement of it in
the times of Moses, and by him, [Deu
32:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#029). The end of the world, and all
things in it, as early as the times of Enoch, the seventh from Adam,
[Jde 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014). The end and issue of every
event, at least of many very remarkable and momentous ones, before they
came to pass; and particularly things relating to Christ, the beginning
and end; the fulfilling end of the moral law for righteousness; the
scope and design of the ceremonial law, to which that tended, and in
which it issued; as well as the end of the whole Scripture, of the
prophecies and promises of it: and this end was declared very early, and
spoken of by all the prophets that were from the beginning of the world;
and which is a full proof of the omniscience of God, and so of his true
deity, [Luk 1:70](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#070).

And from the ancient times the things that are not yet done; that were
not at this time done, though they are since: such as the captivity of
the Jews, and their return from it; also the incarnation of Christ, his
obedience and sufferings, and the glory that should follow; his
resurrection, ascension, and session at the right hand of God; the work
of redemption by him; the effusion of the Spirit; the spread of the
Gospel among the Gentiles, and their conversion; and others which are
now not yet done; as the conversion of the Jews in the latter day, and
the bringing in the fulness of the Gentiles; the glory of the church in
those times as to knowledge, peace, purity, power, and authority; the
destruction of antichrist; and the second coming of the Messiah; all
which have been declared from ancient times; and as the former have been
accomplished, there is reason to believe the latter will:

saying, my counsel shall stand; the purposes and decrees of God, which
are within himself, wisely formed by him, eternal and not frustrable;
and which shall stand, or be accomplished, being the counsels of him who
is all wise, all knowing, all powerful, unchangeable, true, and
faithful; whether they respect the providence of God in relation to the
world in general, and the government of it, or to particular persons,
and their affairs, from the time of their birth to their death; or
whether they respect his grace and goodness in the salvation of men;
such as his purpose according to election, the covenant of his grace,
redemption by Christ, the effectual calling, and eternal glorification;
all which, as they are according to the will and counsel of God; stand
firm and sure, and shall have their full accomplishment; see [Psa
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#011).

And I will do all my pleasure; as he has done in creation, and does in
providence, so he has done, can do, and does in grace, in predestination
and redemption, and in the effectual calling. And particularly this may
refer to the deliverance of the Jews by Cyrus, a type of Christ, and
deliverance by him, as follows:

[Isaiah 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 46:11</span></span>

Calling a ravenous bird from the east,.... Or "a flying fowl", or "swift
winged bird" (u); for the word used does not so much denote
rapaciousness as swiftness; which well agrees with Cyrus, who is here
meant, and not Abraham, as Jarchi, nor Nebuchadnezzar, as others; and
who was always swift in all his expeditions, and always recommended
celerity and dispatch of business to his soldiers and others, as
Xenophon (w) often observes; and very remarkable is that speech of
Tigranes to him, in which he tells him (x), that he so far exceeded the
king of Armenia in swiftness, that he came upon him with a great army,
from a far country, before he could get his army together, which was
just by him. And very observable are the words of Cyrus himself, who was
desirous of being a thorough horseman, that he might seem to be , "a
winged" or "flying man" (y) So the Targum here renders it, a swift bird.
Aben Ezra, who interprets it of Cyrus, says he is so called, as if he
flew to do the will of God; and Kimchi observes of Cyrus, that he has
this name because he came swiftly, and in haste, as a bird that flies:
and it is no unusual thing for a mighty monarch, or a general, marching
with his army, to be compared to a flying bird, particularly an eagle,
[Jer 48:40](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#040) and may be the bird
intended here, which well suits with Cyrus, who had, as Plutarch (z)
reports, an aquiline nose; hence men that have such noses, among the
Persians, are highly esteemed: and Xenophon (a) says, that the standard
of Cyrus was a golden eagle upon the top of a high spear, and which is
retained by the kings of Persia. Cyrus is said to be called from the
east, because, as Kimchi observes, his country lay to the east of
Babylon:

the man that executeth my counsel from afar country; as Persia was from
Babylon, Assyria and other provinces lying between; but though he lived
in a far country, and knew nothing of the affairs of the people of God
in Babylon, or what work he was to do, yet God called him, and brought
him to do his will, which he was ignorant of: so God sometimes puts into
the hearts of men to fulfil his will, which they are strangers to, [Rev
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#017). It is in the Hebrew text, "the
man of my counsel" (b); not with whom the Lord consulted, for none are
of his counsel in this sense; but whom in his counsels, decrees, and
purposes, he appointed to such service, and whom he made use of as an
instrument to do his pleasure; see [Isa
44:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#008).

yea, I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass: I have purposed, I
will also do it; the counsel of the Lord, concerning the deliverance of
his people from Babylon, by the hand of Cyrus; this he had purposed in
his own breast, had spoken of in prophecy, and would certainly perform.
R. Joseph Kimchi interprets this verse of the Messiah, and so does
Jerom, of whom, no doubt, Cyrus was a type; and what is here said agrees
with him: he may be compared to a flying bird for his swiftness in
coming at the appointed time; he came from the east, as the rising sun
of righteousness; he was the man of God's counsel in the highest sense,
and came, being called, to execute it; the work of redemption was
according to the eternal purpose of God, and spoke of by all the holy
prophets, and now accomplished; and his righteousness and salvation are
made mention of in the following verses.

\(u\) "avem, a velocitate", Munster; so Vatablus; ab "in volando
celeriter et cum impetu", Forerius; so Ben Melech says, Cyrus is
surnamed a fowl, because of his great swiftness and haste to come to
Babylon; though he observes that some say, that a ravenous fowl is
called the singular may be put for the plural; so Cocceius renders it,
"volucres", birds, and may design the whole army of Cyrus. (w)
Cyropaedia, l. 1. c. 17. and l. 3. c. 6. and l. 6. c. 17. (x)
Cyropaedia, l. 3. c. 2. (y) Ib. l. 4. c. 17. (z) In Apothegm. (a)
Cyropaedia, l. 7. c. 1. (b) "virum mei consilii", Munster, Pagninus,
Montanus; so according to the Keri: but the Cetib is , "the man of his
counsel".

[Isaiah 46:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 46:12</span></span>

Hearken unto me, ye stout hearted,.... This is not an address to the
Chaldeans, as Kimchi and others think, who were merciless and cruel to
the Jews, and far from doing that which was right unto them, but
oppressed them, and would not let them go; but to the Jews themselves,
at least to the wicked and profligate among them, who were always a
stouthearted, stiffnecked, and a rebellious people; and even those who
made more presences to religion were only self-righteous, and were far
from true righteousness. The whole may be applied to all persons
destitute of the grace of God, professors or profane, who are stout or
stubborn hearted; have hard and impenitent hearts; proud and haughty in
their hearts; proud of their wisdom, power, and strength; stout in their
hearts against God, as appears by their words and actions; oppose
themselves to the people of God, his word and ordinances; and some so
daring as to make a mock at sin, at religion, and a future state, and
outbrave death itself; though when God calls them to an account, as he
sometimes does by his judgments here, and will at the last judgment
hereafter; or by the workings of his Spirit upon them, convincing them
of sin, righteousness, and judgment; their hearts fail, and they cannot
be strong and endure; when his word comes with power, and they hear it,
and feel the energy of it, they are cut to the heart, and their stout
and proud spirits are brought down, and made to submit: even such

that are far from righteousness; as all men are in a state of nature,
none are righteous, no, not one, but are full of all unrighteousness;
even those that are the most righteous and religious, externally, are
without a righteousness; they do not attain to one by the law of works;
they go about to establish their own, and do not submit to the
righteousness of God, and so are far from it: and indeed all God's
elect, in a state of unregeneracy, are far from any knowledge of the
righteousness of Christ, they not being yet convinced of the need of it,
and it having not yet been revealed and applied unto them, and received
by faith; now these are called upon to hear the word externally, which
coming with power, causes them to hear spiritually what follows:

[Isaiah 46:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 46:13</span></span>

I bring near my righteousness, it shall not be far off,.... Meaning
either the faithfulness of God, in fulfilling his promises; or the
justice of God displayed, in redemption by Christ; or Christ himself,
God's righteous One, and the Lord our righteousness; or rather the
righteousness of Christ itself, which Jehovah the Father may call his,
because he sent his Son to work it out, approved of it, accepted it, and
imputes it to his people, and justifies them by it; and which was near
to be wrought out by Christ, and revealed in the Gospel; and which is
brought near and applied by the Spirit of God to a sensible sinner, to a
sinner convinced of the insufficiency of his own righteousness, and of
the suitableness and excellency of Christ's, and of his need of it; and
which is near in Christ, and in the Gospel, for faith to come at, at any
time; nor is it ever far off from the believer, to whom it is imputed,
and on whom it is put:

and my salvation shall not tarry; either Christ, who is God's salvation,
provided and appointed by him, who was to come as a Saviour, and should
not tarry; nor did he tarry beyond the appointed time, [Hab
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#003) or the salvation itself wrought
out by him; this work is done by Christ, and is published in the Gospel,
and is brought nigh and applied by the Spirit of God in conversion, in
due and proper time, and shortly will be fully enjoyed in heaven:

and I will place salvation in Zion for Israel my glory: the Saviour
himself was to come to Zion; near to Zion was salvation wrought out;
here the Gospel of salvation was first published, and out of it the word
of it was sent into all the world; and in Zion, the church of God,
Christ the Saviour is to be met with; and his salvation is the safety of
it, it is placed about it instead of walls and bulwarks; and all this is
for the Israel of God, the spiritual Israel, chosen, redeemed, and
called, and who shall be saved with an everlasting salvation; and who
are the glory of God, have the glory of God, the grace of God in them,
and the righteousness of God upon them, by which they are glorious; who
enjoy the presence of the glorious God, and who is glorified in them,
and by them; whose glory, even the glory of all his perfections, wisdom,
grace, mercy, justice, holiness, truth, and faithfulness, is great in
their salvation. So Kimchi gives the sense of the words,

"the salvation I will give to them shall be glory to me,''

Or Israel may be called his glory, because he gives glory to them; not
only grace here, but glory hereafter, when their salvation wilt be
complete, that is, completely enjoyed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 47](isa047)

</div>
