<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa043)  [Next](isa045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 44:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 44

In this chapter the Lord comforts his people with the promise of the
effusion of his Spirit, and the blessings of his grace upon them; the
consequence of which would be fruitfulness in them, and the conversion
of others, who should profess themselves the Lord's people, [Isa
44:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001), he proves his deity in
opposition to all false gods from his eternity, omniscience, and
foretelling future events, [Isa 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006),
exposes the stupidity of idol makers and the worshippers of them, [Isa
44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009), makes gracious promises of the
remembrance of his people, the remission of their sins, and their
redemption by Christ, [Isa 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021), of
which redemption from Babylon was a type; and of that assurance is
given, from the Lord's creating all things by his power; from his
frustrating and infatuating diviners and wise men; from his fulfilling
his predictions delivered by his prophets; and from his mentioning by
name the instrument of their redemption, Cyrus, [Isa
44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024), which makes way for a
particular prophecy concerning him in the next chapter.

[Isaiah 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 44:1</span></span>

Yet now hear, O Jacob my servant,.... These words are directed to a
remnant according to the election of grace among the Jews, about the
time when their princes should be profaned, and the body of the people
should be given to curse and reproaches; and who are distinguished from
them by the title of the Lord's "servants": who, being called by grace,
were made willing to serve him in righteousness and holiness, either by
preaching his Gospel, and so had the title of the servants of the most
high God, which show unto men the way of salvation; or by observing his
commands and ordinances, and walking agreeably to his will, serving him
acceptably with reverence and godly fear; as they are also, in the next
clause, distinguished from the rest by their being "chosen" of God: and
these, having ears to hear, are called upon to hearken to what the Lord
had to say unto them; for, notwithstanding the sorrowful things
delivered out in the latter part of the preceding chapter, threatening
destruction to the nation of the Jews; yet he had some comfortable
things to say to this remnant, and therefore would now have them hear
them, and attend unto them for their use and comfort:

and Israel whom I have chosen; an Israel out of Israel; a seed the Lord
had reserved for himself, whom he had chosen in Christ before the world
was; to be holy and happy, to grace here and glory hereafter, to believe
in him, and profess his name, and to serve him in their day and
generation, either in a more public, or in a more private way; chosen
vessels they were to bear his name, and show forth his praise. What they
were to hear and hearken to is as follows,

[Isaiah 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 44:2</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord that made thee, and formed thee from the womb,....
Which is not to be understood of the forming of the people of Israel
into a commonwealth or church state, for this is not said of the body of
them; nor of the natural creation and formation of these individuals,
but of their new creation, regeneration, and spiritual formation; which,
as it was owing to the grace and power of God, by which the Lord
describes himself, who is speaking to them, the consideration of it
might serve to encourage their faith and confidence in the performance
of the promises about to be made to them; see [Psa
100:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa100.htm#003), which "will help thee"; in the
exercise of grace, in the performance of duty, in suffering for his
name's sake in every time of trouble, and out of all trouble, and that
right early, and when none else can:

fear not, O Jacob, my servant, and thou Jesurun, whom I have chosen; the
titles are as before, only instead of "Israel" is "Jesurun", which is a
name of the people of Israel, [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015) and here the Targum instead of
it puts Israel; and so the Syriac and Arabic versions. The Septuagint
version renders it, "beloved Israel"; the word signifies upright; and so
the Vulgate Latin version translates it, "O thou most upright one" (w);
and well agrees with this little remnant of Israelites indeed, in whom
there was no guile. Some derive the word from one that signifies to
"see", "behold", "contemplate" (x); and so it may be rendered, "the
seeing ones whom I have chosen", such whose eyes the Lord opened to see
their own vileness and sinfulness, and the glory of Christ and salvation
by him: these are bid not to fear: not any of their enemies, though they
themselves were but worms; and though their number was small, and they
weak and feeble, and their enemies numerous, strong, and mighty; and
though their countrymen would reproach, revile, and persecute them for
Christ's sake, and they should be obliged to turn to the Gentiles, and
carry the Gospel among them, when those of their nation would reject it,
which would issue in the ruin of it, as before predicted; see [Isa
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010).

\(w\) "et rectissime", V. L. a "rectum fuit, Forerius"; so Ben Melech
says, that Israel is called Jeshurun, because he is upright among the
people. (x) A "contemplari, respicere".

[Isaiah 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 44:3</span></span>

For I will pour water oh him that is thirsty,.... Or rather upon the
thirsty land, as the Targum; and so the Syriac version, "in a thirsty
place"; as a dry land is a thirsty land; it thirsts for water, gapes and
opens for it: see [Psa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001) "and
floods upon the dry ground"; large quantities of rain to moisten it, and
make it fruitful; these figurative expressions are explained in the next
clauses:

I will pour my Spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine
offspring; by which "seed" and "offspring" are meant the spiritual seed
of this remnant or little church of Christ among the Jews, in the first
times of the Gospel: such as should be regenerated and converted in it,
and who are signified by the "dry" and "thirsty" ground; for being made
sensible of their desolate condition, their barrenness and
unfruitfulness, they hungered and thirsted after righteousness; were
desirous of Christ and his grace, and more knowledge of him, and eagerly
sought after them; and to these are promised the Spirit, and his gifts
and graces, compared to water, for its purifying, softening,
fructifying, and refreshing nature, and for extinguishing thirst, and
giving a real pleasure and delight; see [Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025) and the abundance thereof is
signified by "floods" of water; for in first conversion especially,
there is an abounding, yea a superabounding of the grace of God; it is a
well of living water; yea, out of the believer flow rivers of living
water, [Joh 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014) and this grace of the
Spirit is always a blessing: and indeed all the blessings of grace go
along with it, as to the manifestation and application of them as
justification, pardon of sin, adoption, &c.; here perhaps a more special
regard is had to the extraordinary effusion of the Spirit, on the day of
Pentecost, when the apostles of Christ being furnished with his gifts
and graces, were fitted to go forth with the "fullness of the blessing"
of the Gospel of Christ. The Targum of the whole is,

"for as waters are given upon the thirsty land, and they flow upon the
dry land, so will I give my Holy Spirit on thy children, and my blessing
upon thy children's children;''

a succession of converts in the Christian church.

[Isaiah 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 44:4</span></span>

And they shall spring up as among the grass,.... That is, such on whom
the Spirit of the Lord shall be poured with his gifts and grace, and
with the blessings of it: by the "grass" may be meant common believers,
comparable to green grass, for their numbers, being many; for their
weakness in themselves; for their flourishing condition; like grass for
its greenness, and verdure, and its springing up by clear shining after
rain; see [Psa 72:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#006) and by those that
"spring up among them" are intended the apostles and ministers of the
word, who exceed common Christians in their gifts, and grace, and
usefulness; grow up higher and taller than they, like palm trees and
cedars in Lebanon; and as such exceed private saints as tall trees
exceed the grass they grow among:

as willows by the water courses; a sort of trees well known, and which
delight in watery places, and grow best on banks of rivers, and shoot up
apace in a very short time, and spread their branches; so the apostles,
after the effusion of the Spirit on them, grew quickly in gifts, and
grace, and evangelic knowledge; and their usefulness spread far and
near. The Targum is,

"the righteous shall grow tender and delicate as the flowers of the
grass, as a tree that sends forth its roots by flows of water.''

[Isaiah 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 44:5</span></span>

One shall say, I am the Lord's,.... This expresses the success of the
apostles' ministry, not only among the Jews, but more especially among
the Gentiles, who were not called by the name of Jacob and Israel; but
now should call themselves by those names, as the following clauses
show, being called by grace and converted; when they should openly
profess their faith in Christ, claim their interest in him, and
acknowledge his property in them, and not be ashamed of the name of
Christians; and this one, and another, even many should do. The Lord has
a people who are his special and peculiar people, his beloved ones, the
objects of his delight and pleasure, his chosen and covenant ones, his
adopted ones, his treasure and his jewels; and hence he has taken such
care of them; he has put them into the hands of Christ for their
security; given him to be a Head, Redeemer, and Saviour of them; bestows
every blessing of grace on them; will not suffer any to hurt them; and
keeps them by his power: and having given them to Christ, they are his
people, his portion, his spouse and bride, his children, and the sheep
of his hand; hence he became incarnate on their account; laid down his
life to save them; sends his Gospel, and along with it his Spirit
effectually to call them; and hence all that he has is theirs, and he
will keep them, and not lose any of them: and being called by grace,
they are the workmanship of the Spirit; his temples in which he dwells,
and in whom he is as the earnest and pledge of their eternal glory: and
this interest the Lord has in his people may be known by them, so as
that they may be able to say, one and another, "I am the Lord's", as
many of them have done; see [Psa
119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094), they may know they are the
Lord's beloved ones, by his drawing them with his love, by the
communications of his grace to them, by the communion with himself he
indulges them with, and by what he shows unto them, and by the shedding
abroad of his love in them; and that they are his chosen ones, by the
Gospel coming in power to them, by their effectual calling, by the
sanctification of the Spirit, and their faith in Christ Jesus; and that
they are his covenant ones, by the application of covenant grace and
blessings to them; and that they are his adopted ones, by the Spirit of
adoption sent down into their hearts, witnessing it unto them; they may
know that they are the redeemed of the Lamb, by their having his Spirit,
and by his being formed in their hearts: and they may know that they are
the temples of the Holy Ghost, by his own work upon them, and his
dwelling in them: and knowing this, they should and will declare, and
say they are the Lord's and none other's; that they are not their own,
nor Satan's, nor the servants of men, but the Lord's to whom they devote
themselves, and whom they desire to serve; and therefore join themselves
to his churches, and walk in his ordinances, publicly confessing their
faith in him, which is telling all the world whose they are; and this
they say with the utmost joy and pleasure, in an exulting, yea, even
boasting way and manner. The Targum is,

"this shall say, I am of them that fear the Lord:''

and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob; reckon himself of
the posterity of Jacob, in a spiritual sense; count it an honour to be
called a wrestling Jacob, and a prevailing Israelite; so the Targum,

"this shall pray in the name of Jacob;''

either in the name of the God of Jacob, the Messiah, or as Jacob did:
"and another shall subscribe with his hand to the Lord": shall give his
hand and seal to serve the Lord; shall esteem it his high and great
privilege to be written among the living in Jerusalem and to have his
name registered among the saints, and in their church book. The Targum
is,

"and this shall offer his oblation before the Lord;''

himself and his sacrifices of prayer and praise: "and surname himself by
the name of Israel": shall value himself upon this, that he is an
Israelite indeed, and shall choose no other name to be called by than
that of a Christian. The Targum is,

"in the name of Israel; he shall draw near;''

and worship with them; all these phrases are expressive of a sincere and
hearty profession of faith in Christ, and of the Christian religion, in
terms borrowed from the people of Israel; see [Act
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041).

[Isaiah 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 44:6</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord the King of Israel,.... The King of the whole world,
and Governor among the nations; and in a peculiar manner King of Israel,
that nation being a theocracy; and especially King of spiritual Israel,
or King of saints, be they of what nation they will:

and his Redeemer, the Lord of hosts; who redeemed Israel out of Egypt,
from the house of bondage, and would again redeem them from the
Babylonish captivity, and the whole Israel of God from sin, Satan, and
the law; which he was able to do, being "the Lord of hosts", of the
armies above and below:

I am the first, and I am the last; the first cause and last end, of all
things in nature, and providence, and grace; all things are of him,
through him, and from him; all things were made by him in creation, and
for his pleasure they are and were created; and all things are disposed
of in his providence for his own glory; and he is the first in
reconciliation, justification, and salvation, and all are to the glory
of his grace: or this is a periphrasis of his eternity, who is from
everlasting to everlasting, without beginning or end, the Alpha and
Omega; the same is said of Christ, [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008), and all the other characters
before mentioned agree with him:

and besides me there is no God: all others are only gods by name, not by
nature, mere nominal fictitious deities, not real ones; and it is to the
exclusion of these from the rank of deity, these words are said; but not
to the exclusion of the Son of God, and the Holy Spirit, who, with the
Father, are the one true God.

[Isaiah 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 44:7</span></span>

And who as I shall call,.... Which of the idols of the Gentiles can do
as the king of Israel, the Lord of hosts has done? call things that are
not, as though they were? call all creatures into being? call men by
their names before they were born, as Isaac; Josiah, and Cyrus, of whom
mention is made in the latter end of this chapter, and call them to
service and usefulness in their day and generation? and call whom he
pleases by his grace to eternal glory?

and shall declare it; the end from the beginning, things future that are
yet to come to pass; or the purposes and decrees of God, his counsel and
covenant, his mind and will?

and set it in order for me; give an exact and orderly account of things
that shall be throughout the successive ages of time; as Jehovah did
with respect to the people of Israel, whose God and king he was; he
foretold to Abraham their going into Egypt, and bondage there, their
deliverance from thence, and settlement in the land of Canaan, and now
their deliverance from Babylon, and by name who should be the instrument
of it; none of the gods of the Gentiles could do this, or anything like
it, or order and dispose all occurrences in providence for his own
glory, and the good of men:

since I appointed the ancient people? meaning either the ancient
patriarchs, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their posterity, the children
of Israel, who were early formed into a body politic, and into a church
state; see [Deu 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#006), or rather the
first man, and the first race of men that inhabited the world before the
flood, called the old world; and so the sense is, who ever did the
things I have done, from the time I made man, and other creatures, and
placed them on the earth, or from the creation of the world? so Aben
Ezra, Jarchi, and Kimchi interpret it; though it is best of all to
understand this of the people of God, the church of the firstborn, whose
names are written in heaven, in the Lamb's book of life, from the
foundation of the world; who are, as the words may be rendered, "the
people of eternity" (y); and may be so called, because they were in some
sense a people that were "from eternity", as the Targum paraphrases it;
not that they had an actual personal being so early, for they are but
creatures of time, raised up in successive generations, and but of
yesterday, and of a short continuance; yet they had from all eternity a
representative being in Christ, as their federal head; they were chosen
in him before the foundation of the world, and had grace given them in
him before the world began, [Eph 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#003)
they were the people of God taken into covenant by him from everlasting,
for so early was the covenant of grace made with Christ, and them in
him; they stood so early related to God as his children, and to Christ
as his spouse and bride; so early were they on the thoughts of God, and
on his heart, and in his affections, as they were also upon Christ's,
and in his hands, and their names so early registered in his book of
life; so that they may be said to be indeed an "ancient people", or "a
people of eternity"; and they may be called so, because they will
continue for ever, as the days of heaven, and as the sun and moon,
before the Lord, [Psa 89:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#029),
everlasting habitations are provided for them, and they shall be for
ever with the Lord; so the Syriac version renders it, "a people for
eternity": now these are appointed by the Lord to come into actual being
at the time, and in the place he has fixed; they are appointed to many
things in life; not unto wrath, either here or hereafter, but to
afflictions, and to death itself: and they are appointed to many good
things, to be called by grace, to be saved with an everlasting
salvation, and to reign with Christ in the New Jerusalem state; see [Isa
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023) where they are called
"ancients", as here; and to be glorified with Christ for ever; it
follows:

and the things that are coming, and shall come? let them show unto them:
let the idols show to their worshippers if they can, "the things that
are coming"; just coming, that are near at hand, that will be tomorrow;
and that "shall come", are at a greater distance, which will be in ages
to come; or wonderful things, and things future, so Jarchi interprets
it; a word (z) like the first being used for signs and wonders. God
foretells wonderful things that shall come to pass, and which
accordingly do; but the idols of the Gentiles can do nothing of this
kind.

\(y\) "populum seculi", Munster, Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Tigurine
version, i.e. "qui a seculo est", Targ. "populum aeternitatis", Gataker.
(z) "sigma", with the Rabbins as here.

[Isaiah 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 44:8</span></span>

Fear ye not, neither be afraid,.... Of the accomplishment of prophecies
and promises, and of professing the true God, and of adhering to Jesus
Christ, the only Redeemer and Saviour; or of the gods of the Heathens,
and of persecuting tyrants, and what they can do against you, and in
favour of their idolatrous religion:

have not I told thee from that time, and have declared it? what should
come to pass, before it did, even everything that has since the
appointment of the ancient people; and particularly what troubles and
persecutions the apostles, ministers of the word, the first Christians
should meet with among the Heathens, for professing and propagating the
Gospel, and what success they should meet with, which came to pass
accordingly:

ye are even my witnesses; as especially the apostles were, who had it
from Christ's own mouth, that they should be hated and persecuted for
the sake of the Gospel, and should be successful wherever they came; as
they also were his witnesses in Jerusalem, and Judea, and Samaria, and
unto the uttermost parts of the earth, of his person, doctrine,
miracles, death, resurrection, and ascension to heaven, [Act
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#008),

is there a God besides me? that is a true God; for there were many
fictitious and false deities, but none omniscient and omnipotent, that
could foretell future events, and accomplish them as he did; there is no
god but the one God, Father, Son, and Spirit; for this an appeal is made
to the witnesses:

yea, there is no God, I know not any; or, there is "no rock" (a); or, is
there any? a word used for God, [Deu
32:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#004), there is no rock to build upon
for salvation, no rock for shelter and safety, but Christ the rock of
ages, on which the church is built, and the gates of hell cannot prevail
against it, [Mat 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#018), and if God,
who is omniscient, knows none else, there can be no other.

\(a\) "nulls rupes", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "non est petra",
Montanus, Cocceius; "estne rupes?" Vitringa.

[Isaiah 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 44:9</span></span>

They that make a graven image are all of them vanity,.... They show
themselves to be vain men, by making such vain things as graven images
are; both images, makers, and worshippers of them are all vain, yea
vanity itself:

and their delectable things shall not profit; their idols made of gold
and silver, or covered with them, and adorned with precious stones, and
so delightful and desirable, are of no manner of profit and advantage,
unless the matter they are made of, and the ornaments about them, were
converted to other uses; yet not as gods, and worshipped as such, who
can be of no service to their worshippers to help them in distress, or
save them from ruin:

and they are their own witnesses; they see not, nor know that they may
be ashamed; they that made them must be witnesses against themselves,
and the idols they have made; they must be convicted in their own
consciences that they cannot be gods; they must be sensible that they
have no sight nor knowledge of persons and things; that they cannot see,
nor know their worshippers, nor their wants, and cannot give them
relief; and this they ought to acknowledge to their own shame that made
them, and that their worshippers of them might be ashamed also.

[Isaiah 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 44:10</span></span>

Who hath formed a god,.... Who ever made one? was such a thing ever
known? or can that be a god which is made or formed? who so mad, foolish
and sottish, as to imagine he has made a god? or is it possible for a
creature to be the maker of a god? or any so stupid as to fancy he had
made one? yet such there were, so void of understanding and reason, and
even common sense: "or molten a graven image": first melted it, and cast
it into a mould, and then graved and polished it, and called it a god?

that is profitable for nothing? or seeing it "is profitable for
nothing", as a god; cannot see the persons, nor hear the prayers, nor
relieve the distresses of those that worship it; and therefore it must
be great folly indeed to make an image for such a purpose, which answers
no end.

[Isaiah 44:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 44:11</span></span>

Behold, all his fellows shall be ashamed,.... Either such who join with
them in the worship of the molten graven image, or god formed, when they
find it is profitable for nothing; so the Targum,

"behold all their worshippers shall be confounded;''

or their fellow workmen, who took their several parts in making the
image, and so must be conscious of the vanity and unprofitableness of
it, and ashamed when upbraided with it:

and the workmen they are of men; or, "of Adam" (b); they are the sons of
Adam, fallen men, sinful, frail, mortal creatures; they are not so much
as of the angels in heaven, but of men on earth, and so very unfit to be
makers of a god:

let them be gathered together; workmen and worshippers, as Demetrius,
and the craftsmen or shrine makers, with others at Ephesus:

let them stand up; and plead for their gods, and say all they can in the
behalf of them:

yet they shall fear, and they shall be ashamed together; the light of
the Gospel breaking forth in the ministry of the apostles and others,
the minds of many were enlightened to see the folly of worshipping
idols, which brought them, and the makers of them, into contempt; who
not being able to withstand the evidence and force of arguments brought
against them, were covered with shame, and filled with fear, lest,
should the Gospel still get further ground, their trade of idol making
would come to nothing; or lest the vengeance of heaven should fall upon
them for their idolatrous practices.

\(b\) "ipsi ex Adamo, sive ex hominibus", Munster, Pagninus, Montanus,
Tigurine version.

[Isaiah 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 44:12</span></span>

The smith with the tongs,.... Or, "the worker of iron" (c); the
blacksmith, who had a concern in making of idols, for some were made of
iron, [Dan 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#004), or in making plates to
cover them, or nails to fasten them with, or instruments which the
carpenter made use of in cutting down trees, and fitting the wood for an
image; such as the axe or hatchet, or plane, and which some think is
here meant, by the word translated "tongs", but is rendered an "axe",
[Jer 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#003) and is used for that, or an
hatchet, or a plane, by the Misnic (d) writers; so the Targum renders
it,

"the smith out of iron makes an axe or hatchet:''

"both worketh in the coals"; he puts his iron in the coals, and blows
upon them, and so makes it soft and malleable, and then takes it out:

and fashioneth it with hammers: beats it with hammers upon the anvil,
and puts it into what form he pleases:

and worketh it with the strength of his arms; uses his utmost strength
to bring it into a form he is desirous of:

yea, he is hungry, and his strength faileth; he drinketh no water, and
is faint; he works at it with all his might and main, is earnest at it,
and is eagerly desirous of finishing his work; he works till he is
hungry and thirsty, and for want of food is ready to faint and sink; and
yet will not give himself time to eat and drink, being so intent upon
his work: or the sense is, though he is hungry and thirsty, and faints
for want of provisions, yet the god he is making, or has made, cannot
supply him with any: this is said to expose the folly of idol making,
and of idol worship.

\(c\) "faber ferri", Pagninus, Montanus; "faber ferrarius", V. L.
Vitringa. (d) Misn. Sabbat, c. 12. sect. 1. Celim, c. 29. 6.

[Isaiah 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 44:13</span></span>

The carpenter stretcheth out his rule,.... Or, the worker of trees (e);
that works in wood, or makes images of wood; having cut down a tree, he
stretches out his rule or line upon it, and takes the dimensions of it,
and measures the length and the breadth of it, as much as is for his
purpose to make a god of: and then

he maketh it out with a line; coloured with ochre, or chalk, which
leaves a mark, by which he knows where to cut it, and fashion it to his
mind:

and he fitteth it with planes; first with the rougher planes, which take
off the knotty and more rugged parts; and then with a smoother plane,
makes it even, and polishes it:

and he marketh it out with a compass; where its head and body, and legs
and arms, and other parts must be:

and maketh it after the figure of a man; with all the parts and
proportion of a man:

according to the beauty of a man; with the face and countenance of a
man; with all the lineaments and just symmetry of a man; in the most
comely and beautiful manner he is capable of, that it may be the more
striking and pleasing to the worshippers of it. Jarchi's note is,

"this is a woman, who is the glory of her husband;''

and so the Targum,

"according to the praise of a woman;''

there being female deities, as Juno, Venus, Diana, and others:

that it may remain in the house (f); either in the temple built for it,
whither its rotaries repair to the worship of it; or in the dwelling
house, being one of the Lares or Penates, household gods: it may be,
this is said by way of scorn and contempt; this god being made, is set
up in the house, from whence it cannot stir nor move, to the help of any
of its worshippers.

\(e\) "faber lignorum", Montanus; "artifex lignarius", V. L. Pagninus;
"faber lignarius", Vitringa. (f) The note of Ben Melech is, "as it is
the glory of a woman to abide in the house, and not go out of doors, so
a graven image abides in the house.''

[Isaiah 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 44:14</span></span>

He heweth him down cedars, and taketh the cypress and the oak,.... To
make gods of, trees both pleasant and durable, but all unfruitful:

which he strengtheneth for himself among the trees of the forest; taking
a great deal of pains in seeking out such trees as were most fit for his
use, and a great deal of care in the growth of them, that they might
answer his end, as well as exerting his strength in cutting of them
down:

he planteth an ash, and the rain doth nourish it; a tree that soon grows
up, and which he plants for the purpose to make a god of; and this being
watered and nourished with rain, which God vouchsafes, though designed
for an idolatrous use, grows, and is fit for what it was intended; and
being so, he cuts it down, and, makes an image of it; which shows his
folly and madness, that a tree of his own planting, which he has seen
the growth of, and yet be so sottish as to imagine that a god may be may
be made of it. The word for "rain" signifies a body in the Syriac (g)
language, as Kimchi observes, and for which he produces [Dan
4:33](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#033), and so Aben Ezra says it
signifies in the Arabic language (h); and the sense is, "the body" of
the tree "grew up", and being grown up, was cut down, and used as
follows.

\(g\) "corpus", Luke iii. 22. 2Cor. x. 10. Castel. Lex. Polyglott. col.
627. So in the Chaldee language. (h) So, according to Schindler,
signifies a body, Lex. Pentaglott. col. 347, 348.

[Isaiah 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 44:15</span></span>

Then shall it be for a man to burn,.... And which indeed is the proper
use of it, but not all that this man puts it to; only the boughs, and
what he cuts off as useless to his purpose, and the chips he makes,
which he commits to the fire:

for he will take thereof, and warm himself; with some part of it he
makes a fire in his parlour, and warms himself when it is cold weather:

yea, he kindleth it, and baketh bread; he heats his oven with another
part of it, and bakes the bread he has made for himself and family to
live on, and which is putting it to a good use:

yea, he maketh a god, and worshippeth it; he maketh a graven image, and
falleth down thereto; the other part of the tree, and which is the
better part, he makes an image of, and carves it, and calls it a god;
and not only so, but when he has done, falls down and worships it; than
which there cannot be a greater instance of stupidity and folly.

[Isaiah 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 44:16</span></span>

He burneth part thereof in the fire,.... To warm himself with, as
before:

with part thereof he eateth flesh; that is, with part of it he dresses
flesh, and makes it fit to eat; unless the meaning is, with part of it
he makes tables and trenchers to eat meat off of; but the former sense
seems most likely, and agrees with what follows:

he roasteth roast, and is satisfied; he roasts his meat with it, and
eats it when roasted, and is highly pleased and delighted with it, and
he eats of it to his satisfaction:

yea, he warmeth him, and saith, Aha; an expression of joy and delight,
being before a good fire in winter time:

I am warm, I have seen the fire; have felt it, and enjoyed the comfort
of it, which has given a sensible pleasure.

[Isaiah 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 44:17</span></span>

And the residue thereof he maketh a god, even his graven image,.... What
remains of the tree, that is not consumed by making a fire to warm with,
by heating the oven to bake bread with, and by using it in the kitchen
to roast meat with, this is made an image of, and being graved and
carved, is called a god, and worshipped; though it is of the same
matter, and of the same nature, with that which was used for warming,
baking, and roasting:

he falleth down unto it, and worshippeth it, and prayeth unto it, and
saith, deliver me, for thou art my god; he bows unto it, falls down on
his knees, and spreads out his hands, and lifts them up, and uses all
the gestures of adoration; yea, makes a formal address in prayer and
supplication, and particularly requests that he would deliver him from
present danger and distresses, of whatsoever kind he was attended with;
declaring at the same time he was his god, in whom he trusted, and from
whom he expected relief and help. Monstrous stupidity!

[Isaiah 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 44:18</span></span>

They have not known nor understood,.... Who the true God is, nor the
worship that is due to him alone; they do not know nor understand divine
and spiritual things; nay, they have not the knowledge and understanding
of men; they want common sense that can do and say such things as before
mentioned, both idol makers and idol worshippers:

for he hath shut their eyes that they cannot see, and their heart that
they cannot understand; either the devil, as some think, the god of this
world, that blinds their eyes from seeing the folly of such gross
idolatry, which he, deceiving them, leads them into; or rather God
himself, who, because they like not to retain him in their knowledge,
gives them up to a reprobate and injudicious mind, to believe a lie, and
worship a false god; this he permits, orders, and overrules to some good
ends and purposes: this is to be understood of the eyes of the
understanding, which, as the word (i) signifies, are "daubed" and
plastered over, that there is no opening of them, and seeing with them;
which is the judicial blindness and hardness of heart, which God
sometimes in righteous judgment gives up men unto; see [Rom
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#028).

\(i\) "oblevit oculos eorum", Montanus; "obleverit", Cocceius; "quod
sculptile oblinat", Piscator.

[Isaiah 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 44:19</span></span>

And none considereth in his heart,.... Or, "and he does not return it to
his heart" (k); he does not come to himself again, or return to his
right mind, but lives and dies under the infatuation; never once
revolving it in his mind, pondering within himself what he has done, or
is doing, whether right or wrong:

neither is there knowledge nor understanding to say; within himself, and
reason the matter in his own mind, and thus express himself:

I have burnt part of it in the fire; to warm myself with:

yea, also I have baked bread upon the coals thereof; both heated the
oven, and baked bread with it; and also upon the live coals have laid
kneaded dough, and baked a cake on them:

and I have roasted flesh, and eaten it; made a fire with another part of
it, and roasted meat at it, and ate it with great pleasure and
satisfaction:

and shall I make the residue thereof an abomination? an idol, which is
an abominable thing to God, and to all men of sense and goodness:

shall I fall down to the stock of a tree? or "the bud of a tree?" (l) or
that which is made out of a tree of my own planting, cutting down, and
hewing, part of which has been used to the above purposes; and the
remaining lifeless log, shall I worship it as a god? and yet, though
such reasoning might be justly expected from a man that is a reasonable
creature, sottish are idolaters, that they seem to be quite deprived of
their rational powers, or at least these are disused by them.

\(k\) "et non reducet ad cor suum", Pagninus, Montanus; "reducit",
Piscator. (l) "ante id quod provenit ex abore", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; "germen ligni", Forerius.

[Isaiah 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 44:20</span></span>

He feedeth of ashes,.... That is, the idolater delights in his idol,
pleases himself with seeks comfort and satisfaction from it, fills and
feeds himself with hopes and expectations of being helped and delivered
by it; but this is all vain hope, a mere delusion; it is as if a man fed
on ashes instead of food; it is feeding on that which has no savour nor
substance, can yield no nourishment, but, on the contrary, is pernicious
and hurtful; and it is like Ephraim's feeding on wind, [Hos
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#001) or on chaff instead of wheat,
[Jer 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#028) and so such who feed upon
and delight themselves in sinful lusts, or false doctrines, may be said
to feed on the same sort of food: and here it may be true of the idol in
a literal sense; part of the wood of which it was made being reduced to
ashes, to which some respect may be had, [Isa
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#015), and that itself was capable of
the same fate. The Targum is,

"behold his god, part of it is ashes;''

so the Vulgate Latin version: "a deceived heart hath turned him aside"
from the true God, and the right worship of him, unto idolatry; the
heart of man is deceitful, and desperately wicked; a man needs no other
to entice him, and draw him away into any sin, and from the living God,
than his own evil heart; which, being deceived itself, deceives him, and
leads him to the commission of such things as are contrary to reason and
common sense: and he is so infatuated with them, and possessed with a
strong belief of them,

that he cannot deliver his soul: divest himself of his erroneous and
wicked principles, and leave his idolatrous practices, or be persuaded
that he is in the wrong:

nor say, is there not a lie in my right hand? that the idol, which his
right hand has made, is a lie, a mere vanity, not to be depended upon
and trusted in: or which is in, or "at his right hand" (m); and
worshipped by him, and is highly esteemed and loved as his right hand;
this he cannot be persuaded to believe, and say that it is a falsehood
and a work of errors; such is the force and fascination of idolatry,
when once persons are ensnared and entangled with it.

\(m\) "quod est in dextera mea", Piscator; "ad dexteram meam", Junius &
Tremellius.

[Isaiah 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 44:21</span></span>

Remember these, O Jacob, O Israel,.... Remember these persons, these
idolaters before spoken of; or these things, the gross idolatries they
were guilty of, and loath and abhor them, shun and avoid them, and not
imitate them, and do the same things: or remember that this was formerly
your case, and admire the distinguishing grace of God, in turning you
from idols to serve him: for by Jacob and Israel may be meant the
spiritual Israel of God, or those from among the Gentiles called by the
grace of God, and incorporated into Christian churches; see [Isa
44:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#005),

for thou art my servant: I have formed thee; thou art my servant: and
therefore should serve the Lord, and him only, and not idols, for no man
can serve two masters; moreover, these were formed by the Spirit and
grace of God in regeneration for his service, and therefore ought
cheerfully to engage therein, and abide in it, and never serve any
other:

O Israel, thou shalt not be forgotten of me; such as remember the Lord,
and remember to serve him, he will remember, and not forget them, his
love to them, his covenant with them, and the promises he has made them;
he will not forget their persons, nor their service, their work and
labour of love, which they have showed to his name. The Septuagint,
Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions, render it, "do not forget
me"; and so the Targum paraphrases it,

"do not forget my fears;''

to fear, serve, and worship the Lord, and him only; but Aben Ezra and
Kimchi observe, it should be rendered as it is by our translators.

[Isaiah 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 44:22</span></span>

I have blotted out as a thick cloud thy transgressions, and as a cloud
thy sins,.... Sins and transgressions are compared to clouds, for the
number of them, they being many as the fleeting clouds of the air; and
for the nature and quality of them: as clouds are vapours rising out of
the earth and sea, so these arise out of the earthly and corrupt heart
of man, which is as a troubled sea; and, like the clouds, they reach up
to the heavens, and the cry of them calls aloud for vengeance from
thence; they cause darkness, even all that darkness, both in
unregeneracy, and after conversion; they intercept the light of God's
countenance, and interpose between God and the souls of men, and cause
him to hide his face from them; they come between them and the sun of
righteousness, and cover him out of their sight; and by means of them
the light and comfort of the Holy Spirit are withdrawn; and they hinder
the free passage of prayer to God, at least as to the apprehension of
God's people; see [Isa 59:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#002), and they
portend a storm, and threaten with a tempest of divine wrath and
vengeance; but God graciously forgives them; which is meant by
"blotting" them out. Clouds are blotted out either by the wind
dissipating and scattering them; or by the sun breaking through them,
conquering and dispersing them, which perhaps is alluded to here; and
designs not the satisfaction of Christ for sin; by which he has finished
and made an end of it; but rather God's act of pardon upon it, and the
application of it to his people; or the discoveries of it by Christ
himself, the sun of righteousness, arising upon them with healing in his
wings, that is, with pardon to their souls; saying to them, thy sins,
though many, are forgiven thee; and they are so blotted out and removed
as to be seen no more, and as if they had never been, as a cloud is; not
only no more seen by the avenging eye of divine justice, but so removed
from them as not to be seen by them, as to have no more conscience of
them, or feel the load and burden of them; and though other clouds or
sins may arise, yet these also are blotted out in the same way, and
shall never appear against the saints to their condemnation. And as,
when clouds are blotted out, there is a clear sky, a serene heaven, the
sun shines in its brightness, and everything is pleasant and delightful;
so when sin is pardoned, or it appears to be so, then God is beheld as
the God of all grace, as all grace and love; the sinner can go with a
holy boldness to him, through the blood of Christ, as being pardoned,
and has fellowship with him; the evidences of interest in Christ become
clear, and the comforts of the Holy Ghost are enjoyed. And let it be
observed, that as no man can reach the clouds, and blot any of them out;
so none can forgive sins but God, this is his sole prerogative, [Isa
43:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#025). Here is mention made of a
cloud, and a thick cloud; no clouds are so thick but God can blot them
out, and these are no sins so great but he can forgive them; clouds, and
thick clouds, are blotted out, lesser and greater sins are forgiven by
him. Some read the words thus, "I have blotted out", wiped or washed
away, "as with a thick cloud, thy transgressions, and as with a cloud
thy sins" (n); and give the sense thus, as clouds pouring down with rain
wash the streets from the filth of them, so the Lord, as with a deluge
of pardoning grace and mercy, washes away the sins of his people; grace
superabounds abounding sin, and carries it all before it, and removes it
clear away; now this blessing of grace is mentioned, to attach the
people of God to his service, as it follows:

return unto me, for I have redeemed thee; this supposes them to have
backslidden from the Lord in heart or in practice, in life and
conversation, or in both, and yet the Lord had forgiven them; and which
was a reason why they should return to him by repentance; as nothing is
a greater motive to it, or more strongly influences it, than a discovery
of pardoning grace; and then the people of God do return to God as their
Father, who graciously receives them, and to Christ as their husband, to
whom they are married, though backslidden, and to their duty to both. So
the Targum,

"return to my worship or service;''

the reason or argument enforcing it is very strong, "for I have redeemed
thee"; from sin, and all its sad effects; from the law, and the curses
of it; and from death and hell, and wrath to come; and therefore need
not fear any of these things, or fear coming to the Lord on account of
them. Such, who are redeemed, need not doubt but they shall be kindly
received, though they have backslidden, and that no good thing will be
withheld from them; for if God has given his Son to redeem them, he will
give all things freely with him; besides, being redeemed, they are the
Lord's, and therefore ought to return to him, and glorify him with their
bodies and spirits, which are his; and as they are redeemed from our
vain conversation, they should return from it, and not indulge one, or
otherwise the end of redemption is not answered: and this being joined
with the forgiveness of sin in the preceding clause, shows that that
proceeds upon the foot of redemption, or upon the foot of satisfaction
made by Christ; and both furnish out arguments engaging to the service
of God.

\(n\) So some in Gataker.

[Isaiah 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 44:23</span></span>

Sing, O ye heavens, for the Lord hath done it,.... Done what he
promised, the forgiveness of the sins of his people, and the redemption
of them. So the Targum,

"because the Lord hath wrought redemption for his people.''

The Vulgate Latin version adds, "mercy" (o); and so the Septuagint
version, "because God hath had mercy on Israel" (p); and therefore the
heavens are called upon to sing on this occasion, as the angels of
heaven did when the Redeemer was born, and who rejoice at the salvation
of God's elect, [Luk 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#013),

shout, ye lower parts of the earth; the earth, which is low in
comparison of the heavens; the inhabitants of it, especially the
Gentiles, which dwelt in the lower parts of the world, in comparison of
Judea, which lay high:

break forth into singing, ye mountains; kings and great men of the
earth, like the strong and lofty mountains:

O forest, and every tree therein; the multitude of the common people;
see [Isa 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#018) these are called upon
to express their joy, for the following reason:

for the Lord hath redeemed Jacob, and glorified himself in Israel; which
is to be understood not merely of their redemption from the Babylonish
captivity, but of the redemption by Christ, which the former was a type
of, and in which all God's people in all nations are concerned, and
therefore have reason to rejoice; and in which all the divine
perfections are glorified, not only the wisdom, power, goodness, grace,
and mercy of God, but his holiness and justice; and saints not only have
reason to rejoice, because they are redeemed from sin and Satan, and the
law, and death and hell, and all spiritual enemies, but because the
glory of God is great in their salvation.

\(o\) "Quia fecit misericordiam", V. L. (p) , Sept.

[Isaiah 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 44:24</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, thy Redeemer,.... These are the words of the Son of
God, of Christ, the Redeemer of his people; and the following show him
to be the mighty God, and so able to redeem them, and therefore was
appointed to this work, and undertook it:

and he that formed thee from the womb; that formed thee in it, and
brought thee out of it, separated thee from it, and called thee by his
grace:

I am the Lord that maketh all things; that made all things out of
nothing at first; for without Christ was not anything made that was
made; all things in heaven, and earth, and sea, were made by him; and he
continues all creatures in their being, and provides for them, and
governs all by his power; he works hitherto, and continues working with
his divine Father, [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001),

that stretcheth forth the heavens alone, that spreadeth abroad the earth
by myself; not to the exclusion of the Father and the Holy Spirit, but
of all creatures, angels and men; of himself, and by his own strength
and power, and, without the help of these, he stretched out the vast
space of the heavens as a curtain, and spread out the earth in its
length and breadth, and the large surface of it, to that great
circumference which it has; a full proof of his proper deity! A man
cannot stretch out a curtain, or piece of tapestry, of any size, without
the help of another; and much less can a creature stretch out the
heavens and the earth.

[Isaiah 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 44:25</span></span>

That frustrateth the tokens of the liars,.... Struck dumb the oracles of
the Heathens, disappointed their lying priests, and made void all the
signs and tokens they gave the people, that such and such things would
come to pass, which did not, and which proved them to be liars:

and maketh diviners mad; soothsayers, astrologers, and such sort of
persons, who pretended to foretell future events; but these not
answering to their predictions, they became mad, because their credit
was ruined, and they lost their reward:

that turneth wise men backward, and maketh their knowledge foolishness;
the wise philosophers among the Gentiles, and their schemes of
philosophy, which were confounded and destroyed, and proved foolish,
through the ministration of the Gospel, [Co1
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#020).

[Isaiah 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 44:26</span></span>

That confirmeth the word of his servant, and performeth the counsel of
his messengers,.... Who, as he confirmed the word of Isaiah and other
prophets, and fulfilled their predictions concerning the captivity of
the Jews, and their deliverance from it; so he has confirmed and
established the word preached by his servants, the Gospel, which is the
counsel of God, delivered out by his messengers, the apostles, and first
preachers of it; it being attended with the demonstration of the spirit,
and of power, to the conversion of sinners, and to the destruction of
idolatry and Pagan worship. By the Lord's "servant" some understand
Moses, as Jarchi; others Isaiah, as Kimchi and most interpreters; and
why not Paul, as Cocceius? though the singular seems rather to be put
for the plural, as the next clause explains it; and so the Arabic
version renders it, "his servants"; to which the Targum agrees,
paraphrasing it,

"confirming the words of his servants the righteous:''

that saith to Jerusalem, thou shalt be inhabited, and to the cities of
Judah, ye shall be built, and I will raise up the decayed places
thereof; all which suppose that Jerusalem, which, in the prophet's time,
was full of inhabitants, should be emptied of them, by the sword,
famine, pestilence, and captivity; yet, nevertheless, there should be a
return of the Jews from captivity, and this city should be peopled and
inhabited again; and also, that the cities of Judah, which were now in
good circumstances, should be laid waste, and all the adjacent country
be in a ruinous condition, all which should be rebuilt and restored to a
flourishing state again. The Lord had said it, and it should be done; as
accordingly it was. This may be understood, in a spiritual sense, of the
building up of the church of God, and the setting up and establishing
the interest of Christ, by the preaching of the Gospel.

[Isaiah 44:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 44:27</span></span>

That saith to the deep, be dry,.... The Targum is,

"that saith to Babylon, be desolate;''

and most interpreters, Jewish and Christian, understand it of Babylon,
which was situated in a watery place, by rivers of water, particularly
the river Euphrates, and in a low valley:

and I will dry up thy rivers; some think the allusion is to the
stratagem of Cyrus, made use of, under a divine direction, to drain the
river Euphrates, and make it passable for his army; by which means he
surprised the city of Babylon, and took it: though others think it
refers to the drying up of the Red sea and the river Jordan, which are
proofs of what God can do, and a periphrasis of his power.

[Isaiah 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 44:28</span></span>

That saith of Cyrus, he is my shepherd,.... Or Coresh, as his name in
the Hebrew language is; and in the Persian tongue signifies the "sun";
from whence he had his name, as Ctesias (q) and Plutarch (r) say; to
which the Hebrew word "cheres", which signifies the "sun", has some
affinity; though Joseph Scaliger (s) would have the name of Cyrus to
signify "food" in the Persian language, and which answers to his
character as a shepherd. The father of this illustrious person was
Cambyses, king of Persia; his mother's name was Mandane, daughter of
Astyages, king of Media (t). This prophecy, concerning him, was nearly
two hundred years before he was born. Josephus says (u), that Cyrus read
this prophecy himself, which Isaiah had delivered out two hundred and
ten years before; and which is a proof both of God's prescience of
future contingencies, and of the truth of divine revelation. The Lord
honours him with the title and character of his "shepherd", who was to
lead his flock, the people of Israel, out of the Babylonish captivity,
and guide them into their own land. It is very usual, both in sacred and
profane writings, for kings to be called shepherds; and if Cyrus
signifies "food", as before observed, his name and office agree. Justin
(w) says, he had this name given him, while he was among the shepherds,
by whom he was brought up, having been exposed in his infancy. Cyrus
himself compares a king to a shepherd, and observes a likeness between
them (x):

and shall perform all my pleasure; concerning the deliverance of the
Jews from Babylon, and the encouragement of them to go up to their own
land, and rebuild their city and temple; and many other things which he
did, agreeably to the secret will of God, though he knew it not; and
what he did he did not do in obedience to his will, but as overruled by
the power and providence of God:

even saying to Jerusalem, thou shalt be built; these are not the words
of the Lord, as before, but of Cyrus, giving orders that Jerusalem
should be built:

and to the temple, thy foundation shall be laid; with great propriety
this is said, since only the foundation was laid in his time; the Jews
being discouraged and hindered by their enemies from going on with the
building in his reign, until the times of Darius, king of Persia. See
[Ezr 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001).

\(q\) Excerpta, p. 648. Ed. Gronov. (r) In Vita Artaxerxis, (s) Emendat.
Temp. I. 6. (t) Xenophon. Cyropaedia, l. 1. sect. 1. (u) Antiqu. l. 11.
c. 1. sect. 2. (w) Hist. ex Trogo l. 1. c. 5. (x) Xenophon, Cyropaedia,
l. 8. sect. 18.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 45](isa045)

</div>
