<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa023)  [Next](isa025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 24:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 24

This chapter contains a prophecy of calamities that should come upon the
whole world, and the inhabitants of it, for their sins; of the
preservation of a remnant; of the visitation of the kings of the earth;
and of the appearance of Christ in his glory and majesty. The miserable
condition of the world, and its inhabitants, especially all within the
Romish jurisdiction, is set forth by various phrases, [Isa
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001) the causes of which are the
transgression and mutation of the laws and ordinances of Christ, [Isa
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#005) the effects of which are the
cursing and burning of the inhabitants, [Isa
24:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#006) cessation of all joy among them,
[Isa 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#007) and the destruction of their
chief city, Rome, [Isa 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#010) then
follows a prophecy of a remnant that shall escape, and be brought into a
very comfortable condition, and sing for joy, and glorify God in the
midst of the earth, and in the uttermost parts of it, [Isa
24:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#013) but it is intimated it shall go
ill with others for their perfidy and treachery; fear and danger shall
attend them everywhere, [Isa 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016)
yea, in the issue, the world shall be shaken, and moved and removed, and
be utterly dissolved, fall and not rise more, [Isa
24:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#019) when the kings and great ones of
the earth shall be taken prisoners, and punished by the Lord, [Isa
24:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#021) and then Christ shall take to
himself his great power, and reign with his people gloriously in the New
Jerusalem state, [Isa 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023).

[Isaiah 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 24:1</span></span>

Behold, the Lord maketh the earth empty,.... Some, by the "earth", only
understand the land of Israel or Judea, and interpret the prophecy of
the captivity of the ten tribes by Shalmaneser, as Kimchi, and other
Jewish writers; and others, of the destruction of the Jews by
Nebuchadnezzar; but some take in along with them the neighbouring
nations who suffered by the same princes at the same time. Vitringa
interprets the whole of the times of the Maccabees, as also the three
following chapters [Isa 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001); though
it is best to understand it of the Papal world, and all the
antichristian states; and there are some things in it, at the close of
it, which respect the destruction of the whole world. The Septuagint
version uses the word by which Luke intends the whole Roman empire, [Luk
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001) and the Arabic version here
renders it, "the whole world": the "emptying" of it is the removal of
the inhabitants of it by wars and slaughters, which will be made when
the seven vials of God's wrath will be poured upon all the antichristian
states; see [Rev 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001) and this being a
most remarkable and wonderful event, is prefaced with the word "behold":

and maketh it waste; or desolate; the inhabitants and fruits of it being
destroyed. R. Joseph Kimchi, from the use of the word in the Arabic
language, renders it, "and opened it" (n); and explains it of the
opening of the gates of a city to the enemy, so as that men may go out
of it; to which the Targum inclines paraphrasing it,

"and shall deliver it to the enemy:''

and turneth it upside down; or, "perverteth the face of it" (o); so that
it has not the form it had, and does not look like what it was, but is
reduced to its original chaos, to be without form and void; cities being
demolished, towns ruined, fields laid waste, and the inhabitants slain;
particularly what a change of the face of things will there be in the
destruction of the city of Rome! see [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007). The Targum is,

"and shall cover with confusion the face of its princes, because they
have transgressed the law:''

and scattereth abroad the inhabitants thereof; who will be obliged to
fly from place to place from the sword of their victorious enemies. All
is spoken in the present tense, though future, because of the certainty
of it.

\(n\) So "aperuit totam portam", Golius, col. 321. (o) "et pervertet
faciem ejus", Piscator.

[Isaiah 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 24:2</span></span>

And it shall be, as with the people, so with the priest,.... Or,
"prince" (p); no order or rank of men will fare better than another;
their dignity, in things civil or ecclesiastical, will not secure them
from ruin; it will be no better with princes and priests than the common
people; they shall all alike share in the common destruction. Not
Jeroboam's priests, but rather the Romish priests, are here meant, who
have led the people into superstition and idolatry; blind leaders of the
blind, and so both fall into the ditch together:

as with the servant, so with his master; as with the maid, so with her
mistress; there shall be no distinction of superiors and inferiors; as
not of prince and subjects, so not of master and servant, mistress and
maid; no respect will be had to persons, but the one shall be treated
even as the other:

as with the buyer, so with the seller; the one that bought an estate,
and thought to enjoy it, will be no better off than he that sold it, and
perhaps spent the money; the one will be possessed of no more than the
other, seeing what the one had bought, and the other sold, will now be
in the possession of a third:

as with the lender, so with the borrower; their condition will be equal;
he that was so poor that he was obliged to borrow to carry on his
business, or for the necessaries of life, and so he that was so rich
that he was capable of lending, now the one will be no richer than the
other, but both on a level; the substance of the lender being taken from
him:

as with the taker of usury, so with the giver of usury to him; this was
forbidden the Jews by a law, [Deu
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#019) wherefore not the land of Judea
is here meant, but the antichristian states, among whom this practice
has greatly prevailed.

\(p\) "ac praesidi", Junius & Tremellius; "sic gubernator", Piscator.

[Isaiah 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 24:3</span></span>

The land shall be utterly emptied, and utterly spoiled,.... Entirely
emptied of its inhabitants, and wholly spoiled of its riches and
substance; this is repeated, and with greater strength, to confirm what
is before said, and which receives a greater confirmation by what
follows:

for the Lord hath spoken this word; who is able to perform it, and who
is faithful to his threatenings, as to his promises; not a word of his
shall ever fail; the judgments threatened to the antichristian world are
his true and faithful sayings; and the ruin of Rome is certain, because
strong is the Lord that judgeth her, [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008).

[Isaiah 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 24:4</span></span>

The earth mourneth, and fadeth away,.... It mourns, because of its
inhabitants being destroyed; and it fades away, because stripped of its
wealth and riches: so the kings of the earth, and merchants of it are
represented as weeping and mourning at the destruction of Rome, because
of its judgments, and the loss of its trade and riches, [Rev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009),

the world languisheth, and fadeth away: the inhabitants of it are like a
sick man, that is so faint and feeble that he cannot stand, but totters
and falls; and like the leaves of trees and flowers of the fields, whose
strength and beauty are gone, and fade and fall:

the haughty people of the earth do languish: the kings and merchants of
the earth before mentioned, who grow sick and faint through fear of what
is coming upon them.

[Isaiah 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 24:5</span></span>

The earth also is defiled under the inhabitants of it,.... Or, "and the
earth"; or, "for the earth is defiled" (q); and so it is a reason why it
is emptied and spoiled, because polluted and corrupted with the
fornication of the whore of Rome, with her idolatries and superstitions,
with which the inhabitants of the earth are defiled; or with her rapine
and violence, cruelties, bloodshed, and murders; for blood defiles a
land, [Num 35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033) all which are
committed by the inhabitants of the earth, subject to the see of Rome,
by reason of which it may be said to be corrupted or defiled; so the
phrase may be interpreted "for", or "because of the inhabitants of it":
thus Jarchi and Kimchi, because of their wickedness and impieties; see
[Rev 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018) or, "the earth is
deceitful" (r), or plays the hypocrite; promising and showing as if it
would bring forth fruit, and brings forth none, but is barren and
unfruitful, because of the sins of the inhabitants of it; see [Rev
18:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#014),

because they have transgressed the laws; of God and man, as antichrist
and his followers have done; who is that wicked that "lawless one", that
sets up himself above laws, and takes upon him to dispense with the laws
of God and man, [Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004) and in
innumerable instances has transgressed both, casting all contempt upon
them, and bidding all defiance to them, as being not at all bound and
obliged by them:

changed the ordinance; or "ordinances"; the singular for the plural, a
collective word; the ordinances of divine revelation, of the Gospel
dispensation, those of baptism, and the Lord's supper; the former of
these is changed, both as to subjects and mode, from adult baptism to
infant baptism, from immersion to aspersion; and the latter, in it the
bread and wine are pretended to be changed into the very body and blood
of Christ, and is only given in one kind to the laity, and made a real
sacrifice of, when its end and use are only to commemorate the one
sacrifice already offered up; moreover, by the "ordinance" may be meant
the Scriptures, which are the "the rule of judgment"; which antichrist
has most miserably perverted, and has changed and altered the sense of
them; taking upon him to be the infallible interpreter of them, and
judge of all controversies, forbidding the reading of them to the
people, and setting up his own decrees, definitions, and determinations,
above them; and is "that throne of iniquity, that frameth mischief, by a
law", or ordinance, of his own making, and which he puts in the room of
the divine law or ordinance, [Psa
94:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#020) where the same word is used as
here; and he is that little horn, that thought to change times and laws,
[Dan 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025),

broken the everlasting covenant; not the eternal law of nature, nor the
everlasting covenant of circumcision, or that made with Israel on mount
Sinai; but the new covenant, or the administration of the covenant of
grace under the Gospel dispensation, which is to last to the end of
time, and lies in the ministration of the word, and administration of
ordinances; which antichrist has done all that in his power lies to
break, make null and void, by corrupting the word, and changing the
ordinances, and setting up his own institutions above them, and against
them.

\(q\) "et terra", V. L. "nam terra", Piscator. (r) "hypocrita est",
Montanus, Tigurine version.

[Isaiah 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 24:6</span></span>

Therefore hath the curse devoured the earth,.... The inhabitants of it,
and the fruits upon it, alluding to the earth being cursed for the sin
of man, when it brought forth briers and thorns; this may denote the
seven vials of God's wrath poured upon the earth, or the antichristian
states. Some, by the curse, understand perjury or false swearing; so the
Targum,

"therefore, because of perjury (or a false oath) the earth is become a
desert;''

of which popes, and Popish princes, cardinals, priests, Jesuits, &c.
have been notoriously guilty:

and they that dwell therein are desolate: for want of houses, cities and
towns being destroyed by war; or through famine, for want of provisions,
the earth being cursed for their sins: or the words may be rendered,
"for they that dwell therein are guilty" (s); of idolatry, bloodshed,
perjury, thefts, sorcery, and all other abominations, [Rev
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020),

therefore the inhabitants of the earth are burned; their cities burnt
with fire, and particularly the city of Rome; or their persons, their
bodies burnt with burning fevers, and pestilential diseases; and their
minds with envy, fury, and madness: this may be the same with the fourth
vial poured upon the sun, when men will be scorched with fire and great
heat, and blaspheme, [Rev 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#008). The
Vulgate Latin version here renders it, "shall be mad"; through the wrath
of God poured out upon them:

and few men left; but what shall be consumed by fire or sword, by famine
or pestilence, or by one or other of the vials; and those that remain
shall be frightened, and give glory to the God of heavens [Rev
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013).

\(s\) Sept. "peccabunt", V. L. "quia deliquerunt", Tigurine version;
"rei aguntur, sive luunt", Cocceius.

[Isaiah 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 24:7</span></span>

The new wine mourneth,.... For want men to drink it, or because spilled
by the enemy; or the inhabitants of the land mourn for want of it, not
having their vintages as usual:

the vine languisheth; or is sickly, and so barren and unfruitful, does
not bring forth its clusters of grapes as it used to do; there being
none to prune it, and take care of it, and being trodden down by hostile
forces. The Targum is,

"all that drink wine shall mourn, because the vines are broken down.''

So the Romish harlot, and those that have drank of the wine of her
fornication, and have lived deliciously, shall have, in one hour, death,
and mourning, and famine, [Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007),

all the merryhearted do sigh; such, whose hearts wine has formerly made
glad, shall now sigh for want of it; and such who have lived deliciously
with the whore of Rome, and have had many a merry bout with her, shall
now bewail her, and lament for her, when she shall be utterly burnt with
fire, [Rev 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009).

[Isaiah 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 24:8</span></span>

The mirth of tabrets ceaseth,.... Or of drums, and such like musical
instruments, used at junketings and jovial feasts. So when Babylon is
fallen, the voice of harpers and musicians, and of pipers and
trumpeters, shall be heard no more therein, [Rev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022),

the noise of them that rejoice endeth; the tumultuous noise of revelling
persons at feasts and banquets, at marriages, and such like seasons; and
so it is said, that when Babylon is destroyed, the voice of the
bridegroom and the bride shall be heard no more at all therein, or the
joy expressed on such occasions by their friends and companions, [Rev
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#023),

the joy of the harp ceaseth; an instrument of music used on joyful
occasions; the voice of harpers is particularly mentioned in [Rev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022).

[Isaiah 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 24:9</span></span>

They shall not drink wine with a song,.... They that have wine to drink
shall not drink it with that pleasure they have heretofore done; nor
shall their drinking be attended with merry songs, such as are sung by
drunkards, who, while they are quaffing, are chanting to the sound of
the viol, or other musical instruments; see [Amo
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#005),

strong drink shall be bitter to them that drink it; they shall have no
gust for it, or relish of it, as they formerly had; either through
bodily diseases upon themselves, or because of the calamities upon the
nations and states in which they dwell: this will be the case of her
that says, "I sit a queen, and shall see no sorrow", [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007).

[Isaiah 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 24:10</span></span>

The city of confusion is broken down,.... Or "of vanity", as the Vulgate
Latin version; or of "emptiness" or "desolation"; the word is "tohu",
used in [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002) this is to be
understood not of Bethel, where one of Jeroboam's calves was, called
Bethaven, or "the house of vanity"; nor Samaria, the chief city of the
ten tribes; nor Jerusalem; but mystical Babylon, whose name signifies
"confusion"; even the city of Rome, in which there is nothing but
disorder and irregularity, no truth, justice, or religion; a city of
vanity, full of superstition and idolatry, and devoted to ruin and
desolation; and will be broke to pieces by the judgments of God, which
will come upon it in one hour, [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008),

every house is shut up, that no man may come in: or, "from coming in";
not for fear of the enemy, and to keep him out; but because there are no
inhabitants in them, being all destroyed by one means or another, by
fire or sword, or famine or pestilence, so that there is none to go in
or out.

[Isaiah 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 24:11</span></span>

There is a crying for wine in the streets,.... Not to them that have it,
to come and sell it, as Kimchi; but for want of it: there shall be a
howling and lamentation in the streets of Rome, during the siege of it,
when there will be a famine of bread and of wine, as in [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008) by those who used to drink wine,
and make glad their hearts; but now shall be without it. This is put for
all desirable things, which their souls lusted after; but now will be
departed from them, [Rev 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#014),

all joy is darkened: or come to an eventide; the light of joy is turned
into the darkness of misery and distress; this will be, when the fifth
vial is poured out on the seat of the beast, and his kingdom will be
full of darkness; and men will gnaw their tongues for pain, and yet not
repent of their sins, but blaspheme the God of heaven, [Rev
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010),

the mirth of the land is gone; not Jerusalem, the joy of the whole
earth, as Jarchi; but the mirth and joy of the city of Rome; See Gill on
[Isa 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#008).

[Isaiah 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 24:12</span></span>

In the city is left desolation,.... And nothing else, palaces, houses,
and temples burnt, and inhabitants destroyed; none but devils, foul
spirits, and hateful and unclean birds, inhabiting it, [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002),

and the gate is smitten with destruction; or "gates", the singular for
the plural; none passing and repassing through them, as formerly, and
themselves utterly destroyed. This, according to Kimchi, shall be in the
days of the Messiah, in the times of Gog and Magog.

[Isaiah 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 24:13</span></span>

When thus it shall be in the midst of the land among the people,....
When the above judgments shall be executed, the city of Rome shall be
destroyed, and the vials of God's wrath are poured but on all the
antichristian states, on all the followers of the beast, throughout the
whole Romish jurisdiction:

there shall be as the shaking of an olive tree, and as the gleaning of
grapes, when the vintage is done; as when an olive tree is shaken, or
beaten with a staff, which was the usual way of gathering olives, and
which the word (t) here signifies, there are some few left upon the
uppermost or outermost branches, which cannot be reached; and as, after
the vintage is got in, there are some grapes to be gleaned and gathered
from the vines; see [Isa 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#006) so it is
here insinuated that there should be some, though but a few, a remnant,
according to the election of grace, that should escape the above
calamities, and be preserved as a seed for the church of God; and so it
will be, that just before the destruction of mystical Babylon, the
Lord's people will be called out of her, that they partake not of her
sins, and of her plagues, [Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004).
The Targum is,

"for now shall be left alone the righteous in the midst of the earth,
among the kingdoms, as the shaking of olives, as the gleaning of grapes
after the vintage;''

and to olives and grapes are these gracious persons fitly compared, for
the goodness, loveliness, and fruitfulness of them, through the grace of
God.

\(t\) "similes olivis destrictae oleae", Junius & Tremellius; "tanquam
strictura oleae", Cocceius.

[Isaiah 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 24:14</span></span>

They shall lift up their voice, they shall sing,.... That is, as the
Septuagint version adds,

"they that are left upon the earth;''

these shall lift up their voice, in singing the praises of God, for his
judgments on Babylon, and avenging the blood of his saints; and for
their deliverance and salvation, and the inestimable blessings they are
now put into the possession of; these are they, who, having gotten the
victory over the beast and his image, sing the song of Moses and the
Lamb, [Rev 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002),

for the majesty of the Lord, they shall cry aloud from the sea: so the
Hebrew accents distinguish these clauses; and the sense is, that from
the west, as Kimchi and Ben Melech interpret it, from the western
nations, where Protestantism chiefly prevails; or from the Mediterranean
Sea, which lay west of Judea; from the maritime countries, the countries
bordering upon it, where at this time will appear many that will embrace
the Gospel of Christ; or from the isles of the sea, as the phrase is
explained in the next verse [Isa
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#015), such as our isles of Great
Britain and Ireland; great acclamations will be made unto the Lord, on
account of his glorious majesty, seen in the destruction of antichrist,
and in setting up his own kingdom and glory: these are the four and
twenty elders, who will fall down, and give thanks to Christ, for taking
to himself his great power, and reigning; and these triumphant and
victorious persons are represented as standing on a sea, while they make
their shouts and hallelujahs; see [Rev
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#016) this, with what follows in the
two next verses [Isa 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#015), belong to
the Philadelphian church state, or spiritual reign of Christ, and
express the light and joy that will attend that.

[Isaiah 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 24:15</span></span>

Wherefore glorify ye the Lord, in the fires,.... These are the words of
the remnant, now triumphing and singing, calling upon others also to
glorify the Lord in the fires of affliction and tribulation, in which
they had lately been, and had themselves done: or, "in the valleys" (u);
in low estates and conditions: or, "in holes" (w); dens and clefts of
rocks, where they fled from their persecuting enemies; but neither of
these versions suit the state of the true church, as it will be at this
time. The word "Urim", here used, which is one of the names of what was
put into the breastplate of the high priest, signifies "lights"; which
sense of the word the Vulgate Latin version retains, rendering it, "in
doctrines glorify the Lord", and so the Targum,

"therefore, when light cometh to the righteous, they shall glorify the
Lord;''

and so the words may be rendered, "glorify the Lord for the Urim", or
"the lights"; for Christ, who has the true "Urim" and "Thummim", lights
and perfections; for the light of his Gospel, and the truths of it,
which will now be spread in a most wonderful manner throughout the
world; to which times may be applied those words, "arise, shine, for thy
light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon thee--and the
Gentiles shall come to thy light, and kings to the brightness of thy
rising", [Isa 60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001) and which will be a
just and sufficient reason for giving glory to the Lord:

even the name of the Lord God of Israel, in the isles of the sea; whose
name will now be known, not in Israel, or among the Jews only, but in
all distant and foreign countries, which are sometimes meant by the
isles of the sea; and in all islands, even the most remote, who will
have reason to join with them on the continent to glorify God, whose
name will now be great in all the earth.

\(u\) "in vallibus". So Kimchi, Ben Melech, Munster, Pagninus, Montanus,
Piscator. (w) "In cavernis vel speluncis", Forerius, Sanctius.

[Isaiah 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 24:16</span></span>

From the uttermost part of the earth have we heard songs,.... Of praise
and thanksgivings, on account of the judgments of God on antichrist; for
the glorious appearance of Christ's kingdom; for the spread of his
Gospel throughout the world; for the conversion of the Jews, and the
bringing in of the fulness of the Gentiles everywhere; wherefore these
songs are heard from all parts of the world, and the uttermost parts of
them; these are the voices said to be heard in heaven, or in the church,
everywhere, [Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015) so some Jewish
writers (x) interpret the words of the days of the Messiah, and of the
songs then to be sung:

even glory to the righteous; to the righteous One; meaning either the
righteous God, who is essentially righteous in himself, and
declaratively in his works of providence and grace, and in the judgments
he executes on his enemies; on account of which, particularly, glory is
here ascribed unto him, even for his judgments on the great whore, they
being just and true, [Rev 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#006) or to
Christ the righteous One, who is so as God, and as Mediator, and is the
author of righteousness to his people; who ascribe the glory of deity,
of salvation, and of righteousness to him, who is crowned with glory and
honour now, and will be glorified on earth at this time; for then he,
and he alone, will be exalted, and will reign before his ancients
gloriously: or to righteous men, such who are made righteous by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to them: it is a glory to have on the
righteousness of Christ; and such as have it are all glorious within,
and will be remarkably glorious in the latter day, a crown of glory in
the hands of the Lord; and especially in the New Jerusalem church state,
when they will have the glory of God upon them, as well as in the
ultimate state. Ben Melech observes, that signifies desire and good
will; and so may suggest, that the righteous at this time will have all
that their hearts can wish for and desire, as well as visibly appear to
be the objects of God's light and pleasure. Some think that the word
"tzebi", translated "glory", signifies the land of Judea, called "the
glory of all lands", [Eze 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006) which
will at this time be restored to the Jews, who will now be converted,
and be all righteous:

but I said, my leanness, my leanness, woe unto me: the treacherous
dealers have dealt treacherously, yea, the treacherous dealers have
dealt very treacherously: this the prophet said, which brought leanness
upon him; he either pining and fretting at the present state of his
people, so very unlike to that which he now had a view of; they being a
set of treacherous men, there being no faith in them, with respect to
God or one another; no religion or truth, no honour nor honesty among
them: or having in view the future state of this people when the Messiah
should come; whom they would reject, and treacherously betray into the
hands of the Gentiles, and crucify: or else, rather foreseeing, by a
spirit of prophecy, the sad times that would be previous to those
glorious ones before mentioned; as great declensions among professors;
great coldness and lukewarmness in religious affairs, the consequence of
which is leanness of soul; the interest of Christ brought very low, his
witnesses being slain, and prophesying at an end; and all this through
the treachery of false teachers that lie in wait to deceive: unless,
rather, it can be thought that this refers to the Laodicean state, when
there will be great lukewarmness and indifference in the professors of
religion; great carnality and security, and much spiritual leanness,
though great boasts of riches and fulness; and which will issue in the
dissolution of the world, and the personal appearance of Christ, to
which the following part of the chapter seems to relate. The Targum
interprets the word "razi", which is repeated, and rendered "leanness",
by a "secret" or mystery, thus,

"the prophet said, a secret, a reward for the righteous is shown unto
me; a secret punishment for the wicked is revealed unto me;''

and so Jarchi explains it of two secrets, the secret of punishment, and
the secret of salvation; but of the latter especially the prophet would
not say woe unto me, nor indeed of the former; for as the one is
desirable, so the other is but just and righteous, and neither of them
secrets, or mysteries: rather, if the idea of a mystery or secret is to
be retained, the prophet may be thought to be thrown into distress, in
the foreview of the blindness that should happen to Israel, and continue
till the fulness of the Gentiles came in, which the apostle calls a
mystery, [Rom 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025) and of their
rejection, because of their disbelief of the Messiah, and their
perfidious usage of him and his followers, dealing very treacherously
with them, and betraying them into the hands of wicked men.

\(x\) Midrash Kohelet, fol. 62. 3.

[Isaiah 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 24:17</span></span>

Fear, and the pit, and the snare, are upon thee, O inhabitant of the
earth. This is to be understood not of the land of Judea only, and the
inhabitants of it, but of all the earth; Kimchi interprets it of the
nations of the world, particularly the Greeks and Turks; but the whole
world, and the inhabitants of it, are meant, as the following verses
show. There is an elegant play on words in the Hebrew, which cannot well
be expressed in English, in the words "pachad, pachath, pach", fear,
pit, and a snare; which are expressive of a variety of dangers,
difficulties, and distresses; there seems to be an allusion to creatures
that are hunted, who flee through fear, and fleeing fall into pits, or
are entangled in snares, and so taken. Before the last day, or second
coming of Christ to judge the world, there will be great perplexity in
men's minds, great dread and fear upon their hearts, and much distress
of nations; and the coming of the Son of Man will be as a snare upon the
earth; see [Luk 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025).

[Isaiah 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 24:18</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that he who fleeth from the noise of the
fear,.... From the fearful noise that will be made, the voices and
thunderings heard in the heavens above, the sea and waves roaring below;
or from wars, and rumours of wars, and terrible armies approaching and
pursuing, [Luk 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025) or rather at the
report of an object to be feared and dreaded by wicked men, even the Son
of Man coming in the clouds of heaven, [Rev
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#007),

shall fall into the pit; of ruin and destruction, dug for the wicked,
[Psa 94:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#013) just as the kings of Sodom
and Gomorrah fell into the slime pits, when they fled from their
conquerors, [Gen 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#010),

and he that comes up out of the midst of the pit shall be taken in the
snare; the meaning is, that he that escapes one trouble should fall into
another, so that there will be no safety anywhere. Jarchi's note is,

"he that escapes the sword of Messiah ben Joseph, shall fall upon the
sword of Messiah ben David; and he that escapes from thence shall be
taken in a snare in the war of Gog:''

for the windows from on high are open; not hereby signifying, as Jerom
thinks, that the Lord would now see all the sins of men, which, because
he did not punish before, he seemed by sinners to be ignorant of; but
the allusion is to the opening of the windows of heaven at the time of
the deluge, [Gen 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011) and intimates,
that the wrath of God should be revealed from heaven, and the severest
judgments be denounced, made manifest, and come down from thence in a
very visible, public, and terrible manner, like an overflowing tempest
of rain:

and the foundations of the earth do shake: very probably the dissolution
of the world may be attended with a general earthquake; or this may
denote the dread and terror that will seize the inhabitants of it.

[Isaiah 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 24:19</span></span>

The earth is utterly broken down,.... Still alluding to the deluge, when
the earth broke in upon the waters under it, if Mr. Burnet's theory of
the earth can be supported:

the earth is clean dissolved; it will be an entire dissolution, nothing
shall remain; all these things, as Peter says, the heavens and the
earth, and all in them, shall be dissolved, [Pe2
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#011),

the earth is moved exceedingly; out of its place and form, and shall
fall into its original chaos and confusion. The Targum is,

"moving, the earth shall be moved; agitating, the earth shall be
agitated; breaking or dissolving, the earth shall be broken or
dissolved;''

which seems to express the more gradual and natural dissolution of the
world. These expressions are used, and repeated, to declare the certain
and complete destruction of it.

[Isaiah 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 24:20</span></span>

The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard,.... When it shall be
moved and agitated to and fro, and dissolved; or this may be meant of
the inhabitants, who shall be at their wits' end, and in the utmost
confusion, not knowing what to do, nor where to go, having no more
thought, nor sense, nor command of themselves, than a drunken man; and
this is in just retaliation, that as they have been drunk with sin,
having drank up iniquity like water, they shall now be drunk with
punishment, which being heavy upon them, will make them stagger like a
drunken man:

and shall be removed like a cottage; or, "a tent" (x); either of
soldiers or shepherds, which are easily taken down and moved; or like "a
lodge" (y), as the word is rendered [Isa
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#008). The Septuagint render it a "fruit
watch"; and, according to the Jewish writers, it signifies a booth or
tent, in which the keepers of gardens or vineyards watched in the night;
which Jarchi says was built on the top of a tree, and Kimchi on a hill;
and, being made of light wood, was easily moved to and fro with the
wind. The Targum is,

"and it goes and comes as a bed;''

that is, rocks as a cradle:

and the transgression thereof shall be heavy upon it; that is, the
punishment of transgression, which, like a talent of lead, in [Zac
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac005.htm#008) shall crush it, and the
inhabitants of it, to pieces:

and it shall fall, and not rise again; in the form it now is; for there
will be new heavens and a new earth, in which the righteous, who will
share the first resurrection, will dwell; for as for the first earth, or
present one, it shall pass away, and no place be found for it, [Rev
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011).

\(x\) "quasi tabernaculum", V. L. (y) "Ut diversoriolum", Piscator.

[Isaiah 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 24:21</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day,.... Not at the precise exact time
the earth shall be dissolved, but previous to it, within that
dispensation that is called the last day:

that the Lord shall punish the host of the high ones that are on high;
which is not to be understood of the darkening of the sun, moon, and
stars in the heavens, as some; nor of the visiting of angels, as Aben
Ezra; nor of the punishment of Satan, and his principalities and powers,
who are reserved to the judgment of the great day; much less of the
people of the Jews, their kings and rulers; nor the great monarchs of
the earth, the Assyrian, Chaldean, and others; but of antichrist and,
his dignified clergy, cardinals, archbishops, bishops, &c. who are the
"host or army of that high one" (z), as it may be rendered; of him that
exalts himself above all that is called God, sitting in the high place
in the temple of God, as if he was God; him, with all his mighty ones,
will Christ, who is the true Jehovah, destroy with the breath of his
mouth and the brightness of his coming; see [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004),

and the kings of the earth upon the earth; the kings of the earth, who
have committed fornication with the whore of Rome; and who will make war
with the Lamb, and shall be overcome by him, [Rev
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002) or, "the kings of he earth" with
"their earth" (a); both they and their land shall be visited.

\(z\) "super exercitum excelsi", Pagninus, Montanus, So Cocceius. (a)
"cum terra ipsorum", Junius & Tremellius.

[Isaiah 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 24:22</span></span>

And they shall be gathered together,.... First to the battle of the
great day of God Almighty at Armageddon, [Rev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014) and there being overcome and
taken, they shall be gathered together

as prisoners are gathered in the pit, and shall be shut up in the
prison; in the prison or the grave, and in hell; as captives are, till
such time as something is determined and ordered what to be done with
them:

and after many days shall they be visited; or punished, that is, after
the thousand years are ended, when the wicked dead will be all raised;
after the battle of Gog and Magog, when Satan, the beast, and false
prophet, and all their adherents, shall be cast into the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone, [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020).

[Isaiah 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 24:23</span></span>

Then the moon shall be confounded, and the sun ashamed,.... Either
literally understood; and the meaning is, that they shall be darkened,
their light being eclipsed by the superior light of Christ, the sun of
righteousness; see [Mat 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029) the New
Jerusalem church state, which is referred to, will have no need of the
light of the sun, or of the moon, Christ being the light thereof, [Rev
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023) figuratively it may be
interpreted of the kings and great men of the earth, as Aben Ezra; whose
glory will be outshone by the transcendent lustre and glory of Christ,
the King of saints. The Targum paraphrases it of idolaters thus,

"and they shall be confounded that worship the moon, and they shall be
ashamed that worship the sun;''

perhaps this may have reference to the fourth vial, which shall be
poured out upon the pope and his clergy, [Rev
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#008),

when the Lord of hosts shall reign in Mount Zion, and in Jerusalem; who
is no other than the Lord Jesus Christ, the true Jehovah, the Lord of
hosts or armies, of the sun, moon, and stars, the host of heaven, and of
the heavenly host of angels, and of men on earth; who was King from
eternity, and reigned during the Old Testament dispensation; came a King
into this world, though his kingdom was not of it, nor was with
observation: upon his ascension to heaven was made and declared Lord and
Christ; and now rules in the hearts of his people by his Spirit and
grace, and whose spiritual reign will more manifestly appear in the
latter day; but here it is to be understood of his reign on earth, which
will be personal, visible, and glorious, and in a different manner from
what it now is, when he will be King over all the earth. Zion and
Jerusalem, where he will reign, may be literally understood as the chief
place of his residence during this state, the spot of ground where he
was most despised and ill treated; see [Zac
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#004) or mystically, the church in the
New Jerusalem state, [Rev 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002) here he
will reign,

and before his ancients gloriously: or, "in glory"; in his own glory,
both as God and as man, and Mediator; and in his Father's glory, and in
the glory of his holy angels, in which he will come and appear; and
therefore his appearing is called a glorious one, [Luk
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#026), [Tit
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#013) and this "before his ancients",
the ancient patriarchs both before the flood, as Adam, Abel, &c. and
after the flood, as Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, and others; the old Jewish
church, the prophets and saints of the Old Testament dispensation; the
apostles and elders of the Gospel churches under the New; the four and
twenty elders, the representatives of the Gospel churches, so often
spoken of in the book of the Revelation; very probably with reference to
this text; and all the saints, in all ages, who will now be raised from
the dead, and live and reign with him; these are his ancients, who are
loved with an everlasting love, chosen in him before the foundation of
the world, with whom a covenant was made in him, and grace given to them
in him, before the world began; in the midst and presence of these he
will reign, and they shall behold his glory; yea, these shall appear in
glory; for so the words may be construed, "before his ancients", who are
"glory", or "in glory" (b); for they shall appear with him in glory,
both in soul and body, having the glory of God upon them, [Col
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#004).

\(b\) "et coram senibus suis, gloria", Pagninus, Montanus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 25](isa025)

</div>
