<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa030)  [Next](isa032.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 31](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 31:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 31

This chapter denounces woe to those that trusted in the Egyptians;
assures the Jews of God's care and protection of them; calls them to
repentance, and foretells the destruction of the Assyrian army. The sin
of those that trusted in Egypt, with the reasons of their trust, and not
looking to the Lord, and seeking him, is declared in [Isa
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001.md) and their folly exposed in so
doing; since the Lord is wise, powerful, and unchangeable, and the
Egyptians frail and weak; so that the helper and the helped must fall
before him, [Isa 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#002.md) whereas
protection might be expected from the Lord, as is promised, whose power
is like that of the lion, and whose tender care is like that of birds to
defend their young, [Isa 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#004.md)
wherefore the Jews are called upon to return to the Lord by repentance,
from whom they had revolted; which would be shown by their detestation
of idolatry, the sin they had been guilty of, [Isa
31:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#006.md) and the chapter is closed with a
prophecy of the ruin of the Assyrian army, and the flight of their king,
[Isa 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#008.md).

[Isaiah 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 31:1</span></span>

Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help,.... Or, "O ye that go down",
&c.; what poor foolish creatures are you! And in the end what miserable
and wretched ones will ye be! Such were the Jewish rulers and people,
who either went themselves, or sent ambassadors to the king of Egypt, to
supply them with men and horses against the king of Assyria, contrary to
the express command of God, which forbid them returning to Egypt; and
which showed their unmindfulness of deliverance from thence, and their
not having a due sense of that mercy upon them; as well as their so
doing exposed them to the danger of being drawn into the superstitions
and idolatries of that people:

and stay on horses, and trust in chariots, because they are many; and in
horsemen, because they are very strong; having their dependence upon,
and placing their confidence in, the strength and numbers of the cavalry
of the Egyptians:

but they look not unto the Holy One of Israel, neither seek the Lord;
they did not look unto the Lord with an eye of faith, nor seek him by
prayer and supplication; or ask any counsel or instruction of him, as
the Targum paraphrases the last clause; so that their sin lay not only
in their confidence in the creature, but in their neglect of the Lord
himself; and so all such persons are foolish and miserable, that trust
in an arm of flesh, that place their confidence in creature acts, in
their own righteousness, duties, and services, and have no regard to the
Holy One of Israel, to the holiness and righteousness of Christ, neglect
that, and do not submit to it; thus the Targum interprets the former
clause of the Word of the Holy One of Israel, the essential Word Christ.

[Isaiah 31:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 31:2</span></span>

Yet he also is wise,.... That is, God, the Holy One of Israel, is, whom
they disregarded; and wiser too than the Egyptians, to whom they sought
for help, and who were thought to be a wise and political people; and
wiser than themselves, who imagined they acted a prudent part, in
applying to them; so wise as to know all their schemes, and able to
confound them, as well as most certainly and fully to complete his own;
and it would have been therefore the highest wisdom to have sought to
him, and not to men:

and will bring evil; the evil of punishment or affliction on wicked men,
which he has threatened, and which they could in no wise escape, by
taking the methods they did:

and will not call back his words; his threatenings delivered by the
prophets: these, as he does not repent of, he will not revoke or make
void, but fulfil and accomplish; what he has said he will do, and what
he has purposed he will bring to pass; and therefore it was a weak and
an unwise part they acted, by applying to others, and slighting him:

but will arise against the house of evildoers; not the ten tribes of
Israel, as Jarchi and Kimchi interpret it; but rather the people of the
Jews, or some particular family among them; it may be the royal family,
chiefly concerned in sending the embassy to Egypt, or in advising to it;
though it may be the singular is put for the plural, as the Septuagint
and Arabic versions render it "the houses"; and so may design all those
great families which joined in this affair, and are therefore called
"evildoers"; as all such are that put their confidence in the creature,
and not in the Lord; and against such he will "arise", in a hostile
manner, sooner or later, against whom there is no standing; see [Job
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#004.md),

and against the help of them that work iniquity; that is, against the
Egyptians, the helpers of the Jews, who were workers of iniquity, and
therefore their help and hope in it would be in vain; or else the latter
part is descriptive of the Egyptians their helpers, who were a wicked
and idolatrous nation, and so not to be sought unto for help, or trusted
in, since, God being against them, it would be to no purpose, as he is
against all workers of iniquity.

[Isaiah 31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 31:3</span></span>

Now the Egyptians are men, and not God,.... Be it that they are mighty,
they are not mighty, as God is; and indeed they are but frail, feeble,
mortal, and mutable men, and therefore not to be trusted in, and
depended on; or to be put upon an equality with God, and even to be
preferred to him, as they were by the Jews; and of what use and service
could they be unto them, seeing God was against them?

and their horses flesh, and not spirit; only flesh, without an immortal
soul or spirit, which man has; and therefore a foolish thing in man to
trust in them, who must be entirely guided and directed by them; and
much less angelic spirits, or like them, which are incorporeal,
invisible, and exceedingly mighty and powerful, which excel all
creatures in strength, and are called the mighty angels; these are God's
cavalry, his horses and chariots; see [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017.md), [Hab
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#008.md) and what mighty things have been
done by them, even by a single one? Witness the destruction of the
Assyrian army, in one night, by one of them; wherefore the Egyptian
cavalry was not to be named with them (q):

When the Lord shall stretch out his hand; as soon as he does it, before
he strikes, and when he does this in order to it:

both he that helpeth shall fall; or "stumble", take a false step;
meaning the Egyptians, sent for and come forth to help the Jews; but,
stumbling and falling themselves, would be but poor assistants to them.
Aben Ezra interprets this of the king of Assyria destroying the
Egyptians, when he came to Jerusalem:

and he that is holpen shall fall down; the Jews, helped by the
Egyptians, who should fall, and be destroyed, though not now; yet
hereafter by the Chaldeans, as they were:

and they all shall fail together; both the Egyptians and the Jews.

\(q\) So Ben Melech interprets "spirit" of an angel, as he does the word
"God" in the preceding clause.

[Isaiah 31:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 31:4</span></span>

For thus hath the Lord spoken unto me,.... The prophet Isaiah, who had
heard and received what follows from the Lord, and therefore it might be
depended upon; and they are words of grace and mercy, promising
preservation and deliverance; and therefore it was a foolish thing to
send to Egypt for help:

Like as the lion, and the young lion roaring on his prey; or
"muttering", or "growling over his prey" (r); for the lion roars when he
is hungry, and wants a prey, and not when he has got one; but when he
has one, and is tearing it in pieces, and feeding upon it, he makes a
lower noise, a growling one, especially when he apprehends anyone near
to disturb him:

when a multitude of shepherds is called forth against him; or, "a
fulness of shepherds" (s); the whole posse of them, all that are in the
towns and villages, or fields adjacent: who, when a lion has got a lamb
or sheep out of the flock, are alarmed and called together, to deliver
it, if possible, out of his hands; one not daring to venture, or being
not sufficient to disturb him, or drive him away: or, "when a multitude
of shepherds meet him" (t); with the prey in his jaws; or rather "call
to him", make a noise, in hopes to frighten him, and cause him to drop
his prey, that being all they can do, not daring to go near him; which
sense is confirmed by what follows:

he will not be afraid of their voice, nor abase himself for the noise of
them; he will not leave and lose his prey, or flee from it or them, for
the yell and confused noise they make; nor move at all the faster for
them, not being in the least intimidated by them:

so shall the Lord of hosts come down to fight for Mount Zion, and for
the hill thereof; that is, he shall come down from heaven by his angel,
or in the display of his mighty power, and fight against the Assyrian
army, in favour of his people, the inhabitants of Zion or Jerusalem, and
deliver them; and there will be no more withstanding him, or putting him
off from his purpose, or preventing his good designs and resolutions,
than the shepherds are able to divert a lion from his prey. The simile
is expressive of the power of God, and of his certain accomplishment of
his purposes and promises.

\(r\) "ab" "mussitare." (s) "plenitudo pastorum", Montanus, De Dieu,
Cocceius. A collection of them, as Ben Melech. (t) "quando in occursum
illius venit", Munster.

[Isaiah 31:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 31:5</span></span>

As birds flying, so will the Lord of hosts defend Jerusalem,.... As the
preceding metaphor expresses the mighty power of God, this his
tenderness and affection, as well as his speed and swiftness in the
deliverance of his people. As birds in the air, at a distance,
especially the eagle, have their eye upon their nests, and their young
ones in them, and when in danger fly to their assistance, and hover over
them, and about them, to keep off those that would hurt them, or carry
them away; so the Lord, on high, sees his people when in distress, and
hastens to help them, and does surround, protect, and defend them: thus
the Lord did, when Sennacherib with his army besieged Jerusalem; who
boasted, with respect to other nations, that he had "found as a nest the
riches of the people", and that "there was none that moved the wing
against him", [Isa 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#014.md) to which it
is thought the allusion is here:

defending also he will deliver it; from present distress, the siege of
the Assyrian army:

and passing over he will preserve it; passing over the city of Jerusalem
to the army of the king of Assyria, that lay encamped against it; and
smiting that by an angel with a sudden destruction, preserved the city
from the ruin it was threatened with. The allusion is rightly thought to
be to the Lord's passing over the houses of the Israelites, when he
destroyed the firstborn in Egypt, [Exo
12:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#023.md) where the same word is used as
here, and nowhere else.

[Isaiah 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 31:6</span></span>

Turn ye unto him,.... From the Egyptians, to whom they sought for help,
unto the Lord, they had neglected; from evil ways and practices,
idolatry and impiety, by repentance and reformation; to the true worship
of God, to his word and ordinances, statutes and commands. The Targum
is,

"turn to the law;''

which they had rejected and broken. These are the words of the prophet,
a call of his to the people to repentance, to which they might be
induced by the gracious declaration of the Lord unto them, in the
preceding verses, promising them preservation and safety:

from whom the children of Israel have deeply revolted: or, "made deep a
revolt" (u); had gone very far back from God, and deep into sin and
ruin, that their recovery was difficult; and yet their return was
absolutely necessary, which ought to be done both speedily and heartily.
Some think reference is had to the deep schemes they had laid, those
political ones, at least, which they thought were such, in applying to
Egypt for help, when they, as it is said, [Isa
29:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#015.md) sought "deep to hide their
counsel front the Lord"; in doing which they deeply departed from him,
and are here called to return to him. This is said not of the ten
tribes, that were gone into captivity, but of the Jews, who were the
posterity of Israel also; which is mentioned, to put them in mind of
their descent, as an aggravation of their sin, and as an argument for
their return.

\(u\) Heb. "profundam fecerunt recessionem", Piscator; "profundaverunt
defevtionem", Montanus.

[Isaiah 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 31:7</span></span>

For in that day,.... When deliverance shall be wrought; when men shall
be convinced of the vanity and insufficiency of their idols to help
them, and of their sin in worshipping them; when they shall be brought
to repentance for it, and turn to the Lord as an evidence of it:

every man shall cast away his idols of silver, and his idols of gold;
with contempt and abhorrence of them, as the word (w) signifies; every
man "his" own idol, and even those that were of the greatest value,
which were made of gold and silver:

which your own hands have made unto you for a sin; their idols were the
work of their own hands, and were made by them in order to commit sin
with, the sin of idolatry; or sin may be put for the punishment of sin,
which is the issue and consequence of such practices: or it may be
rendered, "which your hands of sin", or "sinful hands, have made" (x);
it was a sin to make such idols, especially with a view to worship them;
it was a sin to worship them; and the fruit of it was deserved
punishment.

\(w\) a "spernere, reprobare." (x) "manus vestrae flagitiosae", Bootius
Animadv. Sacr. l. 4. c. 2. sect. 12.

[Isaiah 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 31:8</span></span>

Then shall the Assyrian fall with the sword, not of a mighty man,....
That is, the Assyrian army under Sennacherib their king, which besieged
Jerusalem in Hezekiah's time; which, as soon as the people were brought
to a sense of their sin, and repentance for it, and cast away their
idols as a proof of it, were utterly destroyed; but not in battle, not
by the sword of Hezekiah, or any of his valiant generals:

and the sword, not of a mean man, shall devour him; neither the sword of
a general, nor of a private soldier, nor indeed of any man, but of an
angel; see [Kg2 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035.md),

but he shall flee from the sword; from the drawn sword of the angel, who
very probably appeared in such a form as in [Ch1
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#016.md) which Sennacherib king of
Assyria seeing, as well as the slaughter made in his army by him, fled
from it; in the Hebrew text it is added, "for himself" (y); he fled for
his life, for his own personal security; see [Kg2
19:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#036.md),

and his young men shall be discomfited; his choice ones, the flower of
his army: or "melt away" (z), through fear; or die by the stroke of the
angel upon them: the sense of becoming "tributary" seems to have no
foundation.

\(y\) "fugiet sibi", Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius; "fuga consulet sibi",
Junius & Tremellius. (z) "in liquefactionem, erunt", Vatablus;
"colliquescent", Piscator.

[Isaiah 31:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 31:9</span></span>

And he shall pass over to his strong hold for fear,.... This is said of
the king of Assyria, departing in haste from the siege of Jerusalem, to
some strong hold in his own country, particularly his strong city
Nineveh, for fear of the angel, and destruction following him; nor could
he think himself safe, until he had got there. Some render it (and the
original will bear it), "and his rock shall pass over for fear" (a); his
mighty men, his men of valour, in whom he trusted, and put his
confidence, who were his strength, on which he depended; these, as many
as were left of them, fled away. So the Targum,

"his princes shall flee for fear;''

though these are expressed in the next clause:

and his princes shall be afraid of the ensign; any ensign or standard
they saw, supposing it to be a detachment of the Jews in pursuit of
them; or not daring afterwards to face any enemy with their banners
displayed: or rather were terrified at the sight of the standard erected
by the angel in the air, and at the slaughter of their companies under
them in the camp:

saith the Lord, whose fire is in Zion, and his furnace in Jerusalem; who
keeps house there, and therefore will defend it. Some, as Aben Ezra and
others, think reference is had to the altar of the Lord, where the fire
was kept continually burning, and sacrifices were offered up to him, and
therefore being the place of his worship, he would take care of it; but
rather it seems to denote the fire of God's wrath, to defend his people,
and destroy his enemies, [Zac 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#005.md). The
Targum is,

"whose lustre is in Zion to them that do the law, and a burning furnace
of fire to them that transgress his word.''

The Jews, in their Talmud (b), interpret the "fire" of hell, and the
"furnace" of the gate of hell.

\(a\) "et rupes ejus prae pavoro transibit", Forerius. So Cocceius and
Ben Melech; with which the version of Junius and Tremellius agrees. (b)
T. Bab. Erubim, fol. 19. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 32](isa032.md)

</div>
