<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa064)  [Next](isa066) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 65](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 65:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 65

This chapter contains an answer to the prayer begun [Isa
63:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#015), and continued in the preceding
chapter; in which reasons are given by the Lord for suffering such
calamities as are before mentioned to come upon the Jewish nation;
particularly their rejection of the Gospel as preached by Christ and his
apostles, and cleaving to the traditions of the fathers, and to their
own righteousness; which disobedience and rebellion are aggravated by
the Gentiles quick reception of the Gospel, as soon as preached to them,
[Isa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001) as also the idolatry of
their fathers, their impurity and breach of the divine laws, [Isa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003), as well as their own pride,
hypocrisy, and self-confidence, [Isa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005) all which being observed by the
Lord was highly provoking to him; and he was determined to recompense
into their bosoms their own sins, and the sins of their fathers, whose
measure they filled up, [Isa 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006),
nevertheless he would have a regard to a remnant among them, in whom the
true grace of God would be found, and who should have a name and a place
in the Gospel church state, and be preserved from the general
destruction, [Isa 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008), but as for the
unbelieving Jews, they should be punished with the sword, with famine,
with disgrace, with distress, vexation, and a curse; when the servants
of the Lord should have food, and joy, and honour, and bless themselves
in the Lord, and serve him, [Isa 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011)
and the chapter is concluded with promises of a new and happy state to
the Jews upon their conversion in the latter day; which will be attended
with much spiritual joy, with abundance of outward felicity, with great
safety and security, and with the presence of God, [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017).

[Isaiah 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 65:1</span></span>

I am sought of them that asked not for me,.... That this is a prophecy
of the calling and conversion of the Gentiles is not to be doubted,
since the Apostle Paul has quoted it, and applied it to that case, [Rom
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020) and is here mentioned as an
aggravation of the sin of the Jews, in rejecting Christ, when the
Gentiles received him; and was the reason of their being rejected of
God, and the Gospel being taken away from them, and given to another
people, and of the Lord's removing his presence from the one to the
other. The Gentiles are described as those that "asked not for" Christ,
or after him, as the apostle supplies it; they had not asked for him,
nor after him, nor anything about him; nor of him "before" this time, as
the Vulgate Latin version renders it; they were without Christ, the
promises and prophecies concerning him; and so had no knowledge of him,
nor made any inquiry about him, who or what he was; they did not ask
after his coming, or for it; did not desire it, or him, and were in no
expectation of it; they asked no favour of him, nor saw any need of him,
or worth in him; and yet now he was "sought of them"; or, as the apostle
has it, "was made manifest unto them"; and so the Septuagint version;
that is, he was manifested to them in the Gospel, and by the ministry of
it; which is a revelation of him, of salvation by him, of justification
by his righteousness, of peace and pardon by his blood, of atonement by
his sacrifice, and of eternal life through him; and the words will bear
to be rendered, "I was preached unto them": for from this word are
derived others (g), which signify an expounder, and an interpretation,
or exposition; and this was matter of fact, that Christ was preached to
the Gentiles upon the Jews' rejection of him, which is one branch of the
mystery of godliness, [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016) and
upon this he was sought of them: they sought him early and earnestly,
and desired to have him and his Gospel preached to them again and again,
[Act 13:42](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#042) they sought after the
knowledge of him, and for an interest in him, and for all grace from
him, righteousness, salvation, and eternal life; and for all the
supplies of grace, as all sensible sinners do; this they did as soon as
he was made manifest to them by the word, and especially as soon as he
was revealed in them, or made manifest in their hearts by his Spirit:

I am found of them that sought me not; that had not sought him before
the Gospel came to them; they sought the world, and the thing, of it,
"for after all these things do the Gentiles seek"; they sought after the
wisdom of the world, the vain philosophy of it; "the Greeks seek after
wisdom"; and at most and best they only sought after morality and
outward righteousness, but not after Christ, till he was set up in the
Gospel as an ensign to them, [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010), but being preached in it, they
were set a seeking after him, and "found" him in it, of whom it is full;
in the doctrines, promises, and ordinances of it; in whom they found
righteousness, life, and salvation, food, and plenty of it, rest,
spiritual and eternal, and everlasting glory and happiness:

I said, behold me, behold unto a nation that was not called by my name;
which still describes the Gentiles, who formerly were not called the
people of God, even those who now are, [Hos
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#023), this Christ says to them in the
Gospel, whose eyes he opens by his Spirit, to behold the glory of his
person, the riches of his grace, his wondrous love and condescension,
the abundance of blessings in him, and the complete salvation he has
wrought out for sinners; and the words are repeated to show that Christ
is only to be beheld, and is always to be looked unto; as well as it
declares the heartiness of Christ, and his willingness that sinners
should look unto him, and be saved; and all this is a proof of the
preventing grace of God in the conversion of men, he is first in it;
before they ask anything of him, or about him, or his Son, he manifests
himself; he reveals Christ, bestows his grace, and presents them with
the blessings of his goodness. R. Moses the priest, as Aben Ezra
observes, interprets this of the nations of the world; and that the
sense is,

"even to the Gentiles that are not called by my name I am preached;''

which agrees with the apostle's sense of them; See Gill on [Rom
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020).

\(g\) So, with the Rabbins, is "to preach"; is "a preacher"; is "a
sermon"; "the name of a book of sermons"; and "an exposition"; see
Buxtorf. Lex. Rab. col. 583, 584.

[Isaiah 65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 65:2</span></span>

I have spread out mine hands all the day unto a rebellious people,....
Meaning Israel, as the apostle explains it, [Rom
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#021), whom he calls a "disobedient
and gainsaying people"; who believed not in Christ, obeyed not his
Gospel, but contradicted and blasphemed it; and were rebellious against
him, would not have him to reign over them, nor submit to his
ordinances; though he most affectionately invited them, earnestly
pressed and urged them, and that daily and frequently, to attend his
ministry; and used all human methods to gain audience of them, and
acceptance with them, but all to no purpose; see [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037), they remained obstinate and
inflexible, and so they did under the ministry of his apostles; for,
notwithstanding their ill usage of him, he ordered the Gospel to be
first preached to them, as it was, till they treated it with such
indignity and contempt, that the apostles turned away from them to the
Gentiles, as they were bid; see [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046). The Targum is,

"I sent my prophets every day, &c.''

which walketh in a way that was not good, after their own thoughts; in
their own way, of their own devising, choosing, and approving, and which
was a wicked one; and after their own imaginations and inventions; after
the traditions of the elders the doctrines and commandments of men; and
after a righteousness of their own, which they sought by the works of
the law, and so submitted not to, but rejected the righteousness of
Christ.

[Isaiah 65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 65:3</span></span>

A people that provoketh me to anger continually to my face,.... They
committed their sins openly, without any fear of the divine Being, and
in defiance of him, not at all awed by his omniscience and omnipresence;
they committed them in the open streets, and even in the temple, the
place of the divine residence; and these they did constantly, which
provoked him to anger and wrath against them; particularly the following
sins:

that sacrificeth in gardens; to idols, as the Targum, placed there, as
they were under every green tree; or in groves, where idols were
worshipped. Fortunatus Scacchus (h) thinks this refers to their having
their sepulchres in their gardens, where they consulted the dead; which
is favoured by a clause in the next verse:

and burneth incense on altars of brick: or, "upon bricks" (i). Kimchi
says, when they made bricks, they put upon them incense for idols; or,
"upon tiles"; upon the roofs of their houses, which were covered with
tiles; see [Jer 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer019.htm#013) when incense
should only have been burnt upon the golden altar erected for that
purpose, [Exo 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#001), not that these
idolatrous actions were committed by the Jews in the times of Christ and
his apostles, the times preceding their last destruction; for, after
their return front the Babylonish captivity, they were not guilty of
idolatry; but these were the sins of their fathers, which God would
recompense into their bosoms, according to [Isa
65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007) they now filling up the measure
of their iniquities, [Mat 23:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#032).

\(h\) Sacr. Eleaochr. Myrothec. I. 2. c. 55. col. 580. (i) "super
lateres", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Vitringa.

[Isaiah 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 65:4</span></span>

Which remain among the graves,.... In order to practise necromancy, to
consult the dead, where they imagined demons and departed spirits
haunted, and of whom they fancied they might get knowledge of future
things:

and lodge in the monuments: whole nights for the same purposes. The
Vulgate Latin version is, "that sleep in the temples of idols"; after
the manner of the Heathens, who used to sleep there in order to obtain
dreams, whereby they might be able to foretell things to come, as they
did in the temple of Aesculapius; or, "in desolate places" (k), as
Kimchi and Ben Melech interpret it; where they expected to meet with
demons and noxious spirits, to give them knowledge of things to come.
The Targum paraphrases both clauses thus,

"who dwell in houses built of the dust of graves, and lodge with the
corpse of the children of men;''

so corpse, according to Jarchi, are expressed by this word, which
signifies "kept", or "preserved" (l), as in [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006), because they are put in a strait
place, from whence they cannot get out; though some think idols are
meant, called so by way of derision, because kept for fear of being
stolen, or because they cannot keep themselves, nor their votaries:

which eat swine's flesh; forbidden by the law, [Lev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#007),

and broth of abominable things is in their vessels; or "pots": broth
made of swine's flesh, and of other sorts of flesh which were unclean by
the law. Our version follows the marginal (m) reading; as do the Targum,
Aben Ezra, Jarchi, and Kimchi; but the written text is, "a fragment"
(n), or piece, or pieces, of abominable things; both may be retained in
the sense of the passage; slices of flesh unclean, and so abominable by
the law, were put into their pots and stewed, and made broth of, which
they drank. Spencer (o) thinks the milk in which kids were boiled is
meant, which the Zabians kept in vessels, and sprinkled on the trees in
their gardens, to make them more fruitful; hence mention is made of
idolatrous practices in gardens, in the preceding verse.

\(k\) "In desertis locis", Munster, Pagninus. (l) "apud custodita",
Junius & Tremellius; "custoditos", Piscator. (m) "jusculum". (n)
"fragmentum". (o) De Legibus Hebr. I. 2. c. 8. sect. 2. p. 275.

[Isaiah 65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 65:5</span></span>

Which say, stand by thyself, &c. According to Aben Ezra, Jarchi, and
Kimchi, these are the unclean persons that did the above things; who say
to the righteous, "draw near to thyself" (p); so the words are, go to
thine own place, or to thine own company:

and come not near to me; keep off at a distance, as unworthy of such
company:

for I am holier than thou; but this is the language of a self-righteous
man, of a Pharisee that strictly observed the rituals of the law; and
fitly describes such who lived in the times of Christ; and exactly
agrees with the characters of such, who not only would have no dealings
with the Samaritans, but washed themselves when they came from market,
or any public place, lest they should be defiled with the common people
of their own nation; and, even with religious persons, would not stand
near them while praying; but despised them, if they had not arrived to
that pitch of outward sanctity they had; see [Joh
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#009), [Luk
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009). The phrase may be rendered, "do
not touch me" (q); and the Pharisees would not suffer themselves to be
touched by the common people, nor would they touch them. Maimonides (r)
says,

"if the Pharisees touched but the garments of the common people, they
were defiled all one as if they had touched a profluvious person, and
were obliged to dip themselves all over;''

so that, when they walked in the streets, they used to walk on the sides
of the way, that they might not be defiled by touching them (s). So
Epiphanius (t) relates of the Samaritan Jews, that when they touch one
of another nation, they dip themselves with their clothes in water; for
they reckon it a defilement to touch anyone, or to touch any man of
another religion; and of the Dositheans, who were another sect of the
Samaritans the same writer observes (u), that they studiously avoid
touching any, for they abhor every man. A certain Arabic geographer of
note (w) makes mention of an island, called the island of the
Samaritans, inhabited by some Samaritan Jews, as appears by their saying
to any that apply to them, do not touch; and by this it is known that
they are of the Jews who are called Samaritans; and this same arrogant
superstition, as Scaliger observes (x), continues in that people to this
day, as those relate who have conversed with them:

these are a smoke in my nose, a fire that burneth all the day: very
offensive to the divine Being, as smoke is to the eyes and nostrils;
very abominable to him; and whose proud and vain conduct raised
indignation in him, and kindled the fire of his anger, which was
continually exercised on them; see [Luk
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015). The Targum is,

"their vengeance is in hell, where the fire burns all the day.''

\(p\) "accede ad te", Vatablus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Cocceius;
"appropinqua ad te", Piscator. (q) "ne contigas me"; so some in
Vatablus; "ne attingite me", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "ne tangae
rue": Cocceius. (r) In Misn. Chagiga, c. 2. sect. 7. (s) lb. Hilcot Abot
Tumaot, c. 13. sect. 8. (t) Contra Haeres. haeres. 9. (u) Contra Haeres,
haeres 13. (w) Apud Scaliger de Emendat, Temp. l. 7. (x) Ibid.

[Isaiah 65:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 65:6</span></span>

Behold, it is written before me,.... This account of their sins; it was
in his sight and constant remembrance, and punishment for them was
determined by him, written in the book of his decrees:

I will not keep silence; but threaten with destruction, and not only
threaten, but execute; plead against them really, as well as verbally,
with sore judgments:

but will recompense, even recompense into their bosom; full and just
recompence of punishment for all their transgressions, as it follows.
The Targum is,

"I will recompense to them the vengeance of their sins, and deliver
their bodies to the second death.''

[Isaiah 65:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 65:7</span></span>

Your iniquities, and the iniquities of your fathers together (saith the
Lord),.... That is, the punishment both of the one and of the other;
these being alike, and continued from father to son, and approved of,
and committed by one generation after another, till the measure was
filled up; and then the recompence of reward is given for all of them
together at once: which have burnt incense upon the mountains, and
blasphemed me upon the hills; where they offered incense and other
sacrifices to idols, which was interpreted by the Lord as a blaspheming
and reproaching of him; see [Isa 57:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#007),

therefore will I measure their former work into their bosom; punish them
for their former sins as well as their latter ones, and both together.

[Isaiah 65:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 65:8</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, as the new wine is found in the cluster,.... Now,
lest the truly godly and gracious among these people should be
distressed at such denunciations of wrath and destruction, it is
suggested that these few, this remnant according to the election of
grace, should be saved from the general ruin; as when men are about to
cut down a vine, or pluck it up, or prune the unfruitful branches of it,
a single cluster of grapes is observed upon it, in which new wine is
supposed to be:

and one saith, destroy it not, for a blessing is in it; one that stands
by, perhaps the owner of the vine, seeing it, says to his servant, spare
the vine, do not cut it down; or do not cut off the branch on which the
cluster is, for there is life and sap in it, and it may grow, and bring
forth much fruit:

so will I do for my servants' sake, that I may not destroy them all; as
formerly he spared Noah at the deluge; of whom the Targum paraphrases
the former clause; and Lot at the burning of Sodom; and Joshua and
Caleb, when all the rest that came out of Egypt perished in the
wilderness; so there would be, and were, a few whom God called by his
grace, among the Jews, brought to the knowledge of Christ, and into a
Gospel church state in Jerusalem; and these he preserved from the
destruction of it, of which they had previous warning, and were directed
to Pella, where they were safe: and so, wherever the truth of grace is,
such shall not be destroyed; and which is a blessing, and a blessed work
in the heart of man, and is a new thing there; and, like new wine,
delightful to God and man; and like wine in the cluster, all grace, and
all spiritual blessings are with it; and which must be tried by
afflictions, to be brought into exercise, as the cluster is pressed; and
which is found but in a few, like wine in a single cluster, concerning
whom the Father says, destroy them not, being loved and chosen by him;
and so says the Son, being redeemed by his blood; and the same says the
Spirit, being regenerated and sanctified by his grace; and such being
the servants of the Lord, and partakers of his grace, he will not suffer
any of them to be destroyed; but encompasses them with his favour; holds
them with his right hand; suffers no enemy to do them wrong, and guards
them with his power.

[Isaiah 65:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 65:9</span></span>

And I will bring forth a seed out of Jacob,.... Jerom says most
understand this of Christ; and who indeed is called the seed of the
woman, the seed of Abraham, the seed of David, and sprang from Jacob or
Israel, and came out of the tribe of Judah; and may be fitly signified
by the cluster, in which new wine and a blessing were, which "seed" here
is explanative of; since the clusters of all divine perfections, of all
the blessings of grace, and of all the promises of it, are in him: and
since he is that seed in whom all the nations of the earth are blessed,
and with whom the covenant of grace was made, [Gal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#016), but others, the above ancient
writer observes, understood it of the apostles; and it seems to design
the first that believed in Christ, who were of the Jewish nation, the
apostles and others; for though the generality of that people rejected
the Messiah, there were a few that believed on him, a remnant according
to the election of grace, whom the apostle calls a seed, the Lord left
among them, and reserved for himself, [Rom
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#029), [Rom
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004) such who received the seed of the
word into their hearts, and were born again of incorruptible seed, and
which remained in them; these were distinguished by the grace of God
from the rest of the people, and were called and brought forth from
among them:

and out of Judah an inheritor of my mountains; this also is true of
Christ, who not only came out of the tribe of Judah, as was foretold he
should, and as it is manifest he did; hence he is called the Lion of
that tribe; but he is also an heir or inheritor of the mountains of God;
he is indeed heir of all things, [Heb
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#002), as he is the Son of God, he is
heir by nature of all the Father has; and, as Mediator, he is heir by
appointment of all persons and things; he has all persons for his
inheritance, and in his possession, and at his dispose, angels and men;
and he is possessed of all things, of all blessings of goodness, natural
and temporal, spiritual and eternal; and his chosen people are joint
heirs with him, and who may be here meant; such as are the seed of the
Lord are sons and heirs; they are heirs of God, being the sons of God;
heirs of his covenant, the blessings and promises of it, which is as a
mountain, firm and immovable; they are heirs of the grace of life, and
of the kingdom; heirs of righteousness, life, and salvation; of eternal
glory, the heavenly Canaan, signified by the mountains of the Lord;
alluding to the mountains on which the temple and Jerusalem stood, or to
those about Jerusalem, or in the land of Judea in general:

and mine elect shall inherit it; Christ is God's first and chief elect,
and his people are chosen in him through grace to glory; and these are
the seed and heirs that do inherit grace, and shall inherit glory; for
this is to be understood not literally of the land of Judea, which was
not long inherited by any after the times of Christ and his apostles, to
which this prophecy respects; unless it can be thought to belong to the
latter day, when the Jews will be converted, and return to it; but
figuratively of Mount Zion, or of the heavenly country:

and my servants shall dwell there; my righteous servants, as the Targum;
these are the same with the seed, the inheritor, and the elect, who
become the servants of God, through the power of his grace, and serve
him cheerfully, willingly, and without selfish ends and views; to this
they are chosen, and for this purpose become a spiritual seed; nor is
this inconsistent with their being heirs; and who shall receive the
inheritance in a way of grace, and possess it for ever; they shall dwell
in the church below, and enjoy all the privileges of it, and shall dwell
upon their estate for ever; for their inheritance is an eternal one,
reserved in the heavens.

[Isaiah 65:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 65:10</span></span>

And Sharon shall be a fold of flocks,.... This was a champaign country
about Joppa and Lydda, in which were rich pastures for herds and flocks,
[Ch1 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#029), it seems to be a prophecy
of the conversion of some in those parts, which had its accomplishment
in the times of the apostles, [Act
9:35](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#035), here Christ had his sheep, and
here was a fold for them; or, however, this may be expressive of the
word and ordinances, which are like Sharon, green and fat pastures, for
the flocks of Christ to be folded and fed in:

and the valley of Achor a place for the herds to lie down in; which,
Aben Ezra says, was round about Jerusalem; but it was the valley in
which Achan was stoned, and because of the trouble he gave to Israel,
and had himself, it was called the valley of Achor, [Jos
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#026), this the Lord promises shall be
given for a door of hope, [Hos 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015)
and such the word and ordinances are, where Christ causes his church and
people to lie down and rest, [Sol 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#007)
and which are an earnest and pledge of future glory and happiness, and
give hope thereof; are the firstfruits of it, as the valley of Achor is
said to be the first place the children of Israel set footing on, when
they had passed over Jordan; it lay to the north of Jericho, over
against Ai:

for my people that have sought me; with their whole hearts, being first
sought and found by him; See Gill on [Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001).

[Isaiah 65:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 65:11</span></span>

But ye are they that forsake the Lord,.... Here the Lord returns to the
body of the people again, the unbelievers and rejecters of the Messiah,
who turned away from him, would not hear his doctrine, nor submit to his
ordinances; they forsook the worship of the Lord, as the Targum; yea,
some that professed to be his disciples, and followed him for a while,
left him, and walked no more with him, [Joh
6:60](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#060),

that forget my holy mountain; Mount Zion, the city of the living God,
the heavenly Jerusalem, the Gospel church, to which the seed or heirs,
the chosen of God, and the servants of the Lord among the Jews, came,
and enjoyed the immunities of it, and worshipped the Lord there; but
these men forgot it, and either never came, or, if any of them did, they
soon forsook the assembling of themselves together, as the manner of
some was, [Heb 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022),

that prepare a table for that troop; or, "for a troop"; a troop of idols
worshipped; or, "for Gad", which some take to be the name of a star; and
R. Moses the priest says it is the name of the star Jupiter, in the
Arabic language, a lucky star. The Vulgate Latin version renders it,
"for fortune": and the word is used by the Jewish writers (y) for the
goddess Fortune, or good luck, and who make mention of "the bed of
fortune" (z); a bed, which, they say, is prepared for a star, and no man
may sleep on it; and a table also, which they might not use but for that
star, the same with the table here; for they used beds or couches at
their tables, or at eating. And Jerom on the place says, it was an old
custom in Egypt, particularly in Alexandria and other cities, on the
last day of the year, to prepares table, with all kind of provisions for
eating and drinking, by way of thankfulness for the fertility of the
last year, and in order to obtain it in the year following; and this the
Israelites did. "Table" seems to be put for an altar, on which sacrifice
was offered to idols. Mention is made by Herodotus (a) of the table of
the sun among the Ethiopians.

And that furnish the drink offering unto that number: or, "to a number";
to a number of deities, which were as numerous as their cities, [Jer
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028) and according to the number of
them they provided drink offerings, or a mixture of wine and water; and
also according to the number of the priests that sacrificed they filled
cups of wine, as Jarchi observes; or according to the number of letters
in a person's name they wished well to, as many cups they drank, to
which Sanctius thinks the allusion is; or to "Meni", which R. Moses
takes to be the name of a star; some interpret it of a number of stars
or planets, the seven planets particularly; and others of the planet
Mercury. Some think it is the name of an idol, either, of an idol of the
Arabians, as Pocock (b); or of the Armenians, as others, Armenia being
called Minni, [Jer 51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027). The Targum
interprets both clauses of idol deities; and so, in the gloss on the
Talmud (c), they are both said to be the names of idols. Bynaeus (d)
seems to me to have advanced the best notion of Gad and Meni, translated
"that troop", and "that number", which is, that the one signifies the
sun, and the other the moon, which he supports with many reasons; so
Vitringa; and yet there is a difficulty in the words, how they are to be
applied to the Jews in the times of Christ and the apostles, when they
were not guilty of such idolatrous practices; unless this is to be
understood of the sins of their forefathers visited on them, as in [Isa
65:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#003), though this is said of the same
persons that forsook the Lord, and forgot his mountain; wherefore I am
inclined to think that some thing like this is the sense of the words;
that the evil charged upon this people, and of which they were guilty,
was, that they regarded the stars, and attributed their case and
circumstances to the influences of them, or to fate and fortune, rather
than to the providence of God; or trusted in their troops and numbers,
and so defied and despised the Roman army that besieged them, which was
their ruin.

\(y\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 65. fol. 58. 2. T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 40. 1.
(z) T. Bab. Nedarim, fol. 56. 1. & Gloss. in ib, & Sanhedrin, fol. 20,
1. Gloss. in ib. (a) Thalia, sive I. 3. c. 18. (b) Specimen Hist. Arab,
p. 92, 93. (c) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 92. 1. & Gloss. in ib. T. Bab.
Sabbat, fol. 67. 2. (d) De Caleeis Hebraeor. I. 1. c. 9. sect. 7, &c.

[Isaiah 65:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 65:12</span></span>

Therefore will I number you to the sword,.... There is an elegancy in
the expression, alluding to Meni, that number, they furnished a drink
offering for, or trusted in; and since they did, God would number them,
or appoint a number of them to the sword; or suffer them to be slain in
great numbers, even from one end of their land to another, [Jer
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#012), they should be numbered and
told out, or care taken that none of them should escape the sword of the
Romans, or not be taken by them:

and ye shall all bow down to the slaughter; be obliged to submit to the
conqueror, and lay down their necks to be sacrificed by him:

because, when I called, ye did not answer; when I spoke, ye did not
hear; when Christ called unto them personally, to come and hear him,
they turned a deaf ear to this charmer, charming so wisely, and would
not attend upon his ministry, [Pro
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#024), and when he called to them in
the ministry of his apostles, they rejected him and his word with
contempt; they put it away from them, contradicting and blaspheming it,
[Act 13:45](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#045). The Targum is,

"because I sent my prophets, and ye turned not; they prophesied, and ye
did not receive them:''

but did evil before mine eyes, and did choose that wherein I delighted
not; adhered to the traditions of the elders, and taught for doctrines
the commandments of men; and which they chose and preferred to the word
of God, and the Gospel of Christ; and these were things the Lord
delighted not in, yea, abhorred; and their embracing and cleaving to
them were evil in his sight; see [Mat
15:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#003).

[Isaiah 65:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 65:13</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God,.... This being the case, the
following contrast is formed between those that believed in Christ, and
those that rejected him:

behold, my servants shall eat, but ye shall be hungry: which has been
verified in a literal sense; for the Christians, the Lord's righteous
servants, as the Targum in the several clauses calls them, were, as
Eusebius (e) relates, by a divine warning, directed to leave Jerusalem,
before the destruction of it; when they removed to a place called Pella,
beyond Jordan, where they had proper accommodations; while the
unbelieving Jews were penned up in the city, and were starved, and
multitudes of them died by famine: and in a figurative sense they had a
famine, not of bread, or of water, but of hearing the word of the Lord;
the Gospel being taken from them, and sent to another people, who
received it, and ate it, and were nourished by it; which is bread that
strengthens, meat that is savoury, milk that nourishes, honey that is
sweet to the taste, delicious fruit, and all that is wholesome and
healthful; Christ in the word particularly, who is the Lamb of God, the
fatted calf, the hidden manna, the bread of life and spiritual meat, as
his flesh is, is the food which believers eat by faith, and feed upon,
and are nourished with; while others starve, feeding upon ashes and
husks, on that which is not bread. Kimchi interprets this and the
following clauses, figuratively, of the reward of the world to come, and
of the delights and pleasures of the soul, signified by eating and
drinking; and so, he says, their Rabbins interpret it; see [Luk
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#015).

Behold, my servants shall drink, and ye shall be thirsty; which has the
same sense as before, the same thing in different words. Particularly
true believers in Christ drink of his blood by faith, which is drink
indeed; and of the grace of Christ, which is the water of life, of which
they may drink freely; and of the Gospel of Christ, which is as wine and
milk, and as cold water to a thirsty soul; and of the love of Christ,
which is better than wine; and they shall drink of new wine with him in
the kingdom of his Father; while the wicked shall thirst after their
sins and lusts now, and have no satisfaction in them, and hereafter will
want a drop of water to cool their tongues.

Behold, my servants shall rejoice; in Christ, in his person, grace, and
fulness; in his righteousness and salvation; and in hope of the glory of
God by him:

but ye shall be ashamed; of their vain confidence; of their trust in
their own righteousness, in their temple, and the service of it; in
their troops and numbers, particularly when taken and carried captive;
and more especially this will be their case at the great day of
judgment, when they shall see him whom they have pierced.

\(e\) Hist. Eccl. I. 3. c. 5. p. 75.

[Isaiah 65:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 65:14</span></span>

Behold, my servants shall sing for joy of heart,.... The songs of
electing, redeeming, and calling grace, with which they come to Zion
now, and will hereafter; having their hearts filled with joy
unutterable, and full of glory, under a sense of the great things which
God has done for them:

but ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and shall howl for vexation of
spirit; under the sore judgments of God upon them, the sword and famine;
more especially during the siege of Jerusalem, and when wrath came upon
them to the uttermost, in the destruction of their city, temple, and
nation, and they fell into the hands of the Romans, who carried them
captive, and dispersed them in various places; and as the wicked will in
hell to all eternity, where is nothing but weeping, wailing, and
gnashing of teeth.

[Isaiah 65:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 65:15</span></span>

And ye shall leave your name for a curse unto my chosen,.... Execrable
and abominable to them, as the name of a Jew is to this day, and in all
places; for their unbelief and impenitence, for their perfidy and
insincerity, for their tricking and covetousness, and other crimes they
are addicted to; see [Jer 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#009),

for the Lord God shall slay them; by the sword of the Romans, and by his
judgments, which continue upon them; the Targum says, with the second
death; and so Jarchi interprets it of eternal death, which is the just
wages of sin:

and call his servants by another name; a new name, as the Septuagint and
Arabic versions; the name of the people of God, the Gentiles formerly
were not called by; but now all that believe in Christ, whether Jews or
Gentiles, are his people; the name of the sons of God, a name better
than that of sons and daughters of the greatest potentate; the name
which the mouth of the Lord calls, "Hephzibah" and "Beulah", being
delighted in by the Lord, and married to him; or rather the name of
Christians, first given to the disciples of Christ at Antioch, and ever
since continued, [Act 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#026).

[Isaiah 65:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 65:16</span></span>

That he who blesseth himself in the earth,.... That is sensible he
stands in need of blessings, and wishes for them, and prays he might
have them; or that takes notice that he is blessed with them, and
acknowledges them, and is thankful for them:

shall bless himself in the God of truth; shall pray to him for blessings
he wants, and ascribe what he has unto him, and give him the praise and
glory of them; by whom is meant, either God the Father, in opposition to
idols, the fictitious deities of the Gentiles, those lying vanities,
which were not gods by nature, and to whom the God of truth, or the true
God, is often opposed, and whom the Targum here calls the living God; or
rather the Messiah, our Lord Jesus Christ: for the words may be
rendered, "shall bless himself in God Amen" (f); that is, in God, who is
the "Amen", which is one of the names of Christ, [Rev
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014) in whom believers are blessed
with all spiritual blessings, and reckon themselves blessed in him, and
ascribe blessing to him for them; in whom all the promises of God are
yea and amen, and who is the true God, and eternal life, [Co2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#020),

and he that sweareth in the earth shall swear by the God of truth; when
an oath is necessary on any account, and it is proper to appeal to the
supreme Being for the truth of anything, this, in Gospel times, should
be done in the name of Christ; he, who is the Amen and faithful witness,
is to be appealed unto, who is God omniscient, the discerner of the
thoughts and intents of the heart. Of forms of swearing by Christ, see
[Rom 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#001). Besides, swearing, as it is
a part of religious worship, may here be put for the whole; so it
signifies, that as all blessings come from Christ, so all worship and
duty should be performed unto him, and in his name.

Because the former troubles are forgotten, they are hid from mine eyes;
which is to be understood not of afflictions and persecutions for the
sake of Christ and his Gospel, for these, especially in the first times
of it, were very great; though in the latter day they will cease, to
which indeed this prophecy extends: but rather either of the idolatry
and superstition of the Gentile world, which were troublesome and
offensive to God, but now removed by the clear light of the Gospel, and
so forgotten by him, and hid from his eyes; or the carnal ordinances of
the legal dispensation, which gave great trouble to the worshippers
then, and could not cleanse their consciences, and through the fear of
death, on the breach of them, were all their lifetime subject to
bondage; but now these are all done away by Christ, and in Gospel times
forgotten by men, and hid from the sight of God, who regards them no
more; see [Jer 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#016), which sense suits
with what follows.

\(f\) "benedicet sibi in Deo Amen", Pagninus, Montanus, Vitringa;
"benedicturus sit in Deo Amen", Cocceius.

[Isaiah 65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 65:17</span></span>

For, behold, I create new heavens and a new earth,.... This prophecy
began to have its accomplishment in the first times of the Gospel, when
through the preaching of it there was a new face of things appeared in
Judea, and in the Gentile world, so that the whole looked like a new
world; and this was all the effect of creating power, of the mighty,
powerful, and efficacious grace of God attending the word, to the
conversion of many souls; a new church state was formed, consisting of
persons gathered out of the world, the old national church of the Jews
being dissolved, and Gospel churches everywhere set up; new ordinances
appointed, to continue till Christ's second coming and the old ones
abolished; a new way of worship observed, at least in a more spiritual
and evangelic manner; a new covenant exhibited, or the covenant of grace
held forth in a new form of administration, the former waxen old and
vanished away; and the new and living way to the Father, through Christ,
made more manifest: this will have a further accomplishment at the
conversion of the Jews, which will be as life from the dead, and things
will look like a new world with them; their blindness will be removed,
the veil will be taken away from them; they will part with all their
legal rites and ceremonies, and the traditions of the elders, and
embrace the Messiah, and all his truths and ordinances; old things shall
pass away, and all things become new: and it shall have its complete
accomplishments in the New Jerusalem state, when not only Christ will
appear, and make all things new in a spiritual sense, and that
completely; but even in a literal sense there will be new heavens, and a
new earth, which John in vision saw; and which Peter says he and other
believers expected, according to the promise of God, when these heavens
and earth shall be dissolved and pass away; and unless this passage is
referred to by him, it will be difficult to find where this promise is;
see [Rev 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#001),

and the former shall not be remembered, nor come into mind; either the
old heavens and earth, which shall pass away, and be no more seen; or
the former state both of the Jewish, and Gentile world; or the former
troubles, as in the preceding verse, taken in the sense of affliction
and persecution; all antichristian troubles shall cease in the latter
day, after the conversion of the Jews, and especially in the New
Jerusalem state; see [Isa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004).

[Isaiah 65:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 65:18</span></span>

But be you glad, and rejoice for ever in that which I create,.... This
may refer either to persons converted, both at the beginning of the
Gospel, and in the latter day, whether Jews or Gentiles; who are the
Lord's creation, or new creatures, being made new men; having new hearts
and spirits given them, or created within them; new principles of life,
light, grace, and holiness, wrought in them, which are the produce of
almighty and creating power; and all such instances are matter of joy,
as to the angels in heaven, so to the saints on earth, and especially to
the ministers of the Gospel; because of the grace bestowed on men, the
glory brought to God, and their own ministry blessed and succeeded, and
so their hands and hearts strengthened: or else this refers to the state
of things under the Gospel dispensation, in every age of it, and
especially in some periods of it, particularly the first and last; and
the whole indeed is a new world or state of God's creating, and is
matter of joy to all the people of God. The Targum renders it,

"rejoice in the world of worlds, which I create:''

agreeably to which is the version of Bishop Chandler (g),

"rejoice for the age to come, that I create;''

the world to come, [Heb 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005), which
Christ is said to be the father of, in the Septuagint version of [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006), the Gospel dispensation, the
Messiah's future world, as opposed to the legal dispensation.

For, behold, I create Jerusalem a rejoicing, and her people a joy; that
is, do that for them, through the mighty power of his grace, as will
justly occasion joy to them, and to all others well affected to them;
the conversion of the Jews will be matter of joy to the Gentiles; and
that, and the bringing in of the fulness of the Gentiles, as well as the
destruction of antichrist, which will occasion a new face of things in
the world, will be matter of joy to the whole church; see [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020).

\(g\) Defence of Christianity, c. 2. sect. 2.

[Isaiah 65:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 65:19</span></span>

And I will rejoice in Jerusalem, and joy in my people,.... God himself
rejoices in his people, as they are considered in Christ; so he did from
all eternity, and so he does at the conversion of them; which is the day
of their espousals, and when he manifests his love to them, and rejoices
over them to do them good, and continues to do so; and he rejoices in
the exercise of his own grace in them, and will do so throughout the New
Jerusalem state, and to all eternity. This seems chiefly to respect the
time of the Jews' conversion, and the latter day glory; and will have
its most complete accomplishment when the tabernacle of God shall be
with men, and he shall dwell among them. [Rev
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#003), and then what follows will be
perfectly fulfilled,

and the voice of weeping shall be no more heard in her, nor the voice of
crying; either on account of outward afflictions and persecutions; or on
account of inward darkness, desertion, and temptation, or the prevalence
of corruptions, [Rev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004).

[Isaiah 65:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 65:20</span></span>

There shall be no more thence an infant of days,.... That is, there
shall no more be carried out from thence, from Jerusalem, or any other
place where the church of God is, to the grave, in order to be interred,
an infant that has lived but a few days, a very common thing now; but,
in the latter day, such instances will be rare, or rather there will be
none at all; every child born will live to the age of man, and not be
cut off by any premature death, either by any natural disease, or by
famine, or sword, or any other calamity, which will now have no place:

nor an old man that hath not filled his days; who, though he may in some
sense, or in comparison of others, be said to be old, yet has not
arrived to the full term of man's life, threescore years and ten, or
more; for it seems, by what follows, as if the term of human life will
be lengthened in the latter day, and reach in common to a hundred years;
so that as long life is always reckoned a temporal happiness, among the
rest that shall be enjoyed, this will be one in the latter day; and
which is to be understood not of the Millennium state, in which there
will be no death, [Rev 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#004), which yet
will be in this, as the following words show; but of the state preceding
that, even the spiritual reign of Christ:

for the child shall die an hundred years old; not that that shall be
reckoned a child that shall die at a hundred years of age (h), the life
of man being now, in these days of the Messiah, as long as they were
before the flood, as the Jewish interpreters imagine; but the child that
is now born, or he that is now a child, shall live to the age of a
hundred years, and not die before: but lest this outward happiness
should be trusted to, and a man should imagine that therefore he is in a
happy state for eternity, being blessed with such a long life, it
follows, "but" or

though the sinner, being an hundred years old; shall be accursed; for
though this shall be common in this state to good men and bad men, to
live a hundred years, yet their death will not be alike; the good man
will be blessed, and enter into a happy state of joy and peace; but the
wicked man, though he lives as long as the other in this world, shall be
accursed at death, and to all eternity; see [Ecc
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#012).

\(h\) Vid. Gloss. in T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 91. 2.

[Isaiah 65:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 65:21</span></span>

And they shall build houses, and inhabit them,.... In Jerusalem, and
other parts of Judea: though this need not be limited to the Jews, but
be considered as reaching to all the Lord's people, the Gentiles also;
who will be in no fear of enemies, or ever be disturbed by them, but
shall dwell in their own houses peaceably and quietly; this is the
reverse of what is threatened to the wicked, [Deu
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#030),

and they shall plant vineyards, and eat the fruit of them; they shall
both live to dwell in their houses when built, and till their vineyards
bring forth fruit, and then eat of them; and they shall be preserved
from enemies breaking in upon them, and wasting their plantations.

[Isaiah 65:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 65:22</span></span>

They shall not build, and another inhabit,.... As the Canaanites did,
whose houses the Israelites inhabited; but they shall inhabit the houses
they have built, and shall not be dispossessed by an enemy:

they shall not plant, and another eat; the fruit of the vines, olives,
fig trees, or others, planted by them:

for as the days of a tree are the days of my people; not as of a leaf
which falls every year, but as of a tree, and as of such that last long,
as oaks, cedars, and the like; though perhaps a tree bearing fruit fit
to eat is meant; and the sense be, that the Lord's people should live as
long as the trees planted by them, and so should eat the fruit thereof,
and not leave them to others to partake of. The Targum, Septuagint, and
Arabic versions, render it,

"as the days of the tree of life;''

which, some of the Rabbins say, were five hundred years. The allusion
may be to the tree of life in paradise, and may be expressive of the
long life of good men in this state; and as the tree of life was typical
of Christ, who is a tree of life to them that lay hold upon him, it may
denote that eternal life his people have by him.

And mine elect shall long enjoy the work of their hands; what they have
built and planted; they shall live long in their houses, and for many
years partake of the fruit of their vineyards. The blessing of long life
is carried on with the promises of all other instances of outward
happiness.

[Isaiah 65:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 65:23</span></span>

They shall not labour in vain,.... As they do, who build houses, and
enemies come and turn them out of them, and dwell in them themselves; or
who plant vineyards, and sow their fields, and strangers come and devour
them; or they are smitten with blasting and mildew:

nor bring forth for trouble; for death, as the Targum; or for a curse,
as the Septuagint: the tense is, they shall not beget and bring forth
children, that shall immediately die by some distemper or another, or be
taken off by famine, sword, or pestilence, to the great grief and
trouble of their parents; but these shall live, and outlive their
parents, so that their death will never be a trouble to them:

for they are the seed of the blessed of the Lord, and their offspring
with them; or, "they are a seed, the blessed of the Lord" (i); or, "they
are the seed blessed of God", or "the Lord", as the Septuagint, Syriac,
and Arabic versions; or, as the Targum,

"a seed whom the Lord hath blessed;''

a spiritual seed of the church, a seed raised up to serve the Lord, whom
he blesses with temporal and spiritual blessings; and their offspring
also, being made a spiritual seed by the grace of God, and succeeding
them in the church, and treading in their steps.

\(i\) "quia sunt semens, benedicti Domini ipsi"; which tension is most
agreeable to the accents.

[Isaiah 65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 65:24</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that before they call, I will answer,.... The
sense is, should they be attacked by any enemy, or fear that they shall
be disturbed by them, and so bethink themselves of making application to
the Lord for help; while they are preparing for prayer, stirring up one
another to it, and appointing a season for it, to meet together on that
account; before they are able to put up one petition in a regular way,
the Lord will appear for them, and give an answer of peace:

and while they are yet speaking, I will hear; while they are praying to
him, he hears and answers, and grants their requests, and more, as he
did Daniel. This shows the readiness of the Lord to help and assist his
people in any time of trouble, or when they may fear an enemy; and is a
great encouragement to attend the throne of grace constantly.

[Isaiah 65:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 65:25</span></span>

The wolf and the lamb shall feed together,.... Or, "as one" (k): as if
they were one, of the same kind and nature, and lived upon the same
food. The people of God are comparable to lambs, for their harmlessness
and innocence; and wicked men to wolves, for their fierceness and
cruelty; but, by the grace of God, the latter become as mild and as
gentle as the former, and live upon the same spiritual food, and join
with them in attendance on the word and ordinances, where they find
spiritual refreshment and comfort together; such who have been
persecutors of the church shall now become members of it; and many
instances of this kind, as there were in the first times of the Gospel,
so there shall be in the latter day:

and the lions shall eat straw like the bullock, or "ox"; to which
creature the ministers of the Gospel are compared for their
laboriousness, as wicked persecutors are to lions; and sometimes the
latter have been so changed by the grace of God, as to become preachers
of it, as Saul was, and very probably many will hereafter; however,
there will be no persecution of the church after those days; wolves and
lions will have their nature changed, and be in fellowship with the
saints, and be better employed than before in persecuting them:

and dust shall be the serpent's meat; the meat of the old serpent, the
devil, as was threatened, [Gen 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#014) to
which he shall now be confined; he shall not be able to bite the saints,
being bruised under their feet; he shall only have power over carnal,
worldly, earthly minded men; and shall not be able to give the church
any trouble, by instigating men to persecute it:

they shall not hurt nor destroy in all my holy mountain, saith the Lord;
that is, Satan and his emissaries; wicked men, comparable to lions and
wolves, shall no more drink the blood of the saints, or persecute the
church of God; after the calling of the Jews, and the bringing in the
fulness of the Gentiles, and the destruction of antichrist, there will
be no more persecution of the church of Christ, the mountain of God's
holiness; he has said it, and we may be assured of the truth of it; See
Gill on [Isa 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#009).

(This verse may also apply to the Millenial state, in which the effects
of the curse on the animals is to be removed. However, from this verse
it seems that the curse on snakes is permanent. Editor.)

\(k\) "sicut unus", Montanus, Musculus, Gataker.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 66](isa066)

</div>
