<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa033)  [Next](isa035) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 34](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 34:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 34

This chapter is a prophecy of the destruction of all the antichristian
nations of the world, and particularly of Rome, signified by Idumea;
which is introduced with a call to a general attention to it, it being a
very awful and solemn affair, [Isa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001) utter and universal destruction
is declared, as the effect of God's wrath, [Isa
34:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#002) which is expressed by a dreadful
scene of blood, to the melting of the mountains with it, and by the
dissolution of the heavens, and the hosts of them, [Isa
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#003) particularly the destruction of
Idumea is denounced by the sword of the Lord being on it, and bathed
with the blood, both of the common people, and of their princes,
signified by various sorts of creatures, [Isa
34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005) the cause of which is the Lord's
vengeance for the controversy of his church and people, injured by Edom
or Rome, [Isa 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#008) whose desolate and
calamitous state is represented as being like that of Sodom, [Isa
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#009) and should be no more inhabited
by men, nor governed by princes, but be the dwelling of wild beasts and
unclean birds, [Isa 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011) all which is
confirmed by the word and Spirit of God, [Isa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#016).

[Isaiah 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 34:1</span></span>

Come near, ye nations, to hear; and hearken, ye people,.... Not the
people of the Jews, as some, whose utter destruction, after their
rejection of the Messiah, is here thought to be prophesied of; and much
less are these people called upon to hear the Gospel preached to them,
as Cocceius thinks; for not good, but bad news they are called to
hearken to, even the account of their utter ruin:

let the earth hear, and all that is therein: not the land of Judea, but
all the earth, and the inhabitants of it:

the world, and all things that come forth of it; which may either be
understood of those that dwell in it, as the Targum interprets it; of
the people that are in it, as the Septuagint and the Oriental versions;
and so the phrase may denote the original of them, being of the earth,
earthly, and to which they must return again; and may be designed to
humble men, and hide pride from them; or else the fruits of the earth,
trees, and everything that spring out of it, which are called upon to
hear the voice of the Lord, when men would not; and so is designed to
rebuke the stupidity and sluggishness of men to hearken to what is said
to them, even from the Lord, when upon the brink of destruction.

[Isaiah 34:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 34:2</span></span>

For the indignation of the Lord is upon all nations,.... All the nations
of the earth, which have committed fornication with the whore of Rome,
or have given in to her false worship, superstition, and idolatry; which
is the reason of God's wrath and indignation against them, and of such
severe punishment being inflicted on them; see [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003),

and his fury upon all their armies; the armies of the kings of the
earth, gathered together at Armageddon, to make war with Christ, and
those that follow him; see [Rev 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014),

he hath utterly destroyed them; not only devoted them to destruction,
but actually destroyed them, with "Cherem", an utter destruction; one of
the words of which Armageddon is compounded, and so points at the place,
as well as the nature and manner, of the destruction:

he hath delivered them to slaughter; to be slain with the sword of him
that sitteth on the white horse, which proceeds out of his mouth, [Rev
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#021).

[Isaiah 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 34:3</span></span>

Their slain also shall be cast out,.... Upon the open fields, and there
lie unburied, and become meat for the fowls of heaven, who are invited
to them as to a supper, even the supper of the great God, [Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017),

and their stink shall come up out of their carcasses; so that they shall
become loathsome and abominable to the living, and none shall care to
come near thereto bury them; an emblem of their loathsome and abominable
sins, the cause of this destruction:

and the mountains shall be melted with their blood; an hyperbolical
expression, denoting the great number of the slain upon the mountains,
and the great quantity of blood shed there; which should run down in
large streams, and carry part of them along with it, as large and hasty
showers of rain wash away the earth, and carry it along with them; such
an hyperbole see in [Rev 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#020).

[Isaiah 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 34:4</span></span>

And all the hosts of heaven shall be dissolved,.... "Pine away" (i), as
with sickness, grow languid, become obscure, lose their light, and be
turned into blood and darkness; this figure is used to express the
horror of this calamity, as if the very heavens themselves, and the sun,
and moon, and stars, were affected with it; see [Isa
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010).

and the heavens shall be rolled gether as a scroll; a book, or volume,
which when rolled up, one letter of it could not be read; and it was the
manner formerly of making and writing books in the form of a roll; hence
the word volume; and here it signifies that there should be such a
change in the heavens, as that not a star should be seen, much less the
sun or moon; and may signify the utter removal and abolition of all
dignities and offices, supreme and subordinate, civil and
ecclesiastical, in the whole Roman jurisdiction; thus the destruction of
Rome Pagan is described in [Rev 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014)
as the destruction of Rome Papal is here; from whence the language seems
to be borrowed:

and all their host shall fall down, as the leaf falleth off from the
vine, and as a falling fig from the fig tree; that is, the stars should
fall down: by whom may be meant persons in office, that made a
considerable figure; who shall fall from their stations, in which they
shone with much splendour and grandeur, as leaves fall from trees in
autumn, particularly the vine; or as unripe and rotten figs fall from
the fig tree when shaken by a violent wind; the same metaphor is used in
[Rev 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#013).

\(i\) "tabescet", Vatablus; "centabescet", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; "contabescent", Cocceius, Gataker.

[Isaiah 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 34:5</span></span>

For my sword shall be bathed in heaven,.... That is, the sword of the
Lord, as it is called in the next verse [Isa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006), and it is he that is speaking;
it designs the vengeance of the Lord, the punishment he will inflict on
the wicked, said to be "bathed in heaven", because determined and
prepared there; the allusion may be to the bathing of swords in some
sort of liquor, to harden or brighten them, and so fit them for use.
Kimchi renders it, "my sword" which is "in heaven shall be bathed", that
is, in the blood of the slain; "heaven" may denote the whole Roman Papal
jurisdiction, as it does the whole Roman Pagan empire in [Rev
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007) and may design the principal men
in it, those that are in the highest places and offices, in whom the
sword of the Lord shall be first drenched, and be as it were satiated
and inebriated with the blood of them:

behold, it shall come down upon Idumea; with great weight, force, and
vengeance, having a commission from heaven to execute. Idumea is here
particularly mentioned, because the Edomites were implacable enemies to
the Jews, and so are here put for all the enemies of God's church and
people, all the antichristian states, particularly Rome, which the Jews,
as Jerom observes, understand by Edom or Idumea here:

upon the people of my curse to judgment; a very descriptive character of
the Papists, the people of God's curse, and righteously so; those who
have anathematized his people, and cursed them with bell, book, and
candle, are anathematized by him, devoted to destruction, and doomed to
be accursed, sentenced to ruin, and on whom judgment shall pass, and
shall be executed; they shall hear, "go, ye cursed", both here and
hereafter, at the fall of Babylon, and at the general judgment. The
Targum is,

"because my sword is revealed in heaven; behold, upon Edom it is
revealed, and upon the people whom I have condemned to judgment.''

[Isaiah 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 34:6</span></span>

The sword of the Lord is filled with blood,.... Multitudes being slain
by it; the "Lord" here is that divine Person that is described as a
warrior, as a General of an army, with a sharp sword, by whom many are
slain, such a number as that it is filled with the blood of them, [Rev
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011),

it is made fat with fatness: not only filled with the blood, but
fattened by it; the allusion is to ravenous creatures gorged and sated
with the blood of others, and thereby made fat; perhaps this may refer
to Christian princes, the sword in the hand of the Lord, who shall be
enriched with the plunder and spoil of the antichristian states:

and with the blood of lambs and goats, with the fat of the kidneys of
rams. The Targum is,

"with the blood of kings and governors, with the fat of the kidneys
princes;''

and Jarchi interprets them, of princes and rulers; but rather the common
people are designed, or the common soldiers in the army, or however the
inferior officers of it; kings, princes, and generals, being intended in
the following verse [Isa 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#007). It
denotes the great carnage of all sorts and ranks of men made at this
time, and which is described in [Rev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018),

for the Lord hath a sacrifice in Bozrah, and a great slaughter in the
land of Idumea: there seems to be two Bozrahs the Scripture speaks of,
the one in Moab, [Jer 48:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#024) and
another in Edom, [Isa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001) which is
here meant, and was a chief city of the Edomites, and signifies a
fortress, being no doubt a place well fortified; this is the Bostra of
Ptolemy (k), and which he places in Arabia Petraea. Aben Ezra says that
some interpret it of Constantinople, the metropolis of the Ottoman
empire; but it is best to understand it of Rome, as Menasseh ben Israel
(l) does, and Idumea of the whole Roman jurisdiction; Rome being the
chief city of the antichristian states, that great city, which John in
his Revelation describes as reigning over the kings of the earth; here
and in all the antichristian kingdoms will be a great "slaughter" of
men, called a "sacrifice" of the Lord, because by his order and
direction, and for the honour of his justice, and being acceptable to
him; and perhaps there may be an allusion to the blood sacrifices being
the Lord's; this slaughter and sacrifice is called the supper of the
great God, [Rev 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017).

\(k\) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17. (l) Spes Israelis, sect. 30. p. 91.

[Isaiah 34:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 34:7</span></span>

And the unicorns shall come down with them,.... With the lambs, goats,
and rams; that is, either the rhinoceros, as some, there being no such
creature as the unicorn; or the buffaloes, as (m) others; these "shall
fall", as the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions render it, they
shall be slain, as well as the rest; meaning, that along with the common
soldiers, and inferior officers, the general officers should fall; and
so the Targum,

"and the mighty shall be slain with them.''

R. Abraham Seba says (n) he read in a certain book, that the word here
should not be read "unicorns", but "the Romans shall come down", &c.:

and the bullocks with the bulls: or, as the Targum,

"and the rulers with the princes;''

the same with the kings, captains, and mighty men in [Rev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018),

and their land shall be soaked with blood, and their dust made fat with
fatness; Or, "their land shall be inebriated" (o), or made drunk, with
blood; and the dust thereof thickened by it, and made clods of with it,
as the parched earth is watered with a plentiful shower, and the dust
laid with it: this is a just retaliation to the whore of Rome, who has
been made drunk with the blood of the saints, and now blood shall be
given her to drink, even her own, with which she shall be filled, and
welter and wallow in the clods of it, [Rev
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006).

\(m\) So Gussetius understands it of a larger sort of oxen, Comment.
Ebr. p. 783. (n) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 47. 3. (o) "et inebriabitur",
Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator.

[Isaiah 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 34:8</span></span>

For it is the day of the Lord's vengeance,.... The time which he has
appointed to take vengeance on antichrist, his 1260 days, or years;
being up, in which he is to reign; these being expired, the time is come
for the Lord to avenge the blood of his saints; see [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020),

and the year of recompences for the controversy of Zion; the church of
God, which has been for many ages abused and injured by the
antichristian powers, for which the Lord will have a controversy with
them; he will appear in favour of his people, and plead the cause of
Zion, and recompense their enemies for all the injuries they have done
them; then they that have led into captivity shall go into captivity,
and they that have killed with the sword shall be killed with it, [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010) this will be a time of double
recompence; and therefore perhaps the word is used in the plural number;
it will be the time of rewarding antichrist as he has rewarded others;
and it will be the time of the dead, that they shall be judged, and
rewards given to God's servants the prophets, [Rev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006). The Targum is,

"the year of recompence, to take vengeance of judgment for the injury of
Zion.''

[Isaiah 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 34:9</span></span>

And the streams thereof shall be turned into pitch,.... The Septuagint
render it, "the valleys"; the word signifying both rivers and valleys,
most render it rivers or streams. The Targum is express,

"the rivers of Rome shall be turned into pitch;''

by which may be meant the maritime places belonging to the Romish
jurisdiction, the same on which the third vial will be poured, by which
the rivers and fountains of waters will become blood; and which refers
to this very time, when blood shall be given to the whore of Rome to
drink, [Rev 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#004). The allusion, in
this and some following clauses, is to the destruction of Sodom and
Gomorrah; see [Jer 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#017),

and the dust thereof into brimstone; and so easily take fire:

and the land thereof shall become burning pitch: plainly pointing to the
destruction of Rome by fire, [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016).

[Isaiah 34:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 34:10</span></span>

It shall not be quenched night nor day,.... It will be long burning, and
shall not be extinguished until it is utterly consumed. The burning of
Rome will continue long, especially the smoke of it; the kings of the
earth, and others, are represented as standing and looking at it, and
lamenting for it, [Rev 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009),

the smoke thereof shall go up for ever; this very phrase is what will be
used by the saints in their "allelujahs", at the burning of Rome, [Rev
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#003) with which compare [Rev
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#011),

from generation to generation it shall lie waste; the land shall be no
more manured and cultivated, nor the city rebuilt; when Babylon is once
fallen, it shall never be raised up again, but always remain desolate,
[Rev 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002),

none shall pass through it for ever and ever; no inhabitant in it, nor
traveller through it; it will be so horrible and terrible, as none will
care to dwell there, yea, not so much as to travel through it; see [Jer
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#018).

[Isaiah 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 34:11</span></span>

But the cormorant and the bittern shall possess it,.... The word for
"cormorant" is rendered a "pelican", in [Psa
102:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#006) they were both unclean fowls
according to the law, of which see [Lev
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#017) and See Gill on [Isa
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#023),

the owl also and the raven shall dwell in it; which were likewise
unclean creatures; and these, with the former, and other creatures after
mentioned, delight to dwell in desolate and ruinous places; and so
Babylon or Rome being destroyed, will become a cage of every unclean and
hateful bird, [Rev 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002),

and he shall stretch out upon it the line of confusion and the stones of
emptiness; "he", that is, God, as Kimchi interprets it; the allusion is
to builders, that make use of the line and plummet, as to build, so to
pull down, that they may know what is to be pulled down, and how far
they are to go; see [Kg2 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#013) and
hereby it is signified, that as the destruction should be entire,
nothing should be left but confusion and emptiness; and all should
become "tohu" and "bohu", which are the words used here; and are the
same that are used to express the confused chaos, the unformed and empty
earth, [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002) so likewise that it
should be by line and level, by rule and measure; or according to the
rules of justice and equity.

[Isaiah 34:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 34:12</span></span>

They shall call the nobles thereof to the kingdom, but none shall be
there,.... They shall call them to take upon them the kingdom and
government, and there shall be none to do it, or that will care to do
it; or rather there will be no kingdom to take unto them. The words may
be rendered either, "as for the nobles thereof, not there a kingdom
shall they be called" (p); or, "the nobles shall call"; or, "they shall
call the nobles", and "there shall be no kingdom" (q); the kingdom of
the beast, as it is called, [Rev 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#010)
shall be no more; and though the cardinals, who are like to nobles, may
call for it, and expect it, or be called to it, yet to no purpose; this
kingdom will not only be full of darkness, but utterly destroyed:

and all her princes shall be nothing; shall come to nothing; the above
mentioned cardinals, who are clothed and live like princes, these shall
be no more; the same with the merchants of the earth, which like the
merchants of Tyre are princes, [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003).

\(p\) "nobiles ejus, et non ibi regnum vocabuntur", Forerius. (q)
"Ingenuos ejus vocabunt, et non erit ibi regnum", Tigurine version.

[Isaiah 34:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 34:13</span></span>

And thorns shall come up in her palaces,.... Where their kings and
princes dwelt, and kept their courts, popes and cardinals; here will be
the tokens of God's curse, as thorns are, these being the people of his
curse, as in [Isa 34:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#005),

nettles and brambles in the fortresses thereof; alluding to "Bozrah"
which signifies a fortress; referring to the towers and fortifications
of the city of Rome, and all other fortified cities within its
jurisdiction:

and it shall be a habitation of dragons; literally, as it figuratively
had been the seat of the old dragon, the devil, and of the beast to whom
the dragon gave his power, seat, and authority; and who, though he
looked like a lamb, spoke like a dragon, [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003),

and a court for owls; or, "daughters of the owl"; or "ostriches", as
some render it.

[Isaiah 34:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 34:14</span></span>

The wild beasts of the desert shall also meet with the wild beasts of
the islands,.... In Rome, and take up their abode there; of these
creatures, the first of which the Targum renders monstrous ones, and the
latter wild cats; see Gill on [Isa
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022),

and the satyr shall cry to his fellow; or the "hairy" one (r); from
which word the goat has its name; and these creatures are described by
the ancients as half goats and half men; of which See Gill on [Isa
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021). The Targum renders it demons;
and with this well agrees the account of Babylon or Rome as fallen, that
it shall be the habitation of, devils, and the hold of every foul
spirit, [Rev 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002),

the screech owl also shall rest there, and find for herself a place of
rest; there being no inhabitants to disturb her. By the name "Lilith",
it appears to be a night bird, which flies and is heard in the night.
The Jews call a she demon by this name, which, they say (s), has a human
face, and has wings, and destroys children as soon as born; and
therefore the Jews, especially in Germany, write upon the four corners
of the bed of a new mother, Adam, Eve, out Lilith (t); the same with the
Lamia of the Romans; and so the Vulgate Latin here renders it.

\(r\) "pilosus", a "capillus." (s) T. Bab. Nidda, fol. 24. 2. (t) Vid.
Buxtorf. Lex. Rab. col. 1140.

[Isaiah 34:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 34:15</span></span>

There shall the great owl make her nest,.... Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben
Melech, say that "kippoz" here is the same with "kippod", rendered
"bittern" in [Isa 34:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#011) but Aben Ezra
takes them to be two different birds; it is hard to say what is designed
by it. Bochart thinks that one kind of serpent is here meant, so called
from its leaping up, and which may be said to make nests, lay eggs and
hatch them, as follows:

and lay, and hatch, and gather under her shadow; lay its eggs, sit upon
them, and hatch them; or "break" them (u), that is, the eggs, by sitting
on them, when the young ones spring out of them; and then being hatched,
and running about, gather them under their wing, especially when in any
danger:

there shall the vultures also be gathered, everyone with her mate; which
creatures usually gather together where dead carcasses lie.

\(u\) "et scindet", Pagninus, Montanus; "rumpet", Vatablus; "quumque
eruperit", Junius & Tremellius, i.e. "pullities", so Ben Melech.

[Isaiah 34:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 34:16</span></span>

Seek ye out of the book of the Lord, and read,.... Joseph Kimchi
interprets this of the book of the law of Moses; which being consulted,
it will appear that punishment was threatened to be inflicted on the
enemies of God's people, particularly the Edomites. Jarchi thinks the
book of Genesis is intended; in which we may read how every creature,
with its mate, at the time of the flood, was gathered to Noah in the
ark. Aben Ezra supposes the book of God's decrees is meant; in which,
could it be seen, might be read all the particulars of this prophecy.
But it seems best to understand it of this book of the prophecy of
Isaiah; which being sought to, and read at the time when these
predictions will be fulfilled, it will be easily seen, by comparing
events with prophecies, how everything will be exactly accomplished;
from whence may be concluded, this book being called the book of the
Lord, that it was written by divine inspiration, as all other parts of
the Bible are; which is a recommendation of them, and is a reason why
they should be constantly applied unto, and diligently read. It may
deserve some consideration, whether the book of the Revelation may not
be designed; which, at the destruction of Babylon or Rome, will be
proper to be looked into afresh, to see the agreement between the
prophecies in it, and the then state of things respecting it, when it
will be an habitation of devils and unclean birds:

not one of these shall fail: not one of these beasts or birds before
mentioned shall be wanting here, or be "deprived" of its prey:

none shall want her mate; the satyr, or vulture, or any other, which
will engage their continuance, and by which means there will be a fresh
brood of them in succession for after ages:

for my mouth, it hath commanded them; these beasts and birds, to
assemble in the above mentioned place:

and his spirit, it hath gathered them; the Spirit of the mouth of the
Lord, his power, and his providence; as he gathered all creatures to
Adam, to give them names; and to Noah, to be preserved with him in the
ark; so, by a secret instinct; will he gather together these creatures,
to inhabit the desolate places of Edom or Rome. The Targum is,

"for by his word they shall be gathered, and by his will they shall draw
near.''

So Ben Melech interprets it of his will and pleasure.

[Isaiah 34:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 34:17</span></span>

And he hath cast the lot for them,.... The Targum adds,

"by his word:''

and his hand hath divided it unto them by line; the same adds,

"by his will.''

The allusion is to the dividing of the land of Canaan by lot and line,
to the children of Israel, for their inheritance and possession; and in
like manner, it is suggested, shall Rome and its territories be
distributed to those wild beasts and birds of prey, and everyone shall
know and take its proper place and portion:

they shall possess it for ever; as their inheritance, allotted and
appointed to them:

from generation to generation shall they dwell therein: See Gill on [Isa
34:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#010) where Jarchi, out of the Derash,
has this note,

"this is the curse of Moses; the war of the Lord against Amalek, from
generation to generation; from the generation of Moses to the generation
of Saul; from thence to the generation of Mordecai; and from thence to
the generation of the King Messiah.''

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 35](isa035)

</div>
