<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa040)  [Next](isa042) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 41:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 41

This chapter contains a summons to the enemies of Christ to come and try
the cause between God and them before him; words of comfort to true
believers, promising them help, protection, and provision; full
conviction of idolaters, and their practices; and is closed with a
promise of some great person, and what he will do unto them, and for the
people of God. The summons is in [Isa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001), expressed according to the forms
used in courts of judicature. The issue of the controversy is put upon
this foot, the raising up a certain person from the east, who it was
that did it, which appearing to be the work of the Lord, proves the
point contended about, [Isa 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002), the
obstinate persistence of idolaters in their idolatry, notwithstanding
this is observed, [Isa 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#005), the
people of God, under the names of Jacob and Israel, the objects of God's
choice and affection, [Isa 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008) are
encouraged against the fear of men, with promises of help and strength
from the Lord, [Isa 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010) of confusion
to their enemies, and victory over them, [Isa
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#011), and of spiritual provisions,
and great prosperity in their wilderness state, in which they should
manifestly see the hand of the Lord, [Isa
41:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#017) when the idolatrous nations are
challenged to produce their strong reasons for their idolatry, and are
put upon proving that their idols can foretell things to come, or do
good or evil to men, or own they are nothing but an abomination, [Isa
41:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021) and then one is spoken of that
should come as a mighty warrior, and tread down the Pagan princes, and a
set of Gospel ministers should be sent, bringing good tidings to Zion,
to the silencing of idolaters, and the cessation of idolatrous worship,
[Isa 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025).

[Isaiah 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 41:1</span></span>

Keep silence before me, O islands,.... The great controversy in the
world after the coming of Christ, which is expressly spoken of in the
preceding chapter, was, as Cocceius observes, whether he was a divine
Person; this was first objected to by the Jews, and afterwards by many
that bore the Christian name; some, in the times of the apostles,
especially the Apostle John; and others in later ages; some affirmed
that he was a mere man, as Ebion and Cerinthus; others that he was a
created God, as Arius; and others a God by office, as Socinus and his
followers; now these are called upon, wherever they were, whether on the
continent, or in the isles of the sea; and especially all such places
which were separated from Judea by the sea, or which they went to by
sea, were called islands, perhaps the European nations and isles are
more particularly intended; and now, as when the judge is on the bench,
and the court is set, and a cause just going to be tried, silence is
proclaimed; so here, Jehovah himself being on the throne, and a cause
depending between him and men being about to be tried, they are
commanded silence; see [Zac 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013),

and let the people renew their strength; muster up all their force,
collect the most powerful arguments they had, and produce their strong
reasons in favour of their sentiments:

let them come near, then let them speak; let them come into open court,
and at the bar plead their cause, and speak out freely and fully all
they have to say; and let them not pretend that they were deterred from
speaking, and not suffered to make their defence, or were condemned
without hearing:

let us come near together in judgment: and fairly try the cause; the
issue of which is put upon this single point that follows.

[Isaiah 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 41:2</span></span>

Who raised up the righteous man from the east,.... The Targum interprets
this of Abraham; and so the Talmud (h); and this way go most Jewish and
Christian commentators, and to him the characters agree; he was a
righteous man, believed in Christ for righteousness, had the
righteousness of faith when circumcised, did justice, and wrought
righteousness himself, and required his children and servants to do the
same, [Gen 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006), he was raised up out
of an idolatrous family, from Ur of the Chaldees, on the other side the
river Euphrates, which lay east of Judea; he was called by the Lord to
his foot, as it follows, and was obedient to him; he went forth at his
command, not knowing whither he went, [Heb
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#008). God gave him by promise the land
of Canaan, possessed by several "nations", and which his seed afterwards
inherited; yea, he made him, in a spiritual sense, "the father of many
nations", even of all believers, in all nations of the world, [Gen
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018), he made him a conqueror "over"
the "kings" that had vanquished the kings of Sodom and Gomorrah, and
plundered their cities; who were no more able to stand before him,
though he had no more than three hundred and eighteen servants of his
household, than "dust and stubble" can resist the force of a mighty
wind; he "pursued them" in an unknown tract, got an entire victory over
them, without being hurt or losing a man; which was so extraordinary an
affair, that Melchizedek, priest of the most high God, and a type of
Christ, went forth to meet him, and blessed him, [Gen
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#014), and who but the mighty God
could or did raise up this man, and make him what he was, and do the
things he did? some, as Aben Ezra, and several Christian writers also,
think that Cyrus is meant, spoken of as raised up already, though to
come, in the manner of prophetic language, called the ravenous bird from
the east, [Isa 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa046.htm#011), who came from
Persia, which lay east of Judea;

whom God called to his foot, and who performed his pleasure, and
executed his counsel, and so said to be a "righteous man" in that
respect; and is expressly said to be "raised up in righteousness";
before whom the Lord subdued "nations", and loosed the loins of "kings";
see [Isa 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#028), some understand it of
him as a type of Christ, who is the righteous One, or "righteousness"
itself, as the word properly signifies, the Lord our righteousness;
whose name is "Oriens", or the east, the rising sun in the east, [Zac
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#008), the angel ascending from the
east, [Rev 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#002), born in the eastern
part of the world; called to be the servant of the Lord, and was; to
whom he has given the Heathen for his inheritance, and made him his
firstborn, higher than the kings of the earth, and whom he will overcome
and slay with his twoedged sword: but since rather Christ is the person
speaking, and concerning whom the controversy is, therefore some person
distinct from him must be meant; and I am inclined to think, with
Coeceius, that the Apostle Paul is intended, that wonderful man; though
this sense is rejected by Vitringa: he was a "righteous" one, made so by
the righteousness of Christ; he believed in it, and was a preacher of
it, and lived a holy and righteous life and conversation; whom the Lord
raised up for uncommon service and usefulness, and to whom he appeared
personally to make him a minister, and send him out to do his work; he
was raised up in the eastern part of the world, in Judea, being a Hebrew
of the Hebrews, and from thence sent forth into various parts; see [Act
26:16](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#016),

called him to his foot; and though he was like a furious lion, raging
against his saints, breathing out slaughter and threatenings against
them, and in the height of his rage and fury; yet was at once, at the
call of Christ, made as tame as a lamb, and said, "Lord, what wilt thou
have me to do?" he was willing to do anything and everything he pleased,
[Act 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001) and when he signified it as
his will that he should preach his Gospel, he was not disobedient, he
did not confer with flesh and blood, but at once set about it with the
greatest zeal and readiness:

gave the nations before him; made him an apostle of the Gentiles, or of
the nations, and made those Gentiles or nations obedient by word and
deed; he triumphed in Christ everywhere, and diffused the savour of his
knowledge in every place, [Rom 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#013),

and made him rule over kings? governors, princes, potentates, and kings
of the earth; he had power over their spirits, being an instrument
either of converting them, as Sergius Paulus the Roman deputy, from
whence some think he had his name; or to make them to tremble at his
discourses, as Felix the Roman governor; and of bringing them at least
to own there was something in the Christian religion, as Agrippa, a
crowned head, who was obliged to confess he had almost persuaded him to
be a Christian, [Act 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#007), and of
bringing their kingdoms, and the inhabitants of them, into subjection to
Christ:

he gave them as dust to his sword, and as driven stubble to his bow;
whose weapons were not carnal, but spiritual, and mighty through God;
his sword was the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God; his bow
and arrows were the Gospel, and the truths of it, in whose ministry
Christ went forth conquering, and to conquer: and this being attended
with the power of God, men could no more stand against them than dust
and stubble before the wind.

\(h\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 156. 2. Bava Bathra, fol. 15. 1. Sanhedrin,
fol. 108. 2. and Taanith, fol. 21. 1.

[Isaiah 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 41:3</span></span>

He pursued them, and passed safely..... Went on in his work, pursued his
great design in subduing the souls of men, and bringing them to the
obedience of Christ; and though he had so many enemies, he "passed on
safely"; God did not suffer them to set upon him, to do him any harm,
even though he was exposed to perils by sea and land, by thieves and
robbers, by his own countrymen and Heathens, in city and country, and
even by false brethren; see [Act
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#010), it is in the future tense, "he
shall pursue them, he shall pass safely" (i); or in peace:

even by the way that he had not gone with his feet; travelling in
foreign parts, in distant countries, in tracks of land unknown unto him;
where he had never been before, even from Jerusalem round about to
Illyricum, fully preaching the Gospel of Christ, [Rom
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019).

\(i\) "persequetur", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "transibit", V. L.
Pagninus, Montanus.

[Isaiah 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 41:4</span></span>

Who hath wrought and done it,.... Contrived and effected it, formed the
scheme, and brought it to pass; namely, raising up the righteous man
from the east, and succeeding him in the manner described:

calling the generations from the beginning? or rather here begins the
answer to the above question, which may be rendered,

he that calleth the generations from the beginning (k); he has wrought
and done this; and to this agree the Syriac and Arabic versions; even he
that knew them from all eternity, before they were, and all the men that
would be in them, and could call them by their names; and who calls
things that are not, as though they were; and who calls them into being
at the appointed time, and continues a succession of them, one after
another; who calls by his grace all that are called in successive
generations, and rules over them by his power, providence, and grace:

I the Lord, the first, and with the last; I am he; the immutable
Jehovah, the everlasting I AM, the Alpha and the Omega, the beginning
and the ending, the first and the last; all which is said of Christ, and
is the person here speaking, [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008),
phrases expressive of his eternity and deity; he is the first and the
last in God's thoughts, purposes, and decrees; in the covenant of grace;
in the creation of all things; in the salvation, justification,
sanctification, adoption, and glorification of his people; and in the
church, above and below:

and with the last, may be understood either of the last generations God
is with, and calls as well as the first, as De Dieu; or of all
believers, with whom he shall be and they with him to all eternity, so
Gussetius (l). Now the conversion of the Apostle Paul, his commission to
preach the Gospel, the extraordinary qualifications he was endowed with,
the wonderful things done by him, in the conversion of sinners, and
planting of churches in the Gentile world, and towards the abolition of
Paganism in it, are incontestable proofs of the deity of Christ; no mere
creature could ever have raised up, such a man, and accomplished him in
such a manner, or wrought such things by him.

\(k\) "ille qui vocat vel vocavit generationes ab inito", Munster,
Tigurine version. So some in Vatablus. (l) Comment. Ebr. p. 29.

[Isaiah 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 41:5</span></span>

The isles saw it, and feared,.... Not the victory which Abraham got over
the kings; nor Cyrus's expedition against Babylon, and other nations,
and his deliverance of the Jews; but the progress of the Gospel, through
the ministry of the Apostle Paul: the idolatrous inhabitants of the
Gentile nations saw great multitudes embracing and professing the
Gospel; they saw their idols neglected, and their temples abandoned;
they feared what would be the consequence of all this, that their old
religion their fathers retained, and they were brought up in, would be
abolished; and especially a panic seized the priests on this account,
whose livelihood depended upon it:

the ends of the earth were afraid; for the sound of the Gospel by him,
and other apostles, went into all the earth, and their words to the end
of the world, [Rom 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018) meaning the
inhabitants that dwelt in the furthest parts of the earth, where
ignorance and idolatry wholly reigned: they drew near, and came: not to
God, nor to Abraham, or Cyrus; rather to their gods, to exert themselves
in the defence of their religion; or, which is best, they got together
to consult what was proper to be done on such an emergency.

[Isaiah 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 41:6</span></span>

They helped everyone his neighbour,.... By advice and counsel, by the
best arguments they could make use of, to withstand the new religion,
and defend the old one; to prevent the embracing the one, and
relinquishing the other:

and everyone said to his brother, be of good courage: or, "be strong"
(m); they strengthened one another's hands in their idolatrous worship,
encouraged each other to oppose the prevailing doctrine; urging, that
the craft of some was in danger, and the religion of them all at stake,
and their gods like to fall into contempt. An instance of this may be
seen in Demetrius the craftsman at Ephesus, when the Gospel mightily
prevailed there, who stirred up the workmen of the same craft with
himself and the like, suggesting the loss of their business, and the
dishonour reflected on their goddess Diana, should the apostle go on as
he did; by which we may judge how it was, more or less, in other parts
of the world; see [Act 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#020).

\(m\) "fortis esto, vel sis strenuus", Vatablus.

[Isaiah 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 41:7</span></span>

So the carpenter encouraged the goldsmith,.... The carpenter, when he
had made a wooden image, encouraged and hastened the goldsmith, or the
"finer", as some render it, to do his part, in covering it with plates
of gold or silver:

and he that smootheth with the hammer him that smote the anvil; he that
beat out thin plates of gold and silver with the hammer, in order to
decorate the wooden god, encouraged the smith at the forge, that smote
on the anvil, there making nails for the fastening it to a pillar or
wall, to hasten his work:

saying, it is ready for the sodering; for the several joints to be put
together, by sodering them:

and he fastened it with nails, that it should not be moved; either the
goldsmith and finer fastened the plates of gold and silver with nails,
that they might be kept fast and close to it; or the smith that smote on
the anvil, and made the nails, he fastened the image with them at some
proper place, that so it might not fall, or be taken away. All which, as
it represents the hurry and solicitude idolaters were in to keep up
their craft and religion, so it exposes them to ridicule and contempt.

[Isaiah 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 41:8</span></span>

But thou, Israel, art my servant,.... As the great spread and success of
the Gospel could not fail of drawing the resentment of the idolatrous
Heathens on those who embraced and professed it, and by whom they were
grievously persecuted under the Roman emperors; wherefore, to support
them under these trials, the Lord speaks these and the following
comfortable words unto them; for not carnal, but spiritual Israel are
here meant; such who by the power of divine grace were turned from idols
to serve the living God, who were made willing to become his servants,
and whose honour it was to be so called and accounted; and being so,
they might be assured their Lord and Master would protect and defend
them, bless and reward them:

Jacob whom I have chosen; Israelites indeed, Jacob like, plain hearted
men, wrestling and prevailing ones in prayer with God, whom he chose to
be his people, and peculiar treasure; who, though disallowed of men,
were like their Lord and Saviour, chosen of God, and precious:

the seed of Abraham my friend: the spiritual seed of Abraham, being
believers in Christ, and friends of his, as Abraham was; and whom he
uses and shows to be such, by disclosing his secrets to them, [Joh
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015).

[Isaiah 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 41:9</span></span>

Thou whom I have taken from the ends of the earth,.... Meaning not
Abraham, nor his natural seed; but such who believed in Christ, who
dwelt in the furthest parts of the earth, to whom the Gospel came, and
by which they were laid hold upon, and apprehended by Christ as his own:

and called thee from the chief men thereof; from among the great men of
the earth, out of their families, courts, and palaces: or rather called
them by grace, when such personages were passed by and left; not many
noble, not many mighty, being called in those times, [Co1
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#026),

and said unto thee, thou art my servant; and not only called them by the
name, but made them such in reality: adding,

I have chosen thee, and not cast thee away; nor does the Lord cast away
any whom he has chosen and foreknown; and therefore being thus dear to
God, as all the above titles and acts of grace show, and being secured
by him from perishing or being eternally lost, this should encourage
them to suffer persecution patiently for his name's sake, and not be
afraid of any of their enemies, as follows.

[Isaiah 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 41:10</span></span>

Fear thou not, for I am with thee,.... Not merely by his essence or
power, who is every where; or by his providence supporting, preserving,
observing, ordering, and overruling all things; but in a way of special
grace, to guard and protect his people, support and supply them, comfort
and strengthen their hearts; wherefore they need not fear any of their
enemies, nor whatsoever they may be called to suffer for his name's
sake, even though they pass through fire and water, and the valley of
the shadow of death:

be not dismayed, I am thy God; through Christ, in a covenant way, as
appeared by the effectual calling of them; and therefore might depend on
his love, be sure of his power, expect all needful supplies, and to be
comfortably carried through every service and trial they were called
unto; and need fear no enemies, or be dismayed at anything that should
befall them; or become weak as water, and their hearts melt like wax
within them, as the Jewish commentators generally interpret the word
(n). The Targum is,

"be not broken;''

in spirit. The word signifies to look about, as persons in distress, and
amazed:

I will strengthen thee; with strength in their souls, to perform duties,
exercise grace, withstand corruptions, resist temptations, bear
afflictions, suffer persecutions, and do their generation work,
according to the will of God; and if God is the strength of his people,
they need not be afraid of any persons or things, [Psa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#001),

yea, I will help thee; help them out of all their afflictions and
temptations, and out of the hands of all their enemies; help them in the
discharge of duty, in the exercise of grace, in bearing the cross, in
fighting the Lord's battles, and in their journey to another world; help
them to every mercy, temporal and spiritual, to all needful supplies of
grace, and at last to glory; whose help is suitable and seasonable, and
may be expected, since he is able to help, either with or without means;
has promised to help his people, as here, and he is faithful that has
promised; he has laid help on one that is mighty, and set up a throne of
grace to come to for help in time of need; and seeing he is their
helper, they need not fear what men or devils can do unto them, [Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005).

I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness; either by
his almighty power, or by his Son, the man of his right hand, made
strong for himself, and the author of righteousness to his people: this
is expressive of his sustentation of them, not merely in a providential
way, but in a way of special grace; and of his powerful protection and
preservation of them, so as that they shall stand in the grace of God,
go on in his ways, and not fall finally and totally, but persevere to
the end, though their trials and temptations may be great and many.

\(n\) "neque dissolvaris", Munster; "vel ne liquefias", Vatablus.
"Verbum formatum a nomine" "quod ceram significat, quae calor exposita
facile dissolvitur", Munster.

[Isaiah 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 41:11</span></span>

Behold, all they that were incensed against thee,.... For rejecting
their idols, and idol worship; for receiving the Gospel, and professing
it:

shall be ashamed and confounded; their idols not being able to help
them, nor they to defend the worship of them: the same is said with
respect to Christ, [Isa 45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024),

they shall be as nothing, and they that strive with thee shall perish;
or, "the men of thy strife" (o); all shall come to nothing, and utterly
perish, as to their persons, substance, power, and dignity; as did the
Roman emperors, the persecutors of God's people.

\(o\) "viri litis tuae", Montanus; "rixae tuae", Vatablus.

[Isaiah 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 41:12</span></span>

They not existing, or being fled into holes and corners, to rocks and
mountains, to hide themselves from the wrath of the Lamb, [Rev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#015),

even them that contended with thee; or, "the men of thy contention" (p);
who contended with them, not by words and arguments, but by severe
persecutions, striving thereby to hinder the progress of the Gospel, and
to root Christianity out of the world:

they that war against thee shall be as nothing, and as a thing of
nought: or, "the men of thy war" (q); that proclaimed and carried on war
against the Christians, in order to destroy them utterly; yet they, and
all their efforts, came to nothing, the Gospel prevailed, and Paganism
was utterly abolished; which came to pass in Constantine's time, at the
opening of the sixth seal, [Rev 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012)
which is a proper comment on this text.

\(p\) "viros jurgii tui", Montanus. (q) "viri belli tui", Vatablus;
"pugnae tuae", Montanus.

[Isaiah 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 41:13</span></span>

For I the Lord thy God will hold thy right hand,.... Take hold of it,
join in league and alliance with his people as it were, go hand in hand
with them; and having such an one with them, and on their side, they
need fear no enemy: or it is expressive of great freedom, familiarity,
and friendship, which may assure believers of the strong affection of
God towards them; and they may conclude themselves safe, being held by
him as a child in the hand of its parents, which is then not afraid of
anything. The Lord holds the right hand of his people, teaching them to
walk by faith, leading them into his presence, and to communion with
himself, and keeps them from falling: or, he "will strengthen their
right hand" (r); to do his work and service, and oppose their enemies;
or he will relieve their wants, and fill their hands with his good
things, which is sometimes the sense of the phrase, [Eze
16:45](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#045),

saying unto thee, fear not, I will help thee; as one friend takes
another by the hand in distress, and bids him be of good cheer,
promising him all needful assistance and supply. See Gill on [Isa
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010).

\(r\) "qui confortat dexteram tuam", Gataker.

[Isaiah 41:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 41:14</span></span>

Fear not, thou worm Jacob,.... Being like a worm, exposed to danger, and
liable to be trampled upon and crushed, mean and despicable in their own
eyes, and in the esteem of others; and it may be Jacob, or the true
Israelites, are so called, because of their impurity in themselves, of
which they are sensible; and chiefly because of their weakness and
impotence to defend themselves, and resist their enemies. It is an
observation of Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben Melech, that the strength of a
worm lies in its mouth, which, though tender, can strike the strongest
cedar, and penetrate into it; and the latter observes, that the strength
of Israel lies in their prayers, as Jacob's did, when, wrestling with
the angel, and making supplication, he had power with God, and
prevailed. Now, though the saints are such poor, weak, and contemptible
things, yet the Lord bids them not fear any of their enemies, he would
take their part, and protect them:

and ye men of Israel; the Vulgate Latin version renders it, "ye dead men
of Israel" (s); such as were accounted as dead men, and had no more
respect shown them than the dead, that are remembered no more; or were
exposed to death daily, for the sake of Christ and his Gospel; or that
reckoned themselves dead to sin, and did die daily to it, and lived unto
righteousness: or, "ye few men of Israel", as others (t) render it;
Christ's flock is a little flock, his church is a little city, and few
men in it, in comparison of the men of the world:

I will help thee, saith, the Lord, and thy Redeemer, the Holy One of
Israel; which is repeated for the confirmation of it, and is the more
strongly assured by these characters of a Redeemer of his people out of
the hands of all their enemies, and the holy and just God, and
sanctifier of them, which he here takes to himself, and makes himself
known by.

\(s\) "mortales Israeliae", Castalio. (t) , Sept. "viri pauci Israel",
Munster, Montanus; "Israel, qui pauco es numero", Tigurine version.

[Isaiah 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 41:15</span></span>

Behold, I will make thee a new sharp threshing instrument, having
teeth,.... The Vulgate Latin version renders it, "as a new threshing
cart, having teeth like saws"; and the Septuagint and Arabic versions,
"as the new threshing wheels of a cart, in the manner of saws"; for corn
with the Jews was threshed out by drawing a cart with wheels over it,
which wheels were stuck with teeth or spikes of iron; see [Isa
28:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#027), or by a cart or sledge filled
with stones to press it down, and at the bottom with iron teeth, which
being drawn to and fro by oxen over the sheaves, separated the grain
from the husk. Beckius has given a figure of this instrument (t), and
some such like instrument is still made use of in the eastern countries,
as Monsieur Thevenot (u) relates;

"at Damascus (he says), and almost all Turkey over, they thresh not the
corn, but after it is cut down they put it up in heaps, and round the
heaps they spread some of it four or five feet broad, and two feet
thick; this being done, they have a kind of sled, made of four pieces of
timber in square, two of which serve for an axle tree to two great
rollers, whose ends enter into these two pieces of timber, so as that
they easily turn in them: round each of these rollers, there are three
iron pinions, about half a foot thick, and a foot in diameter, whose
pinions are full of teeth, like so many saws: there is a seat placed
upon the two chief pieces of the timber, where a man sits, and drives
the horses, that draw the machine, round about the lay of corn that is
two foot thick; and that cutting the straw very small, makes the corn
come out of the ears without breaking it, for it slides betwixt the
teeth of the iron: when the straw is well cut, they put in more, and
then separate the corn from that bashed straw, by tossing all up
together in the air with a wooden shovel; for the wind blows the straw a
little aside, and the corn alone falls straight down--in some places
that machine is different, as I have seen (adds he), in Mesopotamia;
where, instead of those pinions round the rollers, they have many pegs
of iron, about six inches long, and three broad, almost in the shape of
wedges, but somewhat broader below than above, fastened without any
order into the rollers, some straight, and others crossways; and this
engine is covered with boards over the irons, whereon he that drives the
horse sits--they take the same course in Persia.''

Some apply this to the apostles of Christ, compared to oxen that tread
out the corn; and who not only ploughed and sowed, but threshed in hope,
and were instruments of bringing down every "high thing", comparable to
mountains and hills, "that exalted itself against the knowledge of God",
and of reducing it "to the obedience of Christ"; see [Co1
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009), but it seems rather to refer to
Constantine, a Christian emperor, brought forth and brought up in the
church; the same with the man child the woman brought forth, caught up
into heaven, raised to the Roman empire, and who ruled the nations, the
Pagan ones, with a rod of iron, [Rev
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#005) and then the church, who before
was but as a worm, weak and contemptible, now became powerful and
formidable; and therefore compared to a new threshing instrument, heavy,
sharp, and cutting:

thou shall thresh the mountains, and beat them small, and shalt make the
hills as chaff; which metaphorically design kingdoms and states; so the
Targum,

"thou shalt slay the people, and consume kingdoms"; so Jarchi and Kimchi
interpret it of kings and princes; and Aben Ezra particularly of the
Babylonians; but these were not destroyed by the people of God, but by
the Persians: it is better therefore to understand it of the Roman
emperors, and of the Roman empire conquered by Constantine, and
destroyed as Pagan, and when every mountain and island were moved out of
their places, [Rev 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#007), and the
prophecy may have a further accomplishment in the destruction of Rome
Papal, and all the antichristian states, when the kingdom and interest
of Christ, signified by a stone cut out without hands, shall break in
pieces, and consume all other kingdoms: which shall become like the
chaff of summer threshing floors, and the wind shall carry them away,
and no place be found for them, as follows; see [Dan
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034), this threshing of the nations is
ascribed to the church, though only as an instrument, the work is the
Lord's, as in [Isa 41:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#020).

\(t\) Beckius, notes on the Targum on 1 Chron. xx. 3. p. 210. (u)
Travels, Part 2. B. 1. c. 5. p. 24.

[Isaiah 41:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 41:16</span></span>

Thou shalt fan them, and the wind shall carry them away, and the
whirlwind shall scatter them,.... In illusion to the custom of the Jews,
who had their threshingfloors on the tops of hills and mountains, where
they took the opportunity and advantage of the wind in winnowing their
corn, which fanned it, and carried away the chaff, and scattered it
abroad; in like manner, it is suggested, the enemies of the church and
people of God should be dealt with, which are like the chaff the wind
driveth away, and is found no more, [Psa
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#005), and so Rome Pagan was no more as
such when subdued by Constantine, nor will the Papal antichristian
states, [Dan 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#035). Compare with this
what is said of literal Babylon, which will have its accomplishment in
mystical Babylon, [Jer 51:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#033),

and thou shalt rejoice in the Lord: the Targum is,

"in the word of the Lord;''

and so it paraphrases the preceding clause,

"his word shall scatter them as the whirlwind chaff;''

and therefore in him the saints shall rejoice, because it is he that
destroys their enemies; so when Rome Pagan was abolished, and the devil
and his angels, or the Heathen emperors, were drove out of it and
destroyed, there was great joy among the people of God, saying, "now is
come salvation and strength, and the kingdom of our God, and the power
of his Christ", [Rev 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#010) there will
be great rejoicing in the Lord likewise when Rome Papal falls, and the
saints have got the victory over the beast, [Rev
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#002).

and shalt glory in the Holy One of Israel; whose arm alone has done the
above things, and to whom the glory is to be given: it is the true
character of believers to rejoice in Christ, in his person, offices, and
grace, and to glory in his being made unto them wisdom, righteousness,
sanctification, and redemption. [Phi
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003).

[Isaiah 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 41:17</span></span>

When the poor and needy seek water, and there is none, and their tongue
faileth for thirst,.... This is to be understood not literally, but
spiritually; not of their outward circumstances, though the people of
God are for the most part the poor of the world, and in need of the good
things of it, hungry and thirsty, and naked; but of their spiritual
estate: as in Christ they need nothing; but in themselves, and at
different times, and in different frames, want many things; as larger
discoveries of the love of God, fresh supplies of grace from Christ,
more spiritual light and liveliness, fresh strength and comfort, fresh
views of pardon and righteousness, fresh food for faith, and more grace
of every sort to help them in their time of need; and which they seek
for at the throne of grace, and in public ordinances, and sometimes they
can find none, or it is a long time ere they obtain any: they thirst
after doctrine, as the Targum, after the word and ordinances, and
sometimes their circumstances are such, they cannot come at them; after
communion with God, and spiritual comfort, and cannot enjoy it, being in
a place where is no water; and after the blessings of grace, and can
have no application of them; see [Psa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#001), this may represent in a great
measure the state of the church under the ten persecutions of the
Heathen emperors, or when obliged to fly into the wilderness from the
wrath of the dragon, [Rev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#006),

I the Lord will hear them; their cries and prayers, and answer them, and
supply their wants, who is the Lord God Almighty, and can help them, the
Lord that changes not, and therefore they shall not be consumed:

I the God of Israel will not forsake them; neither their persons, nor
his work of grace upon them, but will support them, and provide for
them, and carry on his work in them; of which they may be assured,
because he is the God of Israel, their covenant God and Father.

[Isaiah 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 41:18</span></span>

I will open rivers in high places,.... Which is not usual; but God will
change the course of nature, and work miracles, rather than his people
shall want what is necessary for them; thus he opens to them his
everlasting and unchangeable love, and makes it manifest, and shows it
to them, and their interest in it, which is a broad river, that cannot
be passed over; this is in high places, it flows from the throne of God,
and of the Lamb; and of this river of pleasure he makes his people to
drink, the streams whereof make glad the city of our God; likewise the
fulness of grace in his Son, whose grace is as rivers of water in a dry
land, exceeding abundant, and very refreshing; also the graces of his
Spirit, which he gives in great abundance, and are those rivers of water
he causes to flow forth from them that believe in Christ, in the
comfortable exercise of them; see [Psa
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#008),

and fountains in the midst of the valleys; God himself is the fountain
of life, and of living waters; Christ is the fountain of gardens, and in
him are wells of salvation; the grace of the Spirit is a well of living
water, springing up unto eternal life; and of these, humble souls,
comparable to the lowly valleys, are partakers, [Psa
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#009),

I will make the wilderness a pool of water, and the dry land springs of
water; respecting either the Gentile world, which was like a wilderness
and dry land before the Gospel came into it, but by that was watered and
made fruitful; or the state and case of the people of God being in a
wilderness condition, when the Lord takes notice of them, and supplies
them with everything necessary, so that they are like a watered garden,
whose springs fail not, [Rev 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014).
This passage is applied by the Jews to the times of the Messiah (w).

\(w\) Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 1. 4. fol. 212. 3.

[Isaiah 41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 41:19</span></span>

I will plant in the wilderness the cedar, the shittah tree,.... Where
such trees had not used to grow, but in Lebanon, and such like places.
The "shittah tree" is thought to be a kind of cedar; it is the same of
which is the "shittim wood" mentioned in [Exo
25:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#005) and is so called by the Targum
here:

and the myrtle, and the oil tree; about the former there is no
difficulty, and one would think there should be none about the latter,
and that the olive tree is meant; but Kimchi thinks that is not certain,
and supposes the pine tree is meant; and observes that the olive tree is
distinguished from this oil tree in [Neh
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015), as indeed it is; and is by our
translators there rendered the pine tree, which they take to be meant by
another word in the next clause:

I will set in the desert the fir tree, and the pine, and the box tree
together; what we here render the "pine" the Targum interprets it of the
"elm", and so the Vulgate Latin version: now by all these are
figuratively meant converted persons in the Gentile world, in whom as
great a change was wrought, as if, instead of briers and thorns, came up
such trees as these; and who, by the grace of God, were made as goodly
and beautiful as some of these trees were; as odorous and of as sweet a
scent in their graces and duties as others; and as profitable and
fruitful in grace and good works like others of them; and comparable to
them, as being some of them evergreen, durable, and incorruptible;
because of their perseverance in grace and holiness.

[Isaiah 41:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 41:20</span></span>

That they may see, and know, and consider, and understand together,....
Not the nations of the world, as Kimchi; but rather, as Aben Ezra, the
poor and needy; who in all this, by subduing kingdoms and states, their
enemies, supplying their wants when in the greatest distress, and in a
marvellous manner, and converting sinners, might easily perceive, and so
frankly own and acknowledge, as well as lay it to heart, and lay it up
in their minds, and get understanding from it:

that the hand of the Lord hath done this, and the Holy One of Israel
hath created it; for the things before said to be done carry in them
plain marks of the hand of the Lord, and are as clear proofs of his
almighty power, as what was done in the creation of all things; such as
a worm to be made a threshing instrument, to beat down mountains and
hills, kingdoms and states, and make them as chaff; rivers to be opened
in high places, and all manner of excellent trees to be planted in a
wilderness; and indeed the work of conversion is a creation work; men
are by it made new creatures, and are manifestly the workmanship of the
hand of God.

[Isaiah 41:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 41:21</span></span>

Produce your cause, saith the Lord,.... The Lord having comforted his
people under their afflictions and persecutions from their enemies in
the first times of Christianity, returns to the controversy between him
and the idolatrous Heathens, and challenges them to bring their cause
into open court, and let it be publicly tried, that it may be seen on
what side truth lies:

bring forth your strong reasons, saith the King of Jacob; or King of
saints, the true Israel of God, who acknowledge the Lord as their King
and their God, and whom he rules over, protects and defends; and this
title is assumed for the comfort of them, that though he is King over
all the nations of the world, yet in an eminent and peculiar sense their
King; and he does not style himself the God of Jacob, though he was,
because this was the thing in controversy, and the cause to be decided,
whether he was the true God, or the gods of the Gentiles; and therefore
their votaries are challenged to bring forth the strongest reasons and
arguments they could muster together, in proof of the divinity of their
idols; their "bony" arguments, as the word (x) signifies; for what bones
are to the body, that strong arguments are to a cause, the support and
stability of it.

\(x\) os.

[Isaiah 41:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 41:22</span></span>

Let them bring them forth,.... Not their reasons, as before, but their
gods; let them cause them to come nigh, let them appear in court, and
speak for themselves, when their worshippers have said all they can in
defence of their deity:

and show us what shall happen: what shall come to pass hereafter; and by
that prove their divinity; for none but God can foretell things to come
with certainty; for everything else but what comes from God, by his
prophets, is all conjecture, ambiguous, uncertain, mere juggle, trick,
and deception, as were the oracles of the Heathens; but what is clearly
and plainly foretold, and agreeably to the prediction comes to pass, is
a proof of deity, and as such is here challenged. The "us" here, and the
"we" in the following clauses, either design God, and the Christians,
the true worshippers of him; or rather the three divine Persons in the
Godhead, Father, Son, and Spirit, the one true God, in opposition to the
gods of the Heathens. The Targum renders it,

"what shall happen to us:''

let them show the former things what they be: either what were before
the creation of the world, as Jarchi; what were purposed, decreed, and
determined so early to be done; or let them write, or inspire their
prophets to write, a history of the creation, and of the transactions of
former times, as Moses did, under the inspiration of God; or let them
show what things before predicted by them have come to pass, agreeably
to their predictions; or rather "the first things, which may be, show"
(y); what will first or presently come to pass, that show unto us if you
can:

that we may consider them, and know the latter end of them; or, "and we
will set our hearts upon them" (z); weigh them well in our minds, and
diligently and attentively consider them, how and in what manner it is
foretold they shall come to pass, and take notice and observe the issue
of them, and whether the event answers to the prediction: or "declare us
things for to come"; which are at a great distance; tell us not only
what shall be done in the present age, but onward to the end of the
world.

\(y\) "priora quid ipsa, nuntiate", Montanus; "piora quaenam sint
indicate", Piscator. (z) "et ponemus cor nostrum", V. L. Pagninus,
Montanus.

[Isaiah 41:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 41:23</span></span>

Show the things that are to come hereafter,.... From henceforward to the
consummation of all things: so the Targum,

"show what shall come to the end;''

or at the end, the end of all things; or show wonderful things, which
shall be hereafter; so Jarchi interprets the word; a word like this
having the signification of signs and wonders:

that we may know that ye are gods; as ye are said to be; that we may own
and acknowledge you to be such, there being this clear proof of it, if
it can be made out, foretelling things to come, both near and far off.
The Targum is,

"that we may know whether ye worship idols, in whom there is any
profit;''

as if the words were spoken not to the idols, but to the worshippers of
them: "yea, do good, or do evil"; not in a moral, but in a civil sense;
do good to your friends, to your worshippers; bestow favours upon them,
as I do on mine; or inflict punishment on your enemies, such as despise
your deity, and will not worship you, as I do on those that despise me,
and will not regard my service and worship:

that we may be dismayed, and behold it together: that when we see your
deity, and are convinced of it by the above proofs, we may be amazed and
astonished, as not expecting such proof, and be confounded, and have no
more to object unto it. The Targum is,

"that we may consider and reason together;''

and bring the matter in controversy to an issue, as it is in the next
verse.

[Isaiah 41:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 41:24</span></span>

Behold, ye are of nothing,.... Not as to the matter of them, for they
were made of gold, silver, brass, &c. but as to the divinity of them:
there was none in them, they were of no worth and value; they could do
nothing, either good or evil, either help their friends, or hurt their
enemies; yea, they were less than nothing; for the words may be rendered
by way of comparison, "behold, ye are less than nothing"; (a). See Gill
on [Isa 40:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#017);

and your work of nought; the workmanship bestowed on them, in casting or
carving them, was all to no purpose, and answered no end; or the work
they did, or pretended to do, their feigned oracles, and false
predictions: or, "worse than nothing": some render it, "worse than a
viper" (b); a word like this is used for one, [Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005) and so denotes the poisonous and
pernicious effects of idolatry:

an abomination is he that chooseth you; as the object of his worship; he
is not only abominable, but an abomination itself to God, and to all men
of sense and religion; for the choice he makes of an idol to be his god
shows him to be a man void of common sense and reason, and destitute of
all true religion and godliness, and must be a stupid sottish creature.
The Targum is,

"an abomination is that which ye have chosen for yourselves, or in which
ye delight;''

meaning their idols. This is the final issue of the controversy, and the
judgment passed both upon the idols and their worshippers.

\(a\) "vos minus quam nihil estis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (b)
"pejus opere viperae", Junius & Tremellius; "pejus est opere basilisci",
Piscator.

[Isaiah 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 41:25</span></span>

I have raised up one from the north,.... Either one people, or one
person; a mighty king, as the Targum; meaning either Cyrus, who might be
said to come from the north, and from the rising of the sun, or the
east, as in the next clause; since he was by birth a Medo-Persian, hence
called a mule; by his mother a Mede, and the country of Media lay rather
to the north of Babylon; and by his father a Persian, and Persia lay to
the east of it; and the forces he brought with him against it were
partly Medes, and partly Persians; though some, as Jarchi observes,
think two persons are meant in this and the next clause; in this
Nebuchadnezzar, who came from Babylon, which lay north of Judea, to
invade it; and in the other Cyrus, who came from the east, and
proclaimed the name of the Lord, and liberty to the captive Jews. Kimchi
and his father both interpret it of the King Messiah, as do also more
ancient Jewish writers (c), of whom Cyrus was a type; but to me it seems
best of all, as most agreeable to the scope and tenure of the prophecy,
to understand it of Constantine, who, as reported, was born in Britain,
in the northern part of the world; but, when called to the empire, was
in the eastern parts of it; and so with great propriety it is expressed
here, and in the following clause:

and from the rising of the sun he shall call upon my name; which those
that apply the prophecy to Cyrus explain by [Ezr
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ezr001.htm#001), but is much more applicable to
Constantine, who was a worshipper of the true God, which invocation of
his name is expressive of; and who openly professed the name of Christ,
and encouraged those that did, and spread his name and fame, his Gospel
and his glory, throughout the empire, east and west:

and he shall come upon princes as upon morter, and as the potter
treadeth clay; that is, he shall come upon them with his army, and
conquer them, and tread them down, and trample upon them, as morter is
trodden upon, or mire in the streets; or as the clay is trodden by the
potter, who does with it as he pleases; which those who interpret it of
Cyrus understand of Astyages, Croesus, Belshazzar, and others; see [Isa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#001), and is as true of Constantine,
who subdued the emperors of Rome, trod them under his feet, as Maximius,
Maxentius, Licinius, &c.; moreover, the word "saganin", here used, is a
word used by Jewish writers for priests, for such who were the deputies
of the high priest; and it may design here the Pagan priests, and the
destruction of them, and of Paganism in the Roman empire by Constantine.

\(c\) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 9. fol. 153. 1. Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 13.
fol. 208. 1. Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 19. 2.

[Isaiah 41:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 41:26</span></span>

Who hath declared from the beginning, that we may know?.... Who of the
idols, or of their priests, that have declared things future before they
came to pass, or ever predicted such an event as this before mentioned;
which, if understood of Cyrus, was an hundred and fifty years before it
came to pass; and if of Constantine, near a thousand years:

and before time, that we may say, he is righteous? that is, who hath
declared things before the time of the accomplishment of them, and they
have come to pass, as they have been declared? by which it may be known
that they are gods, or the priests of such that are so, by their having
prescience of future events, or the spirit of prophecy; and so it may be
said of them, that they are just in their pretensions, and have a
rightful claim to deity, or are true prophets; so the Targum,

"that we may say it is true''

yea, there is none that showeth, yea, there is none that declareth; that
shows and declares things to come, or such as the true God shows and
declares:

yea, there is none that heareth your words; none of your worshippers
that ever heard you speak a word, who, when they have prayed to you,
could never have an answer; and therefore you have no just claim to
deity; or ever heard any of your prophets say such a thing should come
to pass, and it did.

[Isaiah 41:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">isa 41:27</span></span>

The first shall say to Zion, behold, behold them,.... Or, "I the first
say to Zion"; I who am the first and the last, [Isa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#004) which some ancient Jewish writers
(d) observe is the name of the Messiah, and apply the passage to him;
or, I am the "first" that say these things to Zion (e),

behold, behold them; behold such and such things shall come to pass, and
accordingly they have come to pass; or, "behold", the promised Messiah,
whom I have long spoken of, behold, he is come; see [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001), and behold them, his apostles
and ministers, publishing the good tidings of salvation, as follows. The
Targum is,

"the words of consolation which the prophets prophesied from the
beginning concerning Sion, behold they come;''

they come to pass; which is such a proof of deity the idols and their
worshippers cannot give:

and I will give to Jerusalem one that bringeth good tidings; which some
interpret of Isaiah; others of Cyrus; others of Christ; and others of
John the Baptist. I suppose the singular put for the plural, "one that
bringeth good tidings", or, "an evangelist for evangelists"; and may be
understood of Gospel teachers, whom the Lord gave to his church and
people, and by means of whom he spread his Gospel, not only in Judea,
but in the Gentile world, to the overthrow of Paganism.

\(d\) T. Bab. Pesach. fol. 5. 1. Bereshit Rabba, sect. 63. fol. 55. 3.
and Vajikra Rabba, sect. 30. fol. 171. 2. (e) "ego primus sum qui dico
haec Sioni", Tigurine version.

[Isaiah 41:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">isa 41:28</span></span>

For I beheld, and there was no man,.... Among all the Pagan priests and
prophets, that could foretell things to come; or could prove that their
idols did or could say anything in favour of them:

even amongst them, and there was no counsellor: none that could be
advocates for these idols, and plead their cause; or could give any good
advice and counsel to persons that needed it, and who applied to them or
their idols for it:

that, when I asked of them, could answer a word; when asked what they
had to say on behalf of their gods they worshipped, were dumb and
speechless; moreover, all this may be said of the idols themselves, that
there was none among them that could foretell a future event, or give
any wholesome counsel to their worshippers, or could say anything in
their own defence; and therefore, to close the controversy, the
following sentence is pronounced.

[Isaiah 41:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">isa 41:29</span></span>

Behold, they are all vanity,.... Both the idols and the worshippers of
them; in vain they claim the title of deity, to which they have no
right; and in vain do men worship them, since they receive no benefit by
them:

their works are nothing; they can do nothing, neither good nor evil;
nothing is to be hoped or feared from them, and the worship given them
is of no avail; nothing is got by it; it is all useless and
insignificant, yea, pernicious and harmful:

their molten images are wind and confusion: though they are made of cast
metal, yet setting aside the costly matter of which they are made, they
are of no more solidity, efficacy, and use, than the wind; and are like
the chaos of the first earth, mere "tohu" and "bohu", one of which words
is here used, without form and void, having no form of deity on them;
and therefore men are directed to turn themselves from them, and behold
a most glorious Person, worthy of worship and praise, described in the
beginning of the next chapter, "behold my servant", &c.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 42](isa042)

</div>
