<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa034)  [Next](isa036.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 35:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 35

This chapter is a prediction of the glory and flourishing estate of the
Gospel church, and of the blessings received by it from Christ. Its
flourishing state is expressed by the fruitfulness of the desert, being
made like to Lebanon, Carmel, and Sharon; and by the inhabitants of it
seeing the glory and excellency of Christ, [Isa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001.md) the ministers of the word are
directed and exhorted to strengthen the weak, and comfort the feeble
minded, by assuring them of the coming of Christ to save them, [Isa
35:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003.md) when miracles, both in nature and
grace, should be wrought; and great alterations should be made in the
wilderness, by the power of God, [Isa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005.md) when a way should be cast up,
described; and the persons that should walk in it are pointed at; and
the end it should bring them to, everlasting joy and happiness, [Isa
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008.md).

[Isaiah 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 35:1</span></span>

The wilderness, and the solitary place, shall be glad for them,....
Either for the wild beasts, satyrs, owls, and vultures, that shall
inhabit Edom or Rome, and because it shall be an habitation for them: or
they shall be glad for them, the Edomites, and for the destruction of
them; that is, as the Targum paraphrases it,

"they that dwell in the wilderness, in the dry land, shall rejoice;''

the church, in the wilderness, being obliged to fly there from the
persecution of antichrist, and thereby become desolate as a wilderness;
and so called, in allusion to the Israelites in the wilderness, [Act
7:38](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#038.md) shall now rejoice at the ruin of
Rome, and the antichristian states; by which means it shall come into a
more flourishing condition; see [Rev
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014.md),

and the desert shall rejoice, and blossom as the rose; or "as the lily",
as the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions; and so the
Targum,

"as the lilies:''

not Judea or Jerusalem, as the Jewish writers, become like a desert,
through the devastations made in it by the king of Assyria's army; and
now made glad, and become flourishing, upon the departure of it from
them: rather the Gentile world, which was like a wilderness, barren and
unfruitful, before the Gospel came into it; but by means of that, which
brought joy with it, and was attended with fragrancy, it diffusing the
savour of the knowledge of Christ in every place, it became fruitful and
flourishing, and of a sweet odour, and looked delightful, and pleasant:
though it seems best to understand it of the Gentile church in the
latter day, after the destruction of antichrist, when it shall be in a
most desirable and comfortable situation. These words stand in
connection with the preceding chapter [Isa
34:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa034.htm#001.md), and very aptly follow upon it.

[Isaiah 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 35:2</span></span>

It shall blossom abundantly, and rejoice even with joy and singing,....
A redundancy of words, to express the very flourishing estate of the
church, and the great joy there shall be on that occasion, as well as
because of the destruction of their enemies, and deliverance from them:

the glory of Lebanon shall be given unto it; a mountain in Judea, famous
for its choice and tall cedars, which were the glory of it; signifying
hereby, that the church of God, which had been in a desolate condition,
should abound with choice and excellent Christians, comparable to the
cedars of Lebanon. Jarchi interprets it of the sanctuary or temple;
which may be so called, because built of the wood of Lebanon. This was
an emblem and type of the Gospel church; and the glory of it lay not
only in its outward form and building, but in those things which were in
the holy places of it, especially the most holy, which were all typical
of spiritual things in Gospel times; so that all the glory of the Jewish
church state and temple is brought into the Gentile church, into the
Christian or Gospel church state; and which will still more appear in
the latter day, when the temple of God will be opened in heaven, and the
ark of the testament; see [Rev 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019.md),

the excellency of Carmel and Sharon; two places in the land of Judea,
famous for fruitfulness and pasturage; and so denote the very great
fruitfulness of the Gospel church; the word and ordinances of which are
as green pastures for the sheep of Christ to feed upon, and by which
they become fat and flourishing:

they shall see the glory of our Lord, and the excellency of our God; the
Targum introduces this clause thus,

"the house of Israel, to whom these things are said, they shall see,''
&c.;

but not Israel in a literal sense is here meant, but the Gentile church,
formerly in the wilderness; or, however, converted persons, be they Jews
or Gentiles, in the latter day, who shall see the glory of divine power,
in the destruction of their enemies; and the excellency and beauty of
divine grace, in the blessings of it bestowed upon them; they shall see
the glory of the Lord, which shall then be risen upon them, [Isa
60:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#001.md) the Lord our God is the Lord
Jesus Christ, who is Lord and God; the glory and excellency of whose
person and offices, and of his righteousness and salvation, is seen in
the Gospel, by those whose eyes are enlightened by the Spirit of God;
and will be more clearly discerned, when there will be a greater
effusion of the Spirit, as a spirit, of wisdom and revelation in the
knowledge of him; and to this sight of the glory and excellency of
Christ, the joy and fruitfulness of the church will be greatly owing.
The Septuagint and Arabic versions render it, "my people shall see", &c.

[Isaiah 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 35:3</span></span>

Strengthen ye the weak hands,.... These are the words of the prophet, as
the Targum,

"the prophet said, strengthen the weak hands;''

or rather of God, by the prophet, to the converted Gentiles, to those
who saw the glory of the Lord; particularly to the ministers of the
Gospel, who have to do with weak and feeble persons, who can scarcely
lift up their hands, or stand upon their legs, under a sense of sin, in
a view of wrath, and immediate ruin and destruction, ready to sink and
faint, because of their enemies, or through want of food; and their
business is to comfort and strengthen them, by preaching the Gospel, and
pointing out the promises of it to them:

and confirm the feeble knees; that so they may keep their ground against
their enemies; shake off their fears and trembling; go on their way
courageously and rejoicing; run, and not be weary; walk, and not faint:
"hands" and "knees" are mentioned particularly, because a man's strength
lies greatly in them; and his weakness is seen by the languor and
trembling of them.

[Isaiah 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 35:4</span></span>

Say to them that are of a fearful heart,.... Or, "hasty of heart" (w);
are at once for flying from the enemy; "hasty" in drawing black
conclusions upon themselves and their state; "inconsiderate" of the
promises made unto them; ready to doubt of, and call in question, the
performance of the above things, respecting the fruitful and flourishing
estate of the church: wherefore it must be said to them,

Be strong, fear not; be strong in faith, fear not the enemy, nor doubt
of the fulfilment of divine promises, relating to their ruin and your
safety:

behold, your God will come with vengeance; Christ, who is God in our
nature, God manifest in the flesh, and who came by the assumption of
human nature; and when he first came, he came with vengeance, and took
vengeance on Satan and his works; on him, and his principalities, and
powers, whom he spoiled and destroyed, as well as made an end of sin and
abolished death; see [Isa 61:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#002.md) so
likewise he came in his kingdom and power, and took vengeance on the
Jewish nation, for their disbelief and rejection of him; and which time
is expressly called the days of vengeance, [Luk
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#022.md) and at the time of his spiritual
coming he will destroy antichrist with the brightness of it, and avenge
the blood of his servants, [Rev 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020.md)
and at his personal coming he will take vengeance on them that know not
God, and obey not his Gospel, [Th2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#008.md)
and the words are so expressed as to take in the several times of his
coming: and since he has already come, and taken vengeance in some
instances, this may serve to encourage, and perhaps the design of it is
to encourage, the faith of God's people, with respect to his future
coming, and the end and issue of it:

even God with a recompence: or, "the God of recompence" (x); and so the
Targum,

"the Lord of recompences;''

both to the wicked a just recompence of reward or punishment for their
sins, it being just with him to recompense tribulation to them that
trouble his people; and to the saints, the time of his spiritual reign
being the time, as to destroy them that destroy the earth, so to give a
reward to his servants the prophets, and to the saints, and to them that
fear his name, [Rev 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018.md),

he will come and save you; the end of his first coming was to save his
people from sin, the curse and condemnation of the law, from hell,
wrath, ruin, and destruction; and the end of his spiritual coming, at
the latter day, will be to save his people from their antichristian
enemies, from idolatry, superstition, and slavery.

\(w\) "festinis corde", Vatablus; "praecipitantibus corde", Cocceius;
"inconsideratis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (x) "praemiator Deus
ipse veniet", Castalio.

[Isaiah 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 35:5</span></span>

Then the eyes of the blind shall be opened,.... Which was literally
fulfilled in the first coming of Christ, [Mat
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#027.md), [Joh
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#001.md) and spiritually, both among Jews
and Gentiles; especially the latter, under the ministry of the apostles,
when those who were blind as to spiritual things had no knowledge of God
in Christ; nor of the way of salvation by him; nor of the plague of
their own hearts; nor of the work of the Spirit of God upon the soul;
nor of the truths of the Gospel; through the power of divine grace had
the eyes of their understanding opened, so as to see their sinfulness
and vileness; their emptiness of all that is good, and their impotency
to do anything that is spiritual; their want of righteousness; their
need of Christ, and the fulness and suitableness of him as a Saviour;
and to have some light into the truths of the Gospel, and a glimpse of
heaven and eternal glory: and this will still have a greater
accomplishment in the latter day, when the blind Jews are converted, and
the fulness of the Gentiles brought in:

and the ears of the deaf shall be unstopped; which was literally true of
some when Christ came in the flesh, [Mat
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#005.md) and spiritually of many who had
not ears to hear in a spiritual sense; stopped what ears they had to the
charming voice of the Gospel; and, though they might externally hear,
did not understand it: yet these having ears given them to hear, and
their ears and hearts opened by the Spirit of God, heard the Gospel
spiritually, profitably, pleasantly, comfortably, and with wonder and
astonishment; and a multitude of such instances there will be in the
latter day glory. Jarchi interprets it of such who were blind as to the
knowledge of the fear of God, and deaf to the voice of the prophets.

[Isaiah 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 35:6</span></span>

Then shall the lame man leap as an hart..... As the lame man did healed
by Peter, [Act 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#001.md) there were many
instances of such persons cured by Christ when here on earth, [Mat
15:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#030.md) and in a spiritual sense this
was verified in many who were impotent to that which is good; had
neither will nor power to go to Christ for life and salvation, nor to
walk by faith in him, nor to walk in his ways; who yet, by the mighty
power of the Spirit and grace of God, became able and willing to go to
him, and venture their souls on him; walked on in him as they had
received him; and not only walked in his ways, but ran in the ways of
his commandments, and leaped for joy for what they saw and heard of him,
and received from him; and innumerable will be the instances of such
mighty grace at the spiritual coming and reign of Christ:

and the tongue of the dumb shall sing; this had its accomplishment, in a
literal sense, at the first coming of Christ, [Mat
9:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#032.md), [Mat
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#022.md) and, in a spiritual sense, in
many who before had nothing to say to God in prayer, nor in praise;
nothing to say of Christ, or for him; or of the blessed Spirit, and his
divine operations; but now, by divine grace, are made to speak unto God,
both in a petitionary way, and in a way of thankfulness; and of Christ,
and of the blessed Spirit; and of the great things each have done for
them; and even to sing for joy, because of the wondrous blessings of
grace they were made partakers of; and many more such there will be in
the latter day, when the Spirit is poured down from on high. Kimchi
interprets all this of the Israelites, who were in captivity as blind,
deaf, lame, and dumb. So the Targum of this and the preceding verse [Isa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005.md),

"then shall the eyes of the house of Israel be opened, who were as blind
men as to the law; and the ears of them that are as deaf men, to attend
to the words of the prophets shall hear; then when they shall see the
captives of Israel gathered to go up to their own land as the swift
harts, and not tarry,'' &c.;

but it may be better applied to their present state, and to their case
when they shall be turned to the Lord in the latter day:

for in the wilderness shall waters break out, and streams in the desert;
not literally, but mystically; and may be understood both of the
doctrines of the Gospel breaking out in the ministry of them, in such
places as were like unto the wilderness and desert, quite barren, and
destitute of the knowledge, grace, and fear of God; see [Joe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018.md) and of the abundance of grace,
and the efficacy of it, making the word effectual to the conversion and
fruitfulness of multitudes of souls, bringing along with it a vast
variety of spiritual blessings; see [Joh
7:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#037.md) to both which, the one as the
means, and the other as the cause, all the above wonderful things are
owing.

[Isaiah 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 35:7</span></span>

And the parched ground shall become a pool, and the thirsty land springs
of water,.... Such persons who have been like the parched earth, barren
and unfruitful, or like the earth scorched with the sun, filled with a
sense of divine wrath, and thirsting, like the dry earth, after the
grace of God, Christ, and his righteousness, shall be comforted and
refreshed, and filled with the grace of God: or such who have been
scorched and parched with the heat of persecution, from the
antichristian party, and have been thirsting after deliverance from it,
shall now enjoy peace and prosperity:

in the habitation of dragons, where each lay; in kingdoms, cities, and
towns, inhabited by men, comparable to dragons for their poison and
cruelty; where the great red dragon Satan had his seat; and the Pagan
emperors, and Papal powers, who have exercised the authority, power, and
cruelty of the dragon, dwell; see [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003.md),

shall be grass, with reeds and rushes; persons shall spring up,
partakers of the grace of God, who, for their number and flourishing
estate, shall be like the green grass; and others, still more eminent
for their gifts and usefulness, like reeds, or canes and rushes; see
[Isa 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#003.md).

[Isaiah 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 35:8</span></span>

And an highway shall be there, and a way,.... Not two ways, but one; the
way shall be a highway, a way cast up, raised, and "elevated" (y); this
is to be understood principally of Christ, the only way of life and
salvation; and of the lesser paths of duty and ordinances: and the
meaning is, that in those desert places, where Christ and his Gospel had
not been preached, at least for many ages, here he should be made known,
as the way, the truth, and the life; his Gospel preached, and his
ordinances administered; and multitudes, both of Jews and Gentiles,
should be directed and enabled to walk here. Christ is a highway to
both; a way cast up by sovereign grace, which is raised above the mire
and dirt of sin, and carries over it, and from it; a way visible and
manifest, clearly pointed to and described in the everlasting Gospel; it
is the King's highway, the highway of the King of kings, which he has
ordered and appointed, and is common to all his subjects, high and low,
rich and poor, stronger or weaker believers, all may walk in this way;
it is an old beaten path, which saints in all ages, from the beginning
of the world, have walked in; it is the good old way, the more
excellent, the most excellent one; all obstructions and impediments are
removed, cast in by sin, Satan, the law, and the world; nor is anyone to
be stopped and molested in this way, and all in it shall come safe to
their journey's end:

and it shall be called The way of holiness; or, "a holy way" (z); Christ
is perfectly holy in nature and life, and the holiness of both is
imputed to those that are in this way; all in this way are sanctified by
the Spirit and grace of God; this way leads to perfect holiness in
heaven, and none but holy persons walk here: salvation by Christ no ways
discourages the practice of holiness, but is the greatest motive and
incentive to it. Christ leads his people in paths of righteousness; in
the paths of truth, of ordinances, and of worship, public and private,
all which are holy; and in the path of Gospel conversation and
godliness: this way is so holy, that

the unclean shall not pass over it; all men are unclean by nature; some
are cleansed by the grace of God and blood of Christ; and though, as
sanctified, they are not free from sin and the pollution of it, yet, as
justified, they are "the undefiled in the way"; and none but such can
pass over, or pass through this way to heaven, [Rev
21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027.md),

but it shall be for those; for holy men, not for the unclean; for Israel
only, as Kimchi, for such who are Israelites indeed; for those who are
before mentioned, [Isa 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005.md) as Jarchi;
it is for those to walk in who have been blind, but now see, and these
are led in a way that they knew not before; for the deaf, who now hear
the voice behind them, saying, this is the way; for the lame man, that
leaps like a hart, to walk and run in; for the dumb, now made to sing,
and go on in it rejoicing; it is for the redeemed to walk in, as in the
following verse. This clause may be rendered, "and he shall be with
them" (a); that is, God shall be with them; they shall have his company
and gracious presence in the way; he will be with them, to guide and
direct them, to supply all their wants, and furnish them with everything
convenient for them; to support and strengthen them, on whom they may
lean and stay themselves; to guard and protect them from all their
enemies; and being with them they shall not miss their way, or fail of
coming to the end. Hence it follows,

the wayfaring men, though fools, shall not err therein; or travellers;
such the saints are, they are strangers, pilgrims, and sojourners here;
they have no continuance here; they are like wayfaring men, that abide
but for a night; they are bound for another country, a better, even a
heavenly one, and at last shall arrive thither: now these, though they
have been "fools" in their unregenerate state, with respect to spiritual
things; or though they may not have that sharpness of wit, and quickness
of natural parts, as some men have; and though they may not have that
clear and distinct knowledge of Gospel truths as others, at least of
some of them, yet shall not err as to the way of salvation; and though
they may err or mistake in some things, yet not in the main, not
fundamentally, nor finally; the way of salvation by Christ is so plain a
way, that he that has any spiritual understanding of it shall not err in
it.

\(y\) "semita strata", Montanus; "vel exaltata lapidibus", Vatablus. (z)
"via sancta", V. L. Piscator. (a) "sed ipse illis ambulator vise" De
Dieu; "ipse cum eis", Tigurine version.

[Isaiah 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 35:9</span></span>

No lion shall be there,.... That is, in the way before described; no
wicked persons, comparable to lions for their savage and cruel
dispositions towards the people of God; for those who have been as such,
as Saul before conversion, yet when brought into this way become as tame
as lambs. The Targum interprets it of tyrannical kings and princes,

"there shall not be there a king doing evil, nor an oppressive
governor;''

and Jarchi applies it to Nebuchadnezzar, as in [Jer
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007.md) and the sense may be, that when
this way shall be more known on earth, in the latter day, there will be
no persecutor of the church and people of God: or else Satan, the
roaring lion, is here meant, who has no part nor lot in this way of
salvation; and all that are in it are out of his reach; and though he
may disturb in the paths of duty and ordinances, yet he can never
destroy those who are in Christ the way:

nor any ravenous beast shall go up thereon; upon the high way; the same
may be intended as before:

it shall not be found there; walking, ravaging, and destroying:

but the redeemed shall walk there; without fear, as Kimchi adds, since
no lion, or any beast of prey, shall be found upon it: the "redeemed"
are the redeemed of the Lord, and by him, and are peculiarly his, being
bought with his precious blood, redeemed from among men, and unto God,
and from sin, the law, its curse, and condemnation; these "shall walk"
in the way of life and salvation by Christ, in consequence of their
being redeemed; which supposes life, strength, and wisdom, which are
given them, and a proficiency or going forward: they "shall" walk here;
though they have been blind, their eyes shall be opened to see this way;
and, though weak, they shall have strength to walk in it; and, though
foolish, they shall have wisdom to guide their feet with discretion;
and, though they may stumble and fall, they shall rise again, and shall
keep on walking to the end.

[Isaiah 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 35:10</span></span>

And the ransomed of the Lord shall return,.... The same with the
"redeemed" in [Isa 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#009.md) these shall
return, or be converted, as the Vulgate Latin version; they are in the
same state and condition with other men by nature, but, by virtue of
their being ransomed by Christ, they are by the grace of God turned from
darkness to light, from the power of Satan unto God; they are returned
from the paths in which they had been straying to Christ, the Shepherd
and Bishop of souls, in order to walk in his ways,

and come to Zion with songs; being called by grace, and converted, they
turn their backs on the world, and the men of it, and ask the way to
Zion, with their faces thitherwards, even to the church of God; and they
find their way, being directed and brought there by the Lord himself;
where they come readily and willingly, not only to hear the Gospel, but
to submit to all ordinances, and become members of a Gospel church; see
[Heb 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#020.md) and hither they "come with
songs", for electing, redeeming, calling, justifying, and pardoning
grace; everyone of which blessings requires a song, and with which they
are now affected, seeing their interest in them, and cannot forbear
speaking of them to the glory of divine grace:

and everlasting joy upon their heads; seen in their countenances, and by
the lifting up of their heads; and which oil of gladness, is poured upon
them, and diffused all over them, like the ointment on Aaron's head: and
this is "everlasting": not as to the exercise of it, which is often
interrupted by sin, temptation, and desertion; but as to the ground and
foundation of it, the everlasting love of God, the everlasting covenant
of his grace, and the everlasting righteousness and salvation by Christ;
and, as to the principle and habit of it, which can never be lost, nor
any man take it away:

they shall obtain joy and gladness; by having the presence of God, and
communion with him; through his love being shed abroad in their hearts;
by being favoured with views of Christ, and interest in him, and with
the gracious influences of the blessed Spirit:

and sorrow and sighing shall flee away; which before attended them,
through convictions of sin, but now removed by the discoveries and
applications of pardoning grace and mercy; or what was occasioned by
want of the divine Presence, now enjoyed; being come to Zion, they are
made joyful in the house of prayer, and are satisfied with the marrow
and fatness of Gospel ordinances, and continually hear the joyful sound
of the Gospel itself: all this may be applied to the state of the saints
in heaven; for the highway before described not only leads to Zion the
church below, but to the Zion above, to the heavenly glory; and all the
redeemed, all that walk in this way, shall come thither; at death their
souls "return" to God that gave them, and are in immediate happiness
with Christ; and in the resurrection shall return from their dusty beds,
and shall appear before God in Zion above; and "with songs" to Father,
Son, and Spirit, for what each have done for them, in election,
redemption, and conversion; and for persevering grace, and for being
safely brought over Jordan's river, and from the grave; see [Co1
15:54](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#054.md), they shall then enter into joy,
which will never end; there will be nothing to interrupt it to all
eternity; it will be "everlasting joy" indeed; and this will be "upon
their heads", visible and manifest, and be upon them as a crown of life,
righteousness, and glory, that shall never fade away; they shall then
"obtain joy and gladness", in all the fulness thereof, their joy in the
Lord will be complete; which these several words and phrases used are
expressive of; and then there will be no more "sorrow and sighing"; for
there will be no more sin and unbelief, or any other corruption of
nature; no more darkness and desertion; no more of any of Satan's
temptations; no more distresses, inward or outward; and so no more
sighing within, nor sorrowing without; all tears will be wiped away. The
Jews (b) apply this passage to the world to come.

\(b\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 110. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 36](isa036.md)

</div>
