<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa037)  [Next](isa039) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 38](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 38:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 38

This chapter gives an account of Hezekiah's sickness, recovery, and
thanksgiving on that account. His sickness, and the nature of it, and
his preparation for it, as directed to by the prophet, [Isa
38:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#001), his prayer to God upon it, [Isa
38:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#002) the answer returned unto it, by
which he is assured of living fifteen years more, and of the deliverance
and protection of the city of Jerusalem from the Assyrians, [Isa
38:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#004), the token of his recovery, the
sun going back ten degrees on the dial of Ahaz, [Isa
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007), a writing of Hezekiah's upon his
recovery, in commemoration of it, [Isa
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#009), in which he represents the
deplorable condition he had been in, the terrible apprehensions he had
of things, especially of the wrath and fury of the Almighty, and his
sorrowful and mournful complaints, [Isa
38:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#010), he observes his deliverance
according to the word of God; expresses his faith in it; promises to
retain a cheerful sense of it; owning that it was by the promises of God
that he had lived as other saints did; and ascribes his preservation
from the grave to the love of God to him, of which the forgiveness of
his sins was an evidence, [Isa 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#015),
the end of which salvation was, that he might praise the Lord, which he
determined to do, on stringed instruments, [Isa
38:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#018), and the chapter is closed with
observing the means of curing him of his boil; and that it was at his
request that the sign of his recovery was given him, [Isa
38:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#021).

[Isaiah 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 38:1</span></span>

In those days was Hezekiah sick unto death,.... This was about the time
that Sennacherib invaded Judea, threatened Jerusalem with a siege, and
his army was destroyed by an angel from heaven; but, whether it was
before or after the destruction of his army, interpreters are not
agreed. Some of the Jewish writers, as Jarchi upon the place, and others
(a), say, it was three days before the ruin of Sennacherib's army; and
that it was on the third day that Hezekiah recovered, and went up to the
temple, that the destruction was; and that it was the first day of the
passover; and that this was before the city of Jerusalem was delivered
from him; and the fears of him seem clear from [Isa
38:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#006) and some are of opinion that his
sickness was occasioned by the consternation and terror he was thrown
into, by reason of the Assyrian army, which threatened ruin to him and
his kingdom. Though Josephus (b) says, that it was after his deliverance
from it, and when he had given thanks to God for it; however, it is
certain it was in the same year, since it was in the fourteenth year of
Hezekiah's reign that Sennacherib invaded Judea, and from this his
sickness and recovery fifteen years were added to his days, and he
reigned no more than twenty nine years, [Kg2
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#002) what this sickness was cannot be
said with certainty; some have conjectured it to be the plague, since he
had a malignant ulcer, of which he was cured by a plaster of figs; but,
be it what it will, it was a deadly one in its own nature, it was a
sickness unto death, a mortal one; though it was not eventually so,
through the interposition of divine power, which prevented it. The
reason of this sickness, which Jarchi gives, that it was because he did
not take to himself a wife, is without foundation; more likely the
reason of it was, to keep him humble, and that he might not be lifted up
with the deliverance, or be more thankful for it:

and Isaiah the prophet, the son of Amoz, came unto him: not of his own
accord to visit him, but was sent by the Lord with a message to him:

and said unto him, thus saith the Lord, set thine house in order; or,
"give orders to thine house" (c): to the men of thine house, as the
Targum; his domestics, his counsellors and courtiers, what they should
do after his death; how his personal estate should be disposed of; how
the throne should be filled up; who should succeed him, since he had no
son: the family and secular affairs of men should be put in order, and
direction given for the management of them, and their substance and
estates should be disposed of by will before their death; and much more
a concern should be shown for the setting in order their spiritual
affairs, or that they may be habitually ready for death and eternity;

for thou shall die, and not live: or not recover of thy sickness, as the
Targum adds: "for thou art a dead man", as it may be rendered, in all
human appearance; the disease being deadly, and of which he could not
recover by the help of any medicine; nothing but almighty power could
save him; and this is said, to observe to him his danger, to give him
the sentence of death in himself, and to set him a praying, as it did.

\(a\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 23. p. 65. (b) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 2. sect. 1.
(c) "praecipe domui tuae", Musculus, Vatablus, Pagniaus, Montanus.

[Isaiah 38:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 38:2</span></span>

Then Hezekiah turned his face to the wall,.... Not figuratively to the
wall of his heart, as Jerom; but literally, either to the wall of his
bedchamber where he lay sick, that his tears might not be seen, and his
prayers interrupted, and that he might deliver them with more privacy,
freedom, and fervency; or else to the wall of the temple, as the Targum,
towards which good men used to look when they prayed, [Kg1
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#038), which was a type of Christ, to
whom we should have respect in all our petitions, as being the only
Mediator between God and man: and prayed unto the Lord; as follows:

[Isaiah 38:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 38:3</span></span>

And said, remember now, O Lord, I beseech thee,.... He puts the Lord in
mind of his good walk and works, which are never forgotten by him,
though they may seem to be: and this he the rather did, because it might
be thought that he had been guilty of some very enormous crime, which he
was not conscious to himself he had; it being unusual to cut men off in
the prime of their days, but in such a case:

how I have walked before thee in truth, and with a perfect heart; or
rather, "that I have walked before thee", as Noldius, since the manner
of walking is declared in express terms; so the Targum, Syriac, and
Arabic versions, and others; that the course of his life in the sight of
God, having the fear of him upon his heart, and before his eyes, was
according to the truth of his word, institutions, and appointments; that
he walked in all the commandments and ordinances of the Lord, and in the
sincerity, integrity, and uprightness of his soul; and however imperfect
his services were, as no man so walks as to be free from sin, yet he was
sincere and without dissimulation in the performance of them; his
intentions were upright, his views were purely to the glory of God:

and have done that which is good in thy sight; agreeably both to the
moral and ceremonial law, in his own private and personal capacity as a
man, in the administration of justice in his government as a king; and
particularly in reforming the nation; in destroying idols, and idol
worship; in breaking in pieces the brazen serpent, when used to
idolatrous purposes; and in setting up the pure worship of God, and his
ordinances; and which he does not plead as meritorious, but mentions as
well pleasing to God, which he graciously accepts of, and encourages
with promises of reward:

and Hezekiah wept sore; not only because of his death, the news of which
might be shocking to nature; but because of the distressed condition the
nation would be in, having now the Assyrian army in it, or at least not
wholly free from fears, by reason of that monarch; and besides, had no
son to succeed him in the throne, and so difficulties and troubles might
arise within themselves about a successor; and it may be, what troubled
him most of all was, that dying without issue, the Messiah could not
spring from his seed.

[Isaiah 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 38:4</span></span>

Then came the word of the Lord to Isaiah,.... Before he had got out into
the middle court, [Kg2 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#004),

saying, as follows:

[Isaiah 38:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 38:5</span></span>

Go and say to Hezekiah,.... Turn again, and tell him, [Kg2
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#005),

thus saith the Lord the God of David thy father; this is said, to show
that he remembered the covenant he made with David his father,
concerning the kingdom, and the succession of his children in it; and
that he had a regard to him, as walking in his steps:

I have heard thy prayer; and therefore was not surely a foolish one, as
Luther somewhere calls it, since it was heard and answered so quickly:

I have seen thy tears; which he shed in prayer, and so studiously
concealed from others, when he turned his face to the wall:

behold, I will add unto thy days fifteen years; that is, to the days he
had lived already, and beyond which it was not probable, according to
the nature of his disease, he could live; and besides, he had the
sentence of death pronounced on him, and had it within himself, nor did
he pray for his life; so that these fifteen years were over and above
what he could or did expect to live; and because it was unusual in such
a case, and after such a declaration made, that a man should live, and
especially so long a time after, it is ushered in with a "behold", as a
note of admiration; it being a thing unheard of, and unprecedented, and
entirely the Lord's doing, and which, no doubt, was marvellous in the
eyes of the king.

[Isaiah 38:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 38:6</span></span>

And I will deliver thee and this city out of the hand of the king of
Assyria,.... So that it seems that Hezekiah's sickness was while the
king of Assyria was near the city of Jerusalem, and about to besiege it,
and before the destruction of the Assyrian army; unless this is said to
secure Hezekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem from all fears of a
return of that king, to give them fresh trouble:

and I will defend this city; from the present siege laid to it, ruin
threatened it, or from any attack upon it, by the Assyrian monarch.

[Isaiah 38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 38:7</span></span>

And this shall be a sign unto thee from the Lord,.... And which it seems
Hezekiah asked, and it was put to him which he would choose, whether the
shadow on the sundial should go forward or backward ten degrees, and he
chose the latter, [Kg2 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008), which was
a token confirming and assuring

that the Lord will do this thing that he hath spoken; recover Hezekiah
from his sickness, so that on the third day he should go up to the
temple; have fifteen years added to his days; and the city of Jerusalem
protected from the attempts of the Assyrian monarch.

[Isaiah 38:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 38:8</span></span>

Behold, I will bring again the shadow of the degrees,.... Or lines made
on a dial plate, to show the progress of the sun, and what time of day
it was. Some think only the shadow was brought back by the power of God,
the sun keeping its course as usual; but in the next clause the sun is
expressly said to return ten degrees: besides, it is not easy to
conceive how the shadow of the sun should go back, unless the sun itself
did; if it had been only the shadow of it on Ahaz's dial, it would not
have fallen under the notice of other nations, or have been the subject
of their inquiry, as it was of the Babylonians, [Ch2
32:31](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#031),

which is gone down on the sundial of Ahaz, the first sundial we read of;
and though there might be others at this time, yet the lines or degrees
might be more plain in this; and besides, this might be near the king's
bedchamber, and to which he could look out at, and see the wonder
himself, the shadow to return ten degrees backward; what those degrees,
lines, or marks on the dial showed, is not certain. The Targum makes
them to be hours, paraphrasing the words thus;

"behold, I will bring again the shadow of the stone of hours, by which
the sun is gone down on the dial of Ahaz, backwards ten degrees; and the
sun returned ten hours on the figure of the stone of hours, in which it
went down;''

but others think they pointed out half hours; and others but quarters of
hours; but, be it which it will, it matters not, the miracle was the
same:

so the sun returned ten degrees, by which degrees it was gone down; and
so this day was longer by these degrees than a common day, be they what
they will, and according as we suppose the sun went back, suddenly, or
as it usually moved, though in a retrograde way, and made the same
progress again through these degrees. The Jews have a fable, that the
day King Ahaz died was shortened ten hours, and now lengthened the same
at this season, which brought time right again. According to Gussetius,
these were not degrees or marks on a sundial, to know the time of day,
for this was a later invention, ascribed to Anaximene's, a disciple of
Anaximander (c), two hundred years after this; but were steps or stairs
built by Ahaz, to go up from the ground to the roof of the house, on the
outside of it, and which might consist of twenty steps or more; and on
which the sun cast a shadow all hours of the day, "and this declined ten
of these steps", which might be at the window of Hezekiah's bedchamber.
(d).

\(d\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 2. c. 76. (d) Vid. Comment. Ebr. p. 859.

[Isaiah 38:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 38:9</span></span>

The writing of Hezekiah king of Judah,.... The Septuagint and Arabic
versions call it a "prayer": but the Targum, much better,

"a writing of confession;''

in which the king owns his murmurings and complaints under his
affliction, and acknowledges the goodness of God in delivering him out
of it: this he put into writing, as a memorial of it, for his own
benefit, and for the good of posterity; very probably he carried this
with him to the temple, whither he went on the third day of his illness,
and hung it up in some proper place, that it might be read by all, and
be sung by the priests and the Levites; and the Prophet Isaiah has
thought fit to give it a place among his prophecies, that it might be
transmitted to future ages:

when he had been sick, and was recovered of his sickness; or, "on his
being sick (e)"; on his sickness and recovery, which were the subject
matter of his writing, as the following show; though it is true also of
the time of writing it, which was after he had been ill, and was well
again.

\(e\) "in aegrotando ipsum", Montanus.

[Isaiah 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 38:10</span></span>

I said, in the cutting off of my days,.... When he was told that he
should die, and he believed he should; this he calls a "cutting off" in
allusion to the weaver's web, [Isa
38:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#012) and a cutting off "his days", he
being now in the prime of his age, about thirty nine or forty years of
age, and not arrived to the common period of life, and to which,
according to his constitution, and the course of nature, he might have
attained. The Jews call such a death a cutting off, that is, by the hand
of God, which is before a man is fifty years of age. The Vulgate Latin
version is, "in the midst of my days"; as it was, according to the
common term of life, being threescore and ten, and at most eighty, [Psa
90:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#010),

I shall go to the gates of the grave; and enter there into the house
appointed for all living, which he saw were open for him, and ready to
receive him:

I am deprived of the residue of my days; the other thirty or forty years
which he might expect to have lived, according to the course of nature;
of these he was bereaved, according to the sentence of death he now had
in him; what if the words were rendered, "I am visited with more of my
years (f)?" and so the sense be, when I was apprehensive that I was just
going to be cut off, and to be deprived of the days and years I might
have lived, and hoped I should, to the glory of God, and the good of my
subjects; just when I saw it was all over with me, I had a gracious
visit or message from the Lord, assuring me that fifteen years should be
added to my life: and so this is mentioned as a singular instance of
divine goodness, in the midst of his distress; and to this sense the
Targum agrees,

"because he remembered me for good, an addition was made to my years.''

\(f\) "visitatus sum, eum adhuc superessent anni", Tigurine version.

[Isaiah 38:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 38:11</span></span>

I said, I shall not see the Lord, even the Lord in the land of the
living,.... Not any more, in this world, though in the other, and that
more clearly, even face to face: his meaning is, that he should no more
see him in the glass of the word; no more praise him in his house;
worship him in his temple; enjoy him in his ordinances; and see his
beauty, power, and glory, in the sanctuary; and confess unto him, and
praise his name (g). The Targum is,

"I shall no more appear before the face of the Lord in the land of the
house of his Shechinah, in which is length of life; and I shall no more
serve him in the house of the sanctuary.''

In the Hebrew text it is, "I shall not see Jah, Jah"; a word, the same
with Jehovah; and is repeated, to show the vehemency of his affection
for the Lord, and his ardent desire of communion with him: unless it
should be rendered, "I shall not see the Lord's Lord in the land of the
living (h)"; or the Lord's Christ in the flesh:

I shall behold man no more with the inhabitants of the world; or "time"
(i); of this fading transitory world, which will quickly cease, as the
word for it signifies: next to God, his concern was, that he should no
more enjoy the company of men, of his subjects, of his courtiers, of his
relations, companions, and acquaintance; particularly of the saints, the
excellent in the earth.

\(g\) Ben Melech observes, that seeing or appearing before the Creator
signifies confession and praise before him, and consideration of his
ways; and this sense of the words, he says, R. Sandiah gives. (h) ,
Sept. "non videbo Jah Jah", Montanus, Vatablus. (i) "cum habitoribus
temporis", Montanus. So Ben Melech explains it; and which will quickly
cease. "mundus, tempus cito desinens"----ldx, "prodit mundi
cessabilitatem, quatenus est colectio rerum pereuntium", Gusset. Ebr.
Comment. p. 242. "cum habitatoribus terrae cessationis", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 38:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 38:12</span></span>

Mine age is departed, and is removed from me as a shepherd's tent,....
Or, my habitation (k); meaning the earthly house of his tabernacle, his
body; this was just going, in his apprehension, to be unpinned, and
removed like a shepherd's tent, that is easily taken down, and removed
from place to place. Some understand it of the men of his age or
generation; so the Targum,

"from the children of my generation my days are taken away; they are cut
off, and removed from me; they are rolled up as a shepherd's tent;''

which being made of skins, as tents frequently were, such as the Arabian
shepherds used, were soon taken down, and easily rolled and folded up
and carried elsewhere:

I have cut off like a weaver my life; who, when he has finished his web,
or a part of it, as he pleases, cuts it off from the loom, and disposes
of it: this Hezekiah ascribes to himself, either that by reason of his
sins and transgressions he was the cause of his being taken away by
death so soon; or this was the thought he had within himself, that his
life would now be cut off, as the weaver's web from the loom; for
otherwise he knew that it was the Lord that would do it, whenever it
was, as in the next clause:

he will cut me off with pining sickness; which was now upon him, wasting
and consuming him apace: or, "will cut me off from the thrum" (l);
keeping on the metaphor of the weaver cutting off his web from the
thrum, fastened to the beam of his loom:

from day even tonight wilt thou make an end of me; he means the Lord by
"he" in the preceding clause, and in this he addresses him; signifying
that the affliction was so sharp and heavy upon him, which was the first
day of it, that he did not expect to live till night, but that God would
put a period to his days, fill them up, and finish his life, and
dispatch him out of this world.

\(k\) "habitatio mea", Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius. (l) "a liciis
resecturus est me", Piscator; "a primis filis resecat me", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 38:13</span></span>

I reckoned till morning,.... Or, "I set my time till the morning (m)";
he fixed and settled it in his mind that he could live no longer than to
the morning, if he lived so long; he thought he should have died before
the night came on, and, now it was come, the utmost he could propose to
himself was to live till morning; that was the longest time he could
reckon of. According to the accents, it should be rendered, "I reckoned
till morning as a lion"; or "I am like until the morning as a lion"; or,
"I likened until the morning (God) as a lion"; I compared him to one;
which agrees with what follows. The Targum is,

"I roared until morning, as a lion roars;''

through the force of the disease, and the pain he was in: or rather,

"I laid my bones together until the morning as a lion; "so indeed as a
lion God" hath broken all my bones (n):''

so will he break all my bones; or, "it will break"; that is, the
sickness, as Kimchi and Jarchi; it lay in his bones, and so violent was
the pain, that he thought all his bones were breaking in pieces; such is
the case in burning fevers, as Jerom observes; so Kimchi interprets it
of a burning fever, which is like a fire in the bones. Some understand
this of God himself, to which our version directs, who may be said to do
this by the disease: compare with this [Job
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#014) and to this sense the following
clause inclines:

from day even tonight wilt thou make an end of me; he lived till
morning, which was more than he expected, and was the longest time he
could set himself; and now be reckoned that before night it would be all
over with him as to this world. This was the second day of his illness;
and the third day he recovered, and went to the temple with his song of
praise.

\(m\) "statui, vel posui usque ad mane", Pagninus, Montanus; "constitui
rursum terminum usque mane", Vatablus. (n) Reinbeck de Accent Heb. p.
411.

[Isaiah 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 38:14</span></span>

Like a crane, or a swallow, so did I chatter,.... Rather, "like a crane
and a swallow", like both; sometimes loud and clamorous, like a crane
(o), when the pain was very acute and grievous; and sometimes very low,
through weakness of body, like the twittering of a swallow; or the moan
he made under his affliction was like the mournful voices of these birds
at certain times. Some think he refers to his prayers, which were quick
and short, and expressed not with articulate words, but in groans and
cries; at least were not regular and orderly, but interrupted, and
scarce intelligible, like the chattering of the birds mentioned:

I did mourn as a dove; silently and patiently, within himself, for his
sins and transgressions; and because of his afflictions, the fruit of
them:

mine eyes fail with looking upwards; or, "on high"; or, as the
Septuagint and Arabic versions express it, "to the height of heaven"; to
the Lord there, whose Shechinah, as the Targum, is in the highest
heavens: in his distress he looked up to heaven for help, but none came;
he looked and waited till his eyes were weak with looking, and he could
look no longer; both his eyes and his heart failed him, and he despaired
of relief; and the prayer he put up was as follows:

O Lord, I am oppressed; undertake for me; or, "it oppresseth me (p)";
that is, the disease; it lay so heavy upon him, it bore him down with
the weight of it, he could not stand up under it; it had seized him, and
crushed him; it held him fast, and he could not get clear of it; and
therefore entreats the Lord to "undertake" for him, to be his surety for
good, as in [Psa 119:122](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#122), he
represents his disease as a bailiff that had arrested him, and was
carrying him to the prison of the grave; and therefore prays that the
Lord would bail him, or rescue him out of his hands, that he might not
go down to the gates of the grave. So souls oppressed with the guilt of
sin, and having fearful apprehensions of divine justice, should apply to
Christ their surety, and take refuge in his undertakings, where only
peace and safety are to be enjoyed. So Gussetius renders the words, "I
have unrighteousness, be surety for me" (q); and takes them to be a
confession of Hezekiah, acknowledging himself guilty of unrighteousness,
praying and looking to Christ the Son of God, and to his suretyship
engagements, who, though not yet come to fulfil them, certainly would.

\(o\) So it is said in the Talmud, "Resh-Lakish cried like a crane", T.
Bab. Kiddushin, col. 42. 1. (p) "Opprimit me, sub.infirmitas, vel
morbus", Munster. (q) "njustitia est mihi hoc est, habeo injustitiam,
reus suro injustitia, sponde pro me", Ebr. Comment, p. 654.

[Isaiah 38:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 38:15</span></span>

What shall I say?.... In a way of praise and thankfulness, for the
mercies promised and received; I know not what to say; I want words to
express the gratitude of my heart for the kindness bestowed. What shall
I render to God for all his benefits? So the Targum,

"what praise shall I utter, and I will say it before him?''

for here begins the account of his recovery, and his thanksgiving for
it:

he hath both spoken unto me, and himself hath done it; the Lord had sent
him a message by the prophet, and assured him that he should recover,
and on the third day go up to the temple; and now he had performed what
he had promised, he was restored, and was come to the house of God with
his thank offering; whatever the Lord says, he does; what he promises,
he brings to pass:

I shall go softly all my years in the bitterness of my soul; before he
did not reckon of a day to live, now he speaks of his years, having
fifteen added to his days, during which time he should "go softly", in a
thoughtful "meditating" frame of mind (r); frequently calling to
remembrance, and revolving in his mind, his bitter affliction, and
recovery out of it, acknowledging the goodness and kindness of God unto
him: or leisurely,

step by step, without fear of any enemies, dangers, or death, having a
promise of such a length of time to live: or go pleasantly and

cheerfully, after the bitterness of my soul (s), as it may be rendered;
that is, after it is over, or because of deliverance from it. So the
Targum,

"with what shall I serve him, and render to him for all the years he
hath added to my life, and hath delivered me from the bitterness of my
soul?''

\(r\) "motitando meditabor", Tigurine version; "leniter, vel pedetentim
incedam" Vatablus; "alacriter incedam", Piscator, Vitringa. (s) "post
amaritudinem", Piscator.

[Isaiah 38:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 38:16</span></span>

O Lord, by these things men live,.... Not by bread only, but by the word
of God: by the promise of God, and by his power performing it; and by
his favour and goodness continually bestowed; it is in him, and by his
power and providence, that they live and move, and have their being, and
the continuance of it; and it is his lovingkindness manifested to them
that makes them live comfortably and go on cheerfully:

and in all these things is the life of my spirit; what kept his soul in
life were the same things, the promise, power, and providence of God;
what revived his spirit, and made him comfortable and cheerful, was the
wonderful love and great goodness of God unto him, in appearing to him,
and for him, and delivering him out of his sore troubles. Ben Melech
renders and gives the sense of the words thus; "to all will I declare
and say, that in these", in the years of addition (the fifteen years
added to his days) "are the life of my spirit"; so Kimchi. The Targum
interprets it of the resurrection of the dead,

"O Lord, concerning all the dead, thou hast said, that thou wilt quicken
them; and before them all thou hast quickened my spirit:''

so wilt thou recover me, and make me to live; or rather, "and" or "for
thou hast recovered (t) me, and made me to live"; for the Lord had not
only promised it, but he had done it, [Isa
38:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#015), and so the Targum,

"and hast quickened me, and sustained me.''

\(t\) So Gataker.

[Isaiah 38:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 38:17</span></span>

Behold, for peace I had great bitterness,.... Meaning not that instead
of peace and prosperity, which he expected would ensue upon the
destruction of Sennacherib's army, came a bitter affliction upon him;
for he is not now dwelling on that melancholy subject; but rather the
sense is, that he now enjoyed great peace and happiness, though he had
been in great bitterness; for the words may be rendered, "behold, I am
in peace, I had great bitterness"; or thus, "behold my great bitterness
is unto peace": or, "he has turned it into peace" (u); it has issued in
it, and this is my present comfortable situation: "but", or rather,

and thou hast in love to my soul delivered it from the pit of
corruption: the grave, where bodies rot and corrupt, and are quite
abolished, as the word signifies; see [Psa
30:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa030.htm#003) or "thou hast embraced my soul
from the pit of corruption (w)"; it seems to be an allusion to a tender
parent, seeing his child sinking in a pit, runs with open arms to him,
and embraces him, and takes him out. This may be applied to a state of
nature, out of which the Lord in love delivers his people; which is
signified by a pit, or dark dungeon, a lonely place, a filthy one, very
uncomfortable, where they are starving and famishing; a pit, wherein is
no water, [Zac 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#011) and may fitly be
called a pit of corruption, because of their corrupt nature, estate, and
actions; out of this the Lord brings his people at conversion, and that
because of his great love to their souls, and his delight in them; or it
may be applied to their deliverance from the bottomless pit of
destruction, which is owing to the Lord's being gracious to them, and
having found a ransom for them, his own Son, [Job
33:24](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#024), and to this sense the
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions seem to incline; "for
thou hast delivered my soul that it might not perish": in love to their
souls, and that they may not perish, he binds them up in the bundle of
life, with the Lord their God; he redeems their souls from sin, Satan,
and the law; he regenerates, renews, and converts them, and preserves
them safe to his everlasting kingdom and glory; in order to which, and
to prevent their going down to the pit, they are put into the hands of
Christ, redeemed by his precious blood, and are turned out of the broad
road that leads to destruction:

for thou hast cast all my sins behind thy back; as loathsome and
abominable, and so as not to be seen by him; for though God sees all the
sins of his people with his eye of omniscience, and in his providence
takes notice of them, and chastises for them, yet not with his eye of
avenging justice; because Christ has took them on himself, and made
satisfaction for them, and an end of them; they are removed from them as
far as the east is from the west, and no more to be seen upon them; nor
will they be any more set before his face, or in the light of his
countenance; but as they are out of sight they will be out of mind,
never more remembered, but forgotten; as what is cast behind the back is
seen and remembered no more. The phrase is expressive of the full
forgiveness of sins, even of all sins; see [Psa
85:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#002), the object of God's love is the
souls of his people; the instance of it is the delivery of them from the
pit of corruption; the evidence of it is the pardon of their sins.

\(u\) Abendana, after Joseph Kimchi, interprets it of changing
bitterness into peace; he observes in the phrase that the first
signifies change or permutation as in Jer. xlvlii. 11. and the second
bitterness: and that the sense is this, behold, unto peace he hath
changed my bitterness, that is the bitterness and distress which I had,
he hath changed into peace. (w) "et tu amplexus es amore animam meam a
fovea abolitionis"; Montanus; "tu vero propenso amore complexus es
animam meam", Piscator; "tu tenero amore complexus animam meam",
Vitringa.

[Isaiah 38:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 38:18</span></span>

For the grave cannot praise thee, death can not celebrate thee,.... That
is, they that are in the grave, and under the power of death, they
cannot celebrate the praises of God with their bodily organs; their
souls may praise him in heaven, but they in their bodies cannot till the
resurrection morn, or as long as they are under the dominion of the
grave; so the Targum,

"they that are in the grave cannot confess before thee, and the dead
cannot praise thee;''

in like manner the Septuagint and Arabic versions: this shows the design
of God in restoring him from his sickness, and the view he himself had
in desiring life, which was to praise the Lord; and which end could not
have been answered had he died, and been laid in the grave:

they that go down to the pit cannot hope for thy truth: for the
performance of promises, in which the truth and faithfulness of God
appear; or for the Messiah, the truth of all the types of the former
dispensation; those that go down to the pit of the grave, or are carried
and laid there, can have no exercise of faith and hope concerning these
things.

[Isaiah 38:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 38:19</span></span>

The living, the living, he shall praise thee, as I do this day,....
Every one of the living, or such who are both corporeally and
spiritually alive; and therefore the word is repeated; none but such who
are alive in a corporeal sense can praise the Lord in this world; and
none but such who are spiritually alive can praise him aright, and such
do under a true sense of the greatness of his mercies, and of their own
unworthiness; and such a one was Hezekiah; for the words may be
rendered, "as I am this day (x)"; that is, alive in both the above
senses; and so did he praise God, in such a spiritual manner, even on
the day he committed this to writing, and was now in the temple offering
up this thanksgiving:

the father to the children shall make known thy truth: not meaning
himself, for at this time he had no children; though, no doubt, when he
had any, as he afterwards had, particularly Manasseh, he took care to
acquaint him with the truth and faithfulness of God in the fulfilling of
his promises to him; and which every religious parent would do, and so
transmit the memory thereof to future ages.

\(x\) "quails ego sum hodie", Syr.

[Isaiah 38:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 38:20</span></span>

The Lord was ready to save me,.... Or, "the Lord to save me (y)"; he was
at hand to save him; he was both able and willing to save him; he was a
present help in time of need; he arose for his help, and that right
early; he very quickly delivered him out of his distress; he, who one
day expected death every moment, was the next day in the temple praising
God:

therefore will we sing my songs; which were made by him, or concerning
him, or which he ordered to be sung, as he did the Psalms of David, [Ch2
29:30](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#030),

to the stringed instruments: which were touched with the fingers, or
struck with a quill or bow; which distinguishes them from wind
instruments, which were blown with the mouth; each of these were used in
the temple service:

all the days of our life; he had before said "we will sing", meaning his
family and his friends with him, his courtiers, princes, and nobles, or
he and the singers of Israel; and this he determined to do as long as he
and they lived; signifying, that the mercy granted would never be
forgotten by him, as well as there would be new mercies every day, which
would call for praise and thankfulness: and this he proposed to do

in the house of the Lord; in the temple; not only privately, but
publicly; not in his closet and family only, but in the congregation of
the people; that the goodness of God to him might be more known, and the
praise and glory given him be the greater.

\(y\) "Dominus ad servandum me", Montanus; "Jehova est ad salvandum me",
Cocceius, Vitringa.

[Isaiah 38:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 38:21</span></span>

For Isaiah had said,.... Before the above writing was made, which ends
in the preceding verse; for this and the following are added by Isaiah,
or some other person, taken out of [Kg2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#007). The Septuagint version adds, "to
Hezekiah"; but the speech seems rather directed to some of his servants,
or those that were about him:

let them take a lump of figs, and lay it for a plaster upon the boil,
and he shall recover; which was done, and he did accordingly recover.
Aben Ezra, Jarchi, and. Kimchi, all of them say, that this was a miracle
within a miracle, since figs are hurtful to ulcers; and so say others;
though it is observed by some, that they are useful for the ripening and
breaking of ulcers; however, it was not from the natural force of these
figs, but by the power of God, that this cure was effected; for, without
that, it was impossible so malignant an ulcer and so deadly a sickness
as Hezekiah's were could have been cured, and especially so suddenly;
nor were these figs used as a medicine, but as a sign of recovery,
according to the Lord's promise, and as a means of assisting Hezekiah's
faith in it.

[Isaiah 38:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 38:22</span></span>

Hezekiah also had said,.... Unto Isaiah, as in [Kg2
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#008),

what is the sign that I shall go up to the house of the Lord? both of
his health, and of his going up to the temple with thanksgiving for it;
though the former is not here mentioned, as it is elsewhere; partly
because it is supposed in the latter, for without that he could not have
gone up to the temple; and partly because he was more solicitous for the
worship and honour of God in his house, the for his health. The Syriac
version transposes these verses, "Hezekiah had said, what is the sign?
&c. and Isaiah had answered, let them take a lump of figs", &c. as if
this latter was the sign; whereas it was that of the sun's going down
ten degrees on the dial of Ahaz, [Isa
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007); see Gill on [Isa
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#007), [Isa
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#008).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 39](isa039)

</div>
