<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa056)  [Next](isa058) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 57](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 57:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 57

This chapter contains complaints of the stupidity and idolatry of the
people, described in the latter part of the preceding chapter; and some
promises of grace to the people of God. The stupidity of the former is
observed, [Isa 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001) they not taking
notice of the death of good men, nor of impending calamities they were
taken from, whose happiness is described, [Isa
57:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002), then these idolatrous people are
summoned before the Lord, [Isa 57:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#003)
and are charged with deriding the saints with idolatry and murder, [Isa
57:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#004) and their idolatry is represented
under the notion of adultery, attended with very aggravating
circumstances, [Isa 57:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#007) and yet these
people still entertained presumptuous hopes of happiness, and boasted
of, and trusted in, their righteousness and good works, which would be
exposed, and be of no advantage to them, [Isa
57:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#010), next follow promises of grace
to the saints, that such that trusted in Christ should inherit the holy
mountain, [Isa 57:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013) that the
stumblingblock of his people should be removed, [Isa
57:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#014), that he should dwell with the
humble and contrite, [Isa 57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015), and
not be always wroth and contend with them, for a reason given, [Isa
57:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#016) and that though he had smote
them, and hid his face from them because of their sins, yet would heal
them, lead them, and comfort them, and speak peace unto them, [Isa
57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017) and the chapter is concluded
with the character of the wicked, and an assurance that there is no
peace for them, [Isa 57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020).

[Isaiah 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 57:1</span></span>

The righteous perisheth,.... Not eternally; he may fear he shall, by
reason of sin and temptation; he may say his strength and hope are
perished; and his peace and comfort may perish for a time; but he cannot
perish everlastingly, because he is one that believes in Christ, and is
justified by his righteousness, from whence he is denominated righteous;
and such shall never perish, but have everlasting life: but the meaning
is, that he perisheth as to his outward man, or dies corporeally, which
is called perishing, [Ecc 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#015) and so
the Targum renders it,

"the righteous die.''

Or it may be rendered, "the righteous man is lost" (b); not to himself,
his death is a gain to him; but to the church, and to the world, which
yet is not considered:

and no man layeth it to heart; takes any notice of it, thinks at all
about it, far from being concerned or grieved; instead of that, rather
rejoice, and are pleased that they are rid of such persons; which will
be the case when the witnesses are slain, [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010). The Targum is,

"and no man lays my fear to heart;''

or on his heart; whereas such providences should lead men to fear the
Lord, and seek to him, and serve him, as it did David, [Psa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001),

and merciful men are taken away; or "gathered" (c); out of the world, to
their own people, to heaven; these are such who obtain mercy of the
Lord, and show mercy to others, holy good men: the former character may
respect the righteousness of Christ imputed to them, this his grace
implanted in them, discovered by acts of mercy and goodness; for one and
the same persons are intended:

none considering that the righteous is taken away from the evil to come;
that there are evil times coming, great calamities, and sore judgments
upon men; and therefore these righteous ones are gathered out of the
world, and are gathered home, and safely housed in heaven, that they may
escape the evil coming upon a wicked generation; and who yet have no
thought about it, nor are they led to observe it as they might, from the
removal of good men out of the world; see [Kg2
22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#020). All this may be applied to the
martyrs of Jesus in times of Popish persecution; or to the removal of
good men by an ordinary death before those times came.

\(b\) , Sept. (c) "colliguntur", V. L. Munster, Piscator, Cocceius;
"congregantur", Pagninus.

[Isaiah 57:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 57:2</span></span>

He shall enter into peace,.... Or "shall go in peace" (d); the righteous
man goes in peace now; he has peace from his justifying righteousness;
he has peace through believing in Christ; he has peace in, though not
from, his obedience and holiness of life; and he has peace in the midst
of the many trials he is exercised with; and he goes out of the world in
peace, with great serenity and tranquillity of mind, as Simeon desired
he might, having views of an interest in Christ, and in the glories of
another world; and as soon as he is departed from hence he enters into
peace, into a state where there is everything that makes for peace;
there is the God of peace; there is Christ, the Prince of peace; there
is the Spirit, whose fruit is peace; and there are the angels of peace,
and good men, the sons of peace: and there is nothing there to disturb
their peace, no sin within, nor Satan's temptations without, nor any
wicked men to annoy and molest them; and there is everything that can
come under the notion of peace and prosperity; for the happiness of this
state is signified by riches, by glory and honour, by a kingdom, and by
a paradise; and into this state the righteous may be said to enter
immediately upon death, which is no other than stepping out of one world
into another; and this they enter into as into a house, as it really is,
a house not made with hands, eternal in the heavens; and, entering into
it, they take possession of it, and for ever enjoy it:

they shall rest in their beds, their souls in the bosom of Abraham, in
the arms of Jesus; their bodies in the grave, which is a bed unto them,
where they lie down and sleep, till they are awaked at the resurrection;
and where they rest from all toil and labour, from all diseases and
distempers, pains and tortures, and from all persecuting enemies; see
[Rev 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013),

each one walking in his uprightness; in the righteousness of Christ, and
in the shining robes of immortality and glory, and in perfect purity and
holiness: or, "before him" (e); before God, in the sight or presence of
him, and by sight, and not by faith, as now. Though this is by some
considered as the character of the righteous man in life, so Aben Ezra;
and then the sense is, that he that walks in his uprightness, in the
uprightness or righteousness of Christ, and by faith on him; that walks
uprightly in his life and conversation before God, and "before himself";
following the rule before him, and walking according to the rule of the
Gospel, and in the ordinances of it blameless, when he comes to die, he
enters into peace and rest. And to this sense is the Targum, which
paraphrases it,

"that are doers of his law;''

see [Rom 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013). In the Talmud (f) it is
interpreted of that peace and happiness righteous men enter into when
they die.

\(d\) "ibit in pace", Gataker. (e) "coram eo", Pagninus, Montanus,
Vatablus, Calvin; "ante se", Cocceius, Vitringa. (f) T. Bab. Cetubot,
fol. 104. 1.

[Isaiah 57:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 57:3</span></span>

But draw near hither,.... The death of the righteous, and their
happiness after it, being observed: the wicked, who thought themselves
safe from danger, and the happier that they were rid of the righteous,
those witnesses and prophets which had tormented them, and therefore
rejoiced on that account, are here summoned to the divine tribunal, to
hear their character, and receive their doom, as follows:

ye sons of the sorceress; the children of Jezebel, the witch, and the
prophetess that taught the servants of the Lord to commit fornication,
and bewitched with her witchcrafts the sons of the apostate church of
Rome; by whose sorceries all nations have been deceived, and of which
she repents not, [Rev 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020),

the seed of the adulterer and of the whore; of the great whore of
Babylon, with whom the kings of the earth have committed fornication;
and whose subjects and children are the seed of this whore, and the sons
of this idolatrous church: or, "that committeth whoredom" (g); which
aggravates the character, that they were not only the children of
adulterous persons, but committed whoredom themselves.

\(g\) "qua scortata est", Piscator; "quod scortaris", Junius &
Tremellius; "qui scortaris", Cocceius.

[Isaiah 57:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 57:4</span></span>

Against whom do ye sport yourselves?.... Is it against the ministers of
the Gospel, the prophets of the Lord, the true and faithful witnesses,
over whose dead bodies you triumph? know that it is not so much against
them, as against the Lord himself, whose ministers, prophets, and
witnesses they are; see [Th1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#008),
"against whom make ye a wide mouth, and draw out the tongue?" gestures
used by way of scorn and derision; see [Psa
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#007). So the Papists open their
mouths, and draw out their tongues, in gibes and jeers, reproaches and
calumnies, against the true Christians, calling and despising them as
heretics and schismatics; which abuse and ill usage of them will be
resented another day. The Targum is,

"before whom do ye open your mouth, and multiply to speak things?''

as antichrist is said to have a mouth open, speaking great things and
blasphemy against God, his name, his tabernacle, and them that dwell in
heaven, [Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005),

are ye not children of transgression; given up to all manner of sin and
wickedness; or children of the wicked one, as the Targum, either of
Satan, or of the man of sin; or, as the Septuagint and Arabic versions
render it, "children of perdition"; of the same character, complexion,
and religion, as the son of perdition is: "a seed of falsehood"; or a
lie, given to lying; to believe a lie, and to speak lies in hypocrisy;
professing a false religion; embracing false doctrines; a spurious
breed, and not the sons of the true church of Christ.

[Isaiah 57:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 57:5</span></span>

Inflaming yourselves with idols under every green tree,.... Or,
"inflamed with or among oaks" (h); with images made of oaken wood, such
as the Papists worship, [Rev 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020)
expressing a burning zeal for their idols, and being as hot upon them,
as impure persons burn in lust one towards another: or "with mighty
ones" (i); the kings and potentates of the earth, with whom the whore of
Rome commits her fornication, even in every flourishing kingdom and
state in Europe, compared to a green tree; alluding to the custom of the
Heathens, who used to set up their idols under green trees and groves,
and there worship them, which were pleasing to the flesh; and I wish,
says Musculus on the text, there were no instances of this kind in the
Papacy.

Slaying the children in the valleys, under the clifts of the rocks? this
may refer to the cruelty of these idolatrous worshippers; for, as they
burn with zeal to their idols, so with rage against those that oppose
their idolatrous practices, not sparing men, women, and children; and
such butcheries have been committed in many places, and especially in
the "valleys" of Piedmont; nor could the cragged rocks secure them from
their falling a sacrifice unto them. Or it may intend the ruining and
destroying the souls of such, who, before they fell into their hands,
were innocent as children, by their superstitious worship and idolatry,
committed in low and dark places, under cragged rocks, and in caves and
dens; such as the above mentioned commentator speaks of, a very dark
one, under a prominent rock, in which the ignorant and unhappy people,
some time ago, worshipped and invoked a certain blessed saint, he knew
not who, which could scarce be looked into without horror; and such was
the cave in which they worshipped the angel Michael.

\(h\) "inflammati inter quercus", Gataker; "incalescentes, vel
incalescitis inter quercus, vel ulmos", Vatablus. (i) "In potentibus",
Cocceius.

[Isaiah 57:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 57:6</span></span>

Among the smooth stones of the stream is thy portion,.... Or thy god;
but the portion of Jacob is not like them, stocks and stones, [Jer
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#016). Whenever they could pick up
smooth stones, and such as were fit for their purpose, whether in the
stream of a brook, or in a valley, as the word also signifies, they
polished and formed them into an image, and made gods of them; and these
were their portion and inheritance, and which they left to their
children. There is an elegant play on words (k) in the Hebrew tongue,
between the word for "smooth stones", and that for a "portion (l)",
which cannot be expressed in our language: or, "in the smooth or
slippery places of the valley shall be thy portions"; see [Psa
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#006).

They, they are thy lot; even those stones. Jarchi's note is, to stone
thee with, the punishment of idolaters with the Jews; suggesting that
those idols would be their ruin; as they will be the ruin of the
idolatrous members of the church of Rome, who repent not of worshipping
their idols of stone among others, [Rev
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020),

even to them hast thou poured a drink offering, thou hast offered a meat
offering; or a "bread offering", as well as a libation of wine,
respecting the sacrifice of the mass, which consists of bread and wine,
which is offered up in honour of their idols, angels and saints; hence
"Michael mass" and "Martin mass", &c.

Should I receive comfort in these? be pleased with such idolatrous
sacrifices? no. The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions
render it, "should I not be angry for these?" I will; I have just reason
for it. Or it may be rendered, "shall I repent of these (m)?" of the
evil I have threatened to bring, and am about to bring upon these
idolaters? I will not.

\(k\) . (l) "In laevitatibus vallis erit portio tua", Gataker, Vitringa.
(m) "a me super his poenitebit?" Musculus; "poenitebit me", some in
Vatablus.

[Isaiah 57:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 57:7</span></span>

Upon a lofty and high mountain hast thou set thy bed,.... Temples and
altars, which are usually built on high places, where they commit
spiritual adultery; that is, idolatry, in imitation of the Heathens, who
had their temples and altars on high places; and the idolatry of the
church of Rome, in this context, is all along expressed in language
agreeable to the Heathen idolatry, and in allusion to it. Some think
this phrase denotes impudence in their idolatrous worship; for not
content to worship under trees, in valleys, and under clifts of rocks,
and such dark places; now, as not blushing at, or being ashamed of their
actions, erect their altars in the most public places. Perhaps some
reference may be had to the city of Rome itself, built on seven
mountains, the seat of antichrist, and where the principal bed for
idolatry is set up. The Targum is,

"on a high and lofty mountain thou hast the place of the house of thy
dwelling;''

which agrees very well with the great city, the seat of the beast.

Even thither wentest thou up to offer sacrifice; the sacrifice of the
mass, to do which the idolaters go to their high places, their temples,
and to their high altars, and especially in the great city.

[Isaiah 57:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 57:8</span></span>

Behind the doors also and the posts hast thou set up thy
remembrance,.... The memorial of thine idols, as the Targum. As the
Heathens had their "lares" and "penates", their household gods, so the
Papists have their tutelar images, which they place in their houses, and
in their bedchambers; their images of saints, their crucifixes and
superstitious pictures, which they call "memories", and "laymen's
books":

for thou hast discovered thyself to another than me; or, "from me" (n);
departing from me, and leaving my bed; rejecting Christ as King of
saints, deserting his worship and ordinances; thou hast uncovered
thyself to another, prostituted thyself to another, been guilty of
spiritual adultery or idolatry; receiving and acknowledging another for
head of the church, according to whose will all things in worship are
directed:

and art gone up; to the bed set up in the high place; to idolatrous
temples and altars, there to offer sacrifice:

thou hast enlarged thy bed; to take in many adulterers, and idolatrous
worshippers; and so, as Musculus observes, many small chapels, at first
erected for this and the other saint, through the vast concourse of
people to them, and the gifts they have brought, have, in process of
time, become large and magnificent temples:

and made a covenant with them; with idols, and idol worshippers;
agreeing to receive the mark and name of the beast, and to worship his
image, [Rev 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015), or, "thou hast cut
for thyself more than they" (o); more trees to make idols of, or to make
more room for the placing of idols in groves than the Heathens: or,
"thou hast hewed it for thyself",

a bed larger (p) than theirs; that is, thy bed thou hast made larger
than theirs: or, "thou hast cut for thyself from them" (q); taken away
from emperors and kings part of, their dominions, and joined them to thy
patrimony, and appropriated them to thine own use:

thou lovedst their bed where thou sawest it; took delight and pleasure
in places of idolatrous worship, and in their idolatry, wherever they
were: or, "thou lovedst their bed, a hand thou hast seen" (r); stretched
out to help thee, or give thee power, or to invite, encourage, and
receive thee into the idolatrous bed; or rather any pillar, monument
(s), or statue, erected for idolatry, which seen, they fell down to and
worshipped.

\(n\) "a me", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Vitringa. (o) "et caedis tibi arbores plusquam illi", Piscator. (p)
"Caedens tibi amplius Cubile quam illorum sit", Junius & Tremellius. (q)
"Et excidisti tibi ex eis", Montanus. (r) "manum vidisti", Montanus,
Cocceius. (s) "Ubi monumentum vidisti", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 57:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 57:9</span></span>

And thou wentest to the king with ointment,.... To the kings of the
earth, the singular for the plural, with whom the whore of Rome has
committed fornication or idolatry, in allusion to harlots, who, in order
to render themselves the more agreeable to their lovers, anointed
themselves with ointment: this may respect the grace of the Spirit of
God, which the church of Rome pretends to give by administration of the
sacraments, which it is said confer grace "ex opere operato"; and the
extreme unction given as a meetness for heaven, in the last moments of
life:

and didst increase thy perfumes; after the manner of harlots, who, to
ingratiate themselves with men, use much perfumes: this may signify the
many ways the whore of Rome takes to make herself regarded by the kings
and nations of the earth; pretending to antiquity, infallibility, power
of working miracles, works of supererogation, primacy and superiority
over all other churches; using great pomp and splendour in places of
worship, and in all religious services:

and didst send thy messengers far off; not only into neighbouring
kingdoms and states, into all the nations of Europe; but even into the
most distant parts of the world, into both the Indies, in order to make
proselytes, spread the religion of the see of Rome, and increase its
power. The pope's "nuncios" and "legates a latere", may be here pointed
at, as well as the Jesuits his emissaries, sent into all parts to
promote his interest. Jarchi's note is,

"to exact tribute of the kings of the nations;''

which has been the business of the pope's legates:

and didst debase thyself even unto hell; or lay thyself low; prostitute
thyself as harlots do to every lover; or didst feign thyself very lowly
and humble, as the pope does when he calls himself "servus servorum"; or
rather, "thou didst depress", or "bring low, even unto hell" (t); that
is, multitudes of men and women, who are brought down to hell by the
false doctrine and worship of the church of Rome; and the followers of
the man of sin say, that if he brings down thousands into hell, none
ought to say, what dost thou? Cocceius thinks it may have respect to his
pretended power over hell, to send as many there as do not please him;
arrogating to himself the keys of heaven and hell; or over purgatory, a
figment of his brain, where he pretends the souls of men are for a time,
and from whence, for a sum of money, he delivers them. The Targum is,

"thou hast depressed the strength of the people; or, as some copies, the
strong of the people unto hell.''

\(t\) "et demisti usque ad infernum", Cocceius.

[Isaiah 57:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 57:10</span></span>

Thou art wearied in the greatness of thy way,.... Or, "in the
multiplicity of thy ways" (u): which were so many, as were enough to
make her weary; the steps which were taken to obtain so much power over
kings and kingdoms, which was gradually got with great pains and
artifice, and to amass such vast treasures, and to enlarge her interest,
and spread her religion in the world; the multitude of stratagems
devised, and vast number of men employed, and embassies made to carry
her point everywhere. Jarchi's note is,

"to fulfil thy desires, and to enlarge thy substance:''

yet saidst thou not, there is no hope; as men in a good cause are apt to
do, upon every difficulty that arises; but here, in this case, though
the cause was very bad, yet when schemes did not take, or not so soon as
wished for and expected, new difficulties arose, and opposition made;
yet no cost nor pains were spared to gain the point in view, and
establish a kingdom and hierarchy; which at last succeeded: this
expresses the resolution, constancy, and pertinency of the bishops of
Rome in their ambitious views and claims of power, who would not give
out, nor despair of arriving at what they aimed at; and which, through
great fatigue and labour, they attained unto:

thou hast found the life of thine hand; that which was sought for and
laboured after; sovereignty over all bishops and churches; power over
kings and kingdoms; and an universal empire over consciences, as well as
over churches and nations; and also immense treasure and riches to
support the pope, cardinals, priests, &c.; and perhaps giving life to
the image of the beast that it should speak, and cause those that would
not worship it to be killed, may be included, [Rev
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#015). The Targum is,

"thou hast multiplied (or as other copies) thou hast found great
riches.''

Jarchi's note is,

"the necessity of thine hands, thou hast found prosperity in thy
works:''

therefore thou wast not grieved; at the toil and labour used, pains
taken, and weariness contracted; the issue was an over recompence for
all the trouble and difficulty that attended it: or, "therefore thou
wast not sick" (w); of the undertaking; did not despond in mind, or
languish without hope of succeeding, finding ground was gained; and at
last things went according to wishes; and then it caused no grief to
reflect upon the fatigue and trouble that had been endured; and also
grieved not at the idolatry introduced, nor repented of it; see [Rev
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020), So the Targum interprets it of
impenitence.

\(u\) "in multitudine viae tuae", Pagninus, Montanus. (w) "non
aegrotasti", Pagninus, Montanus, "non aegrotas", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator.

[Isaiah 57:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 57:11</span></span>

And of whom hast thou been afraid or feared, that thou hast lied,.... By
assuming the name of Christian, when it did not belong to her; as it
does not to the church of Rome which is antichristian: this lie is told,
not out of any fear of God, or reverence of Christ; for she has no fear
or reverence of either; but to serve a purpose, to blind the eyes of men
under the Christian name, and, with a pretence to serve the cause of
Christianity, to get all Christendom under her power:

and hast not remembered me; or, "for thou hast not remembered me, nor
laid it to thy heart?" or, "put me upon thy heart" (x); had no regard to
Christ, nor had true faith in him, nor love to him; but all the reverse;
degraded him in his offices, corrupted his doctrines, ordinances, and
worship. The Targum is,

"and hast not remembered my worship, nor put my fear upon thy heart:''

and have not held my peace even of old, and thou fearest me not or,
"therefore thou fearest me not" (y); because as yet the vials of God's
wrath are not poured out, or his judgment inflicted on antichrist; but,
ever since he began to reign, he has enjoyed great prosperity; therefore
he fears not God, nor regards man; but says, "I sit a queen, and am no
widow, and shall see no sorrow", [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007).

\(x\) "nam mei non es recordata, neque posuisti me super cor tuum",
Grotius. (y) "idcirco me non times", Calvin, Piscator, Gataker.

[Isaiah 57:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 57:12</span></span>

I will declare thy righteousness, and thy works,.... For,
notwithstanding all the idolatry, superstition, irreligion, and cruelty
of the church of Rome, she makes large pretences to righteousness, by
which she expects to be justified, and to merit eternal life, and even
pretends to works of supererogation; but God will in due time make it
clearly appear, both by the ministry of his faithful servants, which he
has done in part already; and by his judgments that he will execute,
that she has no righteousness; that what she calls so is no
righteousness, but wickedness; and that her works she calls good works
are bad ones, superstitious, idolatrous, and tyrannical:

for they shall not profit thee; secure from judgment here, or from wrath
to come; nor justify before God, nor procure salvation and eternal life;
but, on the contrary, shall bring deserved ruin and destruction, here
and hereafter.

[Isaiah 57:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 57:13</span></span>

When thou criest, let thy companies deliver thee,.... From distress and
impending ruin, if they can; meaning not the allies and auxiliaries of
the Jews, the Egyptians and Assyrians, they sent to for help, as Kimchi,
and others; rather, as Jarchi, their idols and graven images they
worshipped, angels and saints departed, the Papists pray unto; let them
now, in the time of Rome's ruin, renew their addresses to them for help
and deliverance, if they can give it: or, "thy gathered ones" (z); the
kings of the earth the whore of Rome has gathered unto her to commit
fornication with her: and who, by her emissaries, will be gathered
together to the battle of the Lord God Almighty, and to make war with
the Lamb, but will be overcome; as also her many religious societies and
convents of Jesuits, friars, priests, &c.; these will stand afar off,
and lament her in her distress; even the kings and merchants of the
earth, ship masters, and all company in ships, but will not be able to
relieve her, [Rev 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009),

but the wind shall carry them all away; vanity shall take them; so far
will they be from helping her in the time of her calamity, that the wind
of God's power and wrath shall carry them away as chaff; a puff of his
"breath", or the least breath of air (a), shall dissipate them, and
bring them to nothing; they will be no more able to stand before him
than the lightest thing that can be thought of can stand before a
blustering wind or tempest. The phrase denotes an utter and easy
destruction of the whole jurisdiction and hierarchy of the church of
Rome:

but he that putteth his trust in me shall possess the land, and shall
inherit my holy mountain; such of God's people as will be in Babylon a
little before its fall, and will be called out of it, who shall betake
themselves to the Lord as their only refuge, and put their trust and
confidence in him, rejecting all idolatry and superstitious worship,
shall enjoy the communion of the true church of Christ, and partake of
all the ordinances of it: it may be this may have also a particular
respect unto the Jews, who will be called about this time; who, upon
their believing in Christ, will return to their own land, and dwell in
Jerusalem, God's holy mountain, as it used to be called. Hence it
follows:

\(z\) "collectitii tui", Tigurine version; "congregati a te", Vatablus;
"copiae tuae collectae", Vitringa. (a) "halitus" Cocceius; "aura" V. L.
"aura levisima" Vitringa.

[Isaiah 57:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 57:14</span></span>

And shall say, cast ye up, cast ye up,.... A causeway, a highway, for
the people of the Jews to return to their own land: this is either said
by the Lord, as some supply it; or by the prophet, as Jarchi; or by him
that putteth his trust in the Lord, as Kimchi; or rather by one, that
is, the first of the living creatures, a set of Gospel ministers, that
shall give to the angels, the Protestant princes and potentates, the
seven last vials to pour out on the antichristian states, both Papal and
Mahometan, and shall stir them up to do it; or the voice out of the
temple, that shall order them to do their work; by which means way will
be made for the return of the said people, [Rev
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#007),

prepare the way; of the true doctrine and worship of God: the way of
truth and holiness, of faith and practice:

take up the stumblingblock out of the way of my people; the
superstition, idolatry, and impiety of the church of Rome, are the great
stumblingblock in the way of the conversion of the Jews, and the means
of hardening that people in their disbelief of Christ and the Christian
religion; wherefore the fall of antichrist, and a reformation everywhere
from all corruption in doctrine and worship, in principle and practice,
which also may be intended by these expressions, will prepare the way
for their embracing the Christian religion, and so for their return to
their own land. The Targum is,

"and he shall say, teach and admonish, prepare (or direct) the heart of
the people to the right way, remove the stumblingblock of the wicked out
of the way of my people.''

[Isaiah 57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 57:15</span></span>

For thus saith the high and lofty One,.... Who is high above the earth,
and the nations of it; higher than the kings in it; the King of kings,
and Lord of lords; and so able to save his people, and destroy his and
their enemies; who is higher than the heavens, and the angels there; who
is exalted above the praises of his people; the knowledge of whose being
and perfections is too wonderful for them; whose thoughts are higher
than theirs; and whose love has a height in it not to be reached by
them; all which may serve to command a proper awe and reverence of him,
and close attention to what he says; and perhaps these characters and
titles are assumed in opposition to antichrist, who exalts himself above
all that is called God, as well as what follows; who boasts of
antiquity, and insolently takes to himself the title of Holiness:
wherefore the Lord goes on to describe himself as

he that inhabiteth eternity: is from everlasting to everlasting, without
beginning or end, the first and the last, who only hath immortality in
and of himself; angels and the souls of men, though they die not, yet
have a beginning; God only is from eternity to eternity; or rather
inhabits one undivided, uninterrupted, eternity, to which time is but a
mere point or moment:

whose name is Holy: his nature being so; he is originally and
essentially holy, and the source of holiness to his creatures, angels
and men; though none are holy in comparison of him; his holiness is
displayed in all his works; he is glorious in it; and therefore with
great propriety holy and reverend is his name:

I dwell in the high and holy place; he dwelt in the most holy place in
the tabernacle and temple, which were figures of the true sanctuary,
heaven, where Jehovah dwells, and seems to be here meant; though the
word "place" is not in the text; and it may be rendered, "I dwell with
the high and holy" (b); and Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech, interpret
it of the holy angels; and if we apply it to the holy and divine Persons
in the Trinity, the Son and Spirit, it may not be amiss, and will stand
well connected with what follows

with him also that is of a contrite and humble spirit; not only with the
other divine Persons, and with those high ones, but with such who are
broken under a sense of sin; not merely in a legal, but in an
evangelical way; not only with the weight of divine wrath, but with a
view of pardoning grace and mercy; and such souls are humble as well as
contrite; have the worst thoughts of themselves, and the best of others;
they are humble under a sense of sin and unworthiness, and submit to the
righteousness of Christ for their acceptance and justification before
God; and ascribe the whole of their salvation to his free grace alone;
and become cheerful followers of the meek and lowly Jesus; with such the
Lord dwells, not merely by his omnipresence and omnipotence, but by his
spirit and grace; or in a gracious way and manner, by shedding abroad
his love in their hearts, and communicating his grace to them; and which
he usually does under the ministry of the word and ordinances, and which
may be expected: and his end in so doing is,

to revive the spirit of the humble, and to revive the heart of the
contrite ones; who are sometimes in a very lifeless and uncomfortable
condition; grace is weak; sin is prevalent; they are under a sense of
divine displeasure; under the hidings of God's face, and attended with
various afflictions and adverse dispensations of Providence: now the
Lord dwells with them, to revive and quicken them; which he does by his
gracious presence; by the discoveries of his pardoning love and grace;
by the application of precious promises; and by granting large measures
of his grace, so that they become comfortable in their souls, and are
quickened to the fresh exercise of grace, and discharge of duty. All
this seems to be spoken for the consolation of the Lord's people in
their low estate, during the reign of antichrist, and towards the close
of it, when greatly oppressed by him. Vitringa interprets this of the
Waldenses and Bohemian brethren; but it seems to respect later times.

\(b\) "excelso et sancto habitabo", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Isaiah 57:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 57:16</span></span>

For I will not contend for ever,.... By afflictive providences; with the
humble and contrite, the end being in a great measure answered by their
humiliation and contrition; when God afflicts his people, it shows that
he has a controversy with them, for their good, and his own glory; and
when these ends are obtained, he will carry it on no longer:

neither will I be always wroth; as he seems to be in the apprehensions
of his people, when he either hides his face from them, or chastises
them with a rod of affliction:

for the spirit should fail before me; the spirit of the afflicted, which
not being able to bear up any longer under the affliction, would sink
and faint, or be "overwhelmed", as the word (c) signifies:

and the souls which I have made; which are of God's immediate creation,
and which are also renewed by his grace, and made new creatures. The
proselytes Abraham made are called the souls he made in Haran, [Gen
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#005), much more may this be said of
the Father of spirits, the author both of the old and new creation. The
Lord knowing the weakness of the human frame, therefore restrains his
hand, or moderates or removes the affliction; see a like reason in [Psa
78:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#038), the last days of trouble to
God's people, which will be the time of the slaying of the witnesses,
will be such that if they are not shortened, no flesh can be saved, but
for the elect's sake they will be shortened, [Mat
24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022).

\(c\) "obrueretur", Junius & Tremellius, Vitriuga; "in deliquium
incideret", Piscator, Gataker.

[Isaiah 57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 57:17</span></span>

For the iniquity of his covetousness was I wroth, and smote him, ....
Not the greedy watchmen of the church of Rome, [Isa
56:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#010), but teachers and preachers in
the reformed churches, who mind their own things, and not the things of
Christ; seek after good benefices and livings, temporalities and
pluralities, and to be lord bishops; taking the oversight of the flock
for filthy lucre sake; which may easily be observed to be the
predominant sin of the preachers and professors of the reformed
churches; for which God has a controversy with them, and, resenting it,
has smote and rebuked them in a providential way; and has threatened
them, as he did the church at Sardis, the emblem of the reformed
churches, that he will come upon them as a thief, [Rev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004).

I hid me, and was wroth: showed his displeasure by departing from them;
and how much God has withdrawn his presence, and caused his spirit to
depart from the churches of the Reformation, is too notorious:

and he went on frowardly in the way of his heart; took no notice of the
reproofs and corrections of God; was unconcerned at his absence; not at
all affected with his departure, and the withdrawings of his Spirit;
these had no effect to cause a reformation, as is now too visibly the
case; the same evil is pursued with equal eagerness; this is a way the
heart of man is set upon, and they do not care to be turned out of it;
and are like froward peevish children under the rod, receive no
correction by it.

[Isaiah 57:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 57:18</span></span>

I have seen his ways, and will heal him,.... Either the ways of such who
trust in the Lord, the ways of the humble and contrite, who are brought
by repentance and reformation, by the dealings of God with them; these
he sees, knows, and approves of, and heals their former backslidings;
for though not all, yet some may be reformed hereby; or rather the ways
of the froward, their evil ways, which are their own ways in opposition
to God's ways, peculiar to themselves, of their own devising and
choosing; these the Lord sees, resents, and corrects for, and yet
graciously pardons them, which is meant by healing:

I will lead him also; out of those evil ways of his into the good and
right way in which he should go; into the way of truth and paths of
righteousness; for it is for want of evangelical light and knowledge
that so many err from the truths of the Gospel, and from the simplicity
of Gospel worship; but in the latter day the Spirit of truth shall be
poured down from on high, and shall lead professors of real religion
into all truth, and they shall speak a pure language, and worship the
Lord with one consent:

and restore comforts to him, and to his mourners; that mourn over their
own sins, and the sins of others; that mourn in Zion, and for Zion; for
the corruptions in doctrine and worship crept into the reformed
churches; for the want of church discipline and Gospel conversation; for
the declensions of professors of religion, and the divisions among them;
and for that worldly, earthly, and carnal spirit that prevails; for
these, as bad as our times are, there are some that mourn publicly and
privately; and to these, and to the church for their sakes, comfort
shall be restored, by sending forth Gospel light, truth, and knowledge,
which shall cover the earth as the waters the sea; by reviving primitive
doctrines and ordinances; by blessing the word to the conversion of a
multitude of sinners, and to the edification of saints; by causing
brotherly love, peace, and spirituality, to abound among professors, and
by blessing all the means of grace to the consolation of their souls;
and by making particular applications of the blood, righteousness, and
sacrifice of Christ, for pardon, justification, and atonement, the solid
foundation of all true comfort.

[Isaiah 57:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 57:19</span></span>

I create the fruit of the lips,.... Which is praise and thanksgiving,
[Heb 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#016) that is, give occasion of
it, afford matter for it, by restoring comforts to the church and its
mourners, as in the preceding verse; and by giving peace, as in all the
following words. The Targum renders it,

"the speech of the lips in the mouth of all men;''

as if it respected that blessing of nature, speech, common to all
mankind: whereas this is a blessing of grace, peculiar to some that
share in the above blessings; and it may be restrained to Gospel
ministers, the fruit of whose lips is the Gospel of peace; or the word
preaching peace by Christ; the word of reconciliation committed to them;
the subject of their ministry, as follows:

peace, peace to him that is far off, and to him that is near, saith the
Lord; peace with God, made by Christ, is the fruit of Jehovah the
Father's lips, who promised it in covenant, on condition of Christ's
shedding his blood to make it; whence the covenant is called the
covenant of peace; and spoke of it in prophecy, as what should be
obtained by Christ the peacemaker; and peace of conscience flowing from
it is the fruit of Christ's lips, who promised to give it to, and leave
it with, his disciples; and that they should have it in him, when they
had tribulation in the world; and who also by his apostles went and

preached peace to them that were afar off, and to them that were nigh;
having first made it by the blood of his cross, [Eph
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#017) in which place there seems a
manifest reference to this passage, when the Gospel was preached to the
Jews that were near; to them in Judea first, from whence it first came;
and then to the Gentiles that were afar off, as well as the dispersed
Jews in distant countries; and in the latter day, to which this prophecy
refers, it will be preached far and near, even all the world over; when
the earth will be filled with the knowledge of the Gospel of peace,
through the ministry of a set of men raised up by the Lord, created for
that purpose, and eminently furnished for such service; the effect of
which will be great spiritual peace in the hearts of God's people, and
much concord, unity, and love among them, as well as there will be an
abundance of external peace and prosperity; and when nations shall learn
war no more. This Kimchi and Ben Melech take to be yet future, and what
will be after the war of Gog and Magog: "and I will heal them"; of all
their soul sicknesses and maladies; of all their divisions and
declensions; of their carnality and earthly mindedness, before
complained of; and even of all their sins and backslidings; and restore
them to perfect health in their souls, and in their church state.

[Isaiah 57:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 57:20</span></span>

But the wicked are like the troubled sea, when it cannot rest,....
Disturbed by winds, storms, and hurricanes, when its waves rise, rage,
and tumble about, and beat against the shore and sand, threatening to
pass the bounds fixed for it. In such like agitations will the minds of
wicked men be, through the terrors of conscience for their sins; or
through the malice and envy in them at the happiness and prosperity of
the righteous, now enjoyed, upon the downfall of antichrist; and through
the judgments of God upon them, gnawing their tongues for pain, and
blaspheming the God of heaven, because of their plagues and pains, [Rev
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#009),

whose waters cast up mire and dirt; from the bottom of the sea upon the
shore; so the hearts of wicked men, having nothing but the mire and dirt
of sin in them, cast out nothing else but the froth and foam of their
own shame, blasphemy against God, and malice against his people.

[Isaiah 57:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 57:21</span></span>

There is no peace, saith my God, to the wicked. They have no share in
the peace made by the blood of Christ; they have no true, solid, inward
peace of conscience; nor will they have any part in the happiness and
prosperity of the church and people of God in the latter day, which will
but add to their uneasiness; and will have no lot and portion in the
eternal peace which saints enjoy in the world to come; and of this there
is the strongest assurance, since God, the covenant God of his people,
has said it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 58](isa058)

</div>
