<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa008)  [Next](isa010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 9

This chapter contains a prophecy, partly of comfort to the church and
people of God, against the calamities predicted in the preceding chapter
[Isa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#001.md); and partly of punishment, to
be inflicted upon the ungodly Israelites by their enemies. The comfort
promised arises from the appearance of Christ, the great light, in some
certain places of the land mentioned, said before to be afflicted, [Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md) which would occasion a joy among
them; illustrated by some similes, by the joy in harvest, and at the
dividing of spoils, [Isa 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003.md) the cause
of which is a deliverance from a burdensome yoke of tyranny and bondage,
wrought in like manner as that by Gideon formerly; different from all
other salvations, which are usually obtained with noise and blood, [Isa
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#004.md) the author of which is the
Messiah; who is described by his birth as man, and by his divine sonship
as God; or by his person, having two natures united in him; and by the
government devolved on him; and by his several names, which express the
greatness and glory of his person and office; and by the increase and
administration of his government, [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md) then follows a denunciation of
judgment on Israel, [Isa 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008.md) the
instruments of which are pointed at, [Isa
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#011.md), and the persons described that
should suffer, high and low, rich and poor, young and old, [Isa
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014.md) the reasons of it, their making
light of former corrections, [Isa 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#009.md)
their impenitence and hardness under chastenings, [Isa
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013.md) their going astray by means of
their leaders; and their hypocrisy and wickedness, [Isa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016.md) all which would occasion the
wrath of God to burn against them, and consume them, [Isa
9:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#018.md) yea, through hunger and want of
provisions, should destroy one another, [Isa
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#020.md).

[Isaiah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 9:17</span></span>

Therefore the Lord shall have no joy in their young men,.... Take no
delight and pleasure in them; but, on the contrary, detest and abhor
them, and so destroy them, being depraved and corrupted by the bad
instructions and examples of their parents:

neither shall have mercy on their fatherless and widows; who are objects
of pity and compassion; yet these being wicked, as well as the fathers
of the one, and the husbands of the other, shall be no more spared than
they have been; so that this expresses both the general corruption and
destruction of this people:

for everyone is a hypocrite and an evildoer; a hypocrite, as Aben Ezra
on the place observes, is one that is outwardly good, and inwardly
wicked; which was the general character of the people of Israel in
Isaiah's time, as it was of the Jews in the times of Christ, see [Mat
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#025.md) they pretended to do good, but
were doers of evil, workers of iniquity, continually committing sin; and
yet would be thought to be very upright and sincere, both in their
religion towards God, and in their dealings with men; but deceitful in
both:

and every mouth speaketh folly; or falsehood; a lie, as the Targum, as
all lies are foolish; as also all vain words, all impious ones; or the
savour of irreligion or superstition, and indeed every idle word, and
all unsavoury and corrupt speech, and there is particularly foolish
talking, which is not convenient, [Eph
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#004.md),

for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still; which is repeated from [Isa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012.md). See Gill on [Isa
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012.md).

[Isaiah 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 9:18</span></span>

For wickedness burneth as the fire,.... That is, the punishment of their
sins, as the Targum interprets it; the wrath of God for sin, which is
poured out like fire, and consumes as that does; unless wicked men are
meant, who are consumed with the fire of divine vengeance; the sense is
the same:

it shall devour the briers and thorns; sinners and ungodly, so the
Targum paraphrases it; and Aben Ezra observes, they are the wicked; who
are compared to briers and thorns, for their unfruitfulness in
themselves, harmfulness to others, and for their weakness to stand
against the fury of incensed Deity, see [Sa2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#006.md),

and shall kindle in the thickets of the forest. Kimchi thinks there is a
gradation in these words, that as fire first begins to burn the thorns,
and smaller wood, and then the greater; so wickedness consumes first the
little ones, who are the thorns, and after that it kindles in the
thickets of the forest, who are the great ones; so the commonwealth of
Israel is compared to a forest; and the thorns, briers, and thickets,
may denote the common people and their governors, who all being guilty
of wickedness, should not escape the vengeance of God:

and they shall mount up like the lifting up of smoke: or lift up
themselves, or be lifted up; so Aben Ezra and Kimchi interpret the word;
but Jarchi thinks it has the signification of "to be perplexed": and
gives the sense of it thus; they are perplexed, and shut up with the
strength of smoke that burns: others take it to be a word of the same
meaning with and render it, "they shall pulverize", or "go into dust in
the lifting up of smoke" (d); and denotes the dissolution of the
commonwealth; but perhaps it may be better rendered, "though they shall
walk proudly" (or behave haughtily), their "pride" shall be as "smoke",
which soon vanishes away; since the word, which is only here used, in
the Syriac language signifies to walk proudly, as a cock with two crests
(e).

\(d\) "et epulverabitur erectione fumi", Cocceius; "adeo ut in
minutissimum pulverem abeant elato fumo, vel elatione fumi", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator. (e) "Et superbient, (fastuose se gerent,) at
superbia (vel quorum superbia) fumus, h. e. fumi instar, evanescit,
interibit, quod etiam Armenis indigiat, isfud vacobulum \`Abac', Syr.
galus, gallinaceus, superbo gradu incedens et bicristatus", Castel.
Lexicon Polyglott. col. 12.

[Isaiah 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 9:19</span></span>

Through the wrath of the Lord of hosts is the land darkened,.... Brought
into great distress and affliction; sore judgments and calamities being
upon it; for not darkness in a natural, but in a figurative sense, is
intended, see [Isa 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022.md) the allusion
is to the ascending of the smoke before mentioned, through fire being
kindled in the thickets of the forest, which filled the air with
darkness; as smoke arising in great quantity does. This sense of the
word, which is only to be met with in this place, is given by Aben Ezra,
Kimchi, and Ben Melech, from the use of it in the Arabic language, in
which it signifies (f) darkness; but the Septuagint and Arabic versions
render it, "the whole land is burned"; and which is confirmed by the
Targum, which so interprets it; and this sense well agrees with the
context:

and the people shall be as the fuel of the fire; this explains who are
meant by the briers and thorns, and thickets of the forest, the
inhabitants of the land of Israel; who, as they are the fuel of fire,
were the objects of divine wrath and fury:

no man shall spare his brother; which may be ascribed either to the
darkness and confusion in which they should be, and so not be able to
discern a friend from a foe, as persons surrounded with smoke; or to
their malignant spirit, cruelty and inhumanity, not only doing ill to
their enemies, but to their own friends and relations, to their own
flesh and blood.

\(f\) "obscura evasit", ---- "tertia pars noctis, a fine crepusculi,
tempus quo posterior peragitur precatio vespertina", Golius, col. 1521,
1522. Castel col. 2944. So Schindler, col. 1410. "ateme, caligo,
tenebra, crepusculum".

[Isaiah 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 9:20</span></span>

And he shall snatch on the right hand, and be hungry,.... Either with
his hand, and rob and plunder all within his reach; or, with his teeth,
as cannibals, or beasts of prey, catch at, tear, and rend in pieces,
whatever comes in their way; and yet hungry after more, and unsatisfied,
as follows:

and he shall eat on the left hand, and they shall not be satisfied;
ravage and spoil on every side, and yet not content. The Targum is,

"he shall spoil on the south, and be hungry; and he shall destroy on the
north, and not be satisfied:''

they shall eat every man the flesh of his own arm; destroy their near
relations, who are their own flesh and blood, or take away their
substance from them; so the Targum,

"they shall spoil every man the substance of his neighbour:''

which will give some light to [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016.md).

[Isaiah 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 9:21</span></span>

Manasseh, Ephraim; and Ephraim, Manasseh,.... That is, "Manasseh" shall
eat or devour "Ephraim"; and "Ephraim" shall eat or devour "Manasseh";
as the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions render it; which is to be
understood of their quarrels, contentions, and wars among themselves,
whereby they bit, devoured, and consumed each other, though they were
brethren; which explains and confirms what is before said, of no man
sparing his brother, and everyone eating the flesh of his own arm. The
Targum paraphrases the words thus,

"they of the house of "Manasseh", with those of the house of "Ephraim",
and they of the house of "Ephraim", with those of the house of
"Manasseh", shall be joined together as one, to come against them of the
house of Judah;''

and so Jarchi interprets them,

""Manasseh" shall be joined with "Ephraim", and "Ephraim" shall be
joined with "Manasseh", and they together shall be joined against
Judah;''

so it follows,

and they together shall be against Judah; as the ten tribes did
sometimes make war against the two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, see
[Ch2 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#006.md),

for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still; more and sorer judgments were to come upon this people for their
sins. See Gill on [Isa 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012.md).

[Isaiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 9:1</span></span>

Nevertheless, the dimness shall not be such as was in her vexation,....
The words may be rendered, "for there shall be no weariness to him that
straitens" or "afflicts" them (f); so Jarchi, who interprets it of the
king of Assyria; but it is better to understand it of Titus Vespasian,
who would not be weary of, but indefatigable in carrying on the siege of
Jerusalem, and in distressing the Jews in all parts: or thus, "for there
shall be no fleeing from him that is oppressed in it" (g); either that
is besieged in Jerusalem, or distressed in Judea; and so the words are a
reason of the former distress, and a continuation and amplification of
it; though many interpreters think they are to be understood by way of
comfort, and as a mitigation of it, which is the sense of our version:

when at first he lightly afflicted the land of Zebulun and the land of
Naphtali; either by Pul king of Assyria, in the reign of Menahem king of
Israel, [Kg2 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019.md) or rather by
Tilgathpilneser king of Assyria, in the reign of Pekah king of Israel,
since by him Galilee, and all the land of Naphtali, were carried
captive, [Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029.md) which at the time
of this prophecy was past, and was but a light affliction in comparison
of what followed:

and afterwards did more grievously afflict her: by Shalmaneser king of
Assyria, in the reign of Hoshea king of Israel, who took Samaria, and
carried Israel or the ten tribes into captivity, from whence they
returned not; and yet it is suggested, that the tribulation and distress
that should come upon the Jews by the Romans should be greater than the
heaviest of these; there should be no fleeing, no escape, no, not of
any, as at those times mentioned, but wrath should come upon them to the
uttermost, and particularly in the places following:

by the way of the sea; which some understand of the Mediterranean sea,
and of that part of the land of Israel which lay next it; but it seems
rather to design the sea of Tiberias or Galilee, as Jarchi rightly
interprets it:

beyond Jordan; a part of the land of Israel so called, known by the name
of Peraea; See Gill on [Mat 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#025.md),

in Galilee of the nations; which was inhabited not only by Jews, but by
persons of other nations, and therefore so called; now these places
suffered much in the wars between the Jews and the Romans, by
skirmishes, sieges, robberies, plunders, &c. as appears from the history
of Josephus. Some interpreters understand all this, as before observed,
as an alleviation of those times of trouble, as if it would be less than
in former times; but it is certain that it was to be, and was, greater
than ever was known, [Mat 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021.md) it is
true, indeed, it may be considered as an alleviation of it, and as
affording some comfort in a view of it, that in those very parts where
there should be so much distress and misery, the Messiah, previous to
it, would appear, and honour it with his presence, who is afterwards
spoken of, and so, in connection with the following words, these may be
rendered thus; as by De Dieu, "but obscurity shall not be brought to it"
(the land) "to which distress is brought; as at the first time he caused
reproach towards the land of Zebulun, and towards the land of Naphtali,
so in the last" (time) "he will give glory by the way of the sea, beyond
Jordan, on the border of the nations": and if it be asked what that
glory should be, the answer is, "the people that walked in darkness",
&c. and so the sense may be, that whereas the inhabitants of Zebulun and
Naphtali, and all Galilee, were lightly esteemed of, being mean and
illiterate, not famous for any arts or sciences, and having no prophet
among them, should, in the days of the Messiah, be highly honoured, and
made glorious by his presence, ministry, and miracles among them (h).
See [Mat 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#013.md), where it is quoted,
and applied to Christ's being in those parts.

\(f\) "quia non defatigatio ei angustanti eos." Quidam in Gataker; so
Jarchi. (g) "Et non poterit avolare de angustia sua", Hieron. (h) See my
book of the Prophecies of the Messiah, &c. p. 148.

[Isaiah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 9:2</span></span>

The people that walked in darkness,.... Meaning not the inhabitants of
Judah and Jerusalem, in the times of Hezekiah, when Sennacherib besieged
them, as Jarchi and Kimchi interpret it; and much less the people of
Israel in Egypt, as the Targum paraphrases it; but the inhabitants of
Galilee in the times of Christ; see [Mat
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#016.md), [Joh
1:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048.md) and is a true character of all
the people of God before conversion, who are in a state of darkness,
under the power of sin, shut up in unbelief; are in gross ignorance of
themselves, and their condition; of sin, and the danger they are exposed
to by it; of divine and spiritual things; of the grace of God; of the
way of peace, life, and salvation by Christ; and of the work of the
blessed Spirit; and of the truths of the Gospel; they are in the dark,
and can see no objects in a spiritual sense; not to read the word, so as
to understand it; or to work that which is good; and they "walk" on in
darkness, not knowing where they are, and whither they are going; and
yet of these it is said, they

have seen a great light; Christ himself, who conversed among the
Galilaeans, preached unto them, and caused the light of his glorious
Gospel to shine into many of their hearts; by which their darkness was
removed, so that they not only saw Christ, this great light, with their
bodily eyes, but with the eyes of their understanding; who may be called
the "light", because he is the author and giver of all light, even of
nature, grace, and glory; and a "great" one, because he is the sun, the
greatest light, the sun of righteousness, the light of the world, both
of Jews and Gentiles; he is the true light, in distinction from all
typical ones, and in opposition to all false ones, and who in his person
is God over all.

They that dwell in the land of the shadow of death; as Galilee might be
called, because it was a poor, miserable, and uncomfortable place, from
whence no good came; and this character fitly describes God's people in
a state of nature and unregeneracy, who are dead in Adam, dead in law,
and dead in trespasses and sins, dead as to the spiritual use of the
powers and faculties of their souls; they have no spiritual life in
them, nor any spiritual sense, feeling, or motion; and they "dwell",
continue, and abide in this state, till grace brings them out of it; see
[Joh 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#046.md),

upon them hath the light shined: Christ in human nature, through the
ministration of his Gospel, by his spirit, so as to enlighten them who
walk in darkness, and to quicken them who dwelt in the land of the
shadow of death, and to comfort them in their desolate estate; and this
light not only shone upon them in the external ministration of the word,
as it did "upon" the inhabitants in general, but it shone "into" the
hearts of many of them in particular, so that in this light they saw
light.

[Isaiah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 9:3</span></span>

Thou hast multiplied the nation,.... With light, knowledge, honour, and
glory, even Galilee of the nations before mentioned, the land of
darkness, and of the shadow of death, where the people dwelt; on whom
Christ, the light, shone in the ministration of his Gospel to them;
whereby the number of believers in Christ were multiplied; and indeed,
as he conversed, preached, and wrought his miracles most here, he had
here the greatest number of disciples and followers; here were the five
hundred brethren by whom he was seen at once, after his resurrection,
[Co1 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#006.md) for this is not to be
understood of the Assyrian nation, whose army under Sennacherib was very
large; nor of the Jewish nation enlarged by the destruction of that
army, or of their increase after their return from the Babylonish
captivity; nor of the church of God by the accession of Gentiles to it;
but of the land or nation before spoken of:

and not increased the joy; or rather, as it should be rendered, "and
hast increased joy unto it"; following the Keri; or marginal reading,
which directs that it should be read, not as a negative, "not", but "to
it"; and which is followed by the Targum and Syriac version, and by
Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Kimchi, and others; and the sense of the words
requires this reading, since it follows,

they joy before thee; or otherwise there would be a manifest
contradiction in the text; though some, to avoid it, read the words
interrogatively, "hast thou not increased the joy?" thou hast; and in
this way both the Keri and the Cetib, the reading and the writing, may
be taken in, "hast thou not increased joy unto it?" and so as Gussetius
(i) renders it,

"thou hast multiplied the nation to whom thou hadst not given great
joy:''

that is, temporal joy; though now much of that which is of a spiritual
kind: Christ the light appearing, his Gospel being preached by him, and
his apostles, and many believing in him, occasioned an increase of
spiritual joy in those parts; and so it is, that wherever the Gospel
comes, and Christ is preached, and souls are converted, there is great
joy, [Act 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#006.md) where there is any grace
of the Spirit, as faith, hope, and love, there is joy; and particularly
when a soul is enlightened and quickened, as in the preceding verse [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002.md), it rejoices, reflecting on the
state of darkness and death it is brought out of, and on the marvellous
light, life, and liberty it is brought into; and at a sight of Christ,
his person, offices, relations, and grace, as the sun of righteousness,
with healing in his wings, and beaming light, salvation, and happiness;
which joy is spiritual, internal, passes knowledge, is imperfect, but
capable of being increased:

they joy before thee; the words, both in this and in the preceding
clauses, are addressed to God, and show, that as the work of conversion,
and an increase of spiritual joy, are from him; so that joy that is
given by hint is expressed "before" him, in his house and ordinances,
and it is in his sight, before whom all things are manifest; and so it
denotes the truth and sincerity of it, which is illustrated by the
following metaphors:

according to the joy in harvest; such as is expressed by men in harvest
time, both by the rich owners and proprietors, when they have a good
harvest, and well got in, and by the poor, who have a prospect of a
comfortable supply in a cheap manner; and this simile is used with great
propriety and pertinence. Christ and his ministers are sowers of seed,
of the word; and hearers of the word are compared to seed sown in
different places; and when any number of these are converted, it is a
harvest which occasions joy. The Targum is,

"as the joy of conquerors in war;''

which agrees with what follows:

and as men rejoice when they divide the spoil; taken in war: in
redemption, Christ has taken the prey from the mighty, and delivered the
lawful captive, and has divided the spoil with the strong; and in
effectual calling binds the strong man armed, and spoils his goods, and
delivers souls out of his hands, and this is matter of great joy, [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012.md) see [Psa
119:162](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#162.md).

\(i\) Ebr. Comment. p. 423.

[Isaiah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 9:4</span></span>

For thou hast broken the yoke of his burden,.... Of Galilee, of the
nation multiplied, of the spiritual inhabitants of it, whose joy was
increased; and this is one reason of it, because they were delivered by
the Lord from the burdensome yoke of the ceremonial law, which was
broken off and abolished by Christ; and from the tyranny of Satan, the
god of this world, out of whose hands they were ransomed and delivered;
and from the dominion of sin, under the power of which they had been in
bondage.

And the staff of his shoulder, the rod of his oppressor; different
phrases, expressive of the same thing; the bondage and slavery of the
law, sin, and Satan:

as in the day of Midian; when Gideon got an entire victory over the
Midianites, with a few unarmed men, by the sound of trumpets, and
breaking of pitchers, [Jdg 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#016.md) and
may denote the easy manner in which Christ obtained a conquest over all
his and our enemies; and the means by which it is made known unto us,
and we are freed from bondage to spiritual enemies; namely, by the
ministration of the Gospel, compared to the blowing of trumpets; and
which is a treasure put into earthen vessels, frail and weak men.

[Isaiah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 9:5</span></span>

For every battle of the warrior is with confused noise,.... With the
sound of the trumpet and as now with beating of drums, and the huzzas
and shoutings of the soldiers, the stamping and neighing of horses, the
rushing of chariots, and rumbling of wheels, and the clashing of swords,
spears, and shields, and these sometimes striking one against another
(k):

and garments rolled in blood; of them that were slain in battle:

but this shall be with burning and fuel of fire; which refers either to
the sudden destruction of the Midianites, or rather to the quick and
easy conquest that Christ obtained over sin, Satan, the world, and
death; which was as soon over as any combustible matter is burnt with
fire. Some interpret this of the destruction of the devil, his angels,
of antichrist, and all wicked men by fire, at the last day; and others
think that this last clause is to be read in connection with the
preceding: "and garments rolled in blood, which shall be for burning,
the fuel of fire" (l); that is, which garments rolled in blood shall be
burnt with fire, and utterly consumed; and so there be no more war, but
perpetual peace. It was usual after victory to burn the armour and
spoils of the enemy (m); or rather it may intend the burning love and
flaming zeal and affection of Christ the Saviour, next described [Isa
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#005.md).

\(k\) Vid. Lydium de re militari, l. 4. c. 3. p. 159. (l) So Cocceius,
De Dieu. (m) Vid. Lydium de re militari, l. 6. e. 4. p. 229.

[Isaiah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 9:6</span></span>

For unto us a child is born,.... This is a reason of all that is said in
the context; of the great light that shone upon and was seen by those
that sat in darkness, and in the land of the shadow of death; of the
great joy among the people; of the breaking off of the yoke, rod, and
staff of the oppressor; and of the burning of garments rolled in blood,
so putting an end to war, and establishing peace; all which is owing to
the child here said to be born, by whom we are to understand the
Messiah; as the Targum interprets it; and not Hezekiah, as many of the
Jewish writers (n) apply it; who could never be represented as a child
just born, when he was, at least, ten or eleven years of age when this
prophecy was given out, and twenty nine when Sennacherib came up with
his army against him, as Aben Ezra observes; to which time he and others
refer the context; nor can any reason be assigned why he should be
called a "son", in such a peculiar and unusual manner; nor can it be
said of him, that he was the great light which shined upon the
inhabitants of Galilee; nor was his birth the occasion of so great joy
as the birth of this child is said to be; nor can it, with any justness,
be said of him, that of the increase of his government and peace there
was no end; seeing his government only extended to the two tribes of
Benjamin and Judah, and his reign was but twenty nine years, and for the
most part attended with affliction, oppression, and war; besides, the
many august titles here used cannot be ascribed unto him, nor to any
mere creature whatever (o); but everything agrees with Christ; and to
him it is applied, even by some ancient and modern writers among the
Jews (p) themselves. This clause respects his humanity, his incarnation
and birth, which is spoken of in the present tense, though future,
because of the certainty of it; that he should really become man, assume
a true body, and a reasonable soul, partake of the same flesh and blood
with the children, be made flesh, and dwell among us: and this was to
us, "for us": for our good, for our profit and advantage; not for
angels, but for men; for the saints under the Old Testament, and under
the New; for all his people, his brethren, and children; that they might
have a sanctified nature; that law and justice might be satisfied in
that nature which had sinned, and Satan be ruined by it, which he
himself had ruined; and that Christ might be a fit Mediator and Redeemer
of his people, and be capable of executing his several offices to our
advantage; his priestly office, by satisfying and interceding for us;
his prophetic office, by teaching us; and his kingly office, by ruling
over us; and that he might answer the relations he stands in of a
father, husband, brother, and friend:

unto us a son is given: even he who is the Son of God, his own Son, his
only begotten Son, his beloved Son, the dear Son of his love; all which
aggravate his love in the gift of him, to be the covenant and head unto
us, to be the Saviour of us, and a sacrifice for us; and in delivering
him up into the hands of men, justice, and death; this is a free gift of
God's love, a very large and comprehensive one, is unparalleled and
unspeakable, unchangeable and irreversible.

And the government shall be upon his shoulder: not only of the world in
general, but of the church in particular; this child is born to royal
dignity; he is King of saints; his government consists in ruling in the
hearts of his people, in enacting laws for them, and causing them to
submit unto them, in subduing their enemies, in protecting them, their
persons and properties, rights and liberties, and in supplying them with
everything necessary; and this government is delegated to him from his
Father, is devolved upon him by him, is not of this world, but is
spiritual; it is righteously administered, is peaceable, and will
continue for ever: and its being said to be "upon his shoulder" is an
allusion to magistrates having a key or rod laid on their shoulders, as
ensigns of their office, or carried by their officers for them, see [Isa
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#004.md) and it shows that it was laid upon
him, or enjoined him by his father, though not against his will; and it
denotes a weight of honour and care bore by him, whose shoulders are fit
for the same, and equal to it; and that he is the prop and support of
his church and people, who are safe under his government and protection:

and his name shall be called Wonderful: not that he should be commonly
called among men by this name, nor by any of the following; but that he
should appear to be, or to have that in him, or to do what would
sufficiently answer to this name, and to the rest: he is wonderful in
his person, and in the glory and beauty of it; that he should be God and
man in one person, and have two natures, so different from each other,
united in him; that he, being truly God, should become man; and that he
should be born of a virgin; wonderful in the disposition of his mind,
and in the qualities he is possessed of; in his love to his people, and
his sympathy with them; in his humility, meekness, and patience; in his
wisdom, conduct, courage, and greatness of soul: wonderful in his life;
in his private life many wonderful things are recorded of him; as the
direction of the wise men to him by a star, and their worshipping of
him; the preservation of him from Herod's cruelty; his disputation with
the doctors in the temple at twelve years of age; and his living such a
mean and obscure life for thirty years together: and his public life was
nothing but a continued series of wonders; his baptism in Jordan; his
temptations in the wilderness; his doctrines and miracles, and his
transfiguration on the mount: wonderful in his death; that he should die
at all, who is the Prince of life, the Lord of life and glory; that he
should die with his own and his Father's consent, and that for sinners,
even the chief of sinners; and by dying procure life for us; abolish
death; destroy him that had the power of it, the devil; and obtain
eternal salvation and redemption: the circumstances attending his death
were marvellous: such as the darkness that was upon the earth; the
rending of the vail, and cleaving of the rocks: wonderful in his
resurrection from the dead, which was by his own power, before he saw
corruption, at the time signified by types and prophecy, and with the
same body exceedingly glorious; and which has an influence on our
justification, regeneration, and resurrection: wonderful in his
ascension to heaven, both in the manner of it, in a cloud, and in the
effects of it, receiving gifts for men, and giving them to them; in his
entrance into heaven; session at the right hand of God; and intercession
for transgressors: wonderful he will be in his second coming to
judgment; the signs of it are many and marvellous; the manner of it
wonderfully glorious; the different effects of it on men, filling some
with joy, and others with terror; and the things that will then be done;
as the raising of the dead; placing all nations before him; separating
the righteous from the wicked; pronouncing their distinct sentences, and
executing them; in a word, Christ is wonderful, in all he is, has, or
belong unto him; in his person, offices, and relations; in his people,
who are for signs and wonders; in his doctrines and ordinances; and in
the manifestations of himself and of his grace to his people, now and
hereafter; nay, the word signifies not only "wonderful", but a "miracle"
itself, as Christ is in his person (q), see [Jdg
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg013.htm#017.md),

Counsellor; this some read in conjunction with the former title, thus,
"Wonderful Counsellor"; so the Arabic version; and the Septuagint, which
calls him, "the Angel of the great council"; and the Targum is,

"who does wonderfully in council;''

and which agrees with [Isa 28:29](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#029.md). This
title belongs to Christ, as concerned with his Father, and the blessed
Spirit, in the works of nature, providence, and grace. God stands in no
need of counsel, nor does it properly fall on him, though it is
sometimes ascribed to him, speaking after the manner of men. Creatures
are not of his council, but Christ is; he was privy to all his thoughts,
purposes, and decrees; he was consulted in creation, and in the works of
providence, [Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026.md), [Gen
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen011.htm#007.md) and in the great affair of
redemption and salvation; the council held concerning that is the great
council the Septuagint version here makes mention of; and may be called
the council of peace, [Zac 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#013.md) in
which the scheme of salvation was fixed; the author of it was found, and
pitched upon; the way of it agreed on, to be through the assumption of
human nature, and by obedience, sufferings, and death; and the time of
Christ's incarnation and death settled, as well as all blessings of
grace and glory, for the persons who were to share in this salvation.
This title also agrees with Christ in respect to his people, to whom he
is council, and for whom he is council; he is council to them; he gives
them council; so he did in person, when on earth; he advised sinners to
repentance; encouraged souls to believe in him; directed the weary to
come to him for rest; the hungry and thirsty for food; such as were
healed and pardoned, he counselled them to sin no more; and he advised
his followers to do to all men as they would men should do to them; to
behave in an humble and modest manner; to bear reproaches and
persecutions cheerfully; to love one another; and to pray to his Father,
in his name, for all things they wanted: and now he gives his people
counsel by the ministry of the word, which is the counsel of God, the
produce of his wisdom, a transcript of his eternal council and covenant,
a declaration of the will of God, and of Christ; and in which Christ
counsels the poor in spirit to come to him for riches, the naked for
clothing, the ignorant for spiritual light and knowledge, such as are
ready to perish for salvation; and he counsels those that believe to
abide in him, and by his truths and ordinances; which counsel is
wholesome and suitable, hearty, sincere, and faithful; is wise and
prudent, and freely given; and which being taken, infallibly succeeds:
he is council for them in heaven; he appears there in the presence of
God for them; represents their persons, and presents their petitions;
answers to all charges exhibited against them; and, as their advocate,
pleads their cause; and calls for blessings agreed to be bestowed upon
them, which they want; for all which he is abundantly qualified, being
the only wise God, the Ancient of days, the Father of his people; and,
as Mediator, the Wisdom of God, in whom all the treasures of wisdom and
knowledge are, and on whom the Spirit of wisdom and understanding, and
of counsel and might, rests:

the mighty God; or "God the mighty One" (r); as some read the words with
a comma; but if read together, the sense is the same; Christ is God,
truly and properly so; as appears from his name Jehovah, which is
peculiar to the most High; from his nature and perfections, being the
same with his Father's: from the works performed by him, as those of
creation, providence, miracles, redemption, resurrection from the dead,
&c.; and from the worship given him, which only belongs to God; also he
is called our God, your God, their God, my God, by which epithets those
that are not truly God are never called; he is said to be God manifest
in the flesh; God over all, blessed for ever; the great God, the living
God, the true God, and eternal life; and he is "the mighty One" as
appears by the works he did, previous to his incarnation; as the
creation of all things out of nothing; the upholding of all things by
the word or his power; the management of all the affairs of providence,
there being nothing done but what he was concerned in; as the confusion
of languages; the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah; bringing the children
of Israel out of Egypt; leading and going before them through the Red
Sea and wilderness; and bearing and carrying them all the days of old:
and also by the works he did when here on earth; as his miracles, called
his mighty works; such as healing all manner of diseases by a word
speaking, or by touching the person, or by the person touching him, even
his garment, or without seeing the person at all, and always without the
use of medicines; dispossessing devils out of the bodies of men; power
over the elements, as to change water into wine, rebuke the wind and
seas, &c.; raising the dead, and even his own body when dead; and, above
all, the great work of redemption, by which he appears to be the mighty
One indeed; his Father's call of him to it shows it; his undertaking it
confirms it; and his actual performance of it puts it out of all doubt;
as well as what was then done by him; such as bearing all the sins of
his people; engaging with all their enemies; conquering them, and
delivering them out of their hands: likewise by what he does now, partly
in the conversion of his people; quickening men dead in trespasses and
sins; causing dry bones to live; giving spiritual sight to such as were
born blind; plucking out of the hands of Satan, and turning from his
power to God; which shows him to be stronger than the strong man armed;
beginning, carrying on, and finishing the work of faith with power on
them; as well as at first making them willing to submit to his
righteousness and to be saved by him; and partly in his care of them
afterwards; he having the government of them on his shoulders; supplying
all their wants; bearing all their burdens; and supporting them under
all their afflictions, temptations, and desertions; protecting them from
all their enemies; strengthening them to do his will and work; and
keeping them from falling totally and finally, and preserving them safe
to his everlasting kingdom and glory: moreover, by what he will do
hereafter; binding Satan, and confining him for the space of a thousand
years; clearing the world of all his and his people's enemies; raising
the dead; and judging the world; and destroying wicked men and devils
with an everlasting destruction.

The everlasting Father; which does not design any relation of Christ in
the Godhead; and there is but one Father in the Godhead, and that is the
first Person; indeed Christ and the Father are one, and the Father is in
him, and he is in the Father, and he that has seen the one has seen the
other, and yet they are distinct, Christ is not the Father; the Son and
Spirit may be considered with the first Person as Father, in creation
and regeneration, they being jointly concerned therein, but not in the
Trinity: it is easy to make it appear Christ is not the Father, but is
distinct from him, since he is said to be with the Father from eternity,
to be the Son of the Father in truth and love, his own Son, his only
begotten and beloved Son; Christ frequently calls the first Person his
Father, prayed to him as such, and is our advocate with him, as well as
the way unto him; he is said to be sent by the Father, to come from him,
and to go to him; and many things are said of Christ that cannot be said
of the Father, as his being made flesh, suffering and dying in the room
of his people; and the Father is said to do many things unto him, as to
anoint him, to seal him, to show him all he did, to commit all judgment
to him, and give him to have life in himself as he had: but Christ is a
Father with respect to chosen men, who were given him as his children
and offspring in covenant; who are adopted into that family that is
named of him, and who are regenerated by his Spirit and grace: and to
these he is an "everlasting Father"; he was so from everlasting; for
regeneration and faith do not make men children, but make them appear to
be so; God's elect are children previous to the Spirit's work upon them,
and even to the incarnation and death of Christ; adoption is an act of
the will of God in covenant from eternity: and Christ is a Father to
these unto everlasting; he will never die, and they shall never be left
fatherless; he and they will ever continue in this relation; he as such
supplies them with everlasting provisions, he clothes them with
everlasting raiment, he gives them an everlasting portion, promotes them
to everlasting honour, saves them with an everlasting salvation, bearing
an everlasting love to them. Some render the words, "the Father of
eternity" (s); the author of eternal life, who has procured it for his
people, and gives it to them; or to whom eternity belongs, who inhabits
it, and is possessed of it, is the everlasting I AM, was before all
persons and things, was set up in an office capacity from everlasting,
and had a glory with the Father before the world was, in whom eternal
election, and with whom the everlasting covenant, were made. The
Septuagint version is, "the Father of the world to come" (t); of the
Gospel dispensation; so called, [Heb
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#005.md) the legal dispensation, when in
being, was the then present world, at the end of which Christ came; this
is now at an end, and a new state of things has taken place, which with
respect to the Old Testament saints was the world to come, and of this
Christ is the Father or author; as the law came by Moses, and he was the
father of the legal dispensation, grace and truth are come by Christ,
the Father and author of the Gospel dispensation; the doctrines of it
are from him, and the ordinances of it by him; and he is the father of
that state or world to come after the resurrection, the New Jerusalem
church state, and also of the ultimate glory.

The Prince of peace; Christ is a Prince, often so called, [Eze
34:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#024.md) he is so by birth, being the
King's Son, the Son of God, and by office, power, and authority; he is
so a Prince as that he is a King; he is exalted to be a Prince and a
Saviour; and he is a Prince superior to kings, being the Prince of the
kings of the earth, [Act 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#031.md) and he
is called the "Prince of peace", because he is the author of peace; just
as he is said to be the "Prince of life", [Act
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#015.md) for the same reason: he is the
author of peace between Jew and Gentile, by abrogating the ceremonial
law, the enmity between them, and by sending the Gospel to both, and
making it the power of God to salvation to some of each of them, and by
bringing them into the same Gospel church state, and making them
partakers of the same privileges and blessings, internal and external,
[Eph 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014.md) and he is the author of
peace between God and sinners; he has made it by the blood of the cross,
having the chastisement of their peace laid upon him, in consequence of
a covenant of peace he made with his Father, who was in him reconciling
the world to himself, and he is so called likewise, because he is the
giver of peace; of all outward peace and prosperity to his churches, as
rest from their enemies, concord among themselves, and additions to them
of such as shall be saved; of internal peace through the discoveries of
his love, and the application of his righteousness, blood, and sacrifice
in a way of believing in him, and in a course of obedience to him; and
likewise of eternal peace and rest in the world to come. Moreover, all
that concern him as a King or Prince show him to be the Prince of peace:
his kingdom lies, among other things, in peace and joy in the Holy
Ghost; the sceptre of his kingdom is the golden sceptre of grace and
mercy; his royal proclamation is the Gospel of peace; the fruit of his
Spirit is peace; and his subjects are peaceable ones, both in church and
state. With this compare [Heb 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#002.md). It
is observable that at his birth there was a general peace, not only in
the Roman empire, [Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001.md) but in all
the world; and it is remarkable, that whereas at this time the Chinese
empire enjoyed a profound peace, the emperor of it changed his name, and
would not be called by his name Ngayus, but Pingus, which signifies
"peaceable" (u).

\(n\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 98. 2. & 99. 1. Jarchi, Aben Ezra, Kimchi,
& Abarbinel, in loc. Nizzachon Vet. p. 87. R. Isaac. Chizzuk Emuna, par.
1. c. 21. p. 195. Lipman. Carmen. p. 115. (o) See my book of the
Prophecies of the Messiah, &c. p. 200, 201. (p) Debarim Rabba, sect. 1.
fol. 234. 4. Perek Shalom, fol. 20. 2. Maimon. apud Maji Synops.
Theolog. Jud. p. 121. Vid. Reuchlin de Arte Cabal. p. 745. (q) "non
admirabilis tantum sed" , "miraculum ille est; per se Deus, per unionem
hypostaticam", Gusset. Ebr. Comment, p. 675. (r) "Deus, fortis", V. L.
Montanus. (s) "Pater aeternitatis", Montanus, Cocceius, &c. (t) , so
some copies; with which agrees the Vulgate Latin version, "Pater seculi
futuri". (u) Martin, Hist. Sinic. p. 361.

[Isaiah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 9:7</span></span>

Of the increase of his government,.... That is, of the Prince of peace,
on whose shoulders it is; which, from small beginnings, will rise to a
very great pitch and height of glory; this is signified by the stone cut
out of the mountain without hands; that smote the image, became a great
mountain, and filled the whole earth, [Dan
2:34](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#034.md) and by the parable of the mustard
seed, the least of all seeds, and yet, when grown up, becomes a great
tree, in which the birds of the air build their nests, [Mat
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031.md). Christ's kingdom and interest,
his dominion and government, may be said to be increased, when his
Gospel is spread far and near, which is called the Gospel of the
kingdom, and the doctrines of it, the mysteries of the kingdom; by means
of which men become subjects of it, and so his kingdom is enlarged. At
first it was only preached in Judea; and then it was carried into the
Gentile world, where it met with great success, and was spread to the
overthrow of Paganism in the Roman empire; a stop was put to its
progress by the appearance and power of antichrist, the man of sin; but
at the Reformation it broke out again, and spread itself over many
nations; and though of late years there has been a decline, in the
latter day the knowledge of it will cover the earth, as the waters do
the sea, and multitudes shall be converted by it; which is meant by the
increase of Christ's government. In the days of his flesh on earth, few
believed in him; after his ascension to heaven, there was a large
increase of his followers in Jerusalem, and in the Gentile world; the
Gospel being preached there, more were the children of the desolate than
of the married wife; large numbers were converted, and churches raised
and formed everywhere; and in the latter day the church shall fill the
earth, and the kingdoms of this world will become the church of Christ;
all nations will flow unto it; the people of the Jews, in a body, will
be converted, and the fulness of the Gentiles will be brought in; the
interest of Christ, which made so contemptible a figure at first,
consisting chiefly of the poor of this world, harassed with persecution,
and disturbed by heretics, will now make a very great one; the kings of
the earth coming into it, the wealth and riches of the world falling
into the hands of the saints, the greatness of the kingdom under the
whole heaven being given to them; Christianity will be the universal
religion of men, and which will be attended with the greatest
spirituality, holiness of life, purity of doctrine, worship, and
discipline, and freedom from persecution, as follows. In the word
rendered, "of the increase", the letter in the middle of it, is shut,
which in other places is open. The Jews seek for mysteries in this. Aben
Ezra says, it respects the miracle of the sun, whose shadow returned
back in Hezekiah's time; this is said, to serve an hypothesis; Kimchi
observes, on the contrary, that in, Ezra (it is in [Neh
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013).md) the same letter at the end of a
word is open, which used to be shut, where mention is made of the walls
of Jerusalem being broken down; and thinks is has this mystery in it,
that at the time of the salvation, the walls of Jerusalem, that were
broken down during the captivity, should be stopped up, and then the
government should be opened, which was shut, until the King Messiah
came. If there is any mystery in this, it may denote that the government
of Christ, which would be for a time straitened, and kept in narrow
bounds and limits, should hereafter be extended throughout the world, to
the four corners of it, to be firm and stable, perfect and complete;
which the figure of this letter, being, shut, and foursquare, may be an
emblem of. See [Rev 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016.md).

And peace there shall be no end; this respects both the increase and
perpetuity of the peace of Christ's kingdom. The peace of believers,
under the Gospel dispensation, is greater than that of the saints under
the legal dispensation, whose sacrifices could not remove a
consciousness of sin and its guilt; and who, through various laws
threatening with death, were all their lifetime subject to bondage; but
great is the peace of New Testament saints, through the blood,
righteousness, and sacrifice of Christ, and which may be increased more
and more; and in the latter day there will be more peace among
themselves; Ephraim shall not envy Judah, nor Judah vex Ephraim; the
sticks of Joseph and Judah shall be one nor will there ever be any more
discord between Jew and Gentile, the lion and the lamb shall lie down
together; there will be no more war among the nations, after the battle
of Armageddon; and no more persecution, after the slaughter of the
witnesses; and this abundance of peace, spiritual and temporal, will be
as long as the moon endures, [Psa 72:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#007.md)
and all this will issue in eternal peace in the world to come:

upon the throne of David, and upon his kingdom; that is, on it the
Prince of peace shall sit, who is David's son, according to the flesh,
and so his heir; see [Luk 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032.md) and
which must be understood spiritually of the church and people of Christ,
who are his throne and kingdom; in whose hearts he reigns by his grace
and Spirit:

to order it; dispose, rectify, put into form and order, and adorn and
beautify, by enacting laws for them, writing them on their hearts, and
putting his Spirit within them, to enable them to keep them; and by
setting persons over them, under him, as deputies and sub-governors,
guides and rulers, to explain his laws, and enforce them; to teach them
to observe all things commanded by him; to whom he gives gifts for
usefulness and service; and whose ministry he blesses, for the
conversion and gathering in of others, and so repairs and glorifies the
house of his kingdom; and also by granting his presence in his word and
ordinances:

and to establish it with justice and judgment; by convincing men by his
Spirit of righteousness and judgment; by revealing in his Gospel his own
righteousness to them; by forming in their hearts the new man, which is
created in righteousness and true holiness; by teaching them to live
soberly, righteously, and godly; and by protecting them from all their
enemies: and so he establishes particular believers in the faith of
himself, and with the doctrine of faith, that they persevere to the end;
and his whole church upon himself, the Rock of ages, that the gates of
hell shall not prevail against it; and in the latter day he will
establish it upon the top of the mountains, [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md),

from henceforth, even for ever; Christ's throne is for ever and ever,
his kingdom is an everlasting one; he will have no successor in it, nor
any rival that shall ever dispossess him of it; all other kingdoms will
cease, but his will remain for ever: though this clause, according to
the accents, is to be connected with what follows (w), thus,

from henceforth, even for ever. The zeal of the Lord of hosts will
perform this; all that is said in this verse, and in the context,
respecting the incarnation of Christ and his kingdom; the veracity,
faithfulness, and power of God, are engaged to perform whatever he has
purposed and promised; and his zeal, which is no other than his fervent
flaming love, will move him to it, and is effectual to accomplish it;
his fervent love for his own glory, which is his ultimate end in all his
works of nature, providence, and grace, will engage him to fulfil
whatever is foretold concerning the birth of Christ, and redemption by
him, and his offices and kingdom; since this is greatly concerned in all
these things, his zeal or fervent love to his Son, shown in giving all
things into his hands, in committing all judgment to him, that men may
honour him as they do the Father, will move him to increase his
government and peace, and make him his firstborn higher than the kings
of the earth; and his zeal or fervent love to his people will put him
upon all this, since it is for their good, as well as for his own glory,
and the honour of his Son; what the queen of Sheba said of Solomon may
be said of Christ and his people, [Kg1
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#009.md).

\(w\) So Junius and Tremellius, whom Reinbeck commends, De Accent. p.
387.

[Isaiah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 9:8</span></span>

The Lord sent a word unto Jacob,.... The prophet, having comforted Judah
with the promise of the Messiah, returns to denounce the judgments of
God upon the ten tribes, under the names of Jacob and Israel, which
signify the same; for the "word" here is not the word of promise, the
comfortable word concerning the Messiah before mentioned; but a word of
threatening, ruin, and destruction, to the kingdom of Israel, after
enlarged upon, which the Lord sent unto them by his prophets before
hand, to warn them of it, and bring them to repentance; by which they
would know, when it came to pass, that their destruction was of the
Lord, and not a matter of chance: the Septuagint version is, "the Lord
sent death upon Jacob"; and so the Arabic version, following it; the
same word, differently pointed, being used for the pestilence, but is
not the sense here; the Targum, Syriac, and Vulgate Latin versions,
render it, "a word", as we do:

and it hath lighted upon Israel, or "hath fallen" (x); as an arrow shot
out of a bow, as some think; or as seed cast upon the earth; or rather
like a thunderbolt: it denotes the sure and full accomplishment of the
word of God upon the persons to whom it was sent; for as his word of
promise, so of threatening, does not return to him void and empty, [Isa
55:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#010.md). The Targum is,

"the Lord sent a word into the house of Jacob, and it was heard in
Israel.''

\(x\) "cecidit", Grotius, Cocccius.

[Isaiah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 9:9</span></span>

And all the people shall know,.... The word of the Lord, and that it is
his; and by sad experience shall feel the weight of it; or, "the people
shall know the whole of it" (y); shall find that the whole of it will be
accomplished, every punctilio in it; whatever is said is done,
everything predicted by it, the substance of it, and every circumstance
relating to it: or they shall be punished, they shall bear, know, and
feel the punishment of their sins; in which sense the word "know", in
the Arabic language, is frequently used, of which Schultens (z) has
given many instances:

even Ephraim, and the inhabitants of Samaria: the ten tribes are meant
by Ephraim; and the inhabitants of Samaria are particularly mentioned,
because Samaria was the metropolis of Ephraim, [Isa
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009.md) and because it was to suffer, and
did suffer much in the threatened calamity, being besieged three years,
then taken, and its inhabitants carried captive; and so experimentally
knew the word of the Lord, and the truth of it, [Kg2
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#005.md),

that say in the pride and stoutness of heart; being proud and haughty,
stout hearted, and far from righteousness, and the fear of God;
hardening themselves against him, despising his word, and defying, as it
were, his power and providence; saying, as follows:

\(y\) "totum ejus". (z) Animadv. Philol. in Job, p. 77, 78.

[Isaiah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 9:10</span></span>

The bricks are fallen down,.... Houses made of bricks, which were
without the cities besieged and destroyed by the Assyrians; of which the
haughty Israelites made no account, looking upon such a desolation as
little, or no loss at all:

but we will build with hewn stone, so that the houses will be better and
stronger, more beautiful, and more durable:

the sycamores are cut down; which grew in the fields, and outer parts of
the cities, and were but a mean sort of wood, and which the Assyrians
cut down to serve several purposes in their siege; of this sort of
trees; see Gill on [Luk 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#004.md),

but we will change them into cedars; that is, will plant cedars in place
of them; trees tall and large, very delightful to look at, of great
worth and usefulness, and very durable; though this may regard not so
much the planting of them as the use of them in building, and the sense
be agreeable to the former clause; that as, instead of brick, they would
build houses with hewn stone; so, instead of sycamore wood, which was
not so substantial and durable, and fit for building, they would make
use of cedar, which was both beautiful and lasting; so the Septuagint,

"the bricks are fallen, let us hew stones, and cut down sycamores and
cedars, and build for ourselves a tower;''

and so the Arabic version; so that, upon the whole, they flattered
themselves they should be gainers, and not losers, by the Assyrian
invasion; thus deriding it, and despising the prophecy concerning it.
Jarchi interprets the bricks and sycamores of the kings that went
before, as Jehoahaz, the son of Jehu, in whose days they were lessened,
and were like a building of brick, broken and falling; but their present
king, Pekah, the son of Remaliah, was strong, like a building of hewn
stone, and so cedars were better for building than sycamores; and to
this sense agrees the Targum,

"the heads (or princes) are carried captive, but we will appoint better
in their room; goods are spoiled, but what are more beautiful than them
we will purchase.''

[Isaiah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 9:11</span></span>

Therefore the Lord shall set up the adversaries of Rezin against
him,.... Set them up on high, as the word (a) signifies; exalt them
above him, and make them superior to him, and conquerors of him, meaning
the Assyrians; who, being sent for by Ahab, went up against Damascus,
took it, and carried the people captive, and slew Rezin the king of
Syria, the head of which was Damascus, [Kg2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007.md) this is mentioned, because the
Israelites put great trust and confidence in this prince, with whom they
were in alliance; and this is said to abate their pride, arrogance, and
haughtiness, before expressed:

and join his enemies together; or mix them; the Assyrian army,
consisting of a mixture of various nations; or "stir" them "up", as the
Targum; instigate them against him. Some understand the whole of Israel,
against whom the adversaries of Rezin, namely, the Assyrians, would
come, as they did, and invade their land, and carry them captive; with
whom were various other people, as follows.

\(a\) "elevabit, sive extollet", Forerius.

[Isaiah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 9:12</span></span>

The Syrians before, and the Philistines behind,.... Rezin, king of
Syria, the confederate of the Israelites, being slain, his people joined
the Assyrians against Israel; and they, with others mentioned, beset
them on all sides, before and behind, east and west; and so the Targum,
Septuagint, and other versions, render it, the Syrians on the east, or
from the rising of the sun; and the Philistines on the west, or from the
setting of the sun; for, as Kimchi observes, Syria lay east of the land
of Israel, and Palestine on the West (b):

and they shall devour Israel with open mouth: greedily and presently;
make, as it were, but one morsel of him:

for all this his anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out
still; that is, the anger of God, that was not turned away; he had not
yet stirred up all his wrath, he had not done with them, he had still
other judgments to bring upon them; and his hand continued to be
stretched out to inflict them, seeing they were not brought to
repentance by what was already done unto them; so the Targum,

"for all this they do not return from their sins, that he may turn away
his anger from them, but still retain their sins; and yet his stroke
will be to take vengeance on them.''

\(b\) So Noldius renders it, Ebr. Concord. Part. p. 10. No. 69.

[Isaiah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 9:13</span></span>

For the people turneth not to him that smiteth them,.... Who was the
Lord of hosts, as it is explained in the next clause; it was he that had
smote the people with the rod of correction and chastisement, by various
afflictions and distresses which he had brought upon them; in order to
bring them to a sense of their sin and duty, to reclaim and recover them
from their backslidings; but they had not such an effect upon them; they
returned not to him by repentance and reformation, from whom they had
turned themselves by their evil ways; nor to his worship, as the Targum
interprets it, to his word and ordinances; for afflictions; unless
sanctified, are of no use to restore backsliders. This is to be
understood of the people of Israel, the ten tribes, whom the prophet
calls "the people", not my people, nor the people of the Lord, because
unworthy of that character. The Septuagint render the words, "the people
returned not until they were smitten", and so the Syriac version
intimating, as if they did return when smitten; but the following words,
and the whole context, show the contrary:

neither do they seek the Lord of hosts; by prayer and supplication, for
pardoning grace and mercy through Christ the Mediator; nor in his word
and ordinances, for his presence and communion with him, or instruction
or doctrine from him, as the Targum; to be taught true doctrine, and
their duty to God and man; this is one part of the character of an
unregenerate man, [Rom 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#011.md).

[Isaiah 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 9:14</span></span>

Therefore the Lord will cut off from Israel head and tail,.... The
former of these is afterwards interpreted of "the ancient and
honourable", men in high places, civil magistrates, judges, governors,
and elders of the people, the king as supreme, and all subordinate
officers; and so the Targum,

"the Lord will destroy from Israel the prince and the ruler;''

and the latter is interpreted of the false prophet. The people of Israel
are compared to a beast with a tail, being so sadly degenerated and
corrupted; as the Romish antichrist, in both his capacities, civil and
ecclesiastical, is compared to a beast; the one being the head, and the
other the tail, [Rev 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001.md) and Rome
Pagan to a dragon with a tail, [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003.md) and the Saracens and Turks to
locusts with tails like the tails of scorpions, [Rev
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#010.md),

branch and rush, in one day. The Septuagint render it, "great and
small"; and so the Arabic version; the first word intending the great
men of the nation, in flourishing circumstances, like branches of trees;
the latter the common, people, like reeds and rushes, weak and feeble;
so Kimchi explains them,

"the strong and the weak;''

though the Targum interprets both of the governor and lord; and so
Jarchi says they signify kings and governors; but Aben Ezra renders the
word root and branch; and so they may denote the utter destruction of
the people of Israel, fathers and children, high and low, rich and poor.
See [Mal 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001.md).

[Isaiah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 9:15</span></span>

The ancient and honourable, he is the head,.... The elder in office, not
in age; and who, on account of his office, dignity, and riches, is
honoured by men, is of a venerable countenance himself, and is
reverenced when seen and looked upon by others, and received by persons
with pleasure and cheerfulness; as the phrase used signifies. The
Septuagint and Arabic versions render it, "who admire", or "have" men's
"persons in admiration"; which is the character Jude gives of false
teachers, [Jde 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#016.md) who are next
described:

and the prophet that teacheth lies, he is the tail; so called from their
low extract, being often of a mean original and descent; or rather from
the meanness of their spirits, their flattery of princes and great men,
to whom they tell lies, and prophesy smooth and false things, for the
sake of a little sordid gain, in allusion to dogs that wag their tails
at their masters; or from the poison of their doctrines, some creatures
having poison in their tails, and do much mischief with them. See [Rev
9:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#019.md).

[Isaiah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 9:16</span></span>

For the leaders of this people cause them to err,.... Or, "who bless
this people", as the Septuagint and Arabic versions; and so the Targum,

"who praise this people;''

that call them blessed, pronounce them happy, see [Mal
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#015.md) and promise them happiness, both
in this world and that to come, though guilty of notorious sins, and
live a vicious course of life; and so harden them in their iniquities,
and cause them to wander more and more from the way of truth and
righteousness; and lead them unto, and leave them in, fatal mistakes
about their state and condition. These seem to design the ecclesiastical
leaders of the people, the blind leaders of the blind, see [Isa
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012.md),

and they that are led of them are destroyed; or, "they" that "are
blessed of them are swallowed up" (c); and so irrecoverably lost; the
deceivers and the deceived perish together; as it is sinful in teachers
and leaders of the people to teach them false things, and lead them out
of the way, it is criminal in the people to be led and taught by them,
who ought to take care what they hear and receive; and therefore both
are righteously punished; for the words are a reason why the Lord would
cut off both the one and the other.

\(c\) "qui ex hoc populo beati dicuntur, absorbebuntur", Vatablus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 10](isa010.md)

</div>
