<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa049)  [Next](isa051) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 50](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 50:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 50

This chapter is a prophecy of the rejection of the Jews, for their
neglect and contempt of the Messiah; and of his discharge of his office
as Mediator, and fitness for it. The rejection of the Jews is signified
by the divorce of a woman from her husband, and by persons selling their
children to their creditors; which is not to be charged upon the Lord,
but was owing to their own iniquities, [Isa
50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001), particularly their disregard of
the Messiah, and inattention to him, as if he was an insufficient
Saviour; whereas his power to redeem is evident, from his drying up the
sea and rivers below, and clothing the heavens above with black clouds,
and eclipsing the luminaries thereof, [Isa
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002), his fitness for his prophetic
office is expressed in [Isa 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004). His
obedience to his Father, and his patience in sufferings, while
performing his priestly office, [Isa
50:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005), and his faith and confidence in
the Lord, as man and Mediator, that he should be helped, carried through
his work, and acquitted; and not be confounded, overcome, and condemned,
[Isa 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007), and the chapter is closed
with an exhortation to the saints to trust in the Lord in the darkest
times; and a threatening to such who trust in themselves, and in their
own doings, [Isa 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010).

[Isaiah 50:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 50:1</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord,.... Here begins a new discourse or prophecy, and
therefore thus prefaced, and is continued in the following chapter:

where is the bill of your mother's divorcement, whom I have put away?
these words are directed to the Jews, who stood in the same relation to
the Jewish church, or synagogue, as children to a mother; and so the
Targum interprets "your mother" by "your congregation", or synagogue;
who were rejected from being a church and people; had a "loammi" written
upon them, which became very manifest when their city and temple were
destroyed by the Romans; and this is signified by a divorce, alluding to
the law of divorce among the Jews, [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001), when a man put away his wife, he
gave her a bill of divorce, assigning the causes of his putting her
away. Now, the Lord, either as denying that he had put away their
mother, the Jewish church, she having departed from him herself, and
therefore challenges them to produce any such bill; a bill of divorce
being always put into the woman's hands, and so capable of being
produced by her; or if there was such an one, see [Jer
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#008), he requires it might be looked
into, and seen whether the fault was his, or the cause in themselves,
which latter would appear:

or which of my creditors is it to whom I have sold you? referring to a
practice used, that when men were in debt, and could not pay their
debts, they sold their children for the payment of them; see [Exo
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#007), but this could not be the case
here; the Lord has no creditors, not any to whom he is indebted, nor
could any advantage possibly accrue to him by the sale of them; it is
true they were sold to the Romans, or delivered into their hands, which,
though a loss to them, was no gain to him; nor was it he that sold them,
but they themselves; he was not the cause of it, but their own sins, as
follows:

behold, for your iniquities have ye sold yourselves; or, "are sold" (w);
they were sold for them, or delivered up into the hands of their enemies
on account of them; they had sold themselves to work wickedness, and
therefore it was but just that they should be sold, and become slaves:

and for your transgressions is your mother put away; and they her
children along with her, out of their own land, and from being the
church and people of God.

\(w\) Sept. "venditi estis", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator, Cocceias,
Vitringa.

[Isaiah 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 50:2</span></span>

Wherefore, when I came, was there no man?.... The Targum is,

"why have I sent my prophets, and they are not converted?''

And so Aben Ezra and Kimchi interpret it of the prophets that prophesied
unto them, to bring them to repentance: the Lord might be said to come
by his prophets, his messengers; but they did not receive them, nor
their messages, but despised and rejected them, and therefore were
carried captive, [Ch2 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#015), but it is
best to understand it of the coming of Christ in the flesh; when there
were none that would receive, nor even come to him, but hid their faces
from him, nor suffer others to be gathered unto him, or attend his
ministry; they would neither go in themselves into the kingdom of the
Messiah, nor let others go in that were entering, [Joh
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011),

when I called, was there none to answer? he called them to the marriage
feast, to his word and ordinances, but they made light of it, and went
about their worldly business; many were called externally in his
ministry, but few were chosen, and effectually wrought upon; he called,
but there was no answer given; for there was no internal principle in
them, no grace to answer to the call; he stretched out his hands to a
rebellious and gainsaying people, [Mat
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#002),

is my hand shortened at all, that it cannot redeem? or have I no power
to deliver? they did not know him to be the mighty God; they took him to
be a mere man; and being descended from such mean parents, and making
such a mean appearance, they could not think he was able to be their
Redeemer and Saviour; but that he had sufficient ability appears by what
follows:

behold, at my rebuke I dry up the sea; he was able to do it, and did do
it for the children of Israel, and made a passage through the Red sea
for them, as on dry land; which was done by a strong east wind he caused
to blow, here called his "rebuke", [Exo
14:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#020), of Christ's rebuking the sea,
see [Mat 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#026).

I make the rivers a wilderness; as dry as the wilderness, and parched
ground; in which persons may pass as on dry ground, and as travellers
pass through a wilderness; so Jordan was made for the Israelites, [Jos
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#017), and may be here particularly
meant; called "rivers" because of the excellency of it, and the
abundance of water in it, which sometimes overflowed its banks; and
because other rivers fall into it, as Kimchi observes:

their flesh stinketh because there is no water, and dieth for thirst; as
they did when the rivers of Egypt were turned into blood, [Exo
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#021).

[Isaiah 50:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 50:3</span></span>

I clothe the heavens with blackness,.... With gross and thick darkness;
perhaps referring to the three days' darkness the Egyptians were in,
[Exo 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#012), or with thick and black
clouds, as in tempestuous weather frequently; or by eclipses of the sun;
there was an extraordinary instance of great darkness at the time of
Christ's crucifixion, [Mat 27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045).

and I make sackcloth their covering; that being black, and used in times
of mourning; the allusion may be to the tents of Kedar, which were
covered with sackcloth, or such like black stuff. The fall of the Pagan
empire, through the power of Christ and his Gospel, is signified by the
sun becoming black as sackcloth of hair, [Rev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012). Jarchi interprets this
parabolically of the princes of the nations, when the Lord shall come to
take vengeance upon them; as Kimchi does the sea, and the rivers, in the
preceding verse, of the good things of the nations of the world, which
they had in great abundance, and should be destroyed.

[Isaiah 50:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 50:4</span></span>

The Lord God hath given me the tongue of the learned,.... These are not
the words of the prophet, as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and others think; though
what is here said is applicable to ministers of the word, who have to do
with weary souls, and it is their work to comfort and refresh them; and
which work requires knowledge and experience of their case, a good
degree of elocution to speak aptly and with propriety, even to have the
tongue of the learned, especially in a spiritual sense; as such have who
have learned of the Father, and have been taught by the Spirit of God,
and are well versed in the Scriptures, and can speak in the taught words
of the Holy Ghost, comparing spiritual things with spiritual; and they
have need of great prudence to time things right, to speak fitly and
opportunely, and give to each their portion in due season, to whom they
minister; and also great diligence and assiduity in prayer, reading, and
meditation; and such as are teachers of others must be the Lord's
hearers, and should be very diligent and attentive ones; all which are
gifts from the Lord, and to be ascribed to him. But the words are to be
understood of Christ, the same person that is speaking in the preceding
verses; who being anointed by the Spirit of the Lord God, as man, whose
gifts and graces he received without measure, he was abundantly
qualified for the discharge of his prophetic office; and was capable of
speaking as never man did, and with such power and authority as the
Scribes and Pharisees did not, and with so much wisdom and eloquence as
were surprising to all that heard him; he had the Spirit of wisdom on
him, and the treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid in him:

that I should know how to speak a word in season to him that is weary;
not only saints, weary with sin, their own and others, and with troubles
from the world, from Satan, and by afflictive providences; but sinners
under first awakenings, distressed and uneasy in their minds at a sight
of sin, in its exceeding sinfulness; pressed with the guilt of it,
filled with a sense of divine wrath on account of it, and terrified with
the thoughts of death, and a future judgment; and are weary with
labouring for bread which satisfies not, for righteousness and life, and
in seeking for resting places, being in want of spiritual rest, peace,
and comfort; and who are hungry and thirsting after righteousness, after
pardoning grace and mercy, after Christ and salvation by him, after his
word and ordinances, after communion with him, and conformity to him;
who are weak and without strength, and ready to faint for want of
refreshment. The word for "weary" signifies "thirsty", according to
Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben Melech; who explain it of persons that thirst
after hearing the word of the Lord: the Targum is,

"to know how to teach the righteous that weary themselves at the words
of the law;''

or, as some render it, that pant after the words of the law: but not the
law, but the Gospel, is "the word in season", to be spoken to weary
souls; which proclaims pardon, preaches peace, is the word of
righteousness and salvation; which directs hungry and thirsty souls to
Christ, as the bread and water of life, and invites weary ones to him
for rest. That word of his, [Mat 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#028)
is a word in season to such persons: such a word Christ spoke when he
was here on earth in his own person, and now speaks by his ministers in
the preaching of the Gospel, and by his Spirit applying it to his
people.

He wakeneth morning by morning; one after another continually, meaning
himself; the allusion is to masters calling their scholars early to
their studies; the morning being the fittest season for instruction and
learning.

He wakeneth mine ear to hear as the learned; who hear attentively, and
with great pleasure and profit. This and the preceding clause seem to
denote both the earliness in which Christ entered on his prophetic
office, and his attentiveness in hearkening to all that was said in the
eternal council and covenant by his divine Father; which he, as the
Prophet of his church, makes known unto his people, [Joh
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#015).

[Isaiah 50:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 50:5</span></span>

The Lord God hath opened mine ear,.... To hear most freely, and receive
most fully, what is said by him, and to observe and do it: the allusion
seems to be to the servant that had his ears bored, being willing to
serve his master for ever, [Exo 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#005)
which phrase of boring or opening the ear is used of Christ, [Psa
40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006). It is expressive of his
voluntary obedience, as Mediator, to his divine Father, engaging in, and
performing with the greatest readiness and cheerfulness, the great work
of man's redemption and salvation.

And I was not rebellious; not to his earthly parents, to whom he was
subject; nor to civil magistrates, to whom he paid tribute; nor to God,
he always did the things that pleased him: he was obedient to the
precepts of the moral law, and to the penalty of it, death itself, and
readily submitted to the will of God in suffering for his people; which
obedience of his was entirely free and voluntary, full, complete, and
perfect, done in the room and stead of his people; is the measure of
their righteousness, and by which they become righteous; is well
pleasing to God, and infinitely preferable to the obedience of men and
angels:

neither turned away back; he did not decline the work proposed to him,
but readily engaged in it; he never stopped in it, or desisted from it,
until he had finished it; he did not hesitate about it, as Moses and
Jeremy; or flee from it, as Jonah.

[Isaiah 50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 50:6</span></span>

I gave my back to the smiters,.... To Pontius Pilate, and those he
ordered to scourge him, [Mat 27:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#026).

and my cheeks to them that plucked off the hair; of the beard; which, is
painful, so a great indignity and affront. The Septuagint renders it,
"and my cheeks to blows"; , a word used by the evangelists when they
speak of Christ being smitten and stricken with the palms of men's
hands, and seem to refer to this passage, [Mar
14:65](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#065),

I hid not my face from shame and spitting; or from shameful spitting;
they spit in his face, and exposed him to shame, and which was a
shameful usage of him, and yet he took it patiently, [Mat
26:67](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#067), these are all instances of
great shame and reproach; as what is more reproachful among us, or more
exposes a man, than to be stripped of his clothes, receive lashes on his
bare back, and that in public? in which ignominious manner Christ was
used: or what reckoned more scandalous, than for a man to have his beard
plucked by a mob? which used to be done by rude and wanton boys, to such
as were accounted idiots, and little better than brutes (x); and nothing
is more affronting than to spit in a man's face. So Job was used, which
he mentions as a great indignity done to him, [Job
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#010). With some people, and in some
countries, particular places, that were mean and despicable, were
appointed for that use particularly to spit in. Hence Aristippus the
philosopher, being shown a fine room in a house, beautifully and richly
paved, spat in the face of the owner of it; at which he being angry, and
resenting it, the philosopher replied, that he had not a fitter place to
spit in (y).

\(x\) "------------barbam tibi vellunt Lascivi pueri", Horace. "Idcirco
stolidam praebet tibi vellere barbara Jupiter?" Persius, Satyr. 2. (y)
Laertius in Vita Aristippi.

[Isaiah 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 50:7</span></span>

For the Lord God will help me,.... As he promised he would, and did,
[Psa 89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021), which is no contradiction
to the deity of Christ, nor any suggestion of weakness in him; for he is
the true God, and has all divine perfections in him; is equal to his
Father in power, as well as in glory, and therefore equal to the work of
redemption, as his other works show him to be; but this is to be
understood of him as man, and expresses his strong faith and confidence
in God, and in his promises as such; and in his human nature he was
weak, and was crucified through weakness, and in it he was made strong
by the Lord, and was held and upheld by him: and this shows the
greatness of the work of man's redemption, that it was such that no mere
creature could effect; even Christ as man needed help and assistance in
it; and also the concern that all the divine Persons had in it:

therefore shall I not be confounded; or "made ashamed" (z); though
shamefully used, yet not confounded; so as to have nothing to say for
himself, or so as to be ashamed of his work; which is perfect in itself,
and well pleasing to God:

therefore have I set my face like a flint: or like "steel" (a); or as an
adamant stone, as some (b) render it; hardened against all opposition;
resolute and undaunted; constant and unmoved by the words and blows of
men; not to be browbeaten, or put out of countenance, by anything they
can say or do. He was not dismayed at his enemies who came to apprehend
him, though they came to him as a thief, with swords and staves; nor in
the high priest's palace, nor in Pilate's hall, in both which places he
was roughly used; nor at Satan, and his principalities and powers; nor
at death itself, with all its terrors.

And I know that I shall not be ashamed, neither of his ministry, which
was with power and authority; nor of his miracles, which were proofs of
his deity and Messiahship; nor of his obedience, which was pure, and
perfect, and pleasing to God; nor of his sufferings, which were for the
sake of his people; nor of the work of redemption and salvation, in
which he was not frustrated nor disappointed of his end.

\(z\) "non erubui", Pagniuus, Montanus; "non afficior ignominia", Junius
& Tremellius, Piscator; "non pudefactus", Syr. (a) "at chalybem".
Forerius. (b) "Tanquam saxum adamantinum", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator.

[Isaiah 50:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 50:8</span></span>

He is near that justifieth me,.... His Father was "near" him in his
whole state of humiliation; he left him not alone; he was at his right
hand, and therefore he was not moved; and "justified" him from all the
calumnies of his enemies, or the false charges they brought against him,
and from all the sins of his people that were upon him; these he took
upon him, and bore them, and made satisfaction for them, upon which he
was acquitted; and which is evident by his resurrection from the dead,
by his ascension to heaven, and session at the right hand of God; and by
the gifts of the Spirit, extraordinary and ordinary, he received for
men, and gave unto them; see [Ti1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016).

Who will contend with me? being thus acquitted; will the law and justice
of God litigate the point with him? they are both satisfied; will Satan
dispute the matter with him? he is foiled, conquered, and destroyed; or
will the wicked Jews enter the argument with him? wrath is come upon
them to the uttermost.

Let us stand together; face to face, if they dare; let them face me, if
they can:

who is mine adversary? let him appear, that he may be known:

let him come near to me: and engage with me, if he has courage or skill.
This is bidding defiance to all his enemies, and triumphing over them.

[Isaiah 50:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 50:9</span></span>

Behold, the Lord God will help me,.... This is repeated from Isa 50:7;
see Gill on [Isa 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#007); to show the
certainty of it, the strength of his faith in it, and to discourage his
enemies:

who is he that shall condemn me? make me out a wicked person (c), prove
me guilty, and pass sentence upon me, when thus acquitted and justified
by the Lord God? The Apostle Paul seems to have some reference to this
passage in [Rom 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033),

lo, they all shall waste old as doth a garment; his enemies, those that
accused him, the Scribes, Pharisees, and chief priests; and those that
condemned him, the Jewish sanhedrim, and the Roman governor:

the moth shall eat them up; they shall be like a worn out or motheaten
garment, that can never be used more. The phrases denote how secret,
insensible, and irrecoverable, their ruin should be, both in their civil
and church state, all being abolished and done away.

\(c\) "quis ipse impium faciet me", Pagninus, Montanus; "impium vel
praevaricatorem et iniquum faciet me", Vatablus.

[Isaiah 50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 50:10</span></span>

Who is among you that feareth the Lord?.... Not with a slavish fear of
the awful majesty of God, or of his tremendous judgments, or of wrath to
come, but with a filial fear, a fear of the Lord, and his goodness,
which is an internal principle in the heart, a reverential affection for
God, a godly fear of him; is attended with faith in him, and joy of him;
which makes holy, and keeps humble, and takes in the whole worship of
God: of men of this character there are but few, and especially there
were but few among the Jews at this time which the prophecy refers to;
the greatest part were rejecters of Christ, before spoken of, and to;
and from whom the Lord turns himself, and addresses these few. There are
none that naturally fear the Lord, only such who have the grace bestowed
on them; their number is but small, but there are always some in the
worst of times, and these are taken notice of by the Lord, [Mal
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016),

that obeyeth the voice of his servant: not the prophet, as the Targum
adds, and as it is commonly interpreted by the Jewish writers, and
others; though some of them say (d) this is "Metatron", a name of the
Messiah with them; and indeed he is meant, before spoken of as the
Lord's servant, and represented as an obedient one, and afterwards as
righteous; see [Isa 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#003) and by his
"voice" is meant either his Gospel, which is a soul quickening and
comforting voice, a charming and alluring one; and which is obeyed,
heard, and hearkened to, by his people, externally and internally, when
they receive it by faith, and in the love of it; or else his commands,
precepts, and ordinances, which love constrains his people to an
obedience unto; and where there is the fear of God, there will be
hearing of his word, and submission to his ordinances:

that walketh in darkness: not the Lord's servant, but the man that fears
the Lord, and obeys his servant's voice, such an one may be in darkness,
and walk in it; or "in darknesses" (e), as in the original; not only in
affliction and misery, often expressed by darkness in Scripture, but in
desertion, under the hidings of God's face; and which may continue for a
while:

and hath no light? or "shining" (f): not without the light of nature,
nor without the light of grace, but without the light of God's
countenance shining upon him; without the light of spiritual joy and
comfort shining in his heart; and this must be a very distressing case
indeed.

Let him trust in the name of the Lord; not in himself, nor in any
creature, but in the Lord himself; in the perfections of his nature, his
mercy, grace, and goodness; in the name of the Lord, which is a strong
tower, and in whom is salvation; in Christ, in whom the name of the Lord
is, and whose name is the Lord our Righteousness; and to trust in him,
when in the dark, is a glorious act of faith; this is believing in hope
against hope.

And stay upon his God; covenant interest continues in the darkest
dispensation; God is the believer's God still; and faith is a staying or
leaning upon him, as such; a dependence upon his power to protect, on
his wisdom to guide, and on his grace, goodness, and all sufficiency, to
supply.

\(d\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 54. 3. (e) (f) "splendor", Pagninus, Montanus,
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Vitringa.

[Isaiah 50:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 50:11</span></span>

Behold, all ye that kindle a fire,.... To enlighten and warm yourselves;
who, rejecting Christ the Light of the world, and despising the glorious
light of his Gospel, and loving darkness rather than light, set up the
light of nature and reason as the rule of faith and practice; or the
traditions and doctrines of men to be guided by; or their own
righteousness for their justification before God, and acceptance with
him:

that compass yourselves about with sparks, that fly out of the fire
kindled, or are struck out of a flint, which have little light and no
heat, and are soon out; which may denote the short lived pleasures and
comforts which are had from the creature, or from anything of a man's
own:

walk in the light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled;
an ironical expression, bidding them take all the comfort and
satisfaction they could in their own works and doings, and get all the
light and heat they could from thence:

this shall ye have of mine hand; which you may depend upon receiving
from me, for rejecting me and my righteousness, and trusting in your
own:

ye shall lie down in sorrow; instead of being justified hereby, and
having peace with God, and entering into heaven, ye shall be pressed
down with sore distress, die in your sins, and enter into an everlasting
state of condemnation and death; see [Mar
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#016). This was the case and state of
the Jews, [Rom 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#031). This is one of
the passages the Jews (g) say is repeated by the company of angels,
which meet a wicked man at death.

\(g\) T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 104. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 51](isa051)

</div>
