<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa048)  [Next](isa050.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 49](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 49:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 49

This is a prophecy concerning Christ, and redemption by him; and of the
enlargement of the church in the latter day, by the conversion of Jews
and Gentiles; which the isles, and people afar off, are exhorted to
listen and hearken to, delivered out by the prophet, in the person of
Christ; who gives an account of his call to his office, and the time of
it; of what the Lord did for him, and said unto him, [Isa
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001.md), then follows a complaint of his
labouring in vain, and a correction of it, [Isa
49:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#004.md) and a further declaration of his
call and appointment to office, and of each of the parts of the work
assigned him, with encouragement to it, [Isa
49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005.md). Christ is again represented
under discouraging circumstances, as despised of men, abhorred by the
nation, and a servant of rulers; who is encouraged by divine promises
that kings should rise up before him, and worship him; that God would be
faithful to his promise to him, and yet choose him, hear and help him,
at a proper time; preserve him, and give him for a covenant to the
people, to the establishment of the earth, and making it habitable, [Isa
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#007.md) for the release of prisoners, and
feeding, leading, and guiding them, and removing all difficulties out of
the way, [Isa 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#009.md) when the calling of
the Gentiles is foretold, which would occasion great joy in the world,
[Isa 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#012.md) yet the church is
introduced as complaining that she was forsaken of God, [Isa
49:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#014.md) which is denied, and the
contrary affirmed; being dear to the Lord as a sucking child to its
mother, and more so; never forgotten by him, and always under his care,
[Isa 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#016.md), and, for her comfort, she
is assured that those who had destroyed and made her waste should be
removed; and that she should have converts that would be an ornament to
her, and these numerous, insomuch that the place of their habitation
would be too strait and narrow, and which would be matter of
astonishment to her, [Isa 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#017.md) and,
besides those that would be converted in the land of Judea, there would
be great numbers in the Gentile world converted by the power of God
accompanying his Gospel, set up as a standard there, kings and queens
countenancing and encouraging the interest of Christ, [Isa
49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022.md) and yet still it is questioned
whether the church should be delivered from her oppressors, [Isa
49:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#024.md) to which it is answered, that
she should be delivered, and her persecutors destroyed; by which it
would be known that the Lord is the Redeemer and Saviour of his people,
[Isa 49:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#025.md).

[Isaiah 49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 49:1</span></span>

Listen, O isles, unto me,.... These are not the words of Cyrus, as Lyra
mentions; nor of the Prophet Isaiah, as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and other
Jewish writers think; but of Christ, calling upon the inhabitants of the
isles to hearken to him; by whom are meant the inhabitants of islands
properly so called, as ours of Great Britain, and may be chiefly
designed, being a place where the Gospel of Christ came early, and has
been long; or all such that dwell in countries beyond the sea, it being
usual with the Jews to call all such countries isles that were beyond
sea to them; Christ is the great Prophet of his church, and is alone to
be hearkened unto, and in all things, [Mat
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md),

and hearken, ye people, from far; that were afar off from the land of
Judea, as well as afar off from God and Christ, and the knowledge of
him, and of righteousness and salvation by him; the Gentile nations are
meant; see [Eph 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012.md), for this is to
be understood of kingdoms afar off, as the Targum paraphrases it; and
not of distant and future things, to be accomplished hereafter, as Aben
Ezra; taking this to be the subject they are required to hearken to, and
not as descriptive of persons that are to hearken:

the Lord hath called me from the womb; to the office of a Mediator; to
be Prophet, Priest, and King; to be the Saviour and Redeemer of men; he
did not assume this to himself, but was called of God his Father, [Heb
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#004.md), and that not only from the womb
of his mother Mary, or as soon as he was conceived and born of her; but
from the womb of eternity, from the womb of eternal purposes and
decrees; for he was set forth, or foreordained in the purposes of God,
to be the propitiation for sin; and was predestinated to be the Redeemer
before the foundation of the world, even before he had a being in this
world as man. So the Targum,

"the Lord, before I was, appointed me;''

he prepared a body for him, and appointed him to be his salvation. The
Syriac version join, the words "from far" to this clause, as do the
Septuagint and Arabic versions, contrary to the accents, and renders
them, "of a long time the Lord hath called me, from the womb"; even from
eternity:

from the bowels of my mother hath he made mention of my name; Jarchi
interprets this of Isaiah, whose name was fixed and given him by the
Lord, while he was in his mother's bowels, signifying that he should
prophesy of salvation and comfort; but it is much better to understand
it of Christ, whose name Jesus, a Saviour, was made mention of by the
Lord, while he was in his mother's womb, and before he was born, [Mat
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020.md), for the words may be rendered,
"before the womb, and before the bowels of my mother" (r); that is,
before he was in them.

\(r\) "ante uterum----ante viscera matris meae", h. e. "antequam essem
in utero, et in visceribus matris meae", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 49:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 49:2</span></span>

And he hath made my mouth like a sharp sword,.... Or,

"he hath put his words in my mouth as a sharp sword,''

as the Targum; namely, the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of
God, and is sharper than a twoedged sword, and is said to come out of
the mouth of Christ, [Eph 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017.md), with
which he pierces into and cuts the hearts of men, and lays open all
their sin and unrighteousness, and cuts down the worst and best in men,
and slays all his enemies; so his mouth was as a sharp sword in the days
of his flesh, to inveigh against the sins and to refute the errors of
the Scribes and Pharisees; as it will be, in the latter day, to smite
the nations of the earth, [Rev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015.md),
"in the shadow of his hand hath he hid me"; in his counsels and purposes
of old, and in his providence;

"in the shadow of his power hath he protected me,''

as the Targum; thus he hid, and protected him from Herod's cruelty in
his infancy; and from the rage and malice of the Scribes and Pharisees,
who sought often to lay hands on him, and take away his life before his
time. The Jews talk very much of the Messiah's being hid under the
throne of glory. Aben Ezra's remark, that the phrase, "he hath hid me",
answers to the scabbard of a sword, before mentioned, is not amiss:

and made me a polished shaft; or, "choice arrow" (s); which being
polished at the point, or well oiled, and shining, pierces the deeper,
So the doctrines of Christ, the words of his mouth, are compared to
bright and sharp arrows, which make cutting work, and give great pain
where they come; as they sometimes do like arrows, swiftly, suddenly,
and with great force and power, [Psa
45:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#005.md). Kimchi observes, that he speaks
of a sharp sword with respect to the Jews that were near, where a sword
could reach them; and of a polished shaft or arrow with respect to the
Gentiles afar off, which must be cast after them:

in his quiver hath he hid me, meaning his secret purposes, and his
powerful protection, as before; which he compares to a quiver, a case in
which arrows are put, because mention had been made of a polished shaft
or arrow before.

\(s\) Sept. "sagittam electam", V. L. "telum electum", Cocceius;
"sagittam nitidam vel electam", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 49:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 49:3</span></span>

And said unto me,.... Both in the everlasting council, and when he made
a covenant with him in eternity; when he found him and anointed him, and
laid help on him; and also when he brought him, his first begotten, into
the world, at his incarnation:

thou art my servant; of his choosing, appointing, calling, sending,
bringing forth, and supporting; so he was as Mediator, especially in his
estate of humiliation, when he appeared in the form of a servant, and
came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, and give his life a
ransom for many; thereby to obtain redemption, which was the great work
and service he was appointed to; which he readily undertook, and
willingly and cheerfully engaged in, and diligently and faithfully
performed; to whom justly belong the characters of an obedient,
diligent, prudent, and faithful servant; in answering which he showed
his regard to his Father's will, his love to his people, and his great
humility and condescension:

O Israel; a name of Christ, and which properly belongs to him, being the
antitype of Jacob or Israel; the Head and representative of the whole
Israel of God; who was of Israel according to the flesh, and an
Israelite indeed in a spiritual sense, and was only sent to the lost
sheep of the house of Israel. Israel is a name of the church, often
given to it in this prophecy; Christ and his church, by virtue of the
union between them, have the same names; as she is sometimes called by
his names, Christ, and the Lord our righteousness, so he is here called
by her name Israel, [Co1 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#012.md),

in whom I will be glorified; this is Jehovah's end in all he does in
nature or grace; and is what Christ had in view in working out our
salvation; and all the divine perfections are glorified in it by him,
the wisdom, power, faithfulness, holiness, justice, love, grace, and
mercy of God. Some render the words actively, "in thee" or "in whom I
will glory" (t); as his own Son, in whom he is well pleased, being the
brightness of his glory, and the express image of his person; and in
whom also all the seed of Israel glory, as well as are justified. Or, as
others, Israel is he, of "whom by thee I will glory", or "glorify" (u);
meaning, that it was the spiritual and mystical Israel, the church, whom
he would save by his Son and servant, the Messiah, and bring to glory.

\(t\) "in quo gloriabor", Munster, Tigurine version, De Dieu; "quia in
te gloriabor", V. L. (u) "Israel est is de quo, per te gloriaturus sum",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "vel glorificaturus", Gal.

[Isaiah 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 49:4</span></span>

Then I said,.... The Messiah said, by way of objection, in a view of
what treatment he should meet with, or when entered on his work, and
which he found by experience, what follows:

I have laboured in vain; this is not to be understood of the travail of
his soul, or of his sufferings and death, which were not in vain, but
issued in the redemption and salvation of his people; but of his
ministry and miracles, and fatiguing journeys among the Jews; which,
with respect to them, were in vain, as to their conversion and
reformation; they rejecting the Messiah, slighting his doctrines and
miracles, refusing to be gathered by him, being a faithless and perverse
generation:

I have spent my strength for naught, and in vain; by frequent preaching
and working of miracles, and travelling from place to place: the same
thing is designed as before, repeated in other words, to express the
certainty of it, to chew the ingratitude and wickedness of the people,
and to utter the complaints of his mind:

yet surely my judgment is with the Lord; or is manifest before the Lord,
as the Targum; the Lord knew that he had called him to his office; how
prudently, diligently, and faithfully he had executed it; and what was
his right and due, and which would be given him; and with this he
corrects his former complaint, and makes himself easy, and quiets and
satisfies his mind:

and my work with my God; or the reward of my works is before my God, as
the Targum; and before himself also, [Isa
40:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#010.md) as his work was assigned him by
the Lord, so his reward was promised him, and which he knew he should
have; and having done his work, be asked for his reward, and had it,
[Joh 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#004.md).

[Isaiah 49:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 49:5</span></span>

And now, saith the Lord,.... Jehovah the Father, in confirmation of the
call, office, and work of Christ, which he hath declared, [Isa
49:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#001.md),

that formed me from the womb to be his servant; who preordained him to
this service before the world began, and prepared him for it from the
womb of his mother Mary, by filling him with grace and wisdom and with
the Spirit without measure; anointing him with the oil of gladness above
his fellows, and so fitting him as man and Mediator for the preaching of
the Gospel, and every other service he called him:

to bring Jacob again, to him; the lost sheep of the house of Israel,
God's elect among the Jews, which were as straying sheep; or all his
chosen people, whether Jews or Gentiles, which were scattered abroad,
and were afar off from God, whom Christ was to bring back again, and
bring nigh unto God, and did:

though Israel be not gathered: in general, only a remnant, according to
the election of grace, the greater part refusing to be gathered
ministerially by him; and the rulers not suffering the common people to
attend on his ministry. [Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037.md). It
may be observed that there is a marginal reading of the Hebrew,
different from the written text; instead of "not" it is "to him"; and
may be rendered thus, "and Israel shall be gathered unto him"; and then
the sense entirely agrees with the preceding clause, with which the
words are connected, and not with the following, as the accent "athnach"
shows, thus; the Lord appointed and formed me to be his servant to bring
back Jacob, and that Israel might be gathered to him; as all the Israel
of God, all the elect of God were by the sufferings and death of Christ;
see [Eph 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#010.md). The marginal reading,
and the writing, may be both retained, as in some other places, thus,
"and shall not Israel be gathered to him?" since he has formed me to
bring back Jacob to him? verily he shall. The marginal reading is
followed by the Targum, and the passage paraphrased thus,

"to return the house of Jacob to his service, and Israel shall be
brought nigh, to his fear.''

And so it is by Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Kimchi, and by the Septuagint,
Syriac, and Arabic versions, and by Aquila: "yet shall I be glorious" in
the eyes of the Lord; or "I shall be glorious", &c.; as he was at his
baptism and transfiguration on the mount; by the wonderful things done
in heaven and on earth at the time of his death, at his resurrection
from the dead, his ascension to heaven, and exaltation at the right hand
of God, far above all principalities and powers, angels, authorities,
and powers, being subject to him; and by the ministration of the Gospel
in the Gentile world, and particularly when he shall reign gloriously in
the latter day, and in the New Jerusalem church state:

and my God shall be my strength; to keep up his spirits under all
discouragements; to protect him from his enemies; to support him in his
work as man; to carry him through it, and enable him completely to
perform it, as he promised he would, and as he did, [Isa
49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008.md).

[Isaiah 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 49:6</span></span>

And he said,.... Or "even he said"; namely, the Lord his God, that
called, appointed, and strengthened him for his service:

it is a light thing that thou shouldest be my servant to raise up the
tribes of Jacob, and to restore the preserved of Israel; the tribes of
Jacob and the preserved of Israel are the elect of God among the Jews;
though the characters agree with all the chosen of God of other nations,
who, are distinguished from the rest of the world, and are "preserved in
Christ", [Jde 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#001.md), where they are
preserved before they are redeemed and called; not from falling in Adam
with the rest of mankind, nor from the general corruption of nature, nor
from actual sins and transgressions; yet from the condemnation of the
law, the damning power of sin, and the second death; the ground of which
is, their being in the love of God, in the covenant of grace, and in the
hands of Christ: and yet, notwithstanding this, they are in a most
miserable condition as the descendants of Adam, and, in a state of
nature; they are "fallen" creatures, which is supposed by the "raising
them up" by Christ, whose work it is; they fell in Adam, and are fallen
from a state of honour, friendship, and communion with God; from the
glorious image stamped on man in his creation; from righteousness and
holiness into sin and misery, poverty and beggary; into a very low
estate indeed, and are not able to raise up themselves, being feeble and
without strength, yea, dead in trespasses and sins; they are gone back
from God, and out of the good way, and are gone astray like lost sheep,
which is supposed by the "restoring" of them: now it is Christ's work to
"raise up", "restore", or "return" these; he raises them to a state of
justification and acceptance with God, to a better righteousness than
they fell from, and to greater riches, honour, and glory; in consequence
of redemption by Christ they are raised to a state of grace here, and to
glory hereafter; they are brought nigh to God, from whom they were
departed, sons to have access unto him and fellowship with him now, and
to be with him for evermore. Now to do all this is said to be a "light
thing"; it was not so in itself, it was a "great thing", famous and
excellent, to be a servant of the Lord, and to be employed in such work
as this; and so the Septuagint and Arabic versions render it; but this
is to be understood either by way of interrogation, as by the Targum,
Kimchi, Ben Melech, and so the Syriac version, "is it a matter of small
moment that thou shouldest be my servant?" &c.; surely it is not; or, if
it is, I will find thee other work to do: or else it is to be understood
comparatively, the elect of God among the Jews being few, in comparison
of those among the Gentiles; wherefore it was not work enough, nor
honour enough, only to be employed in the redemption of them: and
therefore it follows,

I will also give thee for a light to the Gentiles; which supposes the
Gentiles to be in a state of darkness, as they were before the coming of
Christ, and the ministration of the Gospel to them; they were in the
dark about the divine Being, the unity of God, and the persons in the
Godhead; about the worship of God; about a future state, and about their
own state and condition; and about revelation, the truths, doctrines,
and ordinances of it: and this expresses, that Christ should be a
"light" to them, as he has been, not only in a way of nature, as he is
to every man, but in a way of special grace through the ministry of the
word; not in his own person, for he only preached in Judea, but by his
apostles, by whom he went and preached peace to them afar off; and
particularly he was so to them by his Spirit, as a spirit of
illumination; and so they came to have light in divine things, and which
is a "gift" of the free grace of God. Simeon has respect to this
passage, [Luk 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#032.md) and the Apostle
Paul cites it, and applies it to Gospel times, [Act
13:47](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#047.md), it follows,

that thou mayest be my salvation unto the end of the earth; Christ was
given, that he might be the author of that salvation, which God had
chosen and appointed his people to, and provided for them in covenant;
and that being the salvation of his own people, he calls it his own
salvation; and which should reach to them all everywhere, in the several
parts of the world, and the corners and ends of it, east, west, north,
and south, wherever they were. Kimchi refers this to the saving of the
Gentiles, after the war of Gog and Magog, yet to come; and with it
compares [Isa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003.md).

[Isaiah 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 49:7</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, the Redeemer of Israel, and his Holy One,.... These
are all the titles of the Father of Christ, who is the Jehovah, the
self-existent Being, and from whom all have their Being; "the redeemer
of Israel", being concerned with his Son in the redemption, of his
people, in the contriving and settling the method of it, and bringing it
about; "and his Holy One", or the Holy One of Israel, the sanctifier of
them, together with the blessed Spirit; who speaks the following words,
not to the Prophet Isaiah, as Aben Ezra, nor to the people of the Jews,
as the Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, but to Christ:

to him whom man despiseth; whom the Jews despised, because of the
meanness of his descent, parentage, and education; because of his
doctrines, disciples, and followers; and because his kingdom was not of
this world, and came not with observation: or "whom a soul despiseth",
or "despised in soul" (w); heartily despised, as Christ was; or "who
despiseth his soul" (x), or life, as Christ did his, for the sake of his
people, for whom he freely laid his life down, and made his soul an
offering for sin:

to him whom the nation abhorreth; the nation of the Jews abhorred
Christ, his person, doctrine, and miracles; they hated him, and would
not have him to rule over them: they persecuted him, and sought to slay
him, and at last delivered him up to the Romans to be crucified:

to a servant of rulers; of Jewish rulers in subjection to them, being
made under the law; and of Gentile rulers, paying tribute to Caesar, and
when scourged by Pilate, and crucified by his order, which was the usual
death of servants or slaves. But though he was so ill used, despised,
and abhorred, he is encouraged by his divine Father, and great glory and
honour are promised him:

kings shall see and arise, princes also shall worship; they shall see
the glory and majesty of Christ, and rise up in reverence of him, and
fall down before him and worship him; which has had its accomplishment
in part in Constantine, Theodosius, Valentinian, and other Christian
princes, and will have a further fulfilment in the latter day; see [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md). This passage is interpreted by
the Jews of the Messiah (y):

because of the Lord that is faithful; to his promises to him in raising
him from the dead, and giving him glory; in exalting him at his own
right hand; in giving him gifts for men, which he bestowed on them; in
spreading and succeeding his Gospel in the Gentile world; and in the
enlargement of his kingdom and interest in it; all which obliged, and
will oblige, the kings and princes of the earth to own him, and pay
homage to him:

and the Holy One of Israel, and he shall choose thee; or make it appear
that he has chosen thee to be the Saviour and Redeemer of his people,
the Head of the church, and the Judge of the whole world.

\(w\) "ad eum quem contemnens est anima cujusque", Glassius; "ad
contemptum anima", Montanus; "contemptui animae", Cocceius. (x) , Sept.
"ad contemporem animea suae", Grotius; so the Arabic version. (y) Zohar
in Gen. fol. 127. 2.

[Isaiah 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 49:8</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord,.... These are the words of God the Father to his
Son continued; the Jews themselves interpret them of the Messiah (z):

in an acceptable time have I heard thee: this was the time when Christ
was here on earth, when he became incarnate, and suffered and died for
his people: this was an acceptable time to God the Father; his very
sufferings were acceptable; his sacrifice was of a sweet smelling
savour; his righteousness was well pleasing to him; for by all this his
perfections were glorified, his purposes were answered, his covenant and
promises fulfilled, and his people saved: it was acceptable to men, the
things that were now done and procured; as pardon of sin, peace and
reconciliation, a justifying righteousness, and complete salvation;
which is worthy the acceptation of all that are lost and undone, and see
themselves so, and that nothing they can do will save them: or "in a
time of good will" (a); such was the time of Christ's first coming; it
was good will to men, [Luk 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#014.md). God
showed his good will to men by the Person whom he sent to save them, his
own, only, and beloved Son; and by sending him to save sinners, the
chief of sinners, even enemies; and this time was fixed and settled by
the good will and pleasure of God; and during this time the Lord heard
Christ; he always heard him interceding for himself, and for his people;
he heard him in the garden, and on the cross, and at all other times;
see [Heb 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007.md).

and in a day of salvation have I helped thee; at the time when he
wrought out the salvation of his people, then he helped him in it, and
through it, as he promised him, and as Christ believed he would, [Isa
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#001.md). This is to be understood of him
as man and Mediator, and to show the greatness of the work of salvation,
and the concern of God in it; otherwise, as Christ is the mighty God, he
needed no help, and his own arm brought salvation to him:

and I will preserve thee; as he did from his enemies in life, in his
infancy, and when grown up, that his life might not be taken away before
his time; from being overcome by his enemies in the garden, and on the
cross; from the power of death and the grave, by raising him up from
thence; he preserved him to his kingdom and glory, and now retains him
in heaven until the time of the restitution of all things; and will
preserve his seed, and his throne, his cause, and interest, to the end
of time:

and give thee for a covenant of the people; Jews and Gentiles, all that
are given to him, and whom he redeems by his blood, whom the Spirit
sanctifies, and applies the blessings and promises of the covenant to;
which is to be understood of the covenant of grace: Christ is said to be
given for it unto them, he being a covenantee in it; the representative
of these people in it; the surety of it for them; the Mediator and
messenger of it to them; and the ratifier and confirmer of it; and as he
is the great blessing of it, the sum and substance of it; and as all the
blessings and promises of it are in him; and this may respect the
constitution of the covenant from everlasting, and the manifestation of
it in time; and this is a gift of God honourable to Christ, of free
grace to his people, very comprehensive and unspeakable. Kimchi says
this refers to the times of the Messiah: and the end of all this is

to establish the earth; not the land of Judea, but the whole earth;
which, were it not for Christ, and his covenant and suretyship
engagements for his people, and for the sake of them, and their
salvation, would long ago have been dissolved and broke to pieces; but
he bears up the pillars of it; and, when he has gathered in all his
people, will destroy it: or the end in his being given for a covenant
was to "raise up" the fallen inhabitants of the earth, for so the word
(b) may be rendered; or to raise up the elect of God unto life, who were
obnoxious to death; or to establish, settle, and confirm the church of
God on earth; see [Psa 89:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#036.md). The
Targum is, "to raise up the righteous that lie in the dust", referring
it to the resurrection of the dead:

to cause to inherit the desolate heritages; the desolate cities of
Judah, or the Gentile world, which was like a desolate wilderness: it
seems to denote the desolate condition of the church, which should
become comfortable and flourishing through the numerous conversions of
Jews and Gentiles, as the fruit and effect of the covenant of grace made
with Christ; in which the Heathen were given for his inheritance, and
the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md).

\(z\) In Pesikta Rabbati in Yalkut in loc. (a) "in tempore gratuitae
voluntatis", Munster; "in tempore placito", V. L. Pagninus;
"beneplaciti", Piscator. (b) "ad suscitandam terram", Pagninus,
Montanus; "ut erigas terram", Piscator; "ad erigendam terram", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 49:9</span></span>

That thou mayest say to the prisoners, go forth,.... God's covenant
people, while unconverted, are prisoners; they are in the prison of sin,
under the power and dominion of it, and under the guilt of it, and
obligation to punishment for it; and they are in the prison of the law,
they are transgressors of it, and are accused and convicted by it, and
are condemned, and put in prison, and held there; and they are also
Satan's prisoners, and are held and led captive by him at his will; and
by virtue of the covenant, and the blood of it, these prisoners are set
free; and Christ in the. Gospel speaks unto them, and proclaims liberty
to them; and by the knowledge of the truth they are made free, and are
brought into the liberty of the children of God; and are bid to go
forth, and they are brought forth from their prison houses; and bid to
go to the house of God, and walk at liberty, enjoying all the privileges
and ordinances of the Gospel:

to them that are in darkness; in a state of nature and unregeneracy,
which is a state of infidelity and ignorance; when men are in the dark,
and know not themselves, nor their lost state and condition; nor the
exceeding sinfulness of sin; nor Christ, and the way of salvation by
him; nor the Spirit, and the operations of his grace; nor the
Scriptures, and the doctrines of them:

show yourselves; among the people of God, in his house and ordinances,
when called, converted, and enlightened by Christ; or "be revealed" (c)
or manifested, when they are known to be, what they were not knows
before, the people and children of God. The Targum is,

"be revealed to the light;''

such are called to partake of the light of grace, and to enjoy the light
of comfort and communion:

they shall feed in the ways; not in the broad road and highways of sin,
but in the ways of God, in the word and ordinances: this denotes the
publicness and pleasantness of them, and the plenty of provisions in
them; and yet where it might not be expected, and where exposed to
enemies: the allusion is to cattle, that are drove from place to place,
and as they pass along feed in the ways upon such pasture as they there
find; and suggests, that the saints are travellers, and as such have
food provided them by the way:

and their pastures shall be in all high places; on hills and mountains,
which are often barren and unfruitful. The Targum is,

"in or by rivers of water shall be the place of their habitation.''

\(c\) "revelamini", V. L. Munster, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Isaiah 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 49:10</span></span>

They shall not hunger nor thirst,.... Being fed in the ways and high
places of Gospel ordinances with the love of God, with covenant mercies
and precious promises, with Christ, the bread of life, and his grace the
water of life, and with the doctrines of the Gospel; they do not desire
carnal things, as formerly, but spiritual ones, which they have and are
satisfied with, and desire no other food: it signifies that there shall
be no famine of the word, nor want of spiritual provisions; it is
applied to the New Jerusalem state, [Rev
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#016.md) and so the following clause,

neither shall the heat nor sun smite them; not the sun of persecution,
nor the heat of fiery trials and afflictions, particularly in the latter
day; nor the heat of a fiery law and divine wrath, or of Satan's fiery
darts; not however in the above mentioned state, or in the ultimate
glory:

for he that hath mercy on them shall lead them; Christ, the great and
good Shepherd of the sheep, who had mercy on them in eternity, and
therefore undertook to feed them; and in time, and therefore laid down
his life for them; and now in heaven, and sympathizes with him; and at
the last day they shall find mercy with him: these he leads out of a
state of nature, from the wilderness, where he finds them; out of their
sinful ways, and from the pastures of their own righteousness; and he
leads them in paths they had not known, in which they should go, in the
way of truth, faith, and holiness; in right, though sometimes rough
ways; he leads them to himself, his blood, righteousness, and fulness;
into his Father's presence, and to his house and ordinances; into Gospel
truths, and from one degree of grace to another, and at last to eternal
glory; all which he does gradually, softly, gently, in proportion to
their strength, and as they are able to bear:

even by the springs of water shall he guide them; or "fountains of
water" (d); even of living water; which are no other than God himself,
and the plenty of his grace and mercy; Christ, and the fulness of grace
that is in him; the covenant of grace, and the blessings of it; the
Gospel, and its ordinances; see [Rev
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017.md).

\(d\) , Sept. "fontes aquarum", V. L. rather flows of water which come
from fountains, so Ben Melech; "scaturigines aquarum", Montanus;
"scatebras aquarum", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 49:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 49:11</span></span>

And I will make all my mountains a way,.... Or "for", or "into a way"
(e); signifying that they should be dug through or levelled, and a way
made through them, over them, or upon them, for his people to pass: very
probably the allusion is to the mountains that lay between Babylon and
Judea; and which the Lord calls his, because of his making and settling,
and was therefore able to make them a way, or passable: though the words
are not to be literally understood, but denote the removing of all
impediments, obstructions, and difficulties, in the people's return from
captivity; which was typical of redemption by Christ, which had its
difficulties, which he only could get over; he came leaping over these
hills and mountains, and they became a plain before him, the great
Zerubbabel; such as the assumption of a sinless nature, to make
atonement in for sin, which only could be produced in an uncommon and
extraordinary way; the fulfilling of a broken law, satisfying divine
justice, engaging with many enemies who were to be conquered, sin,
Satan, the world, and death; bearing the wrath of God, and submitting to
an accursed death: and so in the conversion of the Gentiles, which may
here be referred to, and of any sinner, there are many mountains of
difficulties in the way of it, which the Lord only can remove; great
opposition is made by the men of the world to the preaching of the
Gospel, the means of it to the work itself, by Satan, who is loathe to
lose a subject of his kingdom; and by men themselves, whose carnal minds
are enmity to God, and all that is good difficulties arise from the
state of deadness, darkness, and hardness of heart men are in before
conversion from the corruptions of their nature, and strong habits of
sin; from the general depravity of all the powers and faculties of the
soul; from the bad company they have got into; or from their own
self-righteousness, they are loathe to part with: and when men are
called, and a work of God is begun, there are many mountains appear in
their way of coming to Christ; as their numerous and aggravated sins,
and doubts about the willingness Christ to receive such sinners; but,
when God works, nothing can let. Many are the obstructions the saints
meet with in their passage, through this world, by reason of a body of
sin, Satan's temptations, the world's persecutions, afflictions of
various kinds, strait circumstances of life, losses, crosses, and
disappointments; unbelief of itself is a mountain, and raises many
others; but the Lord makes a way for his people through all; it may be
some respect may be had to the spread of the Gospel in the world, and
the introduction of latter day glory, and the difficulties in the way
thereof, which the Lord has been removing, and will remove. Rome Pagan
is one mountain which God has removed; and Rome Papal is another he
will, move, with all the antichristian powers; and the Turkish empire is
another:

and my highways shall be exalted; Christ is the great highway of all,
and next his word and ordinances, which are ways of holiness and
righteousness; these may be said to be "exalted", being conspicuous and
visible; and, like causeways, or, highways cast up, that are above, and
carry over the mire and dirt; so these carry over the mire and dirt of
sin and corruption; and may be said to be so when made use of, approved,
and valued: or the words may be rendered, "they shall be", or "let them
be exalted on my highways" (f); that is, his people, being in the
exercise of faith, and in the discharge of their duty; see [Psa
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#033.md) with these words compare [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md) perhaps this passage may be best
explained by [Rev 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012.md), where mention
is made of the drying up of the river Euphrates, or of the destruction
of the Ottoman empire, to make way for the conversion of the eastern
nations, prophesied of, among others, in the following verse.

\(e\) "in viam", V. L. Piscator, Montanus, Cocceius; "ut siut pervii",
Junius & Tremellius; "in viam planam", Vitringa. (f) "et in aggeribus
meis emineant", Junius & Tremellius.

[Isaiah 49:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 49:12</span></span>

Behold, these shall come from far,.... This is a prophecy of the
conversion of the Jews, or of the Gentiles, or of both, in the latter
day, in the several parts of the world; who shall come to Christ, and to
his churches, and join in fellowship with them: the allusion is to the
return of the Jews from their captivity in Babylon, and from all other
parts at that time; some are said to come "from far", from the east, as
it is generally interpreted, from the several eastern nations, as
Persia, Judea lying west from them, on the western or Mediterranean sea:

and, lo, these from the north; from Media, as some; or rather from
Babylon, which lay north of Judea:

and from the west; or "from the sea"; the Mediterranean sea, and the
countries beyond it, which lie west of Judea:

and these from the land of Sinim. The Targum and Vulgate Latin version
render it, from the land of the south, with which Jarchi and Kimchi
agree, where dwelt the Sinites, which were of the children of Canaan,
[Gen 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#017.md), as the latter observes;
and where were the wilderness of Sin, and mountain of Sinai, according
to the observation of Jerom. Aben Ezra thinks Egypt is meant, which lay
south of Judea, and conjectures that Sinai, a place in it, is designed;
perhaps Sin, as others are of opinion, called "the strength of Egypt",
[Eze 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#015.md), the same city the Greeks
called Pelusium; and R. Saadiah, in Kimchi, supposes it is here
intended, which is most likely; the Pelusiotae are meant. Manasseh ben
Israel (g) will have it that the Chinese are intended: China is indeed
called, by Ptolemy (h), the country of the Sinites; and if this is
designed, which is not probable, it cannot be so called from the family
of Cina, as Martinius (i) thinks, since that family was not in being
till two or three hundred years after this prophecy; and, if it concerns
them, it will have its accomplishment, when the kingdoms of this world
shall become Christ's, [Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015.md)
compare with this [Mat 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#012.md) yea, they
are said to have received the Gospel, in the first times of it, by the
means of the apostles, Thomas, or Bartholomew (k). The Septuagint
version renders it, "from the land of the Persians"; and the Arabic
version, "from the land of Persia"; and the Syriac version, "from the
sea of Senjam".

\(g\) Spes Israelis, p. 48. (h) Geograph. l. 7. c. 3. (i) Hist. Sinic.
p. 195. (k) Vid Fabricii Lux Evangelii, p. 652, 653.

[Isaiah 49:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 49:13</span></span>

Sing, O heavens, and be joyful, O earth,.... Which may be understood of
the heavens, and the earth by a personification, a figure usual in
Scripture, to express the greatness of the benefit received, and to
raise thankfulness and admiration in the hearts of God's people; see
[Psa 90:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#011.md) or by the heavens may be
meant the angels in heaven, who, as they rejoice at the conversion of a
single sinner, will much more rejoice at such numerous conversions among
Jews and Gentiles, here prophesied of, [Luk
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#010.md) and, by the "earth", the saints
on earth, the excellent in it, who have a more immediate concern in, and
must be affected with, the case here represented:

and break forth into singing, O mountains; such as are in high office
either in the state, as Christian kings and princes, [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md) or in the church, as prophets
and apostles, [Rev 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020.md). The reason
of all this is,

for the Lord hath comforted his people; with the discoveries of his love
and grace; by his gracious presence among them; by the coming of Christ
unto them in a spiritual way; by sending his Spirit, and renewing the
face of things, and reviving his work in the midst of them; by the pure
and powerful preaching of the Gospel, and comfortable administration of
Gospel ordinances; and by large additions of converts made unto them:

and will have mercy upon his afflicted, or "poor", or "meek" and
"humble" ones, as the words (l) may be rendered: the Lord's people is a
poor and afflicted people, poor in a temporal and spiritual sense; the
church and interest of Christ is in a poor and low condition: the Lord's
people are afflicted outwardly and inwardly, and so become meek, and are
kept humble; these the Lord, in the latter day, will raise from a low
and distressed condition to a more exalted and comfortable one; which
will be an instance of his mercy and compassion, and be matter of joy
unto them.

\(l\) "pauperum suorum", V. L. "pauperes suos", Forerius; "inopes suos",
Vitringa; "humiles", Sept. "mansuetorum", Targum.

[Isaiah 49:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 49:14</span></span>

But Zion said,.... By way of objection, as some think, to the above
prophecies of glorious and comfortable times; she being now in a very
disconsolate condition, and could not tell how to take it in, how it
should thus be, when the case was with her as it was; though I rather
think the words should be rendered, "for Zion had said"; and which is
mentioned to show the uncomfortable condition she had been in, and to
observe the method the Lord took to comfort her, as he before promises.
Reference may be had to the Jews in the times of the Babylonish
captivity, mentioned under the name of Zion; because, as Kimchi says,
that was the chief city of the kingdom of Israel; who, because of the
length of their captivity, might think themselves forsaken and forgotten
by the Lord: yet, by Zion is meant the church under the Gospel
dispensation, the saints that meet at Mount Zion, the hundred and forty
and four thousand, with the Lamb there, [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022.md),

the Lord hath forsaken me, and my Lord hath forgotten me: so the church
might be tempted to conclude, during the persecutions under Rome Pagan,
and the long reign of antichrist not yet at an end, and because of his
oppressions and cruelties; and because of the low and declining state of
the interest of Christ, as it now is; few being converted by the
ministry of the word; great opposition made to the truths of the Gospel
with success; the ordinances of it perverted or neglected; the presence
of God in them very little enjoyed; great indifference and lukewarmness
among professors of religion, and discord and dissensions in churches.
And so it is with particular believers, when they do not enjoy the
presence of God as formerly, either in private or in public ordinances;
have not had a promise for a long time; nor are favoured with the
discoveries of the love of God, or with any visit from him; then they
are apt to say they are forsaken by the Lord, though they cannot give up
their interest in him, and therefore call him "my Lord".

[Isaiah 49:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 49:15</span></span>

Can a woman forget her sucking child, that she should not have
compassion on the son of her womb?.... This is the Lord's answer to the
church's complaint, instancing in the care and affection of a mother to
her child, thereby illustrating his love to his people; he instances in
a "woman", the tender sex; in a "child" of her's, an infant, not one
grown up, from which her affections might be alienated by disobedience;
her suckling child, she had in her arms, and on her knees, and whom her
breasts would put her in mind of; and since one that is not an own child
may be suckled, it is called "the son of her womb"; and is it possible
for such an one to be forgotten?

yea, they may forget; through inadvertency, want of affection, a cruel
disposition, hurry of business, sickness, public calamities, &c. [Lam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#003.md), such monsters in nature there may
be, though rare:

yet will I not forget thee; he cannot forget, because of is nature, on
which forgetfulness cannot properly fall; he will not, because of his
promise, which never fails; he may seem to his people to have forgotten
them, and he may be thought to have done so by others; he forgets their
sins, but not their persons; he cannot forget his love, nor his covenant
with them, nor his promises made to them; nor does he forget their love
to him, nor their works, words, and thoughts; the righteous are had by
him in everlasting remembrance. All this suggests that the Lord stands
in the relation of a parent to his people, and they stand in the
relation of children to him; they are born of him, and are as it were
pieces of himself, and little images of him, and dear to him as the
apple of his eye; they are like sucking children, that suck in the milk
of his word, and suck at the breasts of his ordinances; and they are
used by him in the most tender manner, as infants are; they are kissed
by him, and dandled on the knee; they are led by him, and taught to go;
he delights in them when they begin to speak in prayer or praise, though
in a lisping and stammering manner; all their little actions are
engaging, their works done by them, though imperfect, and a great deal
of childishness in them; when anything ails them, he sympathizes with
them, he takes care of them, and provides for them; and it is a concern
to him whenever he is obliged to chastise them, and can he therefore
forget them?

[Isaiah 49:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 49:16</span></span>

Behold, I have graven thee upon the palms of my hands,.... Not upon his
thick clouds, the clouds of heaven under him, always in view, as R.
Saadiah Gaon, mentioned by Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Kimchi: much better
the Targum,

"lo, as upon the hands thou art engraven before me;''

signifying that his people were always in his sight, his eyes were ever
upon them, and never withdrawn from them; as anything held in the hand,
or tied to or wore upon it, as a signet or ring that has the name of a
person on it, to which the allusion may be; which shows how near and
dear they are to him, what affection he has for them, and care of them;
see [Sol 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006.md). Some think respect is
had to the wounds in the hands of Christ, which, being on their account,
are looked upon and remembered by him; or, however, to their being in
his hands, out of which none can pluck them, [Joh
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#028.md),

thy walls are continually before me; not the walls of Jerusalem to
rebuild, though there may be an allusion to them; but either the walls
of their houses where they dwell; his delights being in the habitable
parts of his earth, where his saints are; or rather the walls of the
church of God, for the erecting and establishing of which he is
concerned. The metaphor seems to be taken from an architect that has the
plan of a building, a house, or a city and its walls, in his hand, or
lying before him. The phrase denotes the constant care and concern of
Jehovah for the protection and safety of his church and people; who
places angels about them, salvation for walls and bulwarks to them, yea,
he himself is a wall of fire about them, [Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001.md).

[Isaiah 49:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 49:17</span></span>

Thy children shall make haste,.... Regenerate persons, young converts,
such as are born again of incorruptible seed by the word; these shall
flock to the church,

as doves to the windows; join themselves to her, and submit to Gospel
ordinances, and

make haste, and delay not, to keep the Lord's commandments; which is no
small pleasure, joy, and comfort to the church of God. Some render it,
"thy builders" (m) "shall make haste"; Gospel ministers, who are wise
masterbuilders under Christ; these shall come with all readiness and
cheerfulness, and build in the temple, the church of God, and rebuild
her walls, and repair her breaches:

thy destroyers and they that made thee waste, shall go forth of thee;
tyrants and persecutors of the church shall cease, and be no more; and
false teachers, that corrupt the minds of men, subvert their faith, and
destroy their souls, as antichrist and his ministers, shall be drove out
of the church, and destroyed by Christ, the Head of it; see [Rev
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018.md).

\(m\) "structores vel aedificatores tui", Munster, Montanus, Calvin,
Tigurine version.

[Isaiah 49:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 49:18</span></span>

Lift up thine eyes round about, and behold,.... Look east, west, north,
and south, and behold the flocking converts from all parts; see on [Isa
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#012.md). The words are spoken to the
church, and for her comfort; and so the Targum,

"lift up thine eyes round about, O Jerusalem, and see all the children
of the people of thy captivity:''

all these gather themselves together, and come to thee; though of
different nations, and come from different quarters, yet coalesce
together, make one body, and join themselves with the church, in which
they centre, and are incorporated:

as I live, saith the Lord; this is the form of an oath, sometimes used
by the Lord, to denote the importance and certainty of a thing, and to
assure his people of it:

thou shalt surely clothe thee with them all as with an ornament; as
children's children are the crown of old men, [Pro
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006.md), so young converts are the crown,
glory, and ornament of the church; even such who are beautified with the
graces of the Spirit, and whose conversations are as become the Gospel
of Christ:

and bind them on thee as a bride doeth; her clothes, the attire of her
head, and her jewels. So in the latter day, when the Jews are converted,
and the fulness of the Gentiles brought in, the marriage of the Lamb
will be come, and the church made ready, as a bride, for her husband,
and be very beautiful and comely in his sight, as well as very
comfortable and glorious in herself; and which will be matter of joy to
all the saints, [Rev 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#007.md). The Targum
is,

"all these shall be unto thee as a garment of glory, and their works in
the midst of thee as the ornament of a bride.''

[Isaiah 49:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 49:19</span></span>

For thy waste and thy desolate places, and the land of thy
destruction,.... Or "thy land of destruction, or thy destroyed land"
(n); laid waste and desolate by the enemy, without inhabitants; such
countries in which there were few professors of the true religion:

shall even now be too narrow, by reason of the inhabitants; because of
the multitude of them; a hyperbolical expression, setting forth the
great numbers of Christian converts everywhere: this straitness will not
be on account of strangers or enemies having taken possession; but on
account of those who are true and proper possessors: for it follows,

and they that swallowed thee up shall be far away; from the church; the
Heathen, the Gentiles, or Papists,

shall now perish out of his, Jehovah's, "land"; "sinners shall be
consumed out of the earth, and the wicked be no more", [Psa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016.md). Antichrist and his abettors,
which "swallowed" up the people, their riches, and substance, like
beasts of prey, to which he is compared, shall go into perdition, and
never disturb the church any more, [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001.md).

\(n\) "terra tua destructa", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, De Dieu; "et
terram destructionis tuam", Cocceius; "et terram tuam quae destructa
est", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 49:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 49:20</span></span>

The children which thou shalt have, after thou hast lost the other,....
Which "other lost" are not the Jews, the broken branches, rejected and
cut off for unbelief; and the "children after" them not the Gentiles
converted, which took their place; but "the other" are such who have
been destroyed by the Heathen persecutions, and especially by the
antichristian cruelties; and the "children after", the great numbers of
converts upon the fall of antichrist. The words may be rendered, "the
children of thine orbity" (o), or "childless state"; such as were born
unto her in an uncommon, extraordinary, and unexpected way, when the
church seemed to be in a widowhood estate, or like a woman that is past
bearing children:

shall say again in thine ears; or, "shall yet say" (p); that is,
hereafter, in time to come: for this is a prophecy of what should be
said in the church's hearing, and such as had never been said before;
and therefore improperly rendered "again"; for there never has been as
yet such a time as this, or such a large number of converts, as to say,

the place is too strait for me to dwell in; there is not room enough for
us, as in [Kg2 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#001.md),

give place to me that I may dwell; one and another of the children or
converts should say, make room for me, that I may have a name and a
place among you, and dwell with you, and abide in the house of the Lord,
and partake of the privileges and ordinances of it: but the word used
signifies drawing nigh, and not giving way or removing; and should
rather be rendered, "draw nigh to me that I may dwell"; or "and I shall
dwell" (q), or "sit"; come close to one another, and we shall all sit
and dwell comfortably together; just as when a house is well filled with
agreeable company, and there is an unwillingness to part with or lose
any, they are desired to sit close together, that there may be room for
all: and this is, and will be, the case with the church and her members;
they will be desirous to sit regularly, and close together, in Gospel
order, that everyone may be comfortable, and partake of the benefit of
communion, and none be obliged to depart: and to this sense Gussetius
(r) interprets the phrase.

\(o\) "filii orbitatis tuae", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Vitringa;
"orbitatum tuarum", Pagninus, Montanus; "tui orbati", Munster. (The word
"orbity" means "childless" or "without parents", Webster's 1828
Dictionary, Editor) (p) "adhuc dicent", Gataker, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Vitringa. q) "accede mihi & habitabo", Montanus; "contrahe te
mea causa ut sedeam", Cocceius. (r) Ebr. Comment. p. 496.

[Isaiah 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 49:21</span></span>

Then shalt thou say in thine heart,.... In, a way of admiration,
secretly within herself, astonished at the numerous crowds flocking in;

who hath begotten me these? not their natural parents, nor they
themselves;

for they are not born of blood, nor of the will of man, nor of the will
of the flesh; nor ministers of the Gospel, though they are instruments,
yet not the cause; but God only, Father, Son, and Spirit, to whom
regeneration is only ascribed: regeneration is a wonderful work of God;
it is unaccountable to the natural man; it is amazing to the saints
themselves; and it is matter of astonishment to the church of God;
especially when on a sudden, and without means, and in great numbers,
men are born again; and particularly when these come from among the
Gentiles, which seems to be the case here:

seeing I have lost my children; by captivity and the sword, by the
tyranny and cruelty of the man of sin:

and am desolate; or alone, as if without a husband, or any to take care
of her: this represents the church in the wilderness, during the reign
of antichrist, [Rev 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014.md), while she
seems to be forsaken of the Lord her husband, though she is not:

and a captive; to the Romish antichrist; see [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010.md),

and removing to and fro; being forced to flee from place to place, by
reason of persecution: there is, no doubt, an allusion in all this to
the case of the Jews in the Babylonish captivity:

and who hath brought up these? the same that begot them, even the Lord
himself; who nourishes and brings up his children with the milk of the
Gospel, and the breasts of Gospel ordinances; so that they are brought
up from children to young men, from young men to fathers, till they
become perfect men; even the church in the wilderness, with her
children, are nourished by him, for a time, and times, and half a time,
[Rev 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#014.md) which is wonderful:

behold, I was left alone; seemingly without husband or children, in a
desolate and wilderness state:

these, where had they been? in the ruins of Adam's fall; in a state of
darkness; in the graves of sin; in a pit wherein is no water; in the
hands of Satan, and among wicked men; even in Babylon itself, but now
called out; see [Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004.md).

[Isaiah 49:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 49:22</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God,.... In answer to the questions, where had these
children been? and from whence did they come? who begot them, and
brought them up? and by what means was all this done, or would be done?

I will lift up mine hand to the Gentiles; beckoning them to come unto
him, directing and ordering them what to do; or rather exerting the
power of his grace in the conversion of them. The Targum is,

"I will reveal my power among the Gentiles;''

his efficacious grace attending the ministry of the word, whereby it
becomes "the power of God unto salvation"; for when that hand is lifted
up or exerted, the "word" comes "not in word only", "but in power, and
in the Holy Ghost", and is effectual to saving purposes:

and set up my standard to the people; meaning Christ, "the ensign of the
people"; who, in the ministration of the Gospel, is set up as a
standard, to gather persons to him, as an ensign or standard is set up
by a general of an army to collect soldiers to him, to come and enlist,
and fight under his banners; see [Isa
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010.md),

and they shall bring thy sons in their arms; or, "bosom" (s); such as
are regenerated by the Spirit and grace of God, under the word, are to
be tenderly dealt with by the ministers of the Gospel, as they are by
Christ, [Isa 40:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#011.md) and to be
encouraged to come and join themselves to the church, and be directed
and assisted by them in that service:

and thy daughters shall be carried on their shoulders; meaning the same
as before, only perhaps weaker converts, dealing with them according to
their infirmities; carrying them with as much ease, care, and
tenderness, as young children are carried on the shoulders of their
parents or others. It may be these expressions are designed to show how
assisting and encouraging the Christian Gentiles will be to the Jews,
when converted in their several countries, both to admit them into
Gospel churches, and bring them into their own land; see [Isa
66:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#019.md).

\(s\) , Sept. "in gremio", Tigurine version; "in sinu", Munster,
Montanus. But Ben Melech interprets it "the arm".

[Isaiah 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">isa 49:23</span></span>

And kings shall be thy nursing fathers, and their queens thy nursing
mothers,.... Who shall show favour and respect to the church and people
of God, grant them liberty, and protect and defend them in their
religious privileges: for this is to be understood not figuratively of
apostles and apostolical men, as Jerom, who are kings and priests unto
God, and who feed the church with the milk of the word, and the breasts
of ordinances; but literally of the kings and queens of the earth; and
is thought to have had its fulfilment, at least in part, in Cyrus,
Ahasuerus, Esther, and others; but more so in Christian kings and
queens, as Constantine and Helena, Theodosius and Placilla, and others;
and will have a far greater accomplishment in the latter day glory; see
[Isa 60:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#003.md),

they shall bow down toward thee with their faces toward the earth; which
expresses the great veneration and respect these great personages shall
have for the church of God, and their entire submission and subjection
to the Gospel of Christ, and the ordinances of it, and to the laws and
discipline of his house; for they shall now become members of the
Christian church, and be entirely under the government of it, as to
religious things; see [Rev 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#009.md).

and lick up the dust of thy feet; the allusion is to the eastern
nations, especially the Persians, who, in the adoration of their kings,
used to kiss the ground they stood on, and seemed to lick, if they did
not, the dust that was about them; and it expresses the very low
submission of kings and princes to the church, and their high veneration
of it; their willingness to do the meanest office for the good of it,
and their great regard and affection for the meanest of its members, the
dust of Zion; see [Psa 72:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#009.md),

and thou shalt know that I am the Lord; the King of kings, and Lord of
lords, who has the hearts of all men, even of kings, in his hands, and
can turn them, and bring them to a thorough submission to his will; and
who is able to accomplish all his promises, and is true and faithful to
them; this will be known and owned by the church, when the above things
have their accomplishment:

for they shall not be ashamed that wait for me; or for my salvation, as
the Targum; for favours from him; for the light of his countenance; for
the discoveries and application of pardoning grace; for the performance
of promises; for answers of prayer; for his spiritual coming, and for
eternal glory and happiness; these shall not be ashamed of him for whom
they wait, nor of their hope and expectation of him, nor at his coming.

[Isaiah 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">isa 49:24</span></span>

Shall the prey be taken from the mighty,.... This is an objection to the
accomplishment of what is predicted and promised above, taken from the
power of the enemy, and his right to detain the people; and are either
the words of the nations among whom the Jews were, according to Kimchi,
boasting of, and presuming upon, and opposing to what is said, both
their might and right, to keep the people in their own hands, bidding as
it were defiance to any to attempt to take them from them; or the words
of the prophet, in the name of the people, as Aben Ezra, objecting to
their deliverance, doubting the effecting of it, or admiring at it: it
may be applied to the taking of the Lord's people out of the hands of
Satan, who may be said to be "mighty" or "strong", as he appears to be
from his nature, a spirit; from his names, the strong man armed, a
roaring lion, the great red dragon, leviathan, the piercing serpent,
&c.; and from his power and dominion over the evil angels, and over men,
both their bodies and souls; and to whom the Lord's own people are a
"prey", while they are in a state of nature, as all mankind, and every
unconverted man, be; a difficult thing it is to take any out of his
hands, and a wonder of grace it is when it is done:

or the lawful captive delivered? justly and lawfully taken captive in
war, as the Jews were by the Babylonians: or, "the captivity of the
righteous be delivered" (t); that is, either the righteous who were
taken captives; or those that took them, who were so in their opinion,
at least with respect to the taking of them, doing, as they judged, what
was lawful and just. The people of God are in their state of nature led
by Satan at his will, and are lawful captives in the judgment of him,
and his principalities; and are in reality taken in war by him, and not
only led captive by him at his will, but with their own will, and are
justly given up unto him. Perhaps all this may be better referred to the
people of God being a prey to the Romish antichrist, and detained as a
lawful captive by him, and to the difficult and wonderful deliverance of
them from him in the latter day; see [Rev
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#004.md). The Targum interprets this and
the following verse of the captives of Esau and Ishmael, by whom seem to
be meant the Pope and Turk.

\(t\) "et an captivitas justi evadet", Montanus; "vel liberabitur",
Munster; "captiva turba justi", Vitringa. And by the righteous Gussetius
(Ebr. Comment. p. 709.) understands God the Father, who is righteous as
a judge, exercising vindictive justice; and from him another person
delivers us, namely, God the Son, the Messiah. A sense truly
evangelical.

[Isaiah 49:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">isa 49:25</span></span>

But thus saith the Lord,.... In answer to the above objection, being
mightier than the mighty, and stronger than he by whom his people are
detained, being the Almighty:

even the captives of the mighty shall be taken away, and the prey of the
terrible shall be delivered; or, "the prey of the violent ones" (u);
which is an answer both as to might and right; as to might, though they
are the captives of the mighty, yet they shall be taken away from them
by him that is mightier than they, even the mighty God; and as to right,
they are the prey of persons that have by force and violence usurped a
power over them, and therefore shall be delivered; as the Lord's people
are out of the hands of Satan; both in redemption by Christ out of the
hands of him that is stronger than they; and in conversion by him who is
stronger than the strong man armed; and enters into their hearts, the
palace of the devil, spoils his goods, takes his armour from him,
overcomes and binds him, and delivers them from his power; so that he
shall not have dominion over them, and much less destroy them, though he
may sometimes be terrible to them by his temptations, [Jer
31:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#011.md). This will have a further
accomplishment, in the deliverance of the Lord's people from the mighty
and terrible beast of Rome:

for I will contend with them that contend with thee; the Babylonians
literally; Satan and his principalities figuratively; and also
antichrist, and the antichristian kings and states, that quarrel with,
fight against, and oppress the Lord's people:

and I will save thy children; regenerate persons, the members of the
church, be they where they will; these the Lord will save with a
temporal, spiritual, and eternal salvation, Deliverance from the Romish
yoke and oppression seems to be here chiefly designed, when Jezebel's
children will be killed with death, as follows; see [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023.md).

\(u\) "captura violenti", Moutanus Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "turba
captiva violenti", Vitringa.

[Isaiah 49:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">isa 49:26</span></span>

And I will feed them that oppress thee with their own flesh,.... Not
that they should feed upon their own flesh, because of famine, for this
was not the case of Babylon when taken; but that they should destroy one
another, as the Midianites did; and which was true of some of the
Babylonians, who assisted Cyrus in taking the city, and destroying the
inhabitants of it; and will be verified in the Popish party killing one
another:

and they shall be drunken with their own blood as with sweet wine; which
denotes the abundance of blood that shall be shed, and the pleasure in
shedding of it. It will be a righteous thing with God to give the whore
of Rome her own blood to drink, even so as to be made drunk with it as
with wine, who has been drunk already with the blood of the saints, [Rev
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#006.md). The Targum is,

"I will give the flesh of them that oppress thee for food to every fowl
of the heavens; and as they are drunken with wine, so the beasts of the
field shall be drunken with their blood;''

see [Rev 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017.md),

and all flesh shall know that I the Lord am thy Saviour and thy
Redeemer, the mighty One of Jacob; it shall be notorious to all the
world, that Jehovah, the "Lord" of lords, the Lord of the whole earth,
is the "Saviour and Redeemer" of his church and people out of all their
afflictions, oppressions, and persecutions, by the Romish antichrist;
this will be apparently seen, and publicly owned and acknowledged, when
antichrist shall be destroyed, and the church saved; by which it will be
manifest, it being the Lord's work, and wondrous in the eyes of men,
that he is "the mighty One of Jacob", able to help and save them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 50](isa050.md)

</div>
