<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Isaiah Index](isa.md)  
  [Previous](isa031)  [Next](isa033.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 32](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001.md)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 32:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 32

This chapter contains a prophecy of the Messiah; for, however applicable
it may be to Hezekiah, as a type of Christ, it only has its full
accomplishment in him, and in his times; who is described as a righteous
King, and as having just princes ruling under him, [Isa
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001.md) and as a very great blessing,
protection, and comfort to his subjects, [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002.md) when follows a prediction of
great light and knowledge that should be in his days, [Isa
32:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#003.md) and of the vileness, hypocrisy,
and covetousness of the Jews in his times, [Isa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005.md) and of the destruction of their
country, because of their sins, of which they seemed greatly insensible,
and were unconcerned about it, and are therefore called upon to lament
it, [Isa 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009.md) which should continue
until there would be a very great effusion of the Spirit, as should make
the world, comparable to a wilderness, fruitful in grace and good works;
the consequence of which is great prosperity, peace, and safety, to the
saints, [Isa 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015.md) and destruction to
their enemies, particularly the city of Rome, [Isa
32:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#019.md) and the chapter is concluded
with the happiness of the Gospel ministration, and the success of it,
[Isa 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020.md).

[Isaiah 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 32:1</span></span>

Behold, a King shall reign in righteousness,.... Not Hezekiah, as the
Jewish writers; at least only as a type, as some writers interpret it;
rather Christ himself, who is "King" not only of the whole world, and of
the kings of it in general, but in particular is King of saints; and who
"reigns" now in and over his church and people, being set as King by his
Father over his holy hill of Zion, and, being exalted at his right hand,
is made and declared Lord and Christ; and where he does and will reign
until all enemies are put under his feet, and ere long will reign
gloriously before his ancients in Jerusalem, [Isa
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023.md) and his reign is "in
righteousness"; in a righteous manner, according to the rules of justice
and equity: all his laws are just; his ways and methods of
administration are right; his sceptre is a sceptre of righteousness:
righteousness is the girdle of his loins, and faithfulness the girdle of
his reins:

and princes shall rule in judgment: the ministers of the Gospel, pastors
of churches, who are set over them in the Lord, and have the rule over
them; and who rule well, and in judgment, when they rule according to
the word of God; when they preach the Gospel, and administer ordinances,
and do all the business of Christ's house, according to the
instructions, laws, and rules he has given.

[Isaiah 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 32:2</span></span>

And a man shall be as an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from
the tempest,.... Or, "that man"; the King Messiah before mentioned; who
had agreed to become man, was promised and prophesied of as such, had
often appeared in a human form, was to be incarnate, and now is; though
he is not a mere man; were he, he could not be what is here said of him,
"as a hiding place, and covert from the wind and tempest", of his
Father's wrath, raised by sin; and which all men are deserving of, and
on whom it must fall, unless secured from it by Christ; who has bore it
in the room and stead of his people, has turned it away, and delivered
them from it, and all the effects of it, so that nothing of it comes
upon them; he has endured the whole force of the storm himself; and his
righteousness, blood, sacrifice, and intercession, screen his people
from it: he also hides and covers them from Satan's temptations, the
blast of the terrible ones, which is as a storm against the wall, so as
they shall not be destroyed by them; by praying for them, succouring of
them, supplying them with his grace, and delivering from them in his own
time: likewise he protects them from the rage and fury of their
persecuting enemies, when they come like a "whirlwind" to "scatter"
them; they have rest in him, when troubled by men; and security by him,
when these winds and waves beat upon them; and when they are tossed with
the tempests of afflictions of various kinds, he bears them up under
them, and carries them through them, and delivers out of them, and
brings them at last safe to glory:

as rivers of water in a dry place; which are very delightful,
refreshing, and fructifying. This denotes the abundance of grace in
Christ, and the freeness of it, which flows from the boundless ocean of
divine love, and which greatly comforts and refreshes the souls of the
Lord's people in this dry and barren land, and makes them cheerful and
fruitful, revives their spirits, makes glad their hearts, and causes
them to go on their way rejoicing:

as the shadow of a great rock in a weary land: to travellers in it, who
passing through a desert in hot countries and sultry climates, are glad
when they find a rock which casts a shade, under which their can sit a
while, sheltered from the scorching sun. Such a weary land is this world
to the saints, who are wearied with sins, their own and others, with
Satan's temptations, with afflictions and troubles of various sorts;
Christ is the "Rock" that is higher than they, to whom they are directed
and led when their hearts are overwhelmed within them; on whom not only
their souls are built, and their feet are set, and he is a shelter to
them; but he casts a shadow, which is very reviving and refreshing, and
that is the shadow of his word and ordinances, under which they sit with
delight and pleasure, and which makes their travelling through this
wilderness comfortable.

[Isaiah 32:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 32:3</span></span>

And the eyes of them that see shall not be dim,.... Not of the seers and
prophets, or ministers of the word only, but of the righteous in
general, as the Targum; even all such as are illuminated by the Spirit
of God, who shall have a clear discerning of Gospel truths, behold with
open face, with eyes unveiled, the glory of them, and of Christ in them,
and not have their eyes covered, or such a dim obscure knowledge of them
as under the law; and not only the watchmen shall see, eye to eye, all
truths clearly and distinctly, but even all, from the least to the
greatest, shall know the Lord, and the earth shall be filled with the
knowledge of him, as the waters cover the sea. It is a prophecy of the
great increase of spiritual light in the times of the Messiah:

and the ears of them that hear shall hearken: very diligently and
attentively to the word preached, and receive and embrace the doctrines
of the Gospel, and submit to, and obey, the ordinances of it.

[Isaiah 32:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 32:4</span></span>

The heart also of the rash shall understand knowledge,.... Such who have
been hasty and precipitant, as the word (c) signifies; who have not
given themselves time to consider what they have read or heard, or has
been proposed unto them, and have hastily received every thing that has
been suggested to them, especially by carnal sense and reason, shall now
sit down, and coolly consider things, and so gain an understanding of
divine and spiritual knowledge, of the knowledge of Christ, of his
person, offices, grace, righteousness, and salvation; an experimental
knowledge and understanding of these things, heart and not head
knowledge:

and the tongue of the stammerer shall be ready to speak plainly; or,
"shall make haste to speak neatly" (d); elegantly and politely; such who
hesitated in their speech, and spoke in a blundering manner, and
scarcely intelligibly, especially when they spoke of divine and
spiritual things, yet now, without the least hesitation, in the freest
and most ready manner, with all plainness and propriety shall talk of
these things, to the great delight, satisfaction, and use of those that
hear them: this was true of the apostles of Christ, those babes and
sucklings, out of whose mouth God ordained praise, and who were most of
them Galilaeans, very illiterate and unpolished, and yet these,
especially when they had the gift of tongues, spake the great things of
God very readily, and in good language; and also is true of other
ministers of the word, raised up among the barbarous nations of the
world.

\(c\) "inconsideratorum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator;
"praecipatorum", Montanus. (d) "festinabit loqui nitida", Pagninus;
"polite", Munster; "diserte", Calvin; "loqui venusta", Cocceius.

[Isaiah 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 32:5</span></span>

The vile person shall be no more called liberal,.... Or "Nabal" (a fool)
"shall no more be called Nadib" (e) (a prince); or have this name put
upon him, or be advanced to honour and dignity, or be flattered with
such a title, so unbecoming him. The sense seems to be, that, in Gospel
times, such who are fools as to the knowledge of spiritual things, that
have no spiritual and experimental knowledge of the truths of the
Gospel, but are quite ignorant of them, shall not be made princes, or
spiritual rulers, and governors in the house of God;

nor the churl said to be bountiful; or called a lord, as Jarchi
interprets the word; which, he says, is used of such an one, because all
men look to him, and respect him (f); but now a covetous and tenacious
man, that withholds more than is meet, that keeps, all he has to
himself, without communicating to others, and scarcely allows himself
the necessaries of life, being so sordidly avaricious, such an one shall
not be a pastor, or ruler, in the church of God; such were the Scribes
and Pharisees among the Jews in Christ's time, and therefore rejected,
[Mat 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#014.md) folly and covetousness are
both bad things in a minister of the word, and greatly disqualify a man
for that work and office: or else the sense of the whole is, that there
should be such a discerning of men in Gospel times, and such
faithfulness used towards them, that a wicked man should not be taken
for a good man, nor in a flattering way be called one; but the precious
and the vile should be distinguished, and called by their right names.
The Targum is,

"the wicked man shall be no more called just, and they that transgress
his word shall not be called mighty.''

\(e\) "Nabal non vocabitur Nadib", Gataker. (f) Kimchi makes it to be
the same with a "prodigal person"; and so Ben Melech; but Elias, in his
Tishbi, p. 93, 95. says there is a difference between them; he says, is
one that squanders his money in eating and drinking, and the like, which
is a bad custom; but is an honourable person, who gives his money to
good purposes, and more than is meet, which is a good custom; and he is
more praiseworthy than the liberal man.

[Isaiah 32:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 32:6</span></span>

For the vile person will speak villainy,.... Or, "a fool will utter
folly" (g); a man that has no understanding of Gospel truths himself can
not deliver them to others; he will only speak foolish things,
concerning the purity of human nature, the power of man's free will, the
sufficiency of his own righteousness to justify him, and the merits of
good works, and the like; and therefore such a man is a very improper
one to be a guide and governor in the church of God:

and his heart will work iniquity; forge and devise it within himself;
will form schemes of false doctrine, discipline, and worship,
disagreeable to the word of God:

to practise hypocrisy; to make men believe he is a very devout and
religious man, when he has no good thing in him, and to put others upon
a profession of religion that have none; which things are commonly done
by foolish and ignorant preachers:

and to utter error against the Lord; such doctrines as are contrary to
the free, rich, sovereign grace of God; to the deity, personality,
sonship, offices, blood, sacrifice, and righteousness of Christ, and so
to the person and operations of the blessed Spirit:

to make empty the soul of the hungry; and he will cause the drink of the
thirsty to fail; the "hungry" and "thirsty" are such as hunger and
thirst after, and earnestly desire, the sincere milk of the word for
their spiritual nourishment and growth; whose "souls" become "empty",
and their "drink" fails, when the doctrines of grace are not dispensed
unto them, but false and unedifying doctrines are delivered, so that
their souls sink and faint, and are ready to die away, for want of the
bread of the Gospel; agreeably to this sense, the Targum paraphrases the
words thus,

"to make the soul of the righteous weary, who desire doctrine, as a
hungry man bread; and the words of the law, which are as water to him
that is thirsty, they think to cause to cease.''

\(g\) "nam stultus stultitiam loquetur", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Isaiah 32:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 32:7</span></span>

The instruments also of the churl are evil,.... Not his vessels or
measures he sells by, which are small and deficient, as Kimchi and Ben
Melech interpret it; nor his servants, his tools in doing his
wickedness, which are fit for his purpose, wicked men; but rather these
are much the same with "the instruments of the foolish shepherd", [Zac
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#015.md) and may signify the evil ways
and methods which covetous pastors or shepherds take to fleece the
flock, and to increase their own gain:

he deviseth wicked devices to destroy the poor with lying words, even
when the needy speaketh right; he consults, contrives, and forms schemes
with all craft and cunning, on purpose, to corrupt, as the word (h)
signifies, the poor and meek, humble and afflicted souls, with false
doctrines; even when these poor and needy ones, who want to have sound
and comfortable doctrine delivered to them, speak and ask for that which
is right and just, agreeably to the oracles of God, and the analogy of
faith, but can not have it; wherefore such a man is unfit to be a ruler
in the house of God.

\(h\) "ad corrumpendum afflictos in eloquiis falsitaits", Montanus.

[Isaiah 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 32:8</span></span>

But the liberal man deviseth liberal things,.... The man of a princely
spirit consults and contrives, and delivers out things worthy of a
prince and governor in the church of God; he that is one of a free
spirit, that is made free by the Spirit of God, and is led into the
doctrines of free grace, will study to deliver out the same to others,
and, as he has freely received, he will freely give, and without any
sinister, selfish, and mercenary ends and views:

and by liberal things shall he stand; or, "be established" (i); both by
the doctrines of free grace he dispenses to others, to be established by
and with which is a good thing; and by the free communications of the
gifts and grace of the Spirit to him, to supply and furnish him yet more
and more for his work; by the discoveries of the free favour of God unto
him; by the enjoyment of his gracious presence in private and in public;
by the blessings of a free and well ordered covenant; and, at last, by
being brought to eternal glory and happiness, in which he will be
settled to all eternity; or, "on liberal things shall he stand"; grace
here, and glory hereafter. The Targum is,

"the righteous consult truth, and they upon truth shall stand.''

\(i\) "stabilietur", Gataker.

[Isaiah 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 32:9</span></span>

Rise up, ye women that are at ease,.... On beds of down, unconcerned
about the present or future state of the nation; who had their share of
guilt in the nation's sins, particularly pride, luxury, superstition,
rejection of the Messiah, and contempt of his Gospel, and so should have
their part in its punishment. Some think that the men of the nation are
so called, because of their effeminacy. The Jews interpret them of the
other cities of Judea, besides Jerusalem; the Targum explains it by
provinces:

hear my voice, ye careless daughters; give ear to my speech; the words
of the prophet concerning the future desolation of their country; here
it is thought the lesser towns and villages are intended by daughters,
who dwelt in confidence and security, having no thought and notion of
destruction coming upon them; so Ben Melech interprets the "women" of
cities, and the "daughters" of villages.

[Isaiah 32:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 32:10</span></span>

Many days and years shall ye be troubled,.... Or, "days above a year"
(k); a year, and somewhat more, yet not two years; which some understand
of the time from this prophecy, until their troubles began, by the
invasion of Sennacherib; and others of the continuance of it, it lasting
more than a year; or, "days with a year"; so Kimchi, days upon a year,
year upon year, one year after another; and so denotes a long duration
of their troubles; and so the troubles of the Jews, before their utter
destruction by the Romans, lasted a great while, and since to this day;
for the prophecy respects those times. Kimchi says it may be interpreted
of the destruction of the whole land of Israel, and of the destruction
of the temple in the days of Zedekiah; or of the destruction of the
second temple, that is, by the Romans:

for the vintage shall fail; being spoiled by the enemy, or taken for
their own use; and so there would be no wine to cheer their hearts, and
make them merry:

the gathering shall not come; of the other fruits of the earth; when the
time of ingathering should come, at which there was a feast that bore
that name, there should be none to be gathered in; the consequence of
which must be a famine, and such there was before and at the destruction
of Jerusalem by the Romans.

\(k\) "dies super annum", Vatablus; "dies ultra annum", Cocceius.

[Isaiah 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 32:11</span></span>

Tremble, ye women that are at ease,.... Which may be considered either
as an exhortation to repentance for their sins, of which, if a due sense
was impressed on their hearts, would cause a trembling of body and mind,
under a fearful expectation of divine wrath; or as a prediction, that
though they were now quite tranquil and easy, and nothing disturbed
them, yet such calamities would come upon them as would make them
tremble:

be troubled, ye careless ones; or, "confident ones" (l); that live
securely, trusting in their present wealth and riches, and confident
that things will always continue as they are; be it known to you that
trouble will come, and better it would be for you if you were now
troubled for your sins, and truly repented of them, that the judgments
threatened, and coming, might be prevented:

strip ye, and make you bare; of your fine clothes, and beautiful
ornaments, in which they prided themselves, which used to be done in
time of mourning, [Eze 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze007.htm#027.md) or it
signifies that this should be their case, they would be stripped not
only of their richest clothes and decorating jewels, but of their
ordinary apparel, and left bare and naked by the enemy:

and gird sackcloth upon your loins; as a token of mourning; see [Gen
37:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#034.md) the word "sackcloth" is
supplied, as it is by Kimchi, and in the Syriac and Arabic versions;
though some understand it as a direction to gird their loins for servile
work, signifying what would be their condition and circumstances when
taken and carried captive by the enemy; they would no longer live at
ease, and in pleasure, as mistresses, but would serve as handmaids.

\(l\) "confidentes", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Isaiah 32:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 32:12</span></span>

They shall lament for the teats,.... Either of the beasts of the field,
that should be dried up, and give no milk, through the great drought
that should be upon the land; or through the waste of the herbage by the
enemy; or else of the women, their breasts and paps, which should afford
no milk for their infants, through the famine that should press them
sore, which would occasion great lamentation, both in mothers and
children; though some think are to be understood of the fields, and are
explained by them in the next clause; the fruitful earth being compared
to a woman, its fields are like breasts or paps, which yield food and
nourishment, but now should not afford any, and therefore there would be
cause of lamentation. Jarchi interprets it, "they shall beat upon their
breasts" (m) a gesture used in lamentation to express exceeding great
grief and sorrow, [Luk 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013.md) some,
because the word rendered "lament" is of the masculine gender, and so
not applicable to women, render the words in connection with the
preceding verse [Isa 32:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#011.md) thus,

"gird sackcloth on your loins, and on your mourning breasts'' (n);

though they may be interpreted indefinitely, "there shall be lamentation
for the teats", among all sorts of people, men, women, and children:

for the pleasant fields, for the fruitful vine; as the fields are when
covered with corn and grass, and the vines with clusters of grapes, but
now should not be, either through drought, or by being foraged and
trampled on by the enemy.

\(m\) So it is explained in T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 27. 2. (n) So
Castalio.

[Isaiah 32:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 32:13</span></span>

Upon the land of my people shall come up thorns and briers,.... The
curse of the earth, the spontaneous productions of it, being
uncultivated, and this through want of men, they being destroyed or
carried captive by the enemy; this is to be understood of the land of
Judea, and not Samaria, as Aben Ezra; where the professing and covenant
people of God dwelt; which is mentioned to show the apostasy of this
people, for which ruin came upon their land, and the aggravation of it,
as well as the goodness of God to them, which continued to the last,
still considering them as his people. This respects not the desolation
of the country by the Assyrian army, nor by the Chaldeans, but rather by
the Romans, even their last destruction:

yea, upon all the houses of joy in the joyous city; not Samaria, the
head of the ten tribes, as some; but Jerusalem, the joy of the whole
earth, as Jarchi; and the "houses of joy" in it mean not public houses,
as taverns, and the like, where persons meet to revel and carouse, but
the houses of nobles, princes, and rich men, who lived voluptuously, in
great sensuality and carnal mirth, drinking wine in bowls, and chanting
to the sound of the viol, and using all instruments of music; but now
their houses, in which they enjoyed so much pleasure, should be
demolished, and briers and thorns should grow upon the spot where they
stood. Some render the word "burning", as in [Isa
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#024.md) "burning shall be on all the
houses" (o), &c.; and think it refers to the burning of the city of
Jerusalem, and the palaces or houses of nobles and rich men in it, which
was done both by the Chaldeans and by the Romans.

\(o\) Junius & Tremellius, Cocceius.

[Isaiah 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 32:14</span></span>

Because the palaces shall be forsaken,.... The palaces of the princes
and nobles shall be forsaken by them, they being obliged to flee from
the enemy, or being taken, and either slain, or carried captive. The
word in the Hebrew is in the singular number, "the palace", meaning the
royal palace; and so Aben Ezra and Jarchi interpret it of the king's
palace; though the Targum paraphrases it the house of the sanctuary, or
the temple, so Kimchi; which was left desolate, as Christ foretold it
should be, [Mat 23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038.md),

the multitude of the city shall be left; to take care of themselves, and
to the fury of their enemies, their princes and nobles being killed or
fled; or, "the city shall be left of the multitude" (p); the multitude
of inhabitants that were in it shall forsake it, and flee, or be
destroyed in it, so that few or none shall remain:

the forts and towers shall be for dens for ever; Ophel and Bachan, which
some take to be the names of two towers of Jerusalem; of Ophel we read
in [Ch2 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#003.md) but rather these intend
in general the high towers and strong fortifications of Jerusalem, which
being cut out of rocks, when demolished served for dens for thieves and
robbers, and wild creatures; and this being "for ever", that is, for a
very long time, shows that it cannot be applied to the destruction of
Jerusalem by the Chaldeans, and the seventy years' captivity; but it is
to be understood of the last destruction, which continues unto this day:

a joy of wild asses; which delight in wild and desert places; see [Job
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#005.md).

a pasture of flocks; where flocks of sheep feed, instead of being
inhabited by men. Jarchi's note is pretty remarkable,

"for the desire, or at the will, of the Ishmaelites, and for the feeding
of the Grecians, and their army;''

and certain it is that Jerusalem now is in the hands of the Ishmaelites,
or Turks. The Targum is,

"the place which was a house of joy and gladness for kings is now become
a spoil for armies.''

\(p\) So Gataker.

[Isaiah 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 32:15</span></span>

Until the Spirit be poured upon us from on high,.... That is, Jerusalem
shall lie in ruins until this time comes; which therefore cannot be
understood of the effusion of the Spirit on the day of Pentecost, which,
as it was before the destruction of the city by the Romans, so the
desolation it was brought to by the Chaldeans did not last so long; but
must be interpreted of a pouring forth of the Spirit in his gifts and
graces yet to come, which will bring on the fulness of the Gentiles, and
the conversion of the Jews, and till that time comes Jerusalem will
continue in a ruinous condition; the sense is the same with that of [Luk
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024.md) "Jerusalem shall be trodden down
of the Gentiles, until the times of the Gentiles are fulfilled". The
Targum of the place is,

"until refreshing comes to us from the face of him, whose Shechinah, or
Majesty, is in the highest heavens;''

with which may be compared [Act 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#019.md),

and the wilderness be a fruitful field, and the fruitful field be
counted for a forest; this will be the consequence, fruit, and effect of
the effusion of the Spirit in the latter day; that such parts of the
world as were like a wilderness, barren and unfruitful, producing
nothing but the briers and thorns of impiety, infidelity, superstition,
and idolatry, should now become like a fruitful field; the Gospel being
now preached everywhere, multitudes of souls converted, churches raised
and formed, and these filled with such as were laden with the fruits of
righteousness; and such places where the Gospel had been preached and
professed, and where churches had been planted, and there were some good
degree of fruitfulness in word and works, now should be abundantly more
fruitful, and the professors of religion more numerous, and look more
like a forest, for number of trees, than a field. Kimchi says this whole
paragraph shall be accomplished in the days of the Messiah.

[Isaiah 32:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 32:16</span></span>

Then judgment shall dwell in the wilderness,.... In the desert part of
the world, inhabited by Pagans, Papists, and Mahometans; where the
Scriptures, the rule of judgment, and where the Gospel, sometimes called
the judgment of the Lord, [Isa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#004.md)
had no place, now they shall have one, and an abiding one; and men of
judgment in spiritual and evangelical things, and such as do justice and
judgment, shall dwell there:

and righteousness remain in the fruitful field; both the doctrine and
practice of righteousness shall continue in the church of God, which
will be the glory of it; the righteous men will be the settled constant
inhabitants of it; these will be all righteous at this time, [Isa
60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021.md) not only by profession, but in
truth and reality; at least the far greater part; so the Targum
interprets it of those that do judgment and do righteousness.

[Isaiah 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 32:17</span></span>

And the work of righteousness shall be peace,.... Not works of
righteousness done by men, no, not by the best of men; for though peace
may be had and enjoyed in doing them, yet it does not arise and flow
from thence, because there is no justification by them, and salvation
through them, without which there can be no true solid peace; nor the
work of righteousness in men, which is their sanctification, and is
indeed the work of God, and follows upon the pouring forth of his
Spirit, and therefore bids fairer to be the sense than the former; yet
peace is one part and branch of the work itself; see [Rom
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md) but the work of righteousness
wrought out for man is rather meant, even the righteousness of Christ, a
work proposed unto him, which he undertook, and has wrought out, and
which was a work, and lay in working, and was a very toilsome and
laborious one; the consequence of which is "peace", inward peace of soul
now, and eternal peace hereafter; the righteousness of Christ applied
removes the guilt of sin from the conscience, it being perfect justifies
from all things, and yields a tranquillity and serenity of mind, which
is had in a way of believing, in this righteousness now, and it will
issue in everlasting peace and rest in the world to come; the end of the
perfect and upright man, who is perfectly justified by Christ's
righteousness, is peace, [Psa 37:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#037.md),

and the effect of righteousness, quietness and assurance for ever; or,
(q) "the service of righteousness"; the same as before, with the "work
of righteousness": a service which Christ performed, as a servant, in
obedience to the law, in the room and stead of his people; a service
perfectly and completely done, and what is well pleasing unto God; and
which, when a sensible sinner sees its interest in, produces "quietness"
of soul, under the mighty hand of God, amidst all the calamities in the
world, and judgments upon men, under the load of calumny and reproach
cast upon him, and notwithstanding all the charges and accusations of
Satan: moreover, this also gives "assurance for ever", of interest in
divine things, in the love of God, and relation to him as a Father, in
Christ as a Saviour and Redeemer, and in the glorious inheritance which
this gives a title to; or a holy confidence and boldness at the throne
of grace now, having this righteousness to make mention of as a
justifying one, and also hereafter, before the throne of judgment, this
being what will answer for him in a time to come.

\(q\) "et cultus justitiae", V. L. Montanus; "labor, seu operatio",
Piscator, Cocceius.

[Isaiah 32:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 32:18</span></span>

And my people shall dwell in a peaceable habitation,.... Jews and
Gentiles, and all the saints, shall dwell in peace and love one with
another, and shall be free from all the outrages and persecutions of the
enemy; which, when these happy times of the pouring forth of the Spirit
and of the spiritual reign of Christ come, will be no more:

and in sure dwellings; where they may dwell safely and confidently,
secure from all enemies, in no fear of them, and free from all hurt and
danger by them:

and in quiet resting places; where they may sleep and rest quietly, and
none to disturb them, and make them afraid: and though all this may be
understood of their private houses and habitations, yet may well enough
be applied to the several Christian communities and churches to which
they belong; where they shall enjoy much spiritual prosperity and
safety, great peace and quietness, comfort and rest, under the ministry
of the word, and administration of ordinances.

[Isaiah 32:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 32:19</span></span>

When it shall hail, coming down on the forest,.... The people of God
will be peaceable and quiet, safe and secure, when the judgments of God,
signified by a "hail" storm, shall come upon antichrist, and the
antichristian states, intended by the "forest", both for their numbers,
and for their barrenness and unfruitfulness; see [Rev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#021.md) and as so it sometimes is, by
the disposition of divine Providence, that a storm of hail falls not
upon fields and gardens, and the fruits of the earth, but upon forests
and desert lands; and as the plague of hail fell upon the Egyptians, and
not upon the Israelites in Goshen, to which some think the allusion is
here; so will it be when God comes to take vengeance on the enemies of
his people:

and the city shall be low in a low place: meaning not the city of
Jerusalem, surrounded with mountains, built under hills, and so under
the wind, and not exposed to the fury of a storm; but rather Babylon,
built in a plain, in a low plain, and yet should be brought lower still;
mystical Babylon is here meant, the city of Rome, that should "in
humiliation be humbled", as the words may be rendered, that is, brought
very low, exceeding low; see [Isa 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#005.md)
and which, at the time of the great hail, will be divided into three
parts, and the cities of the nations shall fall, and Babylon be had in
remembrance by the Lord to destroy it, [Rev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019.md).

[Isaiah 32:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 32:20</span></span>

Blessed are ye that sow beside all waters,.... In places well watered
and moistened, and so fit to receive the seed sown, which grows up, and
brings forth much fruit, and amply rewards the pains of the sower, who
on that account is happy. These words are directed to the ministers of
the Gospel in the latter day; the word is compared to seed, and the
preachers of it to sowers of seed, who have a commission to preach the
Gospel to every creature; and in the latter day, in the spiritual reign
of Christ, to which the whole paragraph refers, they will sow the seed
of the word "by many waters"; or among great multitudes of people,
signified hereby, and with great success, great numbers both of Jews and
Gentiles will be converted:

that send forth thither the feet of the ox and the ass; which were used
in ploughing and tilling the earth, and in making it fit to sow the seed
in it, and to eat off the heads of grain when it is grown thick and
full, which some think is here meant; and the one might also be used to
gather it in when ripe, and the other to tread and thresh it, as the
Targum and Jarchi interpret it; there being a law given the Jews, that
these two should not work together, [Deu
22:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#010.md) and from hence it may be
concluded, that these words refer to a time when this law should be
abolished; and the Jews themselves apply it to the times of the Messiah
(r); and it undoubtedly points to Gospel times, and even to those times
when the Jews shall be converted, and great numbers among the Gentiles
also, who shall join together in spreading the Gospel, and in promoting
the interest of Christ.

\(r\) Debarim Rabba, sect. 6. fol. 241. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 33](isa033.md)

</div>
