<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa026)  [Next](isa028) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 27](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 27:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 27

This chapter refers to the same times as the two foregoing ones [Isa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#001); and is a continuation of the
same song, or rather a new one on the same occasion; it is prophetical
of the last times, and of what shall be done in them, as the destruction
of the antichristian powers, and Satan at the head of them, [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001) the happy state of the church,
and its fruitfulness under the care and protection of the Lord, and his
affection for it, [Isa 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002) its peace,
prosperity, and flourishing condition, [Isa
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005) the nature, use, and end of all
its afflictions and chastisements, [Isa
27:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#007) the ruin and destruction of the
city of Rome, and its inhabitants, and of its whole jurisdiction, [Isa
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#010) a great gathering and conversion
of the Lord's people, both Jews and Gentiles, by the ministry of the
Gospel, [Isa 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#012).

[Isaiah 27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 27:1</span></span>

In that day the Lord with his sore and great and strong sword,....
Meaning either the sword of the Spirit, the Word of God, quick and
powerful, and sharper than a twoedged sword, [Eph
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#017) or else some sore judgment of
God: some understand it of the Medes and Persians, by whom the Lord
would destroy the Babylonish monarchy; or rather it is the great power
of God, or his judiciary sentence, and the execution of it, the same
with the twoedged sword, which proceeds out of the mouth of the Word of
God, by which the antichristian kings and their armies will be slain,
[Rev 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015),

shall punish leviathan the piercing serpent (i), even leviathan that
crooked serpent; and he shall slay the dragon that is in the sea; by
which are meant, not literally creatures so called, though the Talmud
(k) interprets them of the whales, the leviathan male and female; but
mystically earthly princes and potentates, for their great power and
authority, their cruelty and voraciousness, their craft and cunning; so
the Targum and Aben Ezra interpret them of the kings of the earth; and
are to be understood either of distinct persons, or countries they rule
over: some think three are pointed at, as the Egyptians, Assyrians, and
Edomites, or Romans, so Jarchi; or the Greeks, Turks, and Indians, as
Kimchi. The Targum is,

"he shall punish the king who is magnified as Pharaoh the first, and the
king that is exalted as Sennacherib the second, and shall slay the king
that is strong as the dragon (or whale) that is in the sea.''

Some are of opinion that only one person or kingdom is here meant,
either the king of Egypt, compared to such a sea monster, because of the
river Nile, that watered his country; see [Eze
29:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze029.htm#003) others, the king of Babylon,
which city was situated by the river Euphrates, and is described as
dwelling on many waters, [Jer 51:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#013)
and others the king of Tyre, which was situated in the sea; it seems
most likely that all tyrannical oppressors and cruel persecutors of the
church are intended, who shall be destroyed; and particularly Rome
Pagan, signified by a red dragon, [Rev
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003) and Rome Papal, by a beast the
dragon gave his power to, which rose out of the sea, and by another out
of the earth, which spoke like a dragon, [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001) both the eastern and western
antichrists may be included; the eastern antichrist, the Turk, whose
dominions are large, like the waters of the sea; and the western
antichrist, the whore of Rome, described as sitting on many waters, [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001) both which are comparable to
serpents and dragons for their cruelty and poison; moreover, Satan, at
the head of all these, called the dragon, the old serpent, and devil,
must be taken into the account, who is the last enemy that will be
destroyed; he will be taken and bound a thousand years, and then, being
loosed, will be retaken, and cast into the lake of fire, where the beast
and false prophet be, [Rev 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001).
Kimchi thinks this prophecy belongs to the times of Gog and Magog.

\(i\) Or boom, or bar-serpent, "serpentem vectem", V. L. and Montanus;
the same, as the Bishop of Bergen thinks, with the "soeormen", or sea
snake, which often lies stretched out before a creek, like a boom, to
block up the passage; and is soon bent, in a curve, in folds, and is
soon again in a straight line, like a pole or beam; see his History of
Norway, p. 206, 207. (k) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 74. 2.

[Isaiah 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 27:2</span></span>

In that day sing ye unto her,.... The congregation of Israel, as the
Targum; or rather the church of Christ; for after, and upon the
destruction of his and her enemies, there will be great rejoicing and
singing alternately, and by responses, as the word signifies; see [Rev
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001). Gussetius (l) renders it,
"afflict her"; as if spoken by the Lord to the enemies to do their worst
to her, and he would take care of her, that it shall be in vain, and to
no purpose, since he would keep her:

A vineyard of red wine; as the people of the Jews are compared to one,
[Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001) so is the church of Christ
under the Gospel dispensation; see [Sol
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#011) a vineyard is a spot of ground
separated from others, and the church and people of God are separated
from the rest of the world by electing, redeeming, and calling grace; a
vineyard is a place set with various vines, so is the church; there is
Christ the true vine, the principal one, which stands in the first
place, [Joh 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001) and there are
particular congregated churches, which belong to the vineyard, the
general or catholic church, [Sol 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#013)
and there are particular believers that may be so called, [Sol
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#011) moreover, sometimes in vineyards
other trees are planted besides vines, as barren fig trees, [Luk
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#006) and so there are in the visible
church of God nominal believers, carnal professors, trees without fruit;
there are no true vines but such as are ingrafted and planted in Christ,
and who, through union to him, and abiding in him, bring forth fruit; a
vineyard is the property of some one person, as this is of Christ, whose
it is by his own choice, by his Father's gift, by inheritance, by
purchase, as well as it is of his planting, and under his care;
vineyards are valuable, pleasant, and profitable, but exposed to beasts
of prey, and therefore to be fenced and guarded; all which may be
applied to the church of Christ, which shall, in the latter day
especially, be very fruitful, and answer to this character given her in
this song, a vineyard "of red wine"; the allusion is to such a vineyard,
in which vines grow, that bring forth grapes, productive of the best
wine, as the red was reckoned in the eastern countries; see [Gen
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#012) and so Jarchi and Kimchi
interpret it; this is a vineyard very different from that in [Isa
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#005) and from the vine of Israel, [Hos
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#001) the fruit of it, signified by
"red wine", may intend the graces of the Spirit, which like grapes, the
fruit of the vine, grow in clusters; where one is, all of them are, and
come from Christ, the vine, from whom all the fruit of divine grace is
found: and which receive their tincture from the blood of Christ, their
vigour and their usefulness; and may be said, like wine, to cheer the
heart of God and man, [Jdg 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#013) grace
when in exercise is delightful to God and Christ, [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009) and gives pleasure to other
saints, [Psa 34:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#001) and as the fruit of
the vine must be squeezed ere the liquor can be had, so the graces of
the Spirit are tried by afflictive dispensations of Providence, by which
the preciousness and usefulness of them are made known; moreover, the
fruits of righteousness, or good works, may be also intended, by which
the graces of faith and repentance are evidenced, and which, when
performed aright, are acceptable to God through Christ, and profitable
to men; and for these fruits of grace and good works the church will be
famous in the latter day.

\(l\) Comment. Ebr. p. 622.

[Isaiah 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 27:3</span></span>

I the Lord do keep it,.... The vineyard, the church, not only by his
ministers, called the keepers of it, [Sol
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#012) but by himself, by his own power;
for unless he keeps it, who is Israel's keeper, the watchmen wake in
vain; he keeps his church and people from sin, that it does not reign
over them; and from Satan's temptations, that they are not destroyed by
them; and from the malice of the world, and the poison of false
teachers, that they are not ruined thereby; and from a final and total
falling away; the Lord's preservation of his church and people will be
very manifest in the latter day:

I will water it every moment; both more immediately with the dews of his
grace, and the discoveries of his love; that being like dew, it comes
from above, is according to the sovereign will of God, without the
desert of man falls in the night, silently, gently, and insensibly, and
greatly refreshes and makes fruitful, [Hos
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005) and more immediately by the
ministry of the word and ordinances, by his ministers, the preachers of
the Gospel, who water as well as plant, [Co1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006) these are the clouds he sends
about to let down the rain of the Gospel upon his church and people, by
which they are revived, refreshed, and made fruitful, [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006) and this being done "every
moment", shows, as the care of God, and his constant regard to his
people, so that without the frequent communications of his grace, and
the constant ministration of his word and ordinances, they would wither
and become fruitless; but, by means of these, they are as a watered
garden, whose springs fail not, [Isa
58:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#011),

lest any hurt it; as would Satan, who goes about as a roaring lion,
seeking whom he may devour; and the men of the world, who are the boar
out of the wood, and the wild beast out of the field, that would waste
and destroy the vineyard; and false teachers, who are the foxes that
would spoil the vines, [Pe1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008) but,
to prevent any such hurt and damage, the Lord undertakes to keep the
church, his vineyard, himself, which he repeats with some addition, to
declare the certainty of it; or, "lest he visit it" (m); that is, an
enemy, as some (n) supply it; lest he should break down the hedge, and
push into it, and waste it; or Jehovah himself, that is, as Gussetius
(o) interprets it, while Jehovah the Father, [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001), is striking leviathan, or
inflicting his judgments upon his enemies, Jehovah the Son promises to
take care of his vineyard, the church, that the visitation does not
affect them, and they are not hurt by it, but are safe and secure from
it; which is a much better sense than that of Kimchi mentioned by him, I
will water it every moment, "that not one leaf of it should fail"; the
same is observed by Ben Melech, as the sense given by Donesh Ben Labrat:

I will keep it night and day; that is, continually, for he never
slumbers nor sleeps; he has kept, and will keep, his church and people,
through all the vicissitudes of night and day, of adversity and
prosperity, they come into: how great is the condescension of the Lord
to take upon him the irrigation and preservation of his people! how dear
and precious must they be to him! and what a privilege is it to be in
such a plantation as this, watered and defended by the Lord himself!

\(m\) "ne forte visitet eum", Munster, Pagninus, Tigurine version. (n)
So Munster, Pagninus, Vatablus, and Ben Melech. (o) Comment. Ebr. p.
668, 669.

[Isaiah 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 27:4</span></span>

Fury is not in me,.... Against his vineyard he takes so much care of,
his church and people, whom he has loved with an everlasting love; they
are indeed deserving of his wrath, but he has not appointed them to it,
but has appointed his Son to bear it for them, who has delivered them
from wrath to come, and they being justified by his blood and
righteousness, are saved from it; and though the Lord chastises them for
their sins, yet not in wrath and sore displeasure; there is no wrath or
fury in his heart towards them, nor any expressed in the dispensations
of his providence:

who would set the briers and thorns against me in battle? either
suggesting the weakness of his people, who, was he to deal with them as
their sins and corruptions deserved, for which they may be compared to
thorns and briers, they would be as unable to bear his wrath and fury as
briers and thorns could to withstand a consuming fire; or rather
intimating, that should such persons rise up in his vineyard, the
church, as often do, comparable to briers and thorns for their
unfruitfulness and unprofitableness, for the hurt and mischief they do,
and the grief and trouble they give to the people of God, as hypocrites
and false teachers, and all such as are of unsound principles, and bad
lives and conversations, and which are very offensive to the Lord; and
therefore, though there is no fury in him against his vineyard, the
church, yet there is against those briers and thorns, wicked men, whom
he accounts his enemies, and will fight against them in his wrath, and
consume them in his fury; see [Sa2
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#006),

I would go through them: or, "step into it" (p); the vineyard, where
those briers or thorns are set and grow up; the meaning is, that he
would step into the vineyard, and warily and cautiously tread there,
lest he should hurt any of the vines, true believers, while he is
plucking up and destroying the briers and thorns; or contending, in a
warlike manner, with carnal and hypocritical professors:

I would burn them together; or, "I would burn" out of it (q); that is,
gather out of the vineyard the briers and thorns, and bind them up in
bundles, as the tares in the parable, which signify the same as here,
and burn them, or utterly destroy them; though the words may be
rendered, "who will give, or set, me a brier and thorn in battle, that I
should go against it, and burn it up together?", or wholly (r) and the
meaning is, who shall irritate or provoke me to be as a brier and thorn,
to hurt, grieve, and distress my people, to cause me to go into them,
and against them, in a military way, in wrath and fury to consume them?
no one shall. This rendering and sense well agree with the first clause
of the verse. Jerom renders it thus, "who will make me an adamant
stone?" as the word "shamir" is rendered in [Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009), [Zac
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#012) and gives the sense, who will
make me hard and cruel, so as to overcome my nature, my clemency, to go
forth in a fierce and warlike manner, and walk upon my vineyard, which
before I kept, and burn it, which I had hedged about?

\(p\) "gradiar in eam"; so some in Vatablus; "caute ingrediar eam",
Piscator. (q) "succendam ex ea", Junius & Tremellius; "comburam illos ex
ipsa", Piscator. (r) So De Dieu; and some in Vatablus; and which is
approved by Noldius, who renders it in like manner, to the same sense,
Ebr. Concord. Part. p. 409. No. 1671.

[Isaiah 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 27:5</span></span>

Or let him take hold of my strength,.... Not on the law, as the Targum
and Kimchi; but on Christ, as Jerom rightly interprets it; who is the
strength and power of God, the man of his right hand he has made strong
for himself; a strong tower, as the word signifies, a rock of defence,
to whom saints may betake themselves, and be safe; in him they have
righteousness and strength; in him is everlasting strength. The sense
is, let the people of God, any and everyone of them, when afflicted and
chastised by him particularly, and are ready to conclude that he is
wroth with them, and is dealing with them in hot displeasure; let such
look to Christ, and lay hold, and a strong hold, on him by faith, which
will be greatly to their advantage and support. The Targum and Jarchi
render translated "or", by "if"; and then the words are to be read thus,
"if he will", or "should, take hold of my strength", or fortress (s);
or, as some render them, "O that he would (t)", &c.; it follows,

that he may make peace with me, and he shall make peace with me; or
rather, "he shall make peace with me, peace shall he make with me". The
phrase is doubled for the certainty of it; and the meaning is, not that
the believer who lays hold by faith on Christ, Jehovah's strength, shall
make peace with him; which is not in the power of any person to do, no,
not the believer by his faith, repentance, or good works; but Christ the
power of God, on whom he lays hold, he shall make peace, as he has, by
the blood of his cross, and as the only peacemaker; and hereby the
believer may see himself reconciled to God, and at peace with him; and
therefore may comfortably conclude, under every providence, that there
is no fury in God towards him.

\(s\) "si prehenderit munitionem meam", Noldius. (t) "Utiuam, O si
apprehenderit munitionem meam", Forerius.

[Isaiah 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 27:6</span></span>

He shall cause them that come of Jacob to take root,.... That is, the
posterity of Jacob, the seed of Israel, in a spiritual sense; such who
are Israelites indeed, in whom there is no guile; these shall be so far
from being plucked up, or rooted out of the vineyard, the church, that
they shall take deeper root, and their roots shall spread yet more and
more; they shall be rooted and grounded in the love of God, and also in
Christ, and be built up in him, as well as firmly settled and
established in the church, [Eph 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#017)
or, "them that come to Jacob (u)"; proselytes unto him, converted
Gentiles, that come to the church of Christ, signified by "Jacob", and
give up themselves unto it, and are added to it, these shall take root.
The words may be rendered, in days "to come, he shall cause Jacob to
take root": or, he "shall take root", as Aben Ezra, Jarchi, and Ben
Melech supply the words; and so they are a prophecy of the stability and
prosperous estate of the church in the latter day:

Israel shall blossom and bud, and fill the face of the world with fruit;
which may be understood of the fruits of grace and righteousness, which
shall appear upon the people of God, in all parts of the world; or of
the great number of converts everywhere; so the Targum, by "fruit",
understands children's children; the sense is, that when the church of
God, in the latter day, is settled and established, grounded in Christ,
and in the doctrines of grace, it shall be in very flourishing and
fruitful circumstances, abounding in grace and good works, and with
numbers of converts; it shall be like the mustard tree, when it becomes
so great a tree as that the birds of the air make their nests in it; and
as the stone cut out of the mountain without hands, when it becomes a
great mountain, and fills the whole earth, [Mat
13:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#031) compare with this [Isa
37:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa037.htm#031).

\(u\) So some in Gataker.

[Isaiah 27:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 27:7</span></span>

Hath he smitten him, as he smote those that smote him?.... No; the Lord
does smite his people by afflictive dispensations of his providence; he
smites them in their persons, and families, and estates; see [Isa
57:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#017) as he smote Israel, by suffering
them to be carried captive, and as the Jews are now smitten by him in
their present state; yet not as he smote Pharaoh, with his ten plagues,
and him and his host at the Red Sea; or as he smote Sennacherib and his
army, by an angel, in one night; or as Amalek was smitten, and its
memory perished; or as he will smite mystical Babylon, which will be
utterly destroyed; all which have been smiters of God's Israel, who,
though smitten of God, yet not utterly destroyed; the Jews returned from
captivity, and, though now they are scattered abroad, yet continue a
people, and will be saved. God deals differently with his own people,
his mystical and spiritual Israel, than with their enemies that smite
them: he afflicts them, but does not destroy them, as he does their
enemies; he has no fury in him towards his people, but he stirs up all
his wrath against his enemies:

or, is he slain according to the slaughter of them that are slain by
him? or, "of his slain" (w); the Lord's slain, or Israel's slain, which
are slain by the Lord for Israel's sake; though Israel is slain, yet not
in such numbers, to such a degree, or with such an utter slaughter, as
their enemies; though the people of God may come under slaying
providences, yet not such as wicked men; they are "chastened, but not
killed"; and, though killed with the sword, or other instruments of
death, in great numbers, both by Rome Pagan and Papal, yet not according
to the slaughter as will be made of antichrist and his followers, [Rev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#015).

\(w\) "occisorum ejus", Montanus; "interfecti illius", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[Isaiah 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 27:8</span></span>

In measure, when it shooteth forth, thou wilt debate with it,.... Or,
"when he sendeth it forth" (x); when God sends forth an affliction on
his people, or gives it a commission to them, as all are sent by him, he
does it with moderation; he proportions it to their strength, and will
not suffer them to be afflicted above what they are able to bear; and
as, in afflicting, he debates and contends with his people, having a
controversy with them, so he contends with the affliction he sends, and
debates the point with it, and checks and corrects it, and will not
suffer it to go beyond due bounds; and in this the afflictions of God's
people differ from the afflictions of others, about which he is careless
and unconcerned:

he stayeth his rough wind in the day of his east wind: when afflictions,
like a blustering and blasting east wind, threaten much mischief, and to
carry all before them, Jehovah, from whom they have their commission,
and who holds the winds in his fist, represses them, stops the violence
of them, and gradually abates the force of them, and quite stills them,
when they have answered the end for which they are sent: or "he
meditateth" (y); or speaketh, as Jarchi interprets it, "by his rough
wind in the day of his east wind"; God sometimes meditates hard things
against his people, and speaks unto them by the rough dispensations of
his providence, admonishes them of their sins, and brings them to a
sense and acknowledgment of them, which is his view in suffering them to
befall them; or, "he removes by his rough wind" (z); their fruit, so
Kimchi interprets it; as a rough wind blows off the blossoms and fruits,
so the Lord, by afflictions, removes the unkind blossoms and bad fruit
from his people, their sins and transgressions, as it follows.

\(x\) "in emittendo eam", Montanus. (y) "meditatus est", V. L. so it is
used in Psal. i. 2. It sometimes intends a great sound and noise, such
as the roaring of a lion, Isa. xxxi. 4. and Gussetius here interprets it
of thunder, Ebr. Comment. p. 202. so Castalio renders it, "sonans suo
duro spiritu". (z) "Removit in vento suo duro", Pagninus, Montanus;
"removebit", Vatablus; "abstulit", Tigurine version, Piscator; so Ben
Melech observes that the word has the signification of removing in Prov.
xxv. 4, 5.

[Isaiah 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 27:9</span></span>

By this therefore shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged,.... Or
"expiated", or "atoned" (a); not that afflictions are atonements for
sin, or give satisfaction to divine justice for it; but they are the
means of bringing the Lord's people to a sense of their sins, and to
repentance and humiliation for them, and confession of them, and of
leading them to the blood and sacrifice of Christ, by which they are
expiated and atoned, and which the Spirit of God brings near, and
applies unto them; whereby their sins, they are convicted of by means of
afflictions, and which lay heavy upon their consciences, are purged
away, and removed from them:

and this is all the fruit, to take away sin; this is the design and use
of afflictions, the profit and advantage of them to the saints, that,
being humbled for their sins, they depart from them, leave and forsake
them; as well as the guilt of them is taken away from their consciences,
through the application of pardoning grace, upon their repentance; see
[Job 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#008) this shows another
difference between the afflictions of God's people and of others:
namely, in the use and end of them. The sin of idolatry seems to be
particularly designed by what follows; unless the sin of the present
Jews, in their disbelief and rejection of the Messiah, should be rather
intended; which, through their long affliction, they will be convinced
of in the latter day, and it will be taken away from them, and be purged
and expiated through the atoning sacrifice of Christ, the Saviour and
Deliverer, they will embrace, [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025),

when he maketh all the stones of the altar as chalkstones that are
beaten in sunder; that is, when Jacob, or the people of the Jews, being
convinced of their idolatry by their afflictions, shall pull down all
their idolatrous altars; perhaps particularly referring to that which
Ahaz made, [Kg2 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010) and remove the
stones thereof, and break them to pieces, as chalkstones for lime, which
is easily done:

the groves and the images shall not stand up; erect, to be worshipped;
but shall be thrown down, demolished, and broke to pieces; and, by thus
abandoning their idols and idolatrous practices, they will show the
sense they have of their sins, and the sincerity of their repentance;
and it is to be observed, that the Jews, after their return from the
Babylonish captivity, never practised idolatry more, not in the literal
sense; perhaps some respect may be had here to the time when they shall
look on him whom they have pierced, and mourn; and when they shall
renounce all their legal sacrifices, traditions of the elders, and their
own righteousness, their idols, and look alone to the sacrifice of
Christ, and declare against all the idolatry of the church of Rome, and
all antichristian worship.

\(a\) "propitiabitur", Pagninus, Montanus; "expiabitur", Piscator.

[Isaiah 27:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 27:10</span></span>

Yet the defenced city shall be desolate,.... Or "but", or
"notwithstanding" (b); though the Lord deals mercifully with his own
people, and mixes mercy with their afflictions, and causes them to issue
well, and for their good; yet he does not deal so with others, his and
their enemies: for by the "defenced city" is not meant Jerusalem, as
many interpret it, so Kimchi; nor Samaria, as Aben Ezra; nor literal
Babylon, as others; but mystical Babylon, the city of Rome, and the
whole Roman or antichristian jurisdiction, called the "great" and
"mighty" city, [Rev 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010) which will
be destroyed, become desolate, or "alone" (c), without inhabitants:

and the habitation forsaken and left like a wilderness; or
"habitations"; the singular for the plural; even beautiful ones, as the
word (d) signifies, the stately palaces of the pope and cardinals, and
other princes and great men, which, upon the destruction of Rome, will
be deserted, and become as a wilderness, uninhabited by men:

there shall the calf feed: not Ephraim, as Jarchi, from [Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018) nor the king of Egypt, as
Kimchi, from [Jer 46:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#020) nor the
righteous that shall attack the city, and spoil its substance, as the
Targum; see [Psa 68:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#030) but literally,
and which is put for all other cattle, or beasts of the field, that
should feed here, without any molestation or disturbance:

there shall he lie down, and consume the branches thereof; which the
Targum interprets of the army belonging to the city; it denotes the
utter destruction of it, and its inhabitants; see [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002). Some of the Jewish writers (e)
interpret this passage of Edom or Rome, and of the Messiah being there
to take vengeance on it.

\(b\) "sed", Junius & Tremellius, Forerius; "tamen, nihilominus",
Calvin. (c) "solitaria", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator. (d) "amoenum habitaculum", Tigurine version; Piscator (e)
Shemot Rabba, sect. 1. fol. 91. 3.

[Isaiah 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 27:11</span></span>

When the boughs thereof are withered, they shall be broken off,.... This
city is compared to a tree, whose branches are not only gnawed and
consumed by cattle, as in the former verse [Isa
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#010); but which, in a hot dry summer,
are withered and dried up, and so are easily broken, and are fit for
nothing but the fire; hence it follows:

the women come and set them on fire; or "gather" them (f) in order to
burn them; as is commonly done with withered branches, [Joh
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#006) it may design the burning of the
whore of Rome by the kings of the earth; for as antichrist is signified
by a woman, so the ten kings that shall hate her, and burn her flesh
with fire, may be signified by women; see [Rev
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#016). The word here used signifies to
illuminate, or give light, which is done when wood is set on fire; hence
the Vulgate Latin renders it, "women coming, and teaching it"; and so
the Targum,

"women shall come into the house of their gods, and teach them;''

as the woman Jezebel does, [Rev 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020)
the former sense is best:

for it is a people of no understanding; or "understandings": that is,
the people that inhabit the above city, they are sottish and stupid,
have no understanding of God and divine things, of the Scriptures, and
the doctrines of them; among whom this maxim obtains, that ignorance is
the mother of devotion; they are under a judicial blindness, are given
up to strong delusions to believe a lie, [Th2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010),

therefore he that made them will not have mercy on them; and he that
formed them will show them no favour; but his wrath shall be poured out
upon them to the uttermost, which will be fulfilled in the seven vials,
and in the destruction of Rome, and the everlasting ruin of the
worshippers of the man of sin; see [Rev
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001) no argument can be taken from
men's being God's creatures and offspring, and from his being the former
and maker of them, to their salvation; or because they are so, therefore
shall be saved when they are sinful and sottish; for, being like brutes
without understanding, they shall perish as they, without mercy.

\(f\) So Abendana in Miclol Yophi observes, this is the sense some give
of the word, taking it to be the same as is used in Cant. v. 1.

[Isaiah 27:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 27:12</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day,.... When the song will be sung,
[Isa 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#002) when God will appear to have
taken particular care of his church, and is about to bring it into a
flourishing condition; when its troubles and afflictions will come to an
end, with a sanctified use of them; and when the city of Rome will be
destroyed, and all the antichristian powers, then will be the conversion
of the Jews; for antichrist stands in the way of that work:

that the Lord shall beat off; or "beat out" (g); alluding either to the
beating off of fruit from a tree, or to the beating out of grain from
the ear; and signifies the separating of the Lord's people in the
effectual calling from the rest of the world; as the fruit beaten off is
separated from the tree, and corn beaten out is separated from the ear
and chaff; for this beating off does not intend judgment, but mercy; and
is done not by the rod of affliction, but by the rod of the Lord's
strength sent out of Zion, even the Gospel, the power of God to
salvation; which, in the ministration of it, should reach

from the channel of the river unto the stream of Egypt; from the river
Euphrates, on the banks of which was the city of Babylon, to the river
Nile in Egypt, which were the limits and boundaries of the land of
Israel, [Deu 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024) and in which places
many Jews (h) were, or would be, as in the following verse [Isa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013). The Septuagint version is,

"from the ditch of the river to Rhinocorura;''

which, Jerom says, is a town on the borders of Egypt and Palestine. The
meaning is, that the Lord would find out his people, wherever they were,
in those parts, and separate and call them by his grace, and gather them
to himself, and to his church and people, as follows:

and ye shall be gathered one by one, O ye children of Israel; as fruit
is gathered up, when beaten off of the tree; and the phrase "one by one"
denotes either the fewness of them, and the gradual manner in which they
will be gathered; or rather, since this does not so well suit with the
conversion of the Jews, which will be of a nation at once, it may
signify the completeness of this work, that they shall be everyone
gathered, not one shall be left or lost, but all Israel shall be saved;
or it may be also expressive of the conjunction of them, and union of
them one to another, in the Gospel church state, into which they shall
be gathered, as fruit beaten off, and gathered up, is laid together in a
storehouse. To this sense agrees the Targum,

"ye shall be brought near one to another, O ye children of Israel (i).''

\(g\) "excutiat", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Cocceius. (h)
Ben Melech interprets the river of the river Sabation or the Sabbatical
river, beyond which the Jews generally suppose the ten tribes are, and
from whence they will come at the time of their restoration; and, as
this writer says, will come to Egypt, and there be gathered together
with their brethren, the children of this captivity, Judah and Benjamin,
which are scattered in every corner, and join one another. (i) "ad unum
unum", Montanus; "unus ad unum"; so some in Vatablus, Forerius.

[Isaiah 27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 27:13</span></span>

And it shall come to pass in that day,.... When the Lord is about to do
the above things, and in order to it. The Talmudists (k) apply this text
to the world to come, or times of the Messiah, when the ten tribes shall
be returned:

that the great trumpet shall be blown; meaning not the edict or
proclamation of Cyrus, but the ministration of the Gospel, called a
"trumpet", in allusion to those that were ordered by Moses to be made
for the congregation of Israel, [Num
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001), or to the jubilee trumpet, [Lev
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#009) or with respect to any trumpet
giving a musical sound; the Gospel being a joyful sound, a sound of
love, grace, and mercy through Christ, of peace, pardon, righteousness,
and salvation by him; and which may be called a "great" one, the author
of it, God, being great; and it is the effect of great love, and the
produce of great wisdom; it proclaims and publishes great things, great
promises, great truths, and a great salvation; it gives a great sound,
which has and will again go into all the world, and reach to the ends of
the earth; and has been, and will be, attended with great power; the
"blowing" of it intends the ministry of the word, which to perform
aright requires ability and skill; and here it respects the ministration
of it in the latter day, when this Gospel trumpet will be blown more
clearly, and without any jar, discord, and confusion; and more loudly,
openly, and publicly; and more effectually, and to greater purpose:

and they shall come which were ready to perish in the land of Assyria,
and the outcasts in the land of Egypt; all mankind are in a perishing
condition, but all are not sensible of it; some are, and they become so
through the preaching of the word, attended with the power and Spirit of
God; whereby they are convinced of sin, and of their lost estate by
nature; their consciences are loaded with guilt, their souls are filled
with a sense of wrath; they have a sight of sin, but not of a Saviour
from it, or of the pardon of it; they have a view of a broken law, which
curses and condemns, and of injured justice brandishing its sword
against them, but see they have no righteousness to satisfy one or the
other; and find themselves in a starving condition, ready to perish with
hunger; and are like the wretched infant "cast out" into the open field,
to the "loathing" of its person: and these now, whether in Assyria or in
Egypt, or wherever they are, the Gospel trumpet will reach them, and
encourage them to come; and powerful and efficacious grace accompanying
it will engage and cause them to "come" first to Christ as poor
perishing sinners, and venture their souls on him for life and
salvation; they shall come to him in a way of believing, for pardon,
cleansing, rest, food, righteousness, and life; and then they shall come
to his churches, and give up themselves unto them, to walk with them:

and shall worship the Lord in the holy mount at Jerusalem; in the Gospel
church, signified frequently by Mount Zion and Jerusalem; see [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022) where the Jews shall come, when
converted, and join themselves, and worship God internally and
externally, in spirit and in truth: and it may be true of Mount Zion,
and of Jerusalem, in a literal sense, which will be rebuilt, and
inhabited by the Jews, and become a place of divine worship.

\(k\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 110. 2. Midrash Kohelet. fol. 68. 3.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 28](isa028)

</div>
