<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Isaiah Index](isa)  
  [Previous](isa012)  [Next](isa014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Isaiah Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001)

[Isaiah](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">isa 13:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ISAIAH 13

This chapter contains a prophecy of the destruction of Babylon,
literally understood as a type and exemplar of the destruction of the
mystical Babylon, so often spoken of in the book of the Revelation: an
account is given of the persons that should be the instruments of it,
and of the desolation they should make; which would issue in the utter
ruin of that once famous city. The title of the prophecy, and the person
that had it, and brought it, are expressed, [Isa
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001) orders are given to the Medes and
Persians to prepare for war, [Isa 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#002)
and are described as the Lord's sanctified ones, his mighty ones, and
who rejoiced in his highness, [Isa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003) by the multitude of them, by the
length of the way they came, and the end of their coming, by divine
direction, and as the instruments of God's wrath, to destroy the land of
the Chaldeans, [Isa 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004) wherefore the
inhabitants of it are called to howling, because that destruction from
the Lord was at hand, [Isa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006) the
effects of which were fainting, fear, consternation, pain, and sorrow,
without the least relief and comfort, [Isa
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#007) the causes of which were their
sin and iniquity, particularly their arrogance, pride, and haughtiness,
[Isa 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#011) which destruction is
further described by the fewness of men that should be left in the land,
[Isa 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#012) by the strange revolution
made in it, and the confusion it should be in, [Isa
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#013) by the fear and flight of men,
both of their own and other nations, that should be among them, [Isa
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#014) by the slaughter of men and
children, the plunder of their houses, and the ravishing of their wives,
[Isa 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#015) the persons that should be
employed as instruments are mentioned by name, and represented as not to
be bribed with gold and silver; and as merciless and uncompassionate,
that should spare neither young men nor children, [Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017) and the chapter is concluded
with a particular account of the destruction of Babylon; which is
aggravated, by observing its former glory; by comparing its ruin to the
overthrow of Sodom and Gomorrah; by its being no more to be inhabited by
men within, nor to have Arabian shepherds pitching their tents without
it; and by being the habitation of wild beasts, satyrs, dragons, and
doleful creatures, [Isa 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#019).

[Isaiah 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">isa 13:1</span></span>

The burden of Babylon,.... That is, a prophecy concerning Babylon, as
the word is rendered, [Pro 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001). The
Septuagint and Arabic versions translate it "the vision"; it signifies a
taking up (w) a speech against it, and pronouncing a heavy sentence on
it, such an one as should sink it into utter destruction; which will be
the case of mystical Babylon, when it shall be as a millstone cast into
the sea, never to be brought up again, [Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021). The Targum is,

"the burden of the cup of cursing to give Babylon to drink:''

after some prophecies concerning the Messiah and his kingdom, and the
church's song of praise for salvation by him, others are delivered out
concerning the enemies of the people of God, and their destruction, and
begin with Babylon the chief of these enemies, and into whose hands the
people of Israel would be delivered for a while; wherefore this prophecy
is given forth, in order to lay a foundation for comfort and relief,
when that should be their case; by which it would appear that they
should have deliverance from them by the same hand that should overthrow
them:

which Isaiah the son of Amoz did see: by a spirit of prophecy; for this
he saw not with his bodily eyes, though it was as clear and certain to
him as if he had. The Targum is,

"which Isaiah the son of Amoz prophesied.''

\(w\) a "tollere".

[Isaiah 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">isa 13:2</span></span>

Lift ye up a banner upon the high mountain,.... Or "upon the mountain
Nishphah"; some high mountain in Media or Persia, proper to set a
standard on, or erect a banner for the gathering men together, to enlist
themselves as soldiers, and so form an army to march into the land of
Chaldea. Vitringa thinks there may be an allusion to the mountain
Zagrius, which divides Media and Persia from Assyria, mentioned by
Strabo (x). Or "upon a high mountain"; any high mountain fit for such a
purpose; or "against the high mountain", as some (y) read it; meaning
Babylon, called a mountain, [Jer 51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025)
not because of its situation, for it was in a plain; but because of its
eminence above other cities and states. The Targum is,

"against the city that dwells securely, lift up a sign;''

a token of war, proclaim war against it, that lives at ease, and is in
peace; and so the word is used in the Talmudic language, as Kimchi
observes; and to this agrees Jarchi's note,

"to gather against the mountain that is quiet, and trusts in its
tranquillity, lift up a banner to the nations.''

Exalt the voice unto them; the Medes, mentioned by name in [Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017) such as were within call, or
were gathered together by the lifting up of the banner; such were to be
urged with great vehemency to enlist themselves, and engage in a war
against Babylon:

shake the hand; beckon with it to them that are afar off, that cannot
hear the voice:

that they may go into the gates of the nobles; that dwell in the city of
Babylon, where they might expect to find rich plunder; though some
understand this of the nobles or princes of the Medes and Persians, as
Kimchi observes, that should enter through the gates of Babylon into the
city; and by others it is interpreted of the soldiers coming to the
doors of the leaders or generals of the army, to give in their names,
and enlist themselves in their service; which well agrees with what goes
before.

\(x\) Geograph. l. 11. p. 359. (y) "contra montem excelsum", Forerius,
Sanctius.

[Isaiah 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">isa 13:3</span></span>

I have commanded my sanctified ones,.... The Medes and Persians, so
called, not because sanctified by the Spirit of God, or made holy
persons, through the regenerating and renewing grace of God, or purified
by the blood of Christ, and prepared for glory; but because they were
set apart in the mind and counsel of God for a special work and service,
and were qualified by him with courage and strength to perform it, and
therefore said to be his; and this command that was given them was not
by a voice from heaven, or in a message by one of his prophets; but by a
secret instinct, and, by the power of his providence, stirring them up
to engage in such an enterprise (z).

I have also called my mighty ones; meaning Cyrus and Darius, and the
officers of their armies, with the common soldiers, who were furnished
with might and strength to do his will, to which they were called in his
providence:

for mine anger; to execute his wrath upon the Babylonians; so the
Targum,

"that they may avenge my wrath upon them:''

or, "in mine anger"; which being stirred up, put him upon calling those
mighty ones to his service, and fitting them for it: literally it is,
"to my nose" (a); to be before him, to be at his beck and will, and to
minister his wrath and vengeance:

even them that rejoice in my highness; in doing that which tended to the
exaltation and glory of God; they went cheerfully about the work, and
exulted and triumphed in their success: or, "that rejoice my highness"
(b); make me glad, because I am glorified by them. So seven angels, the
Lord's holy and mighty ones, will be employed in pouring out the vials
of his wrath on mystical Babylon, [Rev
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#001).

\(z\) Vid. T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 8. 2. & Gloss. in ib. (a) "in ira mea",
Vatablus; "ad iram meam", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "in naso meo",
Montanus. (b) "exultantis celsitudinis meae", Montanus.

[Isaiah 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">isa 13:4</span></span>

The noise of a multitude in the mountains, like as of a great
people,.... That is, like the noise of a very numerous people; this
noise was heard either on the mountains of Media, where they flocked in
vast numbers to the standard set; or on the mountains upon the borders
of Chaldea, when the army under Cyrus was marching towards Babylon:

a tumultuous noise of the kingdoms of nations gathered together; for
Cyrus's army consisted of several kingdoms and nations; for besides the
thirty thousand Persians he brought with him into Media, where he was
made general of the Medes also, and was sent with the joint forces of
both nations against Babylon, the kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and
Ashchenaz, were prepared, gathered together, and called forth against
it, [Jer 51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027),

the Lord of hosts mustereth the host of the battle; or the warlike army:
it was the Lord, that has the armies of heaven and earth at his command,
who in his providence caused such a numerous army to be formed, directed
them where to march, and put them in battle array, and gave them the
victory.

[Isaiah 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">isa 13:5</span></span>

They come from a far country, from the end of heaven,.... The east, as
Kimchi observes; the Targum is, from the ends of the earth; the
furthermost parts of it, as Persia and Media were: the former is bounded
on the south side by the main ocean; and the latter, part of it by the
Caspian sea; and between Babylon and these kingdoms lay the large
kingdom of Assyria; so that this army might be truly said to come from a
far country:

even the Lord, and the weapons of his indignation; the Medes and
Persians, who were the instruments of his wrath and vengeance against
Babylon; just as Assyria is called the rod of his anger, [Isa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#005) with these he is said to come,
because this army was of his gathering, mustering, ordering, and
directing, in his providence; the end and design of which was,

to destroy the whole land; not the whole world, as the Septuagint render
it; but the whole land of Chaldea, of which Babylon was the metropolis.
The Targum is,

"to destroy all the wicked of the earth.''

[Isaiah 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">isa 13:6</span></span>

Howl ye, for the day of the Lord is at hand,.... These words are an
address to the Babylonians, who instead of rejoicing and feasting, as
Belshazzar and his nobles were the night that Babylon was taken, had
reason to howl and lament; seeing the day that the Lord had fixed for
their destruction was very near, and he was just about to come forth as
a judge to take vengeance on them; for though it was about two hundred
and fifty years from the time of this prophecy, to the taking of
Babylon, yet it is represented as at hand, to show the certainty of it,
both for the comfort of the Jewish captives, when they should be in it,
and for the awakening of the sluggish inhabitants, who were secure, and
thought themselves out of danger:

it shall come as a destruction from the Almighty: suddenly, swiftly, and
irresistibly: there is a beautiful paronomasia in the Hebrew text,
"ceshod mishaddai" (c); as destruction from the destroyer; from God, who
is able to save, and to destroy; he is almighty and all sufficient, so
some render the word; the hand of God was visible in it.

\(c\) .

[Isaiah 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">isa 13:7</span></span>

Therefore shall all hands be faint,.... Or hang down; that is, the hands
of all the Babylonians, the city being taken suddenly and at once, so
that they should not be able to lift them up to lay hold on a weapon,
and defend themselves:

and every man's heart shall melt; like wax before the fire; be
dispirited, and lose all their valour and courage, have neither power
nor heart to resist their enemies, and attempt to save themselves.

[Isaiah 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">isa 13:8</span></span>

And they shall be afraid,.... Troubled, dismayed, frightened, at the
sudden taking of the city, and at the sight of Cyrus's troops marching
up into the very heart of it, and to the king's palace:

pangs and sorrow shall take hold of them; as convulsions, pains in the
bowels, &c. more fully explained in the next clause:

they shall be in pain, as a woman that travaileth; that is in labour,
and ready to bring forth her child, whose pains are very sharp, and
agonies great; the same is said of the king of Babylon, [Jer
50:43](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#043),

they shall be amazed one at another; that so great a city should be so
surprised, and so suddenly taken; and that they shall not be able to
help one another; and that such as were so famous for courage and valour
should be at once so dispirited:

their faces shall be as flames; not red with blushing, through shame, as
Kimchi; but pale with fear, as the colour of flame, or, as the faces of
smiths, that work at a forge: the words may be rendered, "their faces
are as the faces of Lehabim" (d); the name of a people mentioned in [Gen
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013) the same with the Libians, which
were of a blackish or tawny colour; so Jarchi interprets it, and says
they were a people of a yellow complexion: and Aben Ezra observes, that
some interpret it of a nation like the Ethiopians; and so it denotes,
that the Babylonians, their faces should be black with distress and
anguish; see [Joe 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006).

\(d\) "ut facies Lehabim, sive Lybiorum facies eorum", Gataker.

[Isaiah 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">isa 13:9</span></span>

Behold, the day of the Lord cometh,.... Or "is come" (e); said in [Isa
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006) to be at hand, but now it is
represented in prophecy as already come:

cruel both with wrath and fierce anger; which, whether referred to "the
Lord", or to "the day", the sense is the same; the day may be said to be
cruel, and full of wrath and fury, because of the severity and
fierceness of the Lord's anger, exercised upon the Babylonians in it;
and he may be said to be so, not that he really is cruel, or exceeds the
bounds of justice, but because he seemed to be so to the objects of his
displeasure; as a judge may be thought to be cruel and severe by the
malefactor, when he only pronounces and executes a righteous judgment on
him; a heap of words are here made use of, to express the greatness and
fierceness of divine wrath:

to lay the land desolate; the land of the Chaldeans:

and he shall destroy the sinners thereof out of it; this shows that what
is before said most properly belongs to the Lord, to whom the
destruction of Babylon, and the country belonging to it, must be
ascribed; and indeed it was such as could not be brought about by human
force; the moving cause of which was the sin of the inhabitants, some of
whom were notorious sinners, for whose sakes it was destroyed by the
Lord, and they in the midst of it, or out of it; see [Psa
104:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#035).

\(e\) "venit", Piscator; "veniens", Montanus.

[Isaiah 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">isa 13:10</span></span>

For the stars of heaven,.... This and what follows are to be understood,
not literally, but figuratively, as expressive of the dismalness and
gloominess of the dispensation, of the horror and terror of it, in which
there was no light, no comfort, no relief, nor any hope of any; the
heavens and all the celestial bodies frowning upon them, declaring the
displeasure of him that dwells there:

and the constellations thereof shall not give their light; which are
assemblages of stars, or certain configurations of the heavenly bodies,
devised by the ancients; to which each of the names are given for the
help of the imagination and memory; the number of them are forty eight,
twelve in the Zodiac, twenty one on the northern side of it, and fifteen
on the southern. R. Jonah, mentioned both by Aben Ezra and Kimchi, says
that "Cesil", the word here used, is a large star, called in the Arabic
language "Suel", and the stars that are joined unto it are called by its
name "Cesilim"; so that, according to this, only one constellation is
meant; and Aben Ezra observes, that there are some that say that Cesil
is a star near to the south pole, on which, if camels look, they die;
but, says he, in my opinion it is "the scorpion's heart". Jerom's Hebrew
master interpreted it to him Arcturus; and it is in [Job
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#009) rendered Orion, and by the
Septuagint here; which is one of the constellations, and one of the
brightest; and the word being here in the plural number, the sense may
be, were there ever so many Orions in the heavens, they should none of
them give light. The Targum and Jarchi interpret it of the planets:

the sun shall be darkened in his going forth; as soon as it rises, when
it goes forth out of its chamber, as in [Psa
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#005) either by an eclipse of it, or by
dark clouds covering it:

and the moon shall not cause her light to shine: by night, which she
borrows from the sun; so that it would be very uncomfortable, day and
night, neither sun, moon, nor stars appearing, see [Act
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#020) by the sun, moon, and stars, may
be meant king, queen, and nobles, whose destruction is here prophesied
of; it being usual in prophetic language, as well as in other writers
(f), to express great personages hereby.

\(f\) "Solem Asiae Brutum appellat, stellasque salubres appellat
comites", Hor. Serm. 1. Satyr. 7.

[Isaiah 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">isa 13:11</span></span>

And I will punish the world for their evil,.... Not the whole world, but
the kingdom of Babylon, so called because of its large extent, and the
number of its inhabitants, just as the Roman empire is called the whole
world, [Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001) "evil" may be meant,
either of the evil of sin, which was the cause of punishment, or else of
the evil of punishment itself; and the sense be this, I will visit, or,
in a way of visitation, I will bring evil, or evils, upon the world; so
the Targum,

and the wicked for their iniquity, or "on the wicked their iniquity";
that is, I will visit on them, or inflict upon them, the punishment of
their iniquity; meaning the notorious and abandoned sinners among them,
see [Isa 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#009),

and I will cause the arrogancy of the proud to cease, and I will lay low
the haughtiness of the terrible: such as Nebuchadnezzar and Belshazzar,
famous for their pride, arrogance, and haughtiness, tyranny and
oppression, whereby they became terrible to others.

[Isaiah 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">isa 13:12</span></span>

I will make a man more precious than fine gold,.... Which may denote
either the scarcity of men in Babylon, through the slaughter made of
them; so things that are scarce and rare are said to be precious, [Sa1
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#001) or the resolution of the Medes to
spare none, though ever so much gold were offered to them, they being
not to be bribed therewith, [Isa 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017)
or that such should be the fear of men, that they would not be prevailed
upon to take up arms to defend themselves or their king, whatever
quantity of gold, even the best, was proposed unto them, a man was not
to be got for money:

even a man than the golden wedge of Ophir; which designs the same thing
in different words. The Targum gives another sense of the whole,
paraphrasing it thus,

"I will love them that fear me more than gold, of which men glory; and
those that keep the law more than the fine gold of Ophir;''

understanding it of the Israelites, that were in Babylon when it was
taken, and who were precious and in high esteem with the Medes and
Persians, more than gold, and whose lives they spared. Jarchi interprets
it particularly of Daniel, and of the honour that was done him by
Belshazzar, upon his reading and interpreting the writing on the wall,
[Dan 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#029). This is interpreted by the
Jews also of the King Messiah; for in an ancient writing (g) of theirs,
where having mentioned this passage, it is added, this is the Messiah,
that shall ascend and be more precious than all the children of the
world, and all the children of the world shall worship and bow before
him. Some take "Phaz", the word for fine gold, to be the name of a place
from whence it came, and therefore was so called; and that the kingdom
of Phez, in Africa, has its name from hence; and Ophir is taken to be
Peru in America; though others place it in India; and the Arabic version
renders it, "a man shall be more precious than a little stone that is"
brought "from India"; and the Septuagint version is, "than a stone in",
or "of sapphire".

\(g\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 71, 1.

[Isaiah 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">isa 13:13</span></span>

Therefore will I shake the heavens,.... Some think this was literally
fulfilled at the taking of Babylon, when the heavens were shook with
dreadful thunders and lightnings; as well as what is said above of the
sun, moon, and stars, not giving their light; and so is likewise what
follows,

and the earth shall remove out of her place; and that there was a
violent shock by an earthquake at the same time; but rather all this is
to be understood figuratively, as expressive of the great confusion men
would then be in, it being as if all nature was convulsed, and heaven
and earth were coming together, or rather dissolving:

in the wrath of the Lord of hosts, and in the day of his fierce anger;
when that should be; or through it, or because of it, as the Septuagint,
see [Isa 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#006) compare with this [Rev
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#018) which expresses the destruction
of mystical Babylon in much such language.

[Isaiah 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">isa 13:14</span></span>

And it shall be as the chased roe,.... That is, Babylon, and the
inhabitants thereof, shall be like a roe when hunted by the dogs; which
is a very fearful creature, and at the sight and noise of the dogs flies
here and there for safety; just so should be the most courageous of the
Babylonians, when their city should be taken. The Syriac version renders
it, "they shall be"; and the Septuagint and Arabic versions, "they that
are left shall be as the fleeing roe", such who fall not by the sword.
Kimchi interprets it of people of other nations that should be in
Babylon when taken, which agrees with the latter part of the verse:

and as a sheep that no man taketh up; the Septuagint and Arabic versions
read, "as a straying sheep", that flees from the wolf; and there being
none to fetch it back, and bring it to the flock, it wanders about and
perishes:

they shall every man turn to his own people, and flee everyone into his
own land; this is to be understood of such foreigners, who were called
in by the king of Babylon to his assistance, and the defence of the
city; who perceiving it to be taken, or in danger, fled to their own
countries, from whence they came, and so left the city naked and
defenceless, see [Jer 50:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#016).

[Isaiah 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">isa 13:15</span></span>

Every one that is found shall be thrust through,.... With a sword,
spear, or lance, and be slain; that is, everyone that is found in the
city of Babylon; and so the Targum adds,

"and everyone that is found in it shall be slain;''

so Kimchi, in the midst of it, or without; in the street, as Jarchi. The
orders of Cyrus (h) were, that those that were found without (in the
streets) should be slain; and to proclaim in the Syriac language, that
those that were within doors should continue there, but, if they were
found without, they should be put to death; which orders were executed,
and well agrees with this prophecy:

and everyone that is joined unto them shall fall by the sword; or
"added" unto them; any of other nations that joined them as auxiliaries,
see [Rev 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#004) or "that is gathered";
so the Septuagint, "they that are gathered"; that are gathered together
in a body to resist the enemy, and defend themselves. Some render the
word, "every one that is consumed", with age; neither old nor young, as
follows, should be spared. The Targum is,

"everyone that enters into the fortified cities,''

flees there for safety and protection.

\(h\) Xenophon. Cyropaedia, l. 7. sect. 23.

[Isaiah 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">isa 13:16</span></span>

Their children also shall be dashed to pieces before their eyes,....
Upon the ground, or against the wall, as was foretold should be, [Psa
137:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#008) and in way of retaliation for
what they did to the Jews, [Ch2 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#017)
and this was to be done "before their eyes", in the sight of the
inhabitants, which must make it the more distressing and afflicting;
and, as Kimchi observes, this phrase is to be applied to the following
clauses:

their houses shall be spoiled; plundered of the substance, wealth, and
riches in them, by the Persian soldiers:

and their wives ravished; by the same, and both before their eyes, and
after that slain, in like manner as they had ravished the women in Zion,
[Lam 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#011).

[Isaiah 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">isa 13:17</span></span>

Behold, I will stir up the Medes against them,.... The Babylonians; this
explains who are meant by the sanctified and mighty ones, [Isa
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#003) the Medes were a people that
descended from Medai, one of the sons of Japheth, [Gen
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#002) as Josephus observes (i); under
these the Persians are included, though they are only mentioned, because
Cyrus was sent by Cyaxares king of Media on this expedition against
Babylon, and was made by him general of the Medes, and acted as such
under him; and when Babylon was taken, and Belshazzar slain, Darius the
Median took the kingdom, [Dan 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan005.htm#031) now
these are mentioned by name some hundreds of years before the thing came
to pass, as Cyrus their general in [Isa
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#001) which is a strong proof of the
truth of prophecy, and of divine revelation; and, whatever might be the
moving causes of this expedition, the affair was of God; it was he that
put it into the hearts of the Medes, and stirred up their spirits to
make war against Babylon; and though God is not the author of sin, yet
he not only suffered the things to be done before and after mentioned,
but in his providence ordered them as just punishments on a sinful
people:

which shall not regard silver; and as for gold, they shall not delight
in it; not but that they had a regard for, gold and silver, as appears
by their spoiling of the houses of the Babylonians, [Isa
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#016) but that they had not so great a
regard for these things as to spare the lives of any for the sake of
them; they were so intent upon taking away their lives, that they
disregarded their substance; their first work was to slay, and then to
spoil; they first destroyed, and then plundered; no man with his gold
and silver could obtain a ransom of his life from them. Cyrus (k) in his
speech to his army said,

"O ye Medes, and all present, I truly know that not for want of money
are ye come out with me,'' &c.

\(i\) Antiqu. Jud. l. 1. c. 6. sect. 1. (k) Cyropaedia, l. 5. sect. 3.

[Isaiah 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">isa 13:18</span></span>

Their bows also shall dash their young men to pieces,.... That is, the
bows of the Medes should dash in pieces the young men of the
Babylonians. The meaning is, either that they should put them into their
bows, instead of arrows, and shoot them upon the ground, or against a
wall, and so dash them to pieces; or that they should first shoot them
through with their arrows, and then dash them with their bows; according
to Xenophon (l), Cyrus came to Babylon with great numbers of archers and
slingers:

and they shall have no pity on the fruit of the womb; even of those that
were in the womb, but should rip up women with child, and cut them in
pieces:

their eyes shall not spare children; in the arms of their parents, or
running to them, shrieking and crying, and in the utmost fright; and yet
their tender and innocent age would meet with no mercy. The Medes were
notorious for their cruelty (m), and which issued at last in the ruin of
their empire.

\(l\) Cyropaedia, l. 2. sect. 1. (m) Ammian. Marcellin. l. 23. c. 6.
Diodor. Sicul. l. 13. p. 342.

[Isaiah 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">isa 13:19</span></span>

And Babylon, the glory of kingdoms,.... The first and most ancient
kingdom, [Gen 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#010) and now, at the
time of its fall, the largest and most extensive; wherefore of the image
Nebuchadnezzar saw in his dream, which was a representation of several
kingdoms, this was the head, the head of gold, [Dan
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#031) so Babylon is called the "lady of
kingdoms", [Isa 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#005) the word here
used for "glory" is the same with that which is rendered a "roe", [Isa
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#014). Babylon was once as a pleasant
roe, but now a chased one:

the beauty of the Chaldees excellency; the glory of that nation; what
they gloried in, being so famous for pompous buildings, number of
inhabitants, riches and wealth, see [Dan
4:30](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#030). Pliny (n) calls it the head of
the Chaldean nations, and says it obtained great fame in the whole
world:

shall be as when God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah; which, though not at
once, and by fire from heaven, as that was, yet was of God, and, when
completed, was, like that, irrecoverable; which was begun by Cyrus and
Darius, and in after times finished; and besides there was a
circumstance which made it similar to that; for as the men of Sodom were
eating and drinking, when their destruction came upon them, so
Belshazzar, and his nobles, were feasting and revelling when the city
was taken. The Jews (o) say, that, after Belshazzar was slain, Darius
reigned one year, and in his second year the city was overthrown, as God
overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah by fire from heaven; but without any
foundation; for certain it is that Babylon was in being many years after
this, and continued to the time of Alexander the great.

\(n\) Nat. Hist. l. 6. c. 26. (o) Jarchi & Kimchi ex Seder Olam Rabba,
c. 28.

[Isaiah 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">isa 13:20</span></span>

It shall never be inhabited,.... As it has not been since its utter
destruction. Pausanias (p), who lived in the times of Adrian, says,
Babylon, the greatest city that ever the sun saw, that then there was
nothing left of it but a wall: what is now called Babylon is a new city,
and built in another place:

neither shall it be dwelt in from generation to generation; which is the
same thing repeated in other and stronger terms, for the confirmation of
it:

neither shall the Arabian pitch tent there; that sort of the Arabians
called Scenitae, because they dwelt in tents, and moved from place to
place with their flocks, for the sake of pasture; but here there should
be none for them, and therefore would not pitch their tents at it:

neither shall the shepherds make their folds there; as they had used to
do in the pastures adjoining to it, which were formerly exceeding good,
but now would be barren and unfruitful; and as there would be no
shepherds in the city, so neither would any neighbouring ones come
hither, or any from distant parts; partly because of the unfruitfulness
of the place, and partly through fear of wild beasts, which had their
habitation there, as follows. Pliny (q) says it was reduced to a mere
desert.

\(p\) Arcadica sive, l. 8. p. 509. (q) Ut supra. (Nat. Hist. l. 6. c.
26.)

[Isaiah 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">isa 13:21</span></span>

But wild beasts of the desert shall lie there,.... What sort of
creatures are meant is not certain. The Targum renders it by a word
which signifies monstrous, astonishing creatures; the Latin interpreter
of it calls them apes. Jarchi and Kimchi say such are intended as are
called martens or sables, a creature of the weasel kind. The Hebrew word
does not much differ from the Arabic one used for "wild cats":

and their houses shall be full of doleful creatures; whose voices are
very mournful and unpleasant. Aben Ezra says such creatures are meant,
that those that see them are amazed at them. Jarchi declares they are a
kind of creatures he was ignorant of; and Kimchi thinks they are the
same with "furon", or "ferrets": and the Latin interpreter of the Targum
renders the word that uses by "weasels":

and owls shall dwell there; or "the daughters of the owl", or "of the
ostriches", as the Targum and Syriac version; with which agrees the
Vulgate Latin, rendering the word "ostriches", as it is in [Lam
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#003); the Septuagint version translates
it "sirens", or "mermaids":

and satyrs shall dance there; a sort of monstrous creatures with the
ancients, painted half men and half goats; the upper part of them like
men, except the horns on their heads, and the lower parts like goats,
and all over hairy; and the word here used signifies hairy; and is used
for goats, and sometimes for devils, either because they have appeared
in this form, as Kimchi says, to them that believe them; or because
they, by their appearance, inject such horror in men, as cause their
hair to stand upright: hence the Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, interpret
it of devils here; and so the Septuagint version, and those that follow
it, the Syriac and Arabic, render it, "and demons shall dance there":
with this agrees the account of mystical Babylon, [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002).

[Isaiah 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">isa 13:22</span></span>

And the wild beasts of the islands shall cry in their desolate
houses,.... The Targum and Syriac version, "in their palaces", and so
the Vulgate Latin; or "with their widows", such as have lost their
mates: what creatures are here meant is very uncertain; we in general
call them the wild beasts of the islands, because the word is sometimes
used for islands; the Targum renders it "cats", wild ones; the Syriac
version, "sirens"; and the Arabic, the "hyaenae"; the Septuagint
version, "onocentaurs"; and the Vulgate Latin version, "owls", which
live in desolate houses, and cry or answer to one another, which is the
sense of the phrase here:

and dragons in their pleasant palaces; where they delight to be, though
otherwise very dismal. The Septuagint and Arabic versions render it,
"hedgehogs": the Syriac version, "wild dogs"; and the Vulgate Latin
version, "sirens"; the word is commonly used for "whales", and sometimes
for serpents, which seems to be the sense here; and to this agrees the
account that R. Benjamin Tudelensis (r) gives of Babylon, who, when he
was there, about five or six hundred years ago, saw the palace of
Nebuchadnezzar in ruins, but men were afraid to enter into it, because
of serpents and scorpions, which were within it. Rauwolff, a German
traveller, about the year 1574, reports of the tower of Babylon, that it
was so ruinous, so low, and so full of venomous creatures, which lodge
in holes made by them in the rubbish, that no one durst approach nearer
to it than within half a league, excepting during two months in the
winter, when these animals never stir out of their holes (s):

and her time is near to come; that is, the time of the destruction of
Babylon, as the Targum expresses it; which, though two hundred years or
more from the time of this prophecy, yet but a short time with God; and
when this was made known to the Jews in captivity, for whose comfort it
is written, it was not afar off:

and her days shall not be prolonged; the days of her prosperity and
happiness, but should be shortened.

\(r\) Itinerarium, p. 76. (s) Vid. Prideaux's Connection, par. 1. p.
569.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Isaiah Chapter 14](isa014)

</div>
