<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[James Index](jam.md)  
  [Previous](jam001)  [Next](jam003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [James Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md)

[James](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jam 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JAMES 2

In this chapter the apostle dissuades from a respect of persons, on
account of outward circumstances; shows that the law is to be fulfilled,
and that mercy is to be exercised, as well as justice done; and exposes
the folly of such who boast of faith without works: he dissuades the
saints from all partiality to the rich and poor, from their relation to
one another, as brethren, and from their common faith, of which Christ,
the Lord of glory, is the object, [Jam
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md) supposes an instance of it, either
in a court of judicature, or a religious assembly, [Jam
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#002.md) and then makes an appeal unto
them, and expostulates with them about it, [Jam
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#004.md) and makes use of an argument
against it, taken from the divine conduct, and an instance of his grace
in the choice of persons to eternal life, [Jam
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005.md) a conduct very different from some
persons here blamed, [Jam 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006.md), and
other arguments follow, dissuading from a respect of persons, taken from
the characters of rich men, as oppressors of the poor, litigious and
quarrelsome with their neighbours, and blasphemers of the name of God,
[Jam 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#007.md) and from the law of God,
which requires the love of the neighbour, and which to fulfil is to do
well, [Jam 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008.md) and from the breach of
it, by having respect to persons, whereby its penalty is incurred, [Jam
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#009.md) for which a reason is given;
because whoever offends in one point of the law, is guilty of the whole,
[Jam 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010.md) as is a clear case, since
the same lawgiver that forbids one sin, forbids another; so that he that
is guilty of either of them is a transgressor of the law, [Jam
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011.md) wherefore it is right both to
speak and act according to it, since men will be judged by it, [Jam
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012.md) and he will have no mercy shown
him that has shown none to the poor, but merciful ones will escape
damnation, [Jam 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013.md) and then the
apostle argues from the unprofitableness of faith itself without works,
[Jam 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014.md) and which he exemplifies in
the case of a poor brother or sister who are wished well, but nothing
given them; which good words, without deeds, are of no profit, [Jam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015.md) so in like manner, faith without
works is a dead faith, [Jam 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#017.md) nor
indeed can it be made out that a man has faith, if he has not works,
[Jam 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#018.md) at least such a faith as has
justification and salvation connected with it; his faith, at most, is no
better than that of the devils, who are damned, [Jam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019.md) and that such a faith is a dead
faith, [Jam 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#002.md) and that true faith is
attended with, and evidenced by works, the apostle proves by two
instances; the one is that of Abraham, whose faith appeared to be
genuine, and he to be a justified person, by the works he did;
particularly by offering up his son Isaac; in which way his faith
operated, and showed itself to be sincere and hearty; and the Scripture
was fulfilled that Abraham was a believer; and had righteousness imputed
to him, and was a friend of God, and a justified person, [Jam
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021.md) and the other instance is that of
Rahab, whose faith was also shown by her works, and so a justified
person, by receiving the spies with peace, and dismissing them with
safety, [Jam 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025.md), and then the
apostle explains what he means, by saying more than once, that faith
without works is dead; which he illustrates by the simile of a man's
body being dead, without the spirit or soul in it, [Jam
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026.md).

[James 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jam 2:1</span></span>

My brethren,.... As the apostle is about to dissuade from the evil of
having respect to persons, this is a very fit introduction to it, and
carries in it an argument why it should not obtain; since the saints are
all brethren, they are children of the same Father, belong to the same
family, and are all one in Christ Jesus, whether high or low, rich, or
poor:

have not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ, the Lord of glory, with
respect of persons: that is, such as have, and hold, and profess the
faith of Christ, ought not along with it to use respect of persons, or
to make such a distinction among the saints, as to prefer the rich, to
the contempt of the poor; and in this exhortation many things are
contained, which are so many arguments why such a practice should not be
encouraged; for faith, whether as a doctrine or as a grace, is alike
precious, and common to all; and is the faith of Christ, which, as a
doctrine, is delivered by him to all the saints, and as a grace, he is
both the author and object of it; and is the faith of their common Lord
and Saviour, and who is the Lord of glory, or the glorious Lord; and the
poor as well as the rich are espoused by him, as their Lord and husband;
and are redeemed by him, and are equally under his government and
protection, and members of his body: the Syriac Version reads, "have not
the faith of the glory of our Lord Jesus", &c. meaning either the glory
which Christ is possessed of, whether as the Son of God, in the
perfections of his nature, or as man and Mediator, being now crowned
with glory and honour, and which is seen and known by faith; or else
that glory which Christ has in his hands, to bestow upon his people, and
to which they are called, and will appear in, when he shall appear, and
about which their faith is now employed: and since this glory equally
belongs to them all, no difference should be made on account of outward
circumstances, so as to treat any believer with neglect and contempt.

[James 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jam 2:2</span></span>

For if there come unto your assembly,.... The place of religious worship
where saints are assembled together for that purpose; though some think
a civil court of judicature is intended, and to which the context seems
to incline; see [Jam 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006.md)

a man with a gold ring; on his finger, which shows him to be a man of
dignity and wealth; so those of the senatorian and equestrian orders
among the Romans were distinguished from the common people by wearing
gold rings; though in time the use of them became promiscuous (q); the
ancients used to wear but one (r), as here but one is mentioned; and
only freemen, not servants, might wear it: however, by this
circumstance, the apostle describes a rich man, adding,

in goodly apparel; gay clothing, bright shining garments, glistering
with gold and silver, very rich and costly, as well as whole, neat, and
clean:

and there come in also a poor man in vile raiment; mean and despicable,
filthy and ragged: in the courts of judicature with the Jews, two men,
who were at law with one another, might not have different apparel on
while they were in court, and their cause was trying: their law runs
thus (s);

"two adversaries (at law with each other), if one of them is clothed
"with precious garments", (Myrqy Mydgb, "goodly apparel",) and the other
is clothed with , "vile raiment", (the judge) says to the honourable
person, either clothe him as thou art, while thou contendest with him,
or be clothed as he is, that ye may be alike, or on an equal foot.''

\(q\) Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 2. c. 29. (r) Isidor. Hispal.
Originum, l. 19. c. 32. p. 171. (s) Maimon. Hilchot Sanhedrin, c. 21.
sect. 2.

[James 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jam 2:3</span></span>

And ye have respect to him that wears the gay clothing,.... Take notice
of him, and show favour to him, to the neglect and contempt of the
other. This is an instance of respect of persons condemned and dissuaded
from:

and say unto him, sit thou here in a good place; the best place; whether
it be in a religious assembly, or in a civil court of judicature:

and say to the poor, stand thou there; or in a lower and meaner place:

or sit thou here under my footstool; this also was contrary to the
Jewish canons (t), that one should sit, and another stand, while their
cause was trying; the law runs thus:

"one shall not sit, and another stand, but both shall stand; but if the
sanhedrim, or court, please to let them sit, they sit; but one does not
sit above, and the other below; but one by the side of the other.''

\(t\) Maimon. ib. sect. 3. vid. T. Bab. Shebuot, fol. 30. 1.

[James 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jam 2:4</span></span>

Are ye not then partial in yourselves,.... That is, guilty of such
partiality as must appear to yourselves, and your own consciences must
accuse you of; or do not ye distinguish, or make a difference among
yourselves, by such a conduct, towards the rich and the poor:

and are become judges of evil thoughts; or "are distinguishers by evil
thoughts"; that is, make a distinction between the rich and the poor, by
an evil way of thinking, that one is better than the other, and to be
preferred before him.

[James 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jam 2:5</span></span>

Hearken, my beloved brethren,.... As to a matter of importance, and
worthy of attention and regard; being an instance of the divine conduct
towards the poor, and carries in it a strong argument against respect of
persons:

hath not God chosen the poor of this world? this interrogative is equal
to a strong affirmative; and the sense is, that God has chosen the poor
of this world; and which is to be understood, not of the choice of them
to an office, either in church or state; though sometimes this has been
the case, as the instances of David, and the apostles of Christ, show;
nor merely to the Gospel, and the outward means of grace, though the
poor have the Gospel preached unto them; nor of the effectual calling,
though this is true; but of eternal election, which is the act of God
the Father, and passed before the foundation of the world; and is an act
of sovereign grace, and is irrespective of faith, holiness, and good
works; and is the source of all grace, and remains immutable and
irrevocable: now the objects of this are, "the poor of this world"; that
is, who are poor with respect to the things of this world, but not with
respect to the things of another world; for they are chosen to be heirs
of a kingdom, and shall enjoy it; though these are not all chosen by
God, nor are they the only persons that are chosen; there are some poor
men that are not chosen, and are miserable here and hereafter; and there
are some rich men that are chosen; but for the most part, or generally
speaking, they are not many mighty, nor noble, but the poorer sort,
which God has made choice of to partake both of grace and glory. It may
be the apostle has some peculiar respect to the poor among the Gentiles,
whom God had chosen; it was usual with the Jews to call the Gentiles the
world, and they were Jews the apostle now writes to, and who were
scattered abroad among the Gentiles; and therefore he might very aptly
call them "this world", among whom they lived; and suggest to them, that
God had chosen some of the Gentiles, as well as of the Jews, and even
some of the poorer sort of them; and it was usual with the Jews to
distinguish between , "the poor of Israel", and , "the poor of the
world", or "the poor of the nations of the world" (u): the Alexandrian
copy, and some others, leave out the word "this", and so the Syriac and
Arabic versions, which makes the phrase more agreeable to the Jewish way
of speaking. The Gentiles, in common, were despicable with the Jews, and
especially the poor of them; and yet God chose these:

rich in faith; not that they were so, or were considered as such, when
chosen, and so were chosen because of their faith; for then also they
were, or were considered as heirs of the kingdom, which would be
monstrously absurd; and yet there is as much reason, from the text, for
the one, as for the other; but the sense is, that they were chosen "to
be rich in faith"; and so the Syriac version supplies in the next
clause, "that they might be heirs"; which if it had been placed before
this clause also, would have been right; election to grace is signified
in the one, and election to glory in the other: men are chosen, not
because they do believe, or shall believe, but that they might believe;
and which faith they have in consequence of election; and which when
they have, they are rich: faith is a rich precious grace itself; it is a
part of the riches of grace, and is more worth than thousands of gold
and silver; and it is the means of receiving and enjoying much riches,
as Christ the pearl of great price himself, and all spiritual blessings
along with him; such as the rich robe of his righteousness, full pardon
of sin, which is according to the riches of his grace, and adoption,
which makes men heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ, and even the
eternal inheritance itself, both the promise of it, and a right unto it;
all which are said to be received by faith; and therefore believers, how
poor soever they may be, to this world's goods, are truly rich men:

and heirs of the kingdom; of glory, which is prepared for all the chosen
ones, from the foundation of the world; and is freely given to them by
their Father, and to which they are called in the effectual calling; and
hence they are made kings and priests unto God, and have crowns and
thrones provided for them: the Alexandrian copy reads, "heirs of the
promise which he hath promised to them that love him"; that is, which
God has promised them, as the Vulgate Latin and Syriac versions read;
not that their love to God is the cause of this kingdom, or of their
choice to it, or of the promise of it to them; all which flow from the
love of God to them; but this is descriptive of the persons who shall
enjoy it, and may expect to enjoy it, as in [Jam
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012.md).

\(u\) T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 30. 1. & Bava Bathra, fol. 10. 2.

[James 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jam 2:6</span></span>

But ye have despised the poor,.... Or dishonoured, and reproached them,
by showing respect of persons, in preferring the rich to them, and in
distinguishing them in such a manner as was to their contempt and
injury; which is a reproaching not only of them, but their Maker; and is
in effect saying, that God has done either a weak or a wrong thing, in
choosing them to be rich in faith, and heirs of a kingdom, it being
directly contrary to his conduct:

do not rich men oppress you, and draw you before the judgment seats?
which may be understood either of rich men that were unbelievers; and
these either the Heathen magistrates, who ruled over them in a
tyrannical way, and with rigour, and often summoned them before them,
and persecuted them with violence; or their own countrymen, the Jews,
who stirred up the chief men of the Gentiles against them, and drew them
to their judgment seats, as they drew Paul to the judgment seat of
Gallio, [Act 13:50](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#050.md) or else of rich
professors of religion, who assumed a despotic power over the poor
brethren of the church, and loved to have the pre-eminence over them, as
Diotrephes did, and set up tribunals in the churches, and tried and
condemned them in an arbitrary way; or else upon civil accounts had them
before heathen magistrates, and went to law with them in their courts,
before unbelievers, which is a practice condemned in [Co1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#001.md), and seeing now rich men used them
so ill, the apostle mentions this as an argument to dissuade them from
respect of persons; seeing they had but little reason to show so much
regard unto them, who had treated them in so evil a manner: this is not
to be understood of all rich men; nor is the apostle's design to destroy
that natural and civil order there is among men, by reason of their
different stations, offices, and circumstances; it being highly proper
that honour should he given to whom honour is due, but not to the
dishonour of another.

[James 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jam 2:7</span></span>

Of Christ, or Christians;

by the which ye are called? and which, as before, may design either
unbelieving rich men, whether among Jews, or Gentiles, who blasphemed
and cursed the name of Christ, and compelled others to do so likewise;
or such who professed the Christian religion, who by their supercilious
and disdainful treatment of their poor brethren, and by their dragging
of them to the tribunals of the Heathens, and distressing them with
vexatious law suits there, caused the name of Christ, after which they
were called Christians, to be blasphemed and evil spoken of, among the
Gentiles.

[James 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jam 2:8</span></span>

If ye fulfil the royal law,.... Which is the law of love to men, without
distinction of rich and poor, high and low, bond and free; and is so
called, because it is the law of the King of kings; hence the Syriac
version renders it, "the law of God", it is the law of Christ, who is
King of saints; and because it is a principal law, the chief of laws; as
love to God is the sum of the first and great commandment in the law,
and may be called the king of laws; so love to the neighbour is the
second and next unto it, and may very well bear the name of the queen of
laws, and so has royalty in it; and indeed this last is said to be the
fulfilling of the law, [Rom 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#008.md) and
it is also submitted to, and obeyed by such who are made kings and
priests to God; and that in a royal manner, with a princely spirit,
willingly, and with all readiness: the same word, in the Hebrew
language, signifies "princes", and to be willing. The Jews frequently
ascribe royalty to the law, and often speak of , "the crown of the law"
(w); and they suppose the Israelites had crowns upon their heads, when
the law was given them on Mount Sinai, in which were engraven the name
of God, and which they were stripped of when they made the golden calf
(x): now this royal law is fulfilled, when it is regarded without
respect of persons,

according to the Scripture, in [Lev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018.md)

thou shall love thy neighbour as thyself; and which is to be understood
of every nation, without distinction of Jews and Gentiles, and of
persons of every state and condition, rich and poor, without any
difference: and when this law is so observed, it is commendable:

ye do well: that which is right, and which is a man's duty to do; this,
when done from right principles, and to a right end, is a good work, and
is doing a good work well.

\(w\) Pirke Abot, c. 4. sect. 13. & Abot R. Nathan, c. 41. T. Bab.
Megilla, fol. 28. 2. Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 4. fol. 183. 2. & sect. 14.
fol. 215. 2. & Midrash Kohelet, fol. 73. 4. Targum Jon in Deut. xxxiv.
5. (x) Vid. Targum. Jon. & Jerus. in Exod. xxxii. 25. & xxxiii. 4.

[James 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jam 2:9</span></span>

But if ye have respect to persons, ye commit sin, &c. This is not doing
well, but is a transgression of the law, as every sin is; hence it
follows,

and are convinced of the law as transgressors; which carries on a formal
process against such persons; it accuses them of sin, and charges them
with it; it proves it upon them, and convicts them of it; it pronounces
them guilty, and curses them for it; and passes the sentence of
condemnation and death upon them; wherefore care should be taken not to
commit this sin, and so fall under the convictions and reproofs of the
law.

[James 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jam 2:10</span></span>

For whosoever shall keep the whole law,.... Or the greatest part of it,
excepting only in one point, as follows: Adam, in a state of innocence,
was able to keep the whole law, but by sin he lost that power, nor can
any of his posterity now keep it perfectly: they are all transgressors
of it, and liable to its penalty; unregenerate men are not obedient to
it, and have an aversion to it, and despise it, and cast it behind their
backs; regenerate persons, who love it, and delight in it, after the
inner man, do not keep it perfectly; the several parts of the law may be
indeed kept by a believer, and that sincerely, but not to a perfect
degree, for in many things they all offend; Christ only has perfectly
kept it, and is the fulfilling end of it for righteousness; men of a
pharisaical disposition may fancy they have kept it wholly, as the young
man in the Gospel, and Saul, before his conversion; but this is but a
fancy, and a sad mistake: the case in the text is only a supposed one,
and, as it is here put, implies perfection; for it follows,

and yet offend in one point; sin, which is a transgression of the law,
is an offense to God the Father, who is of purer eyes than to behold it;
to Jesus Christ, who loves righteousness, and hates iniquity; and to the
blessed Spirit who is grieved and vexed by it; and to the justice of
God, which being injured by it, demands satisfaction; and to the law of
God, which accuses, convinces, reproves, and condemns for it. The word
used signifies to "fall", and designs more than stumbling, even an open
breach and violation of the law; and which being made, by any, in a
single instance,

he is guilty of all: this seems to agree with some common sayings of the
Jews, that he that is suspected in one thing, is suspected in the whole
law (y); and he that keeps this or the other command, keeps the whole
law; and he that breaks this, or the other command, breaks the whole
law; as whether it respects the sabbath, or adultery, or that command.
Thou shall not covet, or any other (z): and this must be understood, not
of every particular command in the law, as if he that is guilty of
murder is in that instance also guilty of adultery; or he that is guilty
of adultery is in that instance guilty of murder; but the sense is, that
he is guilty of the breach of the whole law, though not of the whole of
the law; as he that breaks anyone condition of a covenant, which may
consist of many, though he does not violate every condition, yet breaks
the whole covenant; so he that transgresses in anyone point of the law,
breaks the whole, commits sin, and is deserving of death, and is treated
by the law as a transgressor of it, let it be in what instance it will.
But it does not follow from hence, that all sins are equal, as the
Stoics say (a), for there are greater and lesser sins, [Joh
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#011.md) though not some venial, and
others mortal, for the wages of every sin is death; nor that the
punishment of sin will be alike, as all sins were punishable alike by
Draco's laws, but not by the law of God, [Mat
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#022.md) but this may be fairly concluded
from hence, that there can be no justification in the sight of God, by
an imperfect obedience to, the law, or by a partial righteousness: the
law requires perfect obedience, and in failure of that, though but in
one point, curses and condemns; and likewise it may be inferred from
hence, that a man is not at liberty to obey and neglect what
commandments of the law he pleases, but should have respect to them all;
which seems greatly the design of the apostle, as appears by what
follows.

\(y\) T. Bab. Erubin, fol. 69. 1. (z) Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 9. fol. 192.
3. Zohar in Exod. fol. 20. 2. & 37. 1. & in Lev. fol. 32. 3. Shemot
Rabba, sect. 25. fol. 109. 3. T. Bab. Kiddushin, fol. 39. 2. & Menachot,
fol. 43. 2. & Abkath Rochel, par. 1. p. 3. (a) Zeno & Chrysippus apud
Laert. Vit. Zeno, p. 510.

[James 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jam 2:11</span></span>

For he that said, Do not commit adultery,.... That same lawgiver, who is
but one, and is God, that gave out the seventh command, and forbids
adultery,

said also, Do not kill; delivered the sixth command, which forbids
murder.

Now if thou commit no adultery; do not break the seventh command;

yet if thou kill, break the sixth command,

thou art become a transgressor of the law; not of that particular
precept of the law, the seventh command, for the contrary is supposed
before, but of the sixth only; and yet by so doing, a man becomes a
violator of the whole law; for the law is but one, though it consists of
various precepts; and the breach of one precept, as well as of another,
is the breach of the law: and besides, there is but one lawgiver, who
has enjoined one command, as well as another, and whose legislative
power and authority is despised and trampled upon by the violation of
one command, as of another. This is the apostle's argument, and way of
reasoning, proving the above assertion, that he that breaks the law in
one particular instance, is guilty of the breach of the whole law.

[James 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jam 2:12</span></span>

So speak ye, and so do,.... Both words and actions should be taken care
of; it becomes men to observe what they say, and what they do; for both
sinful words and works are transgressions of the law, and will be
brought to judgment; every idle word, as well as every evil work, both
open and secret, men must give an account of in the day of judgment:
wherefore it is incumbent on them so to behave,

as they that shall be judged by the law of liberty: See Gill on [Jam
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#025.md) with which compare [Rom
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012.md). Heathens will be judged by the
law of nature, Jews by the law of Moses, and those who live under the
Gospel dispensation, according to the Gospel of Christ.

[James 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jam 2:13</span></span>

For he shall have judgment without mercy,.... Strict justice, and no
mercy shown him:

that hath showed no mercy; to the poor brethren, and distressed members
of Christ, but has shown respect of persons to the hurt of the poor, and
has despised and oppressed them, instead of relieving and comforting
them; so the rich man, that neglected Lazarus at his gates, is refused a
drop of water to cool his tongue; and the servant that cruelly insisted
on his fellow servant's paying him all he owed, justly incurred the
displeasure of his Lord, and was by him delivered to the tormentors; and
that servant that beats his fellow servants will be cut asunder, and,
have his portion with hypocrites; and such who have seen any of the
brethren of Christ hungry, thirsty, naked, sick, and in prison, and have
showed no regard for them, will hear, "Go, ye cursed, into everlasting
fire":

and mercy rejoiceth against judgment; that is merciful men, who have
shown mercy to the poor saints, will not be afraid of the awful
judgment, but rather rejoice or glory, as the word signifies, in the
view of it, since they will obtain mercy at that day, and hear, Come, ye
blessed of my Father, &c. [Mat 25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034.md)
so the Ethiopic version renders it, he only shall glory in the day of
judgment, who hath showed mercy; the Alexandrian copy reads in the
imperative, "let mercy glory", &c. and the Syriac version, "be ye
exalted by mercy over judgment".

[James 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jam 2:14</span></span>

What doth it profit, my brethren,.... The apostle having finished his
discourse on respect of persons, and the arguments he used to dissuade
from it, by an easy transition passes to treat upon faith and works,
showing that faith without works, particularly without works of mercy,
is of no profit and advantage:

though a man say he hath faith, and have not works? it is clear that the
apostle is not speaking of true faith, for that, in persons capable of
performing them, is not without works; it is an operative grace; it
works by love and kindness, both to Christ, and to his members; but of a
profession of faith, a mere historical one, by which a man, at most,
assents to the truth of things, as even devils do, [Jam
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019.md) and only says he has faith, but
has it not; as Simon Magus, who said he believed, but did not.

Can faith save him? such a faith as this, a faith without works, an
historical one, a mere profession of faith, which lies only in words,
and has no deeds, to show the truth and genuineness of it. True faith
indeed has no causal influence on salvation, or has any virtue and
efficacy in itself to save; Christ, object of faith, is the only cause
and author of salvation; faith is only that grace which receives a
justifying righteousness, the pardon of sin, adoption, and a right to
the heavenly inheritance; but it does not justify, nor pardon, nor
adopt, nor give the right to the inheritance, but lays hold on, and
claims these, by virtue of the gift of grace; and it has spiritual and
eternal salvation inseparably connected with it; but as for the other
faith, a man may have it, and be in the gall of bitterness, and bond of
iniquity; he may have all faith in that sense, and be nothing; it is no
other than the devils themselves have; and so he may have it, and be
damned.

[James 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jam 2:15</span></span>

If a brother or sister,.... A Christian man or woman, a fellow member of
a church of Christ; for this relation is to be understood in a spiritual
sense, though it does not exclude such who are in this relation in a
natural sense:

be naked; or clothed in rags, or in very mean and sordid apparel, such
as will neither keep them warm, nor clean and decent; for they must not
be supposed to be entirely naked, but to be in a very uncomfortable and
indecent garb:

and destitute of daily food; have not food sufficient for the day; or
aught to support nature with, and yield them proper refreshment and
nourishment.

[James 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jam 2:16</span></span>

And one of you say unto them,.... That is, one of the same faith, and in
the same communion and church fellowship.

Depart in peace; wishing them all prosperity and happiness, inward and
outward:

be ye warmed and filled; clothed and fed; signifying, that they wished
them all the accommodations of life:

notwithstanding ye give them not those things which are needful for the
body; neither clothes to wear, nor food to eat; nothing to warm their
bodies, or fill their bellies:

what doth it profit? the Ethiopic version reads, "what doth it profit
them?" either the poor brother, or sister, to whom these good words are
given, and nothing else; for these will neither warm them, nor fill
them; or the persons themselves, that say these tidings to them: and the
apostle, by this instance, shows, that as that charity which lies only
in words, and in tongue, and not in deed, and in truth, is unprofitable,
and good for nothing, even to them that profess it; so that faith, which
a man says he has, and yet is without works, is alike unprofitable unto
him.

[James 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jam 2:17</span></span>

Even so faith, if it hath not works, is dead, being alone. It is like a
lifeless carcass, a body without a soul, [Jam
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026.md) for as works, without faith, are
dead works, so faith, without works, is a dead faith, and not like the
lively hope and faith of regenerated persons: and indeed, such who have
no other faith than this are dead in trespasses and sins; not that works
are the life of faith, or that the life of faith lies in, and flows from
works; but, as Dr. Ames observes (b), good works are second acts,
necessarily flowing from the life of faith; to which may be added, and
by these faith appears to be living, lively and active, or such who
perform them appear to be true and living believers.

\(b\) Medulla Theolog. l. 2. c. 7. sect. 35.

[James 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jam 2:18</span></span>

Yea, a man may say, thou hast faith, and I have works,.... That is, a
true believer in Christ may very justly call upon a vain boaster of his
faith, who has no works, to give proof and evidence of it, and address
him after this manner; you say you have faith, be it so that you have; I
have works, you see I have, I say nothing about my faith at present;
now,

shew me thy faith without thy works, if thou canst; see what ways,
means, and methods thou canst make use of, to make it appear to me, or
any other, that you have the faith you talk of: the words are a sort of
sarcasm and jeer upon the man, and yet very just, calling upon him to do
that which is impossible to be done, and thereby exposing his vain
boast; for faith is an inward principle in the heart; an hidden thing,
and cannot be seen and known but by external acts; and where it is
right, it is operative, and shows itself by works, which is not
practicable in those who have none:

and I will show thee my faith by my works; there may be indeed an
appearance of good works, where there is no faith, as in the Heathens,
in the Scribes and Pharisees, and in the Papists, and others; and on the
other hand, there may be the principle of faith implanted, where there
is not an opportunity of showing it by a series of good works, or a
course of godly living, as in elect infants dying in infancy, and in
those who are converted in their last moments, as the thief upon the
cross; wherefore works are not infallible proofs and evidences of faith,
yet they are the best we are capable of giving of it to men, or they of
receiving. In short, works may deceive, and do not infallibly prove
truth of faith, yet it is certain, that where they are not, but persons
live in a continued course of sinning, there cannot be true faith.

[James 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jam 2:19</span></span>

Thou believest that there is one God,.... These words are a continuation
of the address of the man that has works, to him that boasts of his
faith without them, observing to him, that one, and a main article of
his faith, is, that there is one God; which is to be understood in the
Christian sense, since both the person speaking, and the person spoken
to, were such as professed themselves Christians; so that to believe
there is one God, is not merely to give into this article, in opposition
to the polytheism of the Gentiles, or barely to confess the God of
Israel, as believed on by the Jews, but to believe that there are three
persons, Father, Son, and Spirit, and that these three are the one God;
wherefore this article of faith includes everything relating to God; as
to God the Father, his being and perfections, so to Christ, as God, and
the Son of God, and the Messiah, &c. and to the Holy Spirit; and to
believe all this is right:

thou doest well; for that there is but one God, is to be proved by the
light of nature, and from the works of creation and providence, and has
been owned by the wisest of the Heathens themselves; and is established,
by divine revelation, in the books both of the Old and of the New
Testament; what has been received by the Jews, and is well known by
Christians, to whom it is set in the clearest light, and who are assured
of the truth of it: but then

the devils also believe; the Arabic version reads, "the devils likewise
so believe"; they believe the same truth; they know and believe there is
but one God, and not many; and they know that the God of Israel is he;
and that the Father, Son, and Spirit, are the one God; they know and
believe him to be the most high God, whose servants the ministers of the
Gospel are; and they know and believe that Jesus is the Holy One of God,
the Son of God, and the Messiah, [Act
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#017.md).

And tremble; at the wrath of God, which they now feel, and at the
thought of future torments, which they expect, [Mar
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#007.md) and which is more than some men
do; and yet these shall not be saved, their damnation is certain and
inevitable, [Pe2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#004.md) wherefore it
follows, that a bare historical faith will not profit, and cannot save
any; a man may have all faith of this kind, and be damned; and therefore
it is not to be boasted of, nor trusted to.

[James 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jam 2:20</span></span>

But wilt thou know, O vain man,.... These are the words of the apostle
reassuming the argument, that faith without works is dead, useless, and
unprofitable; and the man that boasts of his faith, and has no works to
show it, he calls a "vain man", an empty one, sounding brass, and a
tinkling cymbal; empty vessels make the greatest sound; such are proud
boasters, vainly puffed up by their fleshly mind; but are empty of the
true knowledge of God, and of the faith of Christ, and of the grace of
the Spirit: the Syriac version renders it, "O weak", or "feeble man", as
he must needs be, whose faith is dead, and boasts of such a lifeless
thing; and the Ethiopic version renders it, "O foolish man", for such an
one betrays his ignorance in spiritual things, whatever conceit he has
of his knowledge and understanding: the character seems levelled against
the Gnostics, who were swelled with a vain opinion of their knowledge,
to whom the apostle addresses himself thus. The phrase, "vain man", is a
proper interpretation of the word "Raca", or Reka, used in [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md); see Gill on [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md), which though not to be said to a
man in an angry way, yet may be applied to men of such a character as
here described; who were empty of solid good, and yet boasted of their
knowledge. "Wilt thou know?" dost thou require proofs,

that faith, without works, is dead? as in [Jam
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#017.md) and that true faith has always
works accompanying it, and is shown and known by it? then take the
following instances.

[James 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jam 2:21</span></span>

Was not Abraham our father justified by works,.... Not as the causes of
his justification, that is denied, [Rom
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#002.md) but as effects of it, showing the
truth of his faith, and the reality of his justification: he had both
faith and works, and the former were known by the latter; and even the
faith which he had expressed years ago was manifested, demonstrated, and
confirmed to be true and genuine, by the instance of his obedience to
God, here produced; by which it appeared he was a true believer, a
justified person, approved of God, and loved by him. Now if this was the
case of Abraham, the father of the Jewish nation, yea, the father of the
faithful, of all that believe, he is, and must be a vain man, that talks
of faith without works; and his faith must be a dead one, and he be very
unlike the father of them that believe: the good work instanced in is
the offering up of Isaac;

when he had offered Isaac his son upon the altar: for when he was bid to
take his son, his only and beloved son, Isaac, and offer him up on one
of the mountains, that should be shown him, he made haste to do it; he
provided everything for it; he split the wood, and carried it with him,
and fire in his hand; he built an altar, laid the wood on it, bound his
son, laid the wood on the altar, and his son on the wood, and stretched
out his hand, with his knife in it, to slay him; so that it was all one,
with respect to his intention and will, as if he had actually offered
him, and was a full trial and proof of his obedience to God. This was
not the only act of obedience, or good work, which he performed; but
this being a very eminent one, the apostle instances in it, as a very
considerable evidence of his faith in God, and love to him; and which
showed him to be a justified person, as he was long before he performed
this action, even before Isaac was born; see [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006.md) and therefore it can never be the
apostle's meaning, that he was justified before God by this, or any
other good work or works, as cause or causes of it; but only that he was
declared to be so; or, in other words, that his faith was attended with
good works, and evidenced by them.

[James 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jam 2:22</span></span>

Seest thou how faith wrought with his works,.... Not to justify him
before God; for neither faith nor works are ever said in Scripture to
justify any man; but his faith being of the right kind, a faith which
works by love, it put him upon doing this work, and many others; for
this was done in faith, [Heb 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#017.md) as
all good works are, which are properly such; and where there is true
faith, it will influence and engage a man to do good works, as it did
Abraham.

And by works was faith made perfect? not with an absolute perfection;
for though Abraham's faith was very great, yet there were things lacking
in it, and he had his fits and times of unbelief; and had he lived till
now, his faith, in this sense, would not have been perfect; and he would
have had reason to have used the apostle's petition, [Luk
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#005.md) much less would it have been made
thus perfect by works; but the sense is, that hereby his faith was
declared to be sincere, unfeigned, true, and genuine; just as love is
said to be perfected, [Jo1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#017.md).

[James 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jam 2:23</span></span>

And the Scripture was fulfilled,.... [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006.md) which speaks of Abraham's faith,
and the imputation of to him for righteousness; for the above action of
Abraham, in offering up his son, was a clear proof of the truth of his
faith, there commended: by this it was made known what a strong faith he
had in God, and what reason there was to believe that he was a justified
person.

Abraham believed God, and it was imputed to him for righteousness; See
Gill on [Rom 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#003.md) which shows both that
Abraham was justified before he wrought this work, and therefore that
could not be the cause or matter of his justification, but only an
effect and evidence of it; and that his justification was by faith, or
that object which his faith regarded, and had to do with, was his
justifying righteousness:

and he was called the friend of God, [Ch2
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#007.md) he was loved by God with an
everlasting love, who showed acts of friendship to him; called him by
his grace, and blessed him with spiritual blessings, and increased him
with the increase of God; favoured him with near communion with him,
honoured him with high characters, and distinguished him by peculiar
marks of his favour, and reckoned his enemies and friends as his own;
[Gen 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008.md) and Abraham, on the other
hand, loved God, and showed himself friendly to him; trusted in him, and
believed every word of his; readily complied with his will, and not only
yielded a cheerful obedience to his commands, but enjoined his children
after him to observe them: this was a name which Abraham was well known
by among the eastern nations; hence he is called by the Mahometans, ,
"Khalil Allah", the friend of God; and Mahomet says himself (c),

"God took Abraham for his friend.''

\(c\) Koran, Sura 4:125.

[James 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jam 2:24</span></span>

Ye see then how that by works a man is justified,.... Not as causes
procuring his justification, but as effects declaring it; for the best
works are imperfect, and cannot be a righteousness justifying in the
sight of God, and are unprofitable in this respect; for when they are
performed in the best manner, they are no other than what it is a man's
duty to perform, and therefore cannot justify from sin he has committed:
and besides, justification in this sense would frustrate the grace of
God, make void the death of Christ, and encourage boasting in men. Good
works do not go before justification as causes or conditions, but follow
it as fruits and effects:

and not by faith only: or as without works, or a mere historical faith,
which being without works is dead, of which the apostle is speaking; and
therefore can bear no testimony to a man's justification; hence it
appears, that the Apostle James does not contradict the Apostle Paul in
[Rom 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028.md) since they speak not of the
same sort of faith; the one speaks of a mere profession of faith, a dead
and lifeless one; the other of a true faith, which has Christ, and his
righteousness, for its object, and works by love, and produces peace,
joy, and comfort in the soul. Moreover, the Apostle Paul speaks of
justification before God; and James speaks of it as it is known by its
fruits unto men; the one speaks of a justification of their persons, in
the sight of God; the other of the justification and approbation of
their cause, their conduct, and their faith before men, and the
vindication of them from all charges and calumnies of hypocrisy, and the
like; the one speaks of good works as causes, which he denies to have
any place as such in justification; and the other speaks of them as
effects flowing from faith, and showing the truth of it, and so of
justification by it; the one had to do with legalists and
self-justiciaries, who sought righteousness not by faith, but by the
works of the law, whom he opposed; and the other had to do with
libertines, who cried up faith and knowledge, but had no regard to a
religious life and conversation; and these things considered will tend
to reconcile the two apostles about this business, but as effects
declaring it; for the best works are imperfect, and cannot be a
righteousness justifying in the sight of God, and are unprofitable in
this respect; for when they are performed in the best manner, they are
no other than what it is a man's duty to perform, and therefore cannot
justify from sin he has committed: and besides, justification in this
sense would frustrate the grace of God, make void the death of Christ,
and encourage boasting in men. Good works do not go before justification
as causes or conditions, but follow it as fruits and effects:

and not by faith only: or as without works, or a mere historical faith,
which being without works is dead, of which the apostle is speaking; and
therefore can bear no testimony to a man's justification; hence it
appears, that the Apostle James does not contradict the Apostle Paul in
[Rom 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028.md) since they speak not of the
same sort of faith; the one speaks of a mere profession of faith, a dead
and lifeless one; the other of a true faith, which has Christ, and his
righteousness, for its object, and works by love, and produces peace,
joy, and comfort in the soul. Moreover, the Apostle Paul speaks of
justification before God; and James speaks of it as it is known by its
fruits unto men; the one speaks of a justification of their persons, in
the sight of God; the other of the justification and approbation of
their cause, their conduct, and their faith before men, and the
vindication of them from all charges and calumnies of hypocrisy, and the
like; the one speaks of good works as causes, which he denies to have
any place as such in justification; and the other speaks of them as
effects flowing from faith, and showing the truth of it, and so of
justification by it; the one had to do with legalists and
self-justiciaries, who sought righteousness not by faith, but by the
works of the law, whom he opposed; and the other had to do with
libertines, who cried up faith and knowledge, but had no regard to a
religious life and conversation; and these things considered will tend
to reconcile the two apostles about this business.

[James 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jam 2:25</span></span>

Likewise also was not Rahab the harlot,.... See Gill on [Heb
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031.md) justified by works; this woman
was an instance of the grace of God in calling the chief of sinners, and
was a true believer; and what she did, she did in faith, [Heb
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#031.md) and her faith was shown by her
works to be true and genuine; and it was manifest that she was a
justified person. This instance is produced with the other, to show,
that wherever there is true faith, whether in Jew or Gentile, in man or
woman, in greater or lesser believers, or in such who have been greater
or lesser sinners, there will be good works; and therefore that person
is a vain man that talks and boasts of his faith, and depends upon it,
and slights and rejects good works as unnecessary to be done.

When she had received the messengers: the spies that Joshua sent, into
her house, with peace and safety:

and had sent them out another way; than they came in, even through the
window upon the town wall, [Jos 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001.md).

[James 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jam 2:26</span></span>

For as the body without the spirit is dead,.... This simile is made use
of to illustrate what the apostle had asserted in [Jam
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#017.md) that as a body, when the spirit
or soul is departed from it, or the breath is gone out of it, is dead,
and without motion, and useless; which the Jews (d) express in like
manner, , "the body without the spirit", or "breath, is a carcass".

So faith without works is dead also: a vain thing, useless and
unprofitable, can neither justify, nor save, nor prove that a man is
justified, or will be saved.

\(d\) Ohel. Moed, fol. 15. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: James Chapter 3](jam003.md)

</div>
