<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Judges Index](jdg.md)  
  [Previous](jdg019)  [Next](jdg021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001.md)

[Judges](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jdg 20:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JUDGES 20

This chapter relates, how that there was an assembly of the children of
Israel at Mizpeh, upon what had happened to the concubine of the Levite,
where he appeared and related the whole affair to them, [Jdg
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001.md) upon which they unanimously
agreed to chastise the inhabitants of Gibeah for what they had done,
[Jdg 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#008.md), and in order to do that
sent to the tribe of Benjamin to deliver the guilty, but instead of that
they took to their arms, and prepared for battle in defence of them,
[Jdg 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#012.md) and two battles ensued on
this, in which the Israelites, who were on the right side of the
question, were worsted, [Jdg 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018.md) but
upon their seeking the Lord again, and their humiliation before him,
they engaged a third time in battle, and got an entire victory over the
Benjaminites, and destroyed them all excepting six hundred men, [Jdg
20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026.md).

[Judges 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 20:1</span></span>

Then all the children of Israel went out,.... Of their tribes, cities,
habitations, not every individual of them, but some of the chief of
them, with a select company with them:

and the congregation was gathered together as one man; with as much
unanimity and ease met together in one place, at the same time, as if
only one man had been pitched upon and deputed for that purpose:

from Dan even to Beersheba, from the city Dan, lately built, which was
in the most northern parts of the land of Canaan, to Beersheba, a city
in the most southern part, which included all the tribes in the land of
Canaan, who all, excepting Benjamin, assembled:

with the land of Gilead; which lay on the other side Jordan, inhabited
by the two tribes of Reuben and Dan, and the half tribe of Manasseh, who
also came on this occasion:

unto the Lord in Mizpeh; a city which lay upon the borders of Judah and
Benjamin, and is therefore assigned to them both, [Jos
15:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#038.md) for this was not Mizpeh in the
land of Gilead, but a city near to Shiloh; and, according to Fuller (b),
eight miles from Gibeah, and so was a convenient place to meet at: it is
not to be thought the tribes met here, by a secret impulse upon their
minds, but by a summons of some principal persons in one of the tribes,
very probably in the tribe of Ephraim, where the Levite dwelt, and in
which was the tabernacle of the Lord, and of which the last supreme
magistrate was, namely, Joshua; and all having notice of the occasion of
it, met very readily; and because they assembled in the name and fear of
God, and it was in the cause of God, and as a solemn assembly, a
judicial one, in which God was usually present, they are said to be
gathered unto him, and the rather, as they sought for direction and
counsel from him in the affair before them.

\(b\) Pisah-Sight, B. 2. c. 12. p. 259.

[Judges 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 20:2</span></span>

And the chief of all the people,.... The princes of the tribes and heads
of families, rulers of thousands, and hundreds, and fifties, and tens;
or the "corners" (c), who were like the corner stones in a building,
which are not only the most valuable and ornamental, but the strength of
the building, which cement it, and support it, and hold it together;
though Abarbinel thinks this intends the division and separation of each
tribe, which encamped in a separate corner and side by itself: but the
former sense seems best, and the meaning is, that the principal men of
them:

even of all the tribes of Israel; excepting the tribe of Benjamin:

presented themselves in the assembly of the people of God; now gathered
together: which assembly consisted, besides the heads of them, of

four hundred thousand footmen that drew sword; or were armed men; there
were 600,000 or more in Israel able to bear arms; but as now the wars in
Canaan were pretty much at an end, the militia of the nation was not so
regularly kept up, and many were employed in tilling the ground, and
dressing the vines, and the like; and besides, as there were none of the
tribe of Benjamin present, it need not be wondered at there should be no
more, but rather that so many should be gathered together on such an
occasion.

\(c\) "anguli", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Munster, Vatablus, Drusius,
Tigurine version.

[Judges 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 20:3</span></span>

Now the children of Benjamin heard that the children of Israel were gone
up to Mizpeh,.... Having no doubt the same notice the rest of the tribes
had; but the thing complained of being done in their tribe, and by some
of it, they might be willing to screen the delinquents, or were careless
about and indifferent to the case, and secure and easy, as imagining
their brethren would never go to war with them about it; or were proud
and haughty, and would pay no regard to the summons given them:

then said the children of Israel, tell us, how was this wickedness?
proclamation was made in the assembly, that if any person there knew
anything of this shocking affair, and horrid iniquity, which was the
occasion of their meeting together, that they would rise up and declare
what was the cause of it, how it came about, and by whom it was done; or
they addressed themselves particularly to the Levite, and his host, and
his servant, who might all be upon the spot to bear witness in this
case, as it is certain the former of them was, who upon this stood up,
and spoke as follows.

[Judges 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 20:4</span></span>

And the Levite, the husband of the woman that was slain, answered, and
said,.... He rose up, and, in answer to their request, declared the
whole affair as follows: and none so proper as he, who was upon the spot
when it was done, and so near a relation of the deceased, and had a
right to demand justice to be done; for from hence it appears that she
was his lawful wife, though called a concubine:

I came into Gibeah, that belongeth to Benjamin; which he so particularly
describes, to distinguish it from another of the same name in the tribe
of Judah, lest any mistake should be made, and an innocent people should
suffer in their reputation, or otherwise; and which also would account
for the tribe of Benjamin not being present at this convention:

I and my concubine, to lodge; thither they came, not with an intention
to stay, to sojourn there, and much less to do them any injury, or to
infringe any of their rights and privileges; nor in the least to be
burdensome to them, having brought all necessary provisions with them
for themselves, servants, and cattle, only to get a night's lodging with
them.

[Judges 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 20:5</span></span>

And the men of Gibeah rose against me,.... Not all of them, but some
that dwelt in that city; he forbears giving them the character they
justly deserved, sons of Belial. These came in a tumultuous and violent
manner:

and beset the house round about upon me by night; that he might not make
his escape, resolving if possible to get him into their hands, and do
with him according to their will:

and thought to have slain me; their first intention was to commit the
unnatural sin on him, and, if he resisted, to slay him; but this he
modestly conceals, as being a sin not to be named in an assembly of
saints; and besides he might say this, because he himself chose rather
to be slain than to submit to their lust, which he knew must be the case
upon his refusal and resistance; and even if he had yielded, being
overpowered, this would have been the consequence, that he should have
been abused even unto death, as his wife was:

and my concubine have they forced, that she is dead; or "afflicted", or
"humbled" (d) her; which is a modest expression for carnal knowledge of
her, and which they had to such excess that she died through it.

\(d\) "afflixerunt", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus.

[Judges 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 20:6</span></span>

And I took my concubine, and cut her in pieces,.... Lest it should be
thought that these barbarous creatures, after they had used her in such
a manner that occasioned her death, that they had committed this fact
also; the Levite takes it to himself, and owns that he did that:

and sent her throughout all the country of the inheritance of Israel; to
alarm them, and excite their attention to what had passed, and to raise
their indignation against it:

for they have committed lewdness and folly in Israel; being guilty of
adultery and murder, and would have committed the unnatural crime, if
they could have had an opportunity of doing it.

[Judges 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 20:7</span></span>

Behold, ye are all children of Israel,.... The descendants of one man
that feared the Lord; were of one nation, and of one religion, men
professing godliness, and therefore ought to bear testimony against sin
and wickedness of every sort, and especially such crying abominations as
these:

give your advice and counsel: in this place, being assembled together on
this occasion; consult what is best to be done, and let every man speak
his mind freely what step he thinks should be taken for the glory of
God, and honour of religion, and to bring such persons to justice who
had committed so foul a fact.

[Judges 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 20:8</span></span>

And all the people arose as one man,.... Either the heads of the people
assembled in council, all agreed unanimously in one vote or resolution,
or all the 400,000 men were of the same mind, when the case was reported
to them:

saying, we will not any of us go to his tent, neither will we any of us
turn into his house; that is, they would not return home, to take one
nights rest in their houses, or attend to the business of their callings
or to any affair of life, however urgent, till satisfaction was made for
the evil committed.

[Judges 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 20:9</span></span>

But now this shall be the thing which we will do to Gibeah,.... Where
the fact was done; what follows was proposed by some, and unanimously
agreed to by all:

we will go up by lot against it; cast lots who shall go up to it and
demand satisfaction for the offence committed; and if denied, to act in
an hostile manner against it.

[Judges 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 20:10</span></span>

And we will take ten men of an hundred, throughout all the tribes of
Israel,.... Excepting that of Benjamin which was not with them, not any
of them:

and a hundred out of a thousand, and a thousand out of ten thousand; in
all 40,000, out of the 400,000:

to fetch victual for the people; ten men were to provide food for
ninety, and one hundred men for nine hundred, and 1000 men for 9000, in
all 40,000, for 360,000; these were either to go to their own tribes and
habitations, or to the towns and cities adjacent, to procure food for
this large army; for they came from their homes without any provision,
not knowing that the affair would keep them long; but perceiving that it
would require time before it could be determined, they judged it the
wisest method for some to be appointed to take care of provision for the
army, that it might not be scattered about on that account, but pursue
the war with vigour till satisfaction was obtained:

that they might do, when they came to Gibeah of Benjamin, according to
all the folly that they have wrought in Israel; punish with death the
delinquents, and chastise the inhabitants, and especially the
magistrates, for their connivance at such wicked persons among them, and
negligence of doing their duty.

[Judges 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 20:11</span></span>

So all the men of Israel were gathered against the city,.... Of Gibeah,
even 360,000 men:

knit together as one man; went heart and hand together, united in their
sentiments and resolutions, determining to have justice done, or lose
their lives in this cause: according to the Jews (e), this was on the
twenty third of Shebet, which answers to part of January and part of
February, on which day a fast was kept on this account.

\(e\) Schulchan Aruch, par. 1. c. 580. sect. 2.

[Judges 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 20:12</span></span>

And the tribes of Israel sent men through all the tribes of
Benjamin,.... Meaning the families of Benjamin; for as sometimes a tribe
is called a family, [Jos 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#017.md) so a
family is called a tribe; and there were ten families in the tribe of
Benjamin, according to the number of his sons, the fathers of these
families. [Gen 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021.md), which being
numerous and powerful, and consisting of men of courage, and expert in
war, thought themselves a match for the ten tribes of Israel now
assembled, who sent one out of each tribe, very probably ten in all,
upon this errand; for they judged it most advisable, before they went to
war with them, to try to get the offenders, delivered up to justice, and
so prevent the shedding of blood of either side; and the rather, as
there were none of the tribe of Benjamin at this assembly, and which
indeed might give them reason to suspect they meant not to join with
them in an amicable manner in this affair: however, they were willing to
try peaceable methods first:

saying, what wickedness is this that is done among you? not that they
were sent to inquire what the crime was that was committed, that was
fully known; but by putting the question in this manner, their design
was to aggravate it, and to put the men of Benjamin on considering how
great it was, what an enormous sin it was that was committed, and that
among them; and therefore it lay upon them, either to punish the
perpetrators of it themselves or deliver them up to them to be punished
according to the common law of Israel.

[Judges 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 20:13</span></span>

Now, therefore, deliver us the men, the children of Belial, which are in
Gibeah,.... Those wicked men that were the authors of that abominable
wickedness there committed:

that we may put them to death; as they deserved, since they were guilty
both of adultery and murder; their meaning is, that they in conjunction
with the tribe of Benjamin might condemn them to death and punish them
with it, as their crime deserved:

and put away evil from Israel; prevent both the spread of such a sinful
evil in the nation, encouraged by such examples, and the evil of
punishment coming upon them from God, should they let such wickedness
pass with impunity:

but the children of Benjamin would not hearken to the voice of their
brethren the children of Israel; they refused to give up the men of
Gibeah, that had been guilty of such great wickedness; reckoning it a
reproach, as Josephus (f) says, to obey the commands of others, for fear
of war, and unwilling to yield to any in arms, neither on account of
multitude nor courage.

\(f\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2. sect. 9.

[Judges 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 20:14</span></span>

But the children of Benjamin gathered themselves together out of the
cities unto Gibeah,.... To protect and defend it against the other
tribes, being a city of theirs and where the persons charged with the
crime lived; these got together thither out of the several cities of the
tribe of Benjamin, as many as could bear arms:

to go out to battle against the children of Israel; they neither denied
the fact, nor attempted to palliate and excuse it, nor sought for peace
but at once betook themselves to arms; which showed not only want of
prudence but pride, passion and self-confidence, and that they were
sadly depraved in their morals to rise up in defence of such wicked men;
and a strange infatuation to expect success against such vastly superior
numbers, and in so bad a cause.

[Judges 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 20:15</span></span>

And the children of Benjamin were numbered at that time out of the
cities,.... All that they could muster up, and gather together out of
their several cities, were no more man than

twenty and six thousand men that drew the sword able bodied men fit for
war, and expert in it:

beside the inhabitants of Gibeah, which were numbered seven hundred
chosen men young, stout, and strong, and in all but 26,700; and what are
these to an army of 400,000 men, or however 360,000 that came up against
Gibeah, while 40,000 were employed in getting provisions for them?
Josephus (g) makes the number of the Benjaminites still less, no more
than 25,600, led thereunto by an later account, that 25,000 Benjaminites
were slain in the third and last battle, and only six hundred escaped to
a rock for safety, not considering that 1000 men may well be supposed to
be lost in the two first battles; for it would be strange indeed that
they should lose none in two engagement with so large an army; the same
error is committed in the Vulgate Latin version, which makes them no
more than 25,000; with which agrees the Alexandrian copy of the
Septuagint version: though that, according to the Vatican exemplar, has
but 23,000. The numbers in the Hebrew text are no doubt the right.

\(g\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2. sect. 10.

[Judges 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 20:16</span></span>

Among all this people there were seven hundred chosen men
lefthanded,.... According to Ben Gersom, these were the seven hundred
men of Gibeah; but this does not appear from the text, but, on the
contrary, that these were among all the people; or there were so many to
be selected out of them all, who were lefthanded men; nor is it likely
that all the inhabitants of one place should be such. Benjamin signifies
a son of the right hand, yet this tribe had a great number of lefthanded
men in it, see [Jdg 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#015). Josephus (h.md)
wrongly reduces the number to five hundred:

everyone could sling stones at an hair's breadth, and not miss: the mark
they slung the stone at, so very expert were they at it; and perhaps
their having such a number of skilful men in this art made them more
confident of success, and emboldened them in this daring undertaking, to
point to which this circumstance seems to be mentioned. There were a
people that inhabited the islands, now called Majorca and Minorca,
anciently Baleares, from their skilfulness in slinging stones, to which
they brought up from their childhood, as it is related various writers,
Strabo (i), Diodorus Siculus (k), Floras (l) and others (m); that their
mothers used to set their breakfast on a beam or post, or some such
thing, at a distance, which they were not to have, unless they could
strike it off; and the first of these writers says, that they exercised
this art from the time that the Phoenicians held these islands; and,
according to Pliny (n), the Phoenicians, the old inhabitants of Canaan,
were the first inventors of slings, and from these the Benjaminites
might learn it. The Indians are said (o) to be very expert in slinging
stones to an hair's breadth.

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2. sect. 10. (i) Geograph l. 3. p. 116. (k)
Bibliothec. l. 5. p. 298. (l) Roman Cost. l. 3. c. 8. (m) Vid. Barthii
Ammadv. ad Claudian. in 3 Consul. Honor. ver. 50. (n) Nat. Hist. l. 7.
c. 56. (o) Philoetrat. Vit. Apollon. l. 2. c. 12.

[Judges 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 20:17</span></span>

And the men of Israel, beside Benjamin,.... Who did not join them in
this affair, but opposed them:

were numbered four hundred thousand men that drew sword: see [Jdg
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#009.md).

all these were men of war; inured to it, skilful and courageous.

[Judges 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 20:18</span></span>

And the children of Israel arose,.... From Mizpeh, where they were
assembled, having heard that the Benjaminites were gathered together to
defend the men of Gibeah:

and went up to the house of God; to the tabernacle which was in Shiloh,
[Jdg 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg018.htm#031.md), see [Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001.md) though the Targum takes Bethel
for the name of a place so called; and so do Ben Gersom and Josephus
(p), which was near Shiloh, for Shiloh is said to be on the north side
of Bethel, [Jdg 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#019.md) but as there is
no reason to believe the tabernacle was now removed from Shiloh thither,
so it is not likely they would go to any other place but where the
tabernacle ark, and high priest were:

and asked counsel of God; before Phinehas the high priest, according to
the judgment of Urim and Thummim, [Jdg
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#028.md).

and said which of us shall go up first to the battle against the
children of Benjamin? there being no supreme magistrate, judge, or
general, to lead them; they did not ask whether they should go to war or
no with their brethren; they made no doubt of that, taking it for
granted they had sufficient reason for so doing, and that it was
according to the will of God; nor did they inquire whether they should
be victorious or not, they made no doubt of being victorious, both from
their superior numbers, and the justness of their cause; they only
inquire who should lead them on, having no general; and this they might
do, to prevent any contentions among them about being precedence:

and the Lord said, Judah shall go up first: which tribe pitched their
standard first about the tabernacle, and marched first in their journeys
in the wilderness, and was ordered to go up first and fight the
Canaanites, being a powerful and warlike tribe.

\(p\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2. sect. 10.)

[Judges 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 20:19</span></span>

And the children of Israel rose up in the morning,.... After they had
had counsel at Shiloh, and which perhaps was by a deputation sent
thither:

and encamped against Gibeah: formed a camp near Gibeah of 360,000 men,
enough to have stormed and taken that city at once, one would think.

[Judges 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 20:20</span></span>

And the men of Israel went out to battle against Benjamin,.... From the
place where they were encamped:

and the men of Israel put themselves in array to fight against them at
Gibeah; not only against the inhabitants of Gibeah, but the children of
Benjamin, that came to the defence of them; they formed, themselves in a
line of battle, and prepared for an action.

[Judges 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 20:21</span></span>

And the children of Benjamin came forth out of Gibeah,.... Which was
their place of rendezvous, and which they came to defend; and in and
about which they had stationed their whole army of 26,000 men:

and destroyed down to the ground: killed dead upon the spot:

of the Israelites that day twenty and two thousand men; wanting but 4000
of their whole number, excepting the men of Gibeah, which was such a
rebuff the Israelites did not expect, being engaged in so just a cause,
and having such a numerous army. Several Jewish, writers (q) think this
was on account of their idolatry, that though they were very zealous to
revenge corporeal adultery in the case of the Levite's concubine, and to
remove such iniquity from Israel; yet were not zealous to revenge and
put away spiritual adultery or idolatry in the case of the Danites, who
had set up the image of Micah, and so had spread idolatry not only in
their own tribe, but throughout Israel; and therefore God took this
opportunity to avenge his own quarrel, and rebuke them for their sin;
and now did Benjamin raven as a wolf, according to Jacob's prophecy,
[Gen 49:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#027.md).

\(q\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 103. 2. Pirke Eliezer, c. 28. Jarchi &
Kimchi in loc.

[Judges 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 20:22</span></span>

And the people, the men of Israel, encouraged themselves,.... That
though they had lost a great number of men, yet still their forces were
large and greatly superior to those of Benjamin, and above all their
cause was good:

and set their battle again in array formed a line of battle again facing
their enemy, inviting to another battle, and bidding defiance:

and in the place where they put themselves in array the first day; by
which it seems they kept the field of battle; though they lost so many
men, they did not flee before the children of Benjamin, but stood their
ground; nor were they so superstitious as to fancy the place unlucky;
nor was it a bad situation they were in, to which their want of success
was owing, for then they would have changed it.

[Judges 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 20:23</span></span>

And the children of Israel went up and wept before the Lord until
even,.... The evening of the day in which the battle was fought; not
that the whole army went up to Shiloh to the house of God there, but a
deputation of them, who lamented their defeat, and the loss of so many
lives, but not their sins and transgressions, and particularly the
idolatry they had been guilty of:

and asked counsel of the Lord, saying, shall we go up again to battle
against the children of Benjamin my brother? they seemed to have some
doubt, by the loss they sustained, whether they were right in going to
war with Benjamin, especially as he was their brother; and therefore the
question now is, not who should go up first, which was already
determined, but whether they should go at all; and still they do not ask
any help of God in battle, nor success, but were depending on their
numbers, and the justness of their cause, and therefore neither is
promised to them, only they have an answer to their question:

and the Lord said, go up against him; for Benjamin was certainly in the
wrong, and therefore the Israelites are directed to go against him, and
they also were not sufficiently chastised, nor thoroughly humbled.

[Judges 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 20:24</span></span>

And the children of Israel came near,.... To the city of Gibeah, drew
nigh to battle:

against the children of Benjamin the second day; for the two battles
were fought two days successively.

[Judges 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 20:25</span></span>

And Benjamin went forth against them out of Gibeah the second day,....
Flushed with the victory they had obtained the day before:

and destroyed down to the ground of the children of Israel again
eighteen thousand men, all these drew the sword, were armed men; this,
with the 22,000 slain the day preceding, made 40,000; the same number
singled out from among them by lot to provide food for them, and is
thought by some to be the case Deborah refers to, [Jdg
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#008.md) and is what is certainly intended
in [Hos 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#009.md).

[Judges 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 20:26</span></span>

Then all the children of Israel and all the people went up, and came
unto the house of God,.... This looks as if the whole body of the army,
with other people from parts adjacent, went up to the tabernacle of God
in Shiloh:

and wept and sat there before the Lord; not only wept, but continued
weeping, and that not merely for their defeat, but for their sins, since
it follows:

and fasted that day until even; afflicted their bodies with fasting,
which was a token of the humiliation of their souls for their sins:

and offered burnt offering's and peace offerings before the Lord, to
make atonement for their sins, and to implore success on their arms.

[Judges 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 20:27</span></span>

And the children of Israel inquired of the Lord,.... By the Word of the
Lord, as the Targum, and which has the same expression in [Jdg
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#018.md) for the ark of the covenant of
God was there in those days; in Shiloh, where the tabernacle was.

[Judges 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 20:28</span></span>

And Phinehas the son of Eleazar, the son of Aaron, stood before it in
those days,.... Before the ark, ministering before the Lord, which shows
that this affair was long before the times of Samson, though placed
after them; or otherwise Phinehas must have been more than three hundred
years of age, which is not probable (r). Phinehas's standing before the
ark was the posture of the priest when he inquired of the Lord for any
by Urim and Thummim; the person that inquired stood before him that was
inquired of, as Kimchi observes, and he that was inquired of stood
before the Shechinah, or the presence of the divine Majesty, of which
the ark was a symbol:

saying, shall I yet again go out to battle against the children of
Benjamin my brother, or shall I cease? in which the question is put in
somewhat different manner than before, not only desiring to know whether
it was the will of God they should renew the battle or not, since
Benjamin was their brother, but whether they should have success or not;
intimating, that if the Lord would bless and help them, they were
willing to go up, but if not they chose to desist; for they were fully
convinced now they were wrong in depending on their numbers, or the
justness of their cause; whereas success depended wholly on the will and
pleasure of God, to which they desired to submit:

and the Lord said, go up, for tomorrow I will deliver them into thine
hand; now they are not only directed to go up to the battle, but are
promised victory.

\(r\) Vid. Rainold. de lib. Apocryph. Praelect. 149, 150. p. 345, 353,
354.

[Judges 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 20:29</span></span>

And Israel set liers in wait round about Gibeah. For though they were
assured of success and victory, yet they thought proper to make use of
means: and though their numbers were very great, they had recourse to
art and stratagem, and set an ambush in divers places, much in like
manner as Israel did for the men of Ai; the two cases being pretty much
similar; this ambush was set in the night, as Josephus says (s),

\(s\) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2.) sect. 11.

[Judges 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 20:30</span></span>

And the children of Israel went up against the children of Benjamin on
the third day,.... Not the day following the second battle, since it
would take more time to go to Shiloh, and fast and offer sacrifices
there, but on the third day from the second battle:

and put themselves in array against Gibeah, as at other times; as they
had done on the first and second days of battle.

[Judges 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 20:31</span></span>

And the children of Benjamin went out against the people,.... Sallied
out of Gibeah upon them, where they had put themselves in array against
them:

and were drawn away from the city; the Israelites retreating, and
dissembling a flight, which drew the Benjaminites to pursue after them,
by which means they were drawn off to a greater distance from the city
of Gibeah:

and they began to smite the people, and kill as at other times; at the
other two battles:

in the highways; where it seems two ways met:

of which one goeth up to the house of God; to Bethel, as the Targum (t);
or rather to Shiloh, where the house or tabernacle of God was, and was
two miles from Gibeah, as Bunting (u) says:

and the other to Gibeah in the field; so called, to distinguish it from
the other Gibeah situated on an hill:

about thirty men of Israel; which were killed in this running fight; and
it seems as if one part of the army of Israel took one road, and the
other the other road, and so divided the army of the Benjaminites that
pursued after them.

\(t\) So the Septuagint, and Noldius, p. 69. No. 345. (u) Travels, &c.
p. 121.

[Judges 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jdg 20:32</span></span>

And the children of Benjamin said, they are smitten down before us, as
at first,.... At the first battle, which gave them great spirit, and
they concluded they should have victory, as before:

but the children of Israel said, let us flee, and draw them from the
city unto the highways; pretending to be afraid of them, and not able to
face them, and therefore made as if they fled through fear and
cowardice, which inspired the Benjaminites with fresh ardour to pursue
them closely, and so were drawn from the city to the highways, as
expressed in the preceding verse.

[Judges 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 20:33</span></span>

And all the men of Israel rose up out of their place,.... The main body
of the army, which fled before Benjamin, when they were come to a proper
place, stopped, and rose up out of it, and stood in their own defence:

and put themselves in array at Baaltamar; drew up in a line of battle at
that place, facing their enemies, in order to engage with them: this
place the Targum calls the plains of Jericho, that being the city of
palm trees, which Tamar signifies; and so Jarchi interprets it; but
these are too far off; it must be some place near Gibeah. Jerom (w)
speaks of a little village in his time in those parts, called Bethamari,
and may be thought to be this same place; perhaps in the times of the
old Canaanites here was a grove of palm trees, in which Baal was
worshipped, from whence it had its name:

and the liers in wait of Israel came forth out of their places, even out
of the meadows of Gibeah; or plain of Gibeah, as the Targum; for as the
city was built on a hill, at the bottom of it were a plain and fine
meadows of grass, and here an ambush was placed at some little distance
from the city; and when the army of the Benjaminites were drawn off from
it, in pursuit of Israel, these came forth and placed themselves between
them and the city.

\(w\) De loc. Heb. fol. 89. I.

[Judges 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 20:34</span></span>

And there came against Gibeah ten thousand chosen men out of all
Israel,.... Which, according to Ben Gersom, were the liers in wait; and
came from the south, as the Targum says:

and the battle was sore; not between those liers in wait, and the
Benjaminites, but between those at Baaltamar, and them who set
themselves in battle array against them, and they fought stoutly on both
sides:

but they knew not that evil was near them; that there was an ambush
laid, by which they were in great danger; they knew nothing of the
10,000 men that were now come out against Gibeah, and were between them
and that.

[Judges 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jdg 20:35</span></span>

And the Lord smote Benjamin before Israel,.... Gave Israel the victory
over them at Baaltamar; for notwithstanding all the art and stratagem
they used, their numbers and their valour, victory was of the Lord, and
to him it is ascribed; for until now Benjamin, though fewer in number,
had been always victorious; and the children of Israel destroyed of the
Benjaminites that day 25,100; which is the total sum of all that were
slain of them that day, the particulars of which are afterwards given:

all these drew the sword; were armed men.

[Judges 20:36](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jdg 20:36</span></span>

So the children of Benjamin saw that they were smitten,.... Their forces
broken and worsted, many being killed:

for the men of Israel gave place to the Benjaminites; at first, and made
as if they were afraid of them, and so fled before them, which was only
to decoy them to a greater distance from the city Gibeah:

because they trusted unto the liers in wait, which they had set beside
Gibeah; that these would not only enter the city, and burn it, but meet
the Benjaminites fleeing back to it, when they should turn upon them and
smite them, and so cut off all that remained of them.

[Judges 20:37](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jdg 20:37</span></span>

And the liers in wait hasted,.... When the time was come agreed upon for
them to rise out of their ambush:

and rushed upon Gibeah; at unawares, with great force and violence
entered the city, and took possession of it; or "extended" (x), or
spread themselves unto it; before they lay close in a narrow compass,
but now they put themselves in a regular order, and marched rank and
file, and reached from the meadows in which they were, [Jdg
20:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#033.md), to the city:

and the liers in wait drew themselves along; along the city, in every
part of it, spread themselves all over it, and made themselves masters
of every corner of it; or "made a long sound" (y) with a trumpet,
protracted that to a great length, which was done to terrify the
inhabitants, or to let the Israelites know they were possessed of the
city:

and smote all the city with the edge of the sword; old men, women, and
children, who were not able to bear arms.

\(x\) "extenderunt se", Tigurine version. (y) "pertraxerunt buccinae
sonitum", Paguninus; so Jarchi and Limchi.

[Judges 20:38](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jdg 20:38</span></span>

Now there was an appointed sign between the men of Israel and the liers
in wait,.... Or an appointed time (z) as the Targum; so Kimchi and
Abarbinel. There was a time fixed, at which the men of Israel proposed
to be at Baaltamar, exactly when the Benjaminites would be drawn at a
proper distance from the city, and then the liers in wait were to break
forth, and rush upon it, and enter it:

and that they should make a great flame with smoke to rise up out of the
city; set it on fire, and cause the fire to burn fiercely, that there
might be a large ascent of flame and smoke to be seen afar off; which,
when the men of Israel saw, they would know the city was taken.

\(z\) "tempus constitutum", Panginus, Montanus, Junius et Tremellius,
Piscator.

[Judges 20:39](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jdg 20:39</span></span>

And when the men of Israel retired in the battle,.... Which is before
expressed by their fleeing, and giving place to the Benjaminites, and
was only an artifice of theirs, to draw them off from the city:

Benjamin began to smite and kill of the men of Israel about thirty
persons; which was done in the highways leading to Shiloh and Gibeah in
the field, [Jdg 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#031.md).

for they said, surely they are smitten down before us as in the first
battle; when the greater number of the Israelites were slain by them.

[Judges 20:40](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jdg 20:40</span></span>

But when the flame began to arise up out of the city with a pillar of
smoke,.... Fire being set to it by the liers in wait, who had entered
it, and who made a large fire, which caused a vast pillar of flame and
smoke to arise, which might be seen a great way off:

the Benjamites looked behind them; perhaps at hearing the blowing of the
trumpet, and the long sound of that:

and, behold, the flame of the city ascended up to heaven; went upwards,
and reached to a great height.

[Judges 20:41](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">jdg 20:41</span></span>

And when the men of Israel turned again,.... Turned their faces to the
Benjaminites, on whom they had turned their backs; and which they did on
hearing the sound of the trumpet, or seeing the flame of the city, or
both, and that in order to fight the Benjaminites, and smite them, as
now was their opportunity:

the men of Benjamin were amazed; at this strange and sudden change of
things, at the sight of the flame of their city behind them, and at the
Israelites turning back to fight them, when they thought themselves sure
of victory, as at other times:

for they saw that evil was come upon them; that they were in the utmost
danger, between two fires, as we usually say, liers in wait behind them,
which had seized their city and burnt it, and the army of Israel turning
upon them with great spirit and resolution.

[Judges 20:42](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">jdg 20:42</span></span>

Therefore they turned their backs before the men of Israel,.... And fled
from them:

unto the way of the wilderness; what wilderness is not certain, perhaps
the wilderness of Judah; they did not turn directly back towards Gibeah,
perceiving that was taken, and in the hands of a body of men that would
meet them, and therefore they turned on one side towards the wilderness,
if happily they could make their escape thither, and shelter themselves:

but the battle overtook them; that is, they that made war, as the
Targum, the Israelites that were engaged in battle with them pursued
them, and overtook them:

and them which came out of the cities they destroyed in the midst of
them; either the Israelites that came out of their cities to assist
their brethren destroyed the Benjaminites as they fled, or the
Benjaminites who came out of other cities to Gibeah, these were
destroyed in the midst of it with the inhabitants, by the liers in wait,
when they entered it.

[Judges 20:43](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">jdg 20:43</span></span>

Thus they enclosed the Benjaminites round about,.... Surrounded them on
all sides, the army of Israel being posted in different places, and
people coming out of all the cities to their assistance. Josephus (a)
says, they were forced into, and cooped up, in a hollow place in a
valley, so that they could not escape:

and chased them; or "caused to pursue" (b); calling after them a
pursuit, crying to one another as they went along, saying, pursue them,
pursue them; so Jarchi and Kimchi; which cry, as it inspired the
pursuers with zeal, so they pursued with terror:

and trod them down with ease; they making no resistance, being quite
dispirited; the Targrim is,"from the house of their rest,''where they
took up their rest, and designed to rest that night, but could not,
being so closely pursued, and diligently sought after. Some take
"menuchah", rendered "ease", to be the name of a place, from or unto
which they were pursued and trodden down, see [Ch1
2:52](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#052.md) and so the Septuagint seems to
take it for the name of a place, rendering it, "from Noua":

over against Gibeah, towards the sunrising; that is, as Jarchi
interprets it, to the east of Gibeah, there was this overthrow and
slaughter made.

\(a\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2. sect. 10.) (b) "persequi fecerunt
eum", Pagninus, Montanus, Drusius; "vel eos", Vatablus.

[Judges 20:44](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">jdg 20:44</span></span>

And there fell of Benjamin eighteen thousand men,.... Just the number
they had slain of Israel in the second battle. This is the number of
them that were slain when Israel turned upon them, and by that time they
got to the east of Gibeah; afterwards 5000 more were slain on the
highways, and 2000 near Gidom, as after related:

all these were men of valour; as appears by three times facing and
engaging with the army of Israel, so vastly superior to them, and twice
beating them.

[Judges 20:45](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jdg 20:45</span></span>

And they turned and fled toward the wilderness, unto the rock of
Rimmon,.... Which signifies pomegranate; perhaps it was in the form of
one, and may be the same as in [Sa1
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#002.md) where Saul is said to be under a
pomegranate tree, or under Rimmon, the rock Rimmon, for that is said to
be near Gibeah, as this was. There was a village in the times of Jerom
called Remmon, fifteen miles from Jerusalem to the north (c), but could
not be near this rock to have its name from thence; hither the rest of
the army fled for shelter:

and they gleaned of them in the highways five thousand men; who were
scattered one from another, and as they were found in the highways, and
picked up, they were slain one after another, just as ears of corn are
gleaned one by one, after the harvest is got in, or as grapes in single
berries, after the vintage is over:

and pursued hard after them unto Gidom; which perhaps had its name from
the cutting off of the Benjaminites there:

and slew two thousand men of them; that is, 2000 more besides the 5000
before mentioned.

\(c\) De loc. Heb. fol. 94. B.

[Judges 20:46](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">jdg 20:46</span></span>

So that all which fell that day of Benjamin were twenty and thousand
men,.... It is before said 25,100 [Jdg
20:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#035.md) here the one hundred are
omitted, and the round number of thousands given, which is no unusual
way of speaking and writing; the whole army of Benjamin consisted of
26,700 of which 18,000 were slain in the field of battle, 5000 in the
highways, and 2000 at Gidom, in all 25,000; and we may suppose one
hundred as they were straggling in the road, or found in by places, or
are not mentioned with either of the thousands for the sake of a round
number, and six hundred fled to the rock Rimmon; as for the other 1000,
it is highly probable, they fell in the two first battles, as Ben Gersom
and Abarbinel rightly suppose; for it is not credible, that though they
got such amazing victories, it was without the loss of men, and these
are as few as well can be imagined. Jarchi thinks these thousand fled to
the cities of Benjamin, and were slain when the Israelites entered them,
as after related, [Jdg 20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048.md) which is
much more probable than a tradition they have, that they went into the
land of Romania, and dwelt there. Now all those that were slain were men

that drew the sword; soldiers, not husbandmen, artificers, &c. but armed
men:

all these were men of valour; even those that fled, who chose rather to
lose their lives than ask for quarter.

[Judges 20:47](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">jdg 20:47</span></span>

But six hundred men,.... Who were all that were left of 26,700

turned and fled to the wilderness; turned out of the highway or common
road, and being swift of foot, got to a wilderness; what wilderness is
not certain:

unto the rock Rimmon, and abode in the rock Rimmon four months; very
probably in a cave of that rock, which might be large enough to hold
such a number; Saul is said to have just the same number under it, and
David had also a like number in a cave at Engedi, [Sa1
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#002.md), and from hence these men might
send out of their number to fetch in provision for them from parts
adjacent, after the heat of the action was over, and the rage and fury
of the Israelites subsided.

[Judges 20:48](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">jdg 20:48</span></span>

And the men of Israel turned again upon the children of Benjamin,....
After they had destroyed their army, the city of Gibeah, and the
inhabitants of it: not content with this, in their wrath and fury,
turned and went:

and smote them with the edge of the sword, as well the men of every
city; even men, women, and children, in every city of Benjamin, at least
all that lay in their way; and which they might do to be avenged on
them, for sending out their militia against them, which had made such a
slaughter among them to the loss of 40,000 men, or to fulfil their oath,
that such who came not to Mizpeh should be put to death; for which
reason also the inhabitants of Jabeshgilead, as well as of the cities of
Benjamin, were put to death, men, women, and children, dealing in the
same severity with them as with the Canaanitish nations, or as with a
city given to idolatry:

as the beast, and all that came to hand; spared no living creature,
herds and flocks:

also they set on fire all the cities that they came unto; which belonged
to the tribe of Benjamin, so exceedingly wroth were they with them, for
protecting such that had been the authors of such abominable wickedness,
and for the loss of the lives of so many valuable men.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 21](jdg021.md)

</div>
