<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Judges Index](jdg)  
  [Previous](jdg000)  [Next](jdg002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Judges Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO JUDGES 1

The children of Israel, after Joshua's death, inquiring of the Lord
which tribes should first go up against the remaining Canaanites, Judah
is ordered to go up, who with Simeon did, [Jdg
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001); and had success against the
Canaanites under Adonibezek, whom they brought to Jerusalem [Jdg
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004); and against the Canaanites in
Hebron, Debir, Zephath, Hormah, Gaza, Ashkelon, and Ekron, [Jdg
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#009); the Benjamites had not such good
success as Judah against the Jebusites in Jerusalem, [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021); nor as the house of Joseph had
against Bethel, [Jdg 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#022); nor could
the tribes of Manasseh, Ephraim, Zebulun, Asher, and Naphtali, drive out
the Canaanites from several places which belonged unto them, though many
of them became their tributaries, [Jdg
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#027); and as for the Amorites, they
were too powerful for the tribe of Dan, though some of them became
tributaries to the house of Joseph, [Jdg
1:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#034).(a) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 14.
2.

[Judges 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jdg 1:1</span></span>

Now after the death of Joshua,.... With the account of which the
preceding book is concluded, and therefore this very properly follows
after that; though Epiphanius (b) places the book of Job between them:

it came to pass that the children of Israel asked the Lord; that is, the
heads of them who gathered together at Shiloh, where the tabernacle was;
and standing before the high priest, either Eleazar, or rather Phinehas
his son, Eleazar being in all probability dead, inquired by Urim and
Thummim:

saying, who shall go up for us against the Canaanites first, to fight
against them? for they had no commander in chief, Joshua leaving no
successor, though the Samaritan Chronicle (c) pretends he did; one Abel,
a son of Caleb's brother, of the tribe of Judah, on whom the lot fell,
out of twelve of the nine tribes and a half, to whom Joshua delivered
the government of the nation, and crowned him: but this inquiry was not
for any man to go before them all as their generalissimo, but to know
what tribe should first go up, and they were desirous of having the mind
of God in it, when they might expect to succeed; which to do, at their
first setting out, would not only be a great encouragement to them to go
on, but strike dread and terror into their enemies; and this is to be
understood of the Canaanites who remained unsubdued, that dwelt among
them, and in cities, which though divided to them by lot, they were not
in the possession of; and these being troublesome neighbours to them,
and besides the Israelites daily increasing, needed more room and more
cities to occupy, and more land to cultivate.

\(b\) De Mensur. & Ponder. c. 13. (c) Apud Hottinger. Smegma, p. 522.

[Judges 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jdg 1:2</span></span>

And the Lord said,.... By an articulate voice, which it is probable was
the usual way of answering by Urim and Thummim:

Judah shall go up; not Judah in person, who was long ago dead, but the
tribe of Judah; it was the will of the Lord that that tribe should
engage first with the Canaanites, being the principal one, and the most
numerous, powerful, and valiant, and perhaps had the greatest number of
Canaanites among them; and who succeeding, would inspire the other
tribes with courage, and fill their enemies with a panic:

behold, I have delivered the land into his hands; that part of it which
belonged to that tribe as yet unsubdued, the conquest of which they are
assured of for their encouragement.

[Judges 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jdg 1:3</span></span>

And Judah said unto Simeon his brother,.... The men of the tribe of
Judah said to those of the tribe of Simeon, they being not only brethren
by father's and mother's side, which was not the case of all the sons of
Jacob, but their possessions and inheritances lay near together; and
indeed those of Simeon were within the inheritance of the tribe of
Judah, [Jos 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001); so that as they
lived in great nearness and familiarity with each other, their interests
were closely united together:

come up with me into my lot, that we may fight against the Canaanites;
conjunctly: the meaning is, that the tribe of Simeon, as many of their
warlike men as could, would come and join their forces with those of the
tribe of Judah, in order to reduce such cities, in the lot of that
tribe, the Canaanites as yet were in the possession of:

and I likewise will go with thee into thy lot: the cities being
conquered which were in the lot, of the tribe of Judah, that tribe
proposed to bring their united forces into the lot of the tribe of
Simeon, and reduce such cities as were in that lot:

so Simeon went with him: the tribe of Simeon agreed to the proposal, and
went along with the tribe of Judah against their common enemy.

[Judges 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jdg 1:4</span></span>

And Judah went up,.... Simeon being along with him, from the southern
parts of the land, where they dwelt, and went more northward towards
Jerusalem, and which therefore is called a going up:

and the Lord delivered the Canaanites and Perizzites into their hands:
into the hands of Judah and Simeon: the Canaanites here is not the
common name of the seven nations, but the name of one of those nations,
distinguished from the rest, as here from the Perizzites, who otherwise
were also Canaanites; and both these, at least many of them, dwelt in
those parts, and were subdued by the united forces of Judah and Simeon,
whereby the Lord's promise was fulfilled, [Jdg
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#002),

and they slew of them in Bezek ten thousand men: that is, in and about
Bezek, first and last, in the course of this war, as after related.
Jerom says (d) there were two villages of this name in his time near one
another, seven miles from Neapolis, as you go to Scythopolis; and our
countryman Mr. Sandys (e) says, that when they departed from Bethlehem,
bending their course from the mountains of Judea lying west from it,
near to which, on the side of the opposite hill, they passed a little
village called Bezek, as he took it, two miles from Bethsur, see [Sa1
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#008).

\(d\) De loc. Heb. fol. 89. H. (e) Travels, p. 142. Ed. 5th.

[Judges 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jdg 1:5</span></span>

And they found Adonibezek in Bezek,.... Who was king of, the place, and
whose name signifies lord of Bezek; not that they took him there, for he
is afterwards said to make his escape from thence, but here he was when
they came against that city, and into which they rushed upon him, and
fell upon him as follows:

and they fought against him; entering the city with their forces:

and they slew the Canaanites and the Perizzites: that were in it, or
about it, even to the number of ten thousand, as before related, [Jdg
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#004).

[Judges 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jdg 1:6</span></span>

But Adonibezek fled, and they pursued after him, and caught him,.... It
is very probable his view was to get to Jebus or Jerusalem, a strong and
fortified city and he made his way thither as fast as he could, but was
pursued and overtaken by some of the forces of Judah and Simeon; and the
rather it may seem he took this course, since when he was taken by them,
they brought him thither, as follows:

and cut off his thumbs and his great toes; whereby he was disabled both
for fighting and for fleeing. So the Athenians cut off the thumbs of the
right hand of the Aeginetae, the inhabitants of the island of Aegina, to
disable them from holding a spear, as various writers (f) relate.
Whether the Israelites did this, as knowing this king had used others in
like manner, and so, according to their law of retaliation, "eye for
eye", &c. [Exo 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#023), required it; or
whether, ignorant of it, were so moved and directed by the providence of
God to do this, that the same measure might be measured to him which he
had measured to others, is not certain; the latter seems most probable,
since the Israelites did not usually inflict such sort of punishments;
and besides, according to the command of God, they should have put him
to death, as they were to do to all Canaanites.

\(f\) Valerius Maximus, l. 9. c. 2. Aelian, Var. Hist. l. 2. c. 9.
Cicero de Officiis, l. 3. c. 11.

[Judges 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jdg 1:7</span></span>

And Adonibezek said,.... To the men of Judah, after his thumbs and toes
were cut off, his conscience accusing him for what he had done to
others, and being obliged to acknowledge he was righteously dealt with:

threescore and ten kings, having their thumbs and their great toes cut
off; that is, by him, or by his orders, whom he had conquered and made
captives; according to Josephus (g), they were seventy two; the number
may be accounted for by observing, that in those times, as appears by
the preceding book, every city had a king over it; and besides, these
seventy kings might not be such who had had the government of so many
cities, but many of them such who had reigned successively in the same
city, and had fallen into the hands of this cruel and tyrannical king,
one after another, and their sons also with them might be so called: and
these he says

gathered their meat under my table: were glad to eat of the crumbs and
scraps which fell from thence, and might in their turns be put there at
times for his sport and pleasure, and there be fed with the offal of his
meat, as Bajazet the Turk was served by Tamerlane, who put him into an
iron cage, and carried him about in it, and used him as his footstool to
mount his horse, and at times fed him like a dog with crumbs from his
table (h):

as I have done, so God hath requited me; whether he had any knowledge of
the true God, and of his justice in dealing with him according to his
deserts, and had a real sense of his sin, and true repentance for it, is
not certain; since the word for God is in the plural number, and
sometimes used of Heathen deities, as it may be here by him; however,
the righteous judgment of God clearly appears in this instance:

and they brought him to Jerusalem; to that part of Jerusalem which
belonged to the tribe of Judah; see [Jos
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008); here they brought him alive, and
dying, buried him, as Josephus (i) says; which might be their view in
carrying him thither, perceiving he was a dying man; or they had him
thither to expose him as a trophy of victory, and as an example of
divine justice:

and there he died: whether through grief and vexation, or of the wounds
he had received, or by the immediate hand of God, or by the hands of the
Israelites, is not said; neither are improbable.

\(g\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2. sect. 2. (h) Such dogs are called , in Homer.
Iliad. 23. ver. 173. & Odyss. 17. ver. 227. (i) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2.
sect. 2.

[Judges 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jdg 1:8</span></span>

Now the children of Judah had fought against Jerusalem, and had taken
it,.... Which accounted for their carrying Adonibezek thither. This they
had done in the times of Joshua; for when the king of that place was
taken and slain by Joshua, it seems that he and Israel went and fought
against the city, and took that in which the tribe of Judah had a
principal concern; so Kimchi and Ben Gersom interpret it; but Jarchi and
Abarbinel are of opinion, that now from Bezek they went up to Jerusalem,
and fought against it, and took it; and so others think, because only
the children of Judah are mentioned, and not all Israel, who fought
together in Joshua's time; nor is there any mention made of its being
taken in his time, and yet it seems plain that it was inhabited in part
by the children of Judah, [Jos 15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063);
some therefore have thought that it was twice taken; that after Joshua
had taken it, he and the children of Israel being employed in making
conquests in other parts of the land, the Jebusites repossessed it, from
whence they were now again in part driven, not wholly; and Josephus says
(k), the lower part was taken, and all the inhabitants killed, but the
upper part was hard to be taken, because of the strength of the walls,
and the nature of the place:

and smitten it with the edge of the sword; the "inhabitants of it", so
far as they got possession of it:

and set the city on fire; some part of it only, for in some part of it
dwelt the children of Judah, and in another part the Jebusites.

\(k\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 2. sect. 2.)

[Judges 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jdg 1:9</span></span>

And afterwards the children of Judah,.... After the taking of Bezek, and
the king of it, having him to Jerusalem, where he died: they

went down; from Jerusalem; which was on high ground:

to fight against the Canaanites that dwelt in the mountain, and in the
south, and in the valley; into which several parts the lot of the tribe
of Judah was divided; in each of which they had cities, and some, as it
seems, yet unsubdued, and in the hands of the Canaanites; of these
several parts, and the cities in them, see [Jos
15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021).

[Judges 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jdg 1:10</span></span>

And Judah went against the Canaanites that dwelt in Hebron,.... Hebron
was first taken by Joshua, and the inhabitants of it put to the sword,
[Jos 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#036); but while Joshua was
employed in making other conquests, the Canaanites found ways and means
of getting into the possession of it again; wherefore, when a grant of
it was made to Caleb, he, with the assistance of the tribe of Judah, of
which he was prince, regained it, [Jos
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#012); wherefore what is recorded here
is only a repetition of what was then done; unless it can be thought
that this fact was there inserted by anticipation, or that there were
two expeditions of the children of Judah against this place:

now the name of Hebron, before was Kirjatharba: see [Jos
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015); in the first of which Caleb,
with the assistance of this tribe, drove out the three giants only, who
afterwards got possession again, and in this put them to death, as
follows:

and they slew Sheshai, and Ahiman, and Talmai; see [Num
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#022); but what follows concerning
their going from hence to Debir, and the offer of Caleb to give his
daughter in marriage to whomsoever should take it, does not seem so well
to agree with times after the death of Joshua; since it is highly
probable that Caleb, who was contemporary with him and Eleazar, was now
dead, and at least cannot well be thought to have a young daughter at
this time undisposed of in marriage; wherefore these facts are only
repeated upon observing Judah's having taken Jerusalem, to show what
exploits were performed by men of that tribe; wherefore for what is
after said, [Jdg 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#011), as is said in
[Jos 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#015), where the same things are
related in express words as here, containing the request of Caleb's
daughter: such an one, as made to Domitian, is related by Martial (l).

\(l\) "Est mihi sitque precor", &c. l. 9. ep. 16.

[Judges 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jdg 1:11</span></span>

And from thence he went against the inhabitants of Debir: and the name
of Debir before was Kirjathsepher. See Gill on [Jos
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#015).

[Judges 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jdg 1:12</span></span>

And Caleb said, He that smiteth Kirjathsepher, and taketh it,

to him will I give Achsah my daughter to wife. See Gill on [Jos
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#016).

[Judges 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jdg 1:13</span></span>

And Othniel the son of Kenaz, Caleb's younger brother, took it: and he
gave him Achsah his daughter to wife. See Gill on [Jos
15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#017).

[Judges 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jdg 1:14</span></span>

And it came to pass, when she came to him, that she moved him to ask of
her father a field: and she lighted from off her ass;

and Caleb said unto her, What wilt thou? See Gill on [Jos
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#018).

[Judges 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jdg 1:15</span></span>

And she said unto him, Give me a blessing: for thou hast given me a
south land; give me also springs of water. And Caleb gave her the upper
springs and the nether springs. See Gill on [Jos
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#019).

[Judges 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jdg 1:16</span></span>

And the children of the Kenite, Moses' father in law,.... The posterity
of Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses; for though Jethro returned to his
own country, after he had paid a visit to Moses in the wilderness, yet
Hobab his son, at the persuasion of Moses, travelled with him and Israel
through the wilderness, and went with them into Canaan, at least some of
his descendants, and settled there, some in one part of the land, and
some in another, of whom we read in several places of Scripture; they
continued to the days of Jeremiah, and then went by the name of
Rechabites, so called from Rechab, a descendant of Jethro: these

went up out of the city of palm trees; from the city of Jericho, as the
Targum, so called from the great number of palm trees which grew near
it, see [Deu 34:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#003). This is to be
understood not of the city itself, that was utterly destroyed by Joshua,
and the rebuilding of it was forbidden under a curse, but the country
adjacent, the valley in which it stood, which was set with palm trees;
here was a grove of palm trees (m), and the garden of balsam, which grew
nowhere else, as Strabo (n) says; and who also observes, that here was a
royal palace in his time; this belonged to Herod king of Judea in the
times of Augustus Caesar, to whose palm tree groves there Horace (o)
refers. Here the Kenites first settled when they came first over Jordan
with Joshua, being a most pleasant and delightful place, and suitable to
such persons who dwelt in tents, as they did, and answered to the
promise of Moses to Hobab, [Num 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#029);
and here it seems they had remained to this time: and now they left it,
and came

with the children of Judah into the wilderness of Judah; which was also
a convenient place for the habitation of such persons, who loved a
solitary life. Perhaps the Canaanites about Jericho might be troublesome
to them, and therefore chose to stay no longer, there; or, having a
peculiar affection for the tribe of Judah, they chose to be within their
lot; and the rather, as they were a warlike and valiant tribe, they
might expect the greater safety and protection among them:

which lieth, in the south of Arad; that is, which wilderness of Judah
lay there, of which name there was a country or city, see [Num
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001); and here some of them dwelt to
the times of Saul, the Amalekites then having got possession of the
southern parts, which they infested and were troublesome to, see [Sa1
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#006),

and they went and dwelt among the people; of the tribe of Judah, near
some of the cities which were in the wilderness; of which see [Jos
15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063).

\(m\) Justin. e Trogo, l. 36. c. 3. (n) Geograph. l. 16. p. 525. (o)
Praeferat Herodis. Palmetis Pinguibus----De Arte Poet. ver. 184.

[Judges 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jdg 1:17</span></span>

And Judah went with Simeon his brother,.... Having subtitled his
Canaanites which were in his own lot, according to his promise, he went
with his brother Simeon, or the tribe of Simeon, into their lot to
reduce those that were in that:

and they slew the Canaanites that inhabited Zephath, and utterly
destroyed it: where and what this city was is not certain; there was a
place of this name in upper Galilee, mentioned in Jewish writings (p),
which cannot be meant here; and we read of the valley of Zephathah, [Ch2
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#010); which might have its name from
hence, and if so it was near Mareshah:

and the name of the city was called Hormah; from the destruction made of
it, and of the country about it; for now what had been vowed by Israel
in the wilderness, when near Arad, was fulfilled, [Num
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#001).

\(p\) Juchasin, fol. 68. 1.

[Judges 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jdg 1:18</span></span>

Also Judah took Gaza, with the coast thereof,.... Which by lot fell to
that tribe, [Jos 15:47](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#047); it was not
till now subdued:

and Ashkelon with the coast thereof; which, according to our countryman
Sandys (q), was ten miles from Gaza:

and Ekron with the coast thereof; this also is the lot that fell to
Judah, but was afterwards given to the tribe of Dan, [Jos
15:45](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#045); for whom Judah now fought and
took it; but in a short time all these places were retaken, and
possessed by the Philistines, and were three of their five
principalities which they ever after retained, see [Jdg
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#003).

\(q\) Travels, p. 118. Ed. 5.

[Judges 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jdg 1:19</span></span>

And the Lord was with Judah,.... Encouraging, strengthening, succeeding,
and giving the tribe victory over the Canaanites; the Targum is,"the
Word of the Lord was for the help of the house of Judah:"

and he drove out the inhabitants of the mountains; the mountainous part
of Judea, such as was about Jerusalem, and where Hebron stood, and other
cities, see [Jos 15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048), &c. which
though fortified both by nature and man, yet God being with them, they
were easily subdued:

but could not drive out the inhabitants of the valley; God forsaking
them, because they were afraid of them, for a reason after mentioned, or
through slothfulness, and being weary of fighting, or because they fell
into some sins, which occasioned the divine displeasure; so the
Targum,"after they had sinned, they could not drive out the inhabitants
of the valley:"

because they had chariots of iron; but this was no reason why they could
not drive them out, if God was with them, who could as easily have
delivered these into their hands, as the inhabitants of the mountains;
but is the reason why they were afraid to fight with them, and to
attempt to drive them out, and which they themselves gave why they did
not.

[Judges 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jdg 1:20</span></span>

And they gave Hebron unto Caleb, as Moses said,.... Which was done in
the times of Joshua, both by him and all the people, according to the
order of Moses. This is to be understood not of the city which was given
to the Levites, but of the fields and parts adjacent, [Jos
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#013),

and he expelled thence the three sons of Anak: whose names are given
[Jdg 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#010); this shows that this refers
to the same expedition as in [Jos
15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#014); and is expressed in the same
manner.

[Judges 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jdg 1:21</span></span>

And the children of Benjamin did not drive out the Jebusites that
inhabited Jerusalem,.... That is, that part of it which belonged to
them, for it lay between Judah and Benjamin; and neither of them
separately, nor both conjunctly, could drive out the Jebusites from it,
particularly the strong hold on the top of Mount Sion, which they held
to the times of David. Abarbinel is of opinion, that Jerusalem in those
times was not a city enclosed about, but was a large province, part of
which belonged to the tribe of Judah, and another to the tribe of
Benjamin, and another was possessed by the Jebusites; and so Jarchi says
it was a province, the name of which was Jebusi:

but the Jebusites dwelt with the children of Benjamin unto this day;
when this book was written, which was done by Samuel, as Kimchi and Ben
Gersom; and it is certain from hence it must have been written before
the reign of David, who dispossessed the Jebusites, [Sa2
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006).

[Judges 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jdg 1:22</span></span>

And the house of Joseph, they also went up against Bethel,.... Which lay
upon the borders of the sons of Joseph, Ephraim and Manasseh, [Jos
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001); and though it seems to have been
taken when Ai was, [Jos 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#017); yet it
appears that it was now in the possession of the Canaanites; wherefore
the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh being desirous of enlarging their
borders after the example of Judah, went against this place in order to
take it:

and the Lord was with them; the Word of the Lord, as the Targum,
directing, assisting, and succeeding them in their attempt.

[Judges 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jdg 1:23</span></span>

And the house of Joseph sent to descry Bethel,.... To reconnoitre the
place, to observe its passes and avenues, which were most accessible,
and to examine the walls of it, where they were weakest and least
defended:

now the name of the city before was Luz; which signifies a "nut";
perhaps it was so called from large numbers of nut trees which grew near
it; the Jews suggest as if it was like a nut, no entrance into it but
through a cave or some subterraneous passage, see [Gen
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#019).

[Judges 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jdg 1:24</span></span>

And the spies saw a man come forth out of the city,.... Or "the keepers"
(r); those that were sent to watch, and observe, and get what
intelligence they could of the city, and the way into it:

and they said unto him, show us, we pray, thee, the entrance into the
city; not the gate or gates of it, which no doubt were visible enough,
but some private way into it; the Jews, as before observed, think the
entrance was by the way of a cave, or some hidden passage, of which
Jarchi and Kimchi make mention:

and we will show thee mercy; give him a reward for it, or spare him and
his family when the city came into their hands.

\(r\) "custodes", Pagninus, Montanus; "observatores", Vatablus, Drusius,
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Judges 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jdg 1:25</span></span>

And when he showed them the entrance, into the city,.... Pointing to it
with his fingers, as the same writers observe:

they smote the city with the edge of the sword; they gave notice of what
intelligence they had got to the body of the army, who came up, entered
the city, took it, and put the inhabitants of it to the sword, as they
were ordered to do with all the Canaanites:

but they let go the man and all his family; who had returned to it,
encouraged by the promise made him, and for the sake of saving of his
family; which though not expressed, he might have asked the favour of
sparing them, which might be promised, as was in the case of Rahab;
provided he would either renounce Heathenism, and embrace the true
religion, or depart to another country, the latter of which he chose.

[Judges 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jdg 1:26</span></span>

And the man went into the land of the Hittites,.... With his family;
Kimchi says this was not one of the seven nations of Canaan; and it is
very clear from this narrative, that the land this man went to was not
in the land of Canaan; though it is certain a people of this name
formerly dwelt there, [Gen 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#020); and
the land of Canaan is called the land of the Hittites, [Jos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#004); these either might flee to
another country upon Joshua's entry into the land of Canaan, or a colony
of them from thence might settle elsewhere, to which this man chose to
go, who might be originally of them:

and built a city; his family was numerous, and he a man of wealth, and
was allowed to carry all his substance with him:

and called the name of it Luz; in memory of the place he left, and had
long lived in. There is a city called Loussa, among the cities which
Josephus says (s) were taken by the Jews from the Arabians; and which is
very probably the Lysa of Ptolemy (t), which he places in Arabia
Petraea, and might be the same with this Luz; and, if so, this shows the
land this man went into was in Edom, which is not unlikely; there is
another Luza, which Jerom (u) says fell to the lot of the sons of
Joseph, near Sichem, three miles from Neapolis:

which is the name thereof unto this day: the time of the writing of this
book; See Gill on [Jdg 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021).

\(s\) Antiqu. l. 14. c. 1. sect. 4. (t) Geograph. l. 5. c. 17. (u) De
loc. Heb. fol. 92. M.

[Judges 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jdg 1:27</span></span>

Neither did Manasseh,.... One of the sons of Joseph before mentioned;
and it respects that half tribe of Manasseh, which had its portion on
this side Jordan in the land of Canaan: these did not

drive out the inhabitants of Bethshean and her towns, nor Taanach and
her towns, nor the inhabitants of Dor and her towns, nor the inhabitants
of Ibleam and her towns, nor the inhabitants of Megiddo and her towns:
all which were places the half tribe had assigned them in Issachar and
Asher; of which See Gill on [Jos
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011). This tribe seems to have been
sluggish, and not to have exerted itself at all, or made any attempts to
drive out these people:

but the Canaanites would dwell in that land; not only desired it, but
were determined on it, and rather chose to submit to a tribute than be
expelled, at least would not depart unless they were forced.

[Judges 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jdg 1:28</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Israel was strong,.... All the tribes of
Israel were become numerous, and able to drive the Canaanites out of the
land everywhere, and particularly were able to assist Manasseh in
expelling the Canaanites out of the above places, yet they did not; but
all they did was:

that they put the Canaanites to tribute, and did not utterly drive them
out; which flowed from covetousness, and a love of ease; they did not
care to be at the trouble of expelling them, as they found it turned
more to their account and present advantage to make them tributaries;
and this was true of the Israelites in general, and of the half tribe of
Manasseh in particular; which, as Abarbinel thinks, is here respected.

[Judges 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jdg 1:29</span></span>

Neither did Ephraim drive out the Canaanites that dwelt in Gezer,....
Not so much as made them tributaries, but made a covenant with them, it
is probable, contrary to the express will of God:

but the Canaanites dwelt in Gezer among them; the Ephraimites agreeing
to it, and here they dwelt to the times of Solomon; See Gill on [Jos
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#010); where indeed they are said to
be under tribute; but that seems to respect some later time, and not
when they were first admitted to dwell among them, since no mention is
made of it here.

[Judges 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jdg 1:30</span></span>

Neither did Zebulun drive out the inhabitants of Kitron, nor the
inhabitants of Nahalol,.... The first of these seems to be the same with
Kattah or Kartah, and the latter with Nahalal, both cities given to the
Levites, [Jos 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015); which perhaps was
the reason of their sloth in driving them out; though it aggravated
their sin not to take care to rid those cities of the Canaanites, which
were given to religious persons:

but the Canaanites dwelt among them, and became tributaries; which is
observed so far in their favour, that they exerted themselves to make
them tributaries, which was more than was done by some others.

[Judges 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jdg 1:31</span></span>

Neither did Asher drive out the inhabitants of Accho,.... The same with
Ptolemais; see Gill on [Act 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#007); so
called from the first Ptolemy king of Egypt, who enlarged it; but it has
since recovered its ancient name pretty nearly, and is now called Acca
or Acra."On its north and east sides (Mr. Maundrell says (w)) it is
encompassed with a spacious and fertile plain; on the west it is washed
by the Mediterranean sea; and on the south by a large bay, extending
from the city as far as Mount Carmel:"

nor the inhabitants of Zidon; a well known city in Phoenicia, belonging
to this tribe, see [Jos 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#028),

nor of Ahlab, nor of Achzib, nor Helbah, nor Aphik, nor of Rehob; two of
these places, Ahlab and Helbah, are not mentioned among the cities of
the tribe of Asher, [Jos 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#024); unless
Helbah is the same with Helkath, [Jdg
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#025); of the rest, Achzib; see Gill on
[Jos 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029), Aphik, and Rehob; see Gill
on [Jos 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#030).

\(w\) Journey from Aleppo, p. 54.

[Judges 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jdg 1:32</span></span>

But the Asherites dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the
land,.... They were in a worse condition than those before mentioned;
for the Canaanites were possessed of their country, especially of the
above cities, and were masters of them; and the Asherites only dwelt
among them upon sufferance:

for they did not drive them out; either they did not attempt it, or they
could not do it, and contented themselves with having leave to dwell
among them.

[Judges 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jdg 1:33</span></span>

Neither did Naphtali drive out the inhabitants of Bethshemesh, nor the
inhabitants of Bethanath,.... Of which places See Gill on [Jos
19:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#038),

but he dwelt among the Canaanites, the inhabitants of the land; in the
same disgraceful manner as Asher did, owing to cowardice or sloth:

nevertheless, the inhabitants of Bethshemesh, and of Bethanath, became
tributaries unto them; these two cities did at length exert themselves,
and got the mastery over the Canaanites, as to make them pay tribute to
them; though they ought to have expelled them, and even destroyed them,
according to the command of God, but avarice prevailed over them.

[Judges 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jdg 1:34</span></span>

And the Amorites forced the children of Dan into the mountain,.... Into
the mountainous part of the tribe of Dan; the most noted mountains in it
were Sear and Baalah, which lay on the border of Judah, [Jos
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#010); Joppa in this tribe was built
on an high rock, and so Gibbethon, as its name seems to import, perhaps
was built on a hill or mountain, as were the cities after mentioned:

for they would not suffer them to come down to the valley; which lay
between Joppa and Caesarea, the plain of Sharon, in which were Lydda,
Jamnia, &c. which belonged to their tribe, and they afterwards enjoyed;
See Gill on [Jos 19:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#048).

[Judges 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jdg 1:35</span></span>

But the Amorites would dwell in Mount Heres in Aijalon, and in
Shaalbim,.... And they would not suffer the Danites to dwell in the
valley, a fruitful and delightful part of their country, terrifying them
with their iron chariots, which in the vale they could make use of to
great advantage; so neither would they let them dwell alone in the
mountainous part of their tribe, but would dwell with them, particularly
in three places mentioned: where Mount Heres was is not certain; it
signifies the "sun"; very probably it had its name from the worship of
the sun on it, or from the sun standing still near it; for Aijalon,
where that miracle was wrought, is next mentioned. Perhaps it might be
near to Timnathheres, which was in Mount Ephraim, [Jdg
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#009); since Ephraim assisted in making
these places tributaries; of the two cities, Aijalon and Shaalbim, see
[Jos 19:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#042),

yet the hand of the house of Joseph prevailed, so that they became
tributaries; or "the hand of it became heavy" (x); by which it does not
clearly appear whether the hand of Joseph was made heavy, and to hang
down, by the Amorites; or whether it was heavy upon them, and so
prevailed over them, as our version; but the Septuagint puts it out of
doubt, reading the words,"and the hand of the house of Joseph was heavy
upon the Amorites;''the Ephraimites being near to the tribe of Dan, and
observing how they were pressed by the Amorites, took up arms in their
favour, and obliged the Canaanites of the above places to become
tributaries to the Danites.

\(x\) "et aggravata est manus", V. L. Paginus Montanus.

[Judges 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jdg 1:36</span></span>

And the coast of the Amorites was from the going up to Akrabbim,.... Of
which See Gill on [Num 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#004) and See
Gill on [Jos 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#003),

from the rock, and upwards; even from the city Petra in Idumea, and
beyond that; and there was a country near Idumea, called Acrabatane,
from this mountain Akrabbim,"Then Judas fought against the children of
Esau in Idumea at Arabattine, because they besieged Gael: and he gave
them a great overthrow, and abated their courage, and took their
spoils.'' (1 Maccabees 5:3)such was the extent of these people, that
their coast reached from the places, mentioned to the mountains where
the above cities of Dan were; they were the most powerful people among
the Canaanites, and lay on both sides of Jordan, and were very
troublesome to Israel, yet were at length destroyed, [Amo
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#009).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Judges Chapter 2](jdg002)

</div>
