<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer016)  [Next](jer018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 17:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 17

This chapter is a further prophecy of the destruction of the Jews, with
the causes of it, their sins, as their idolatry, which was notorious; of
which their own consciences, their altars, and their children, were
witnesses, [Jer 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001) for which they
are threatened with the spoil of their substance and treasure, and
discontinuance in their land, [Jer
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003) as also their confidence in an
arm of flesh, which brought the curse of God upon them, when such are
blessed that trust in him; and the difference between those that trust
in men and those that trust in the Lord is illustrated by very apt
similes, [Jer 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005), the source of
which vain confidence is the wicked heart of man, known to none but God,
[Jer 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009) and the vanity of it is
exposed by a partridge sitting on eggs without hatching them, [Jer
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011), and their departure from God,
by trusting in the creature, and in outward things, is aggravated by
their temple being the throne and seat of the divine Majesty; by what
God is to his people that trust in him; and by the shame and ruin that
follow an apostasy from him, [Jer
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012), wherefore the prophet, sensible
of his own backslidings, prays to be healed and saved by the Lord, who
should have all the praise and glory, [Jer
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014) and then relates the scoffs of
the people at the word of God by him, another cause of their ruin;
declares his own innocence and integrity; prays for protection and
security from fear in a time of trouble; and for confusion, terror, and
destruction to his persecutors, [Jer
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#015), then follows an order to him
from the Lord, to go and stand in the gate of the city, and exhort all
ranks of men to the observation of the sabbath, with directions how to
keep it, which had not been observed by their fathers, and which was
another cause of their ruin, [Jer
17:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019), and the chapter is closed with
promises of blessings in city, court, and country, in church and state,
should they religiously observe the sabbath day; but if they profaned
it, the city of Jerusalem, and its palaces, should be burnt with fire,
[Jer 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#024).

[Jeremiah 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 17:1</span></span>

The sin of Judah is written with a pen of iron,.... Or an iron tool,
such as engravers use in working on hard matter:

and with the point of a diamond; such as glaziers use in cutting their
glass; though this is not the word used for a diamond in [Exo
28:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#018), this word is elsewhere
translated an adamant, [Eze 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009).
Bothart (h) takes it to be the smiris, which jewellers use in polishing
their gems. Jarchi makes mention of a Midrash, or exposition, which
explains the iron pen of Jeremiah, and the point of the adamant, or
diamond, of Ezekiel, because of what is said of them, [Jer
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018). Kimchi thinks the word "shamir",
rendered "diamond", is expressive of the subject matter on which their
sin is said to be written, and not of the instrument with which; and
then it is to be read thus,

"the sin of Judah is written with an iron pen (with an iron claw, or
nail, of which mention is made in some Jewish writings) upon "shamir",
or an adamant stone;''

which is no other than their stony heart, as it follows:

it is graven upon the table of their heart; where it is so fixed that it
cannot be rooted out, and will never be forgotten by them, but always
remembered and desired; for which they have the strongest affections,
having a place, and having made deep impressions there: or this may
denote the evidence of it in their own consciences, which bore witness
to it, and which they could not deny:

and upon the horns of your altars; on which the names of their idols
were engraven or inscribed, [Act
17:23](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#023), so that their idolatry was
notorious; their consciences within, and their altars without, were
testimonies of it and besides, the blood of the sacrifices was poured
upon the horns of the altar, [Lev 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#007)
and which, as it was done at the offering of sacrifices appointed of
God, so very probably at the offering of sacrifices to idols, and which
made their sin notorious; yea, even all the sacrifices of the ceremonial
law were a standing testimony of their being sinners, and carried in
them a confession of sin, and that they were deserving of death, and so
were a handwriting against them; for there is no need to limit the sin
of Judah here to idolatry, but it may include all their sins; and so the
Targum expresses it in the plural number,

"the sins of Judah;''

though, if any particular sin is intended, it seems to be idolatry, by
what follows.

\(h\) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 6. c. 11, col. 842. of which stone, see
Dioseorides, Hesychius, & Stephanus in ib.

[Jeremiah 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 17:2</span></span>

Whilst their children remember their altars,.... Which is a further
proof of their long continuance in idolatrous practices, and a fresh
witness against them; they trained up their children in them; who, when
grown up, could not forget them, but imitated them, and went on in the
same evil ways. Some render the words, "as they remember their children,
so they remember their altars (i), and their groves, by the green trees
upon the high hills"; they had the same love to their idols, and the
worship of them, as they had to their children. This sense is received
by Kimchi (k); yea, they had a greater affection for their idols than
for their children; since they made their children pass through the fire
to Moloch, and burnt their sons and their daughters to Baal. The Targum
renders it, "their groves under every green tree": see [Jer
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020). Kimchi and Ben Melech connect
green trees not with groves but with altars; and take the sense to be,
that their altars were by green trees; since groves and green trees were
the same, and which altars also were upon high hills.

\(i\) "sicut recordantur filiorum suorum, ita recordantur ararum
suarum"; so some in Vatablus. (k) So in T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 63. 2. &
Gloss in ib.

[Jeremiah 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 17:3</span></span>

O my mountain in the midst of the field,.... Meaning either the temple,
called the mountain of the house, and of the Lord's house, [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012), or else Jerusalem, which stood
on a hill in the midst of a plain, surrounded with fruitful fields and
gardens; or in the midst of a land like a field. The Targum is,

"because thou worshippest idols upon the mountains in the field:''

I will give thy substance and all thy treasures to the spoil; all the
riches of the city and temple to be the spoil and plunder of the enemy;
See Gill on [Jer 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#013).

and thy high places for sin, throughout all thy borders. The sense is,
that all their substance and treasure throughout their borders, the
riches of the whole land, as well as of the city and temple, [Jer
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#013) and all their high places
throughout the land, which were used for sin, for idolatrous practices,
on account thereof, should become the spoil of the enemy.

[Jeremiah 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 17:4</span></span>

And thou, even thyself,.... Or, "thou, and in thee" (l); that is, thou
and those that are in thee, all the inhabitants of Jerusalem and Judea;
or, "thou even through thyself" (m); through thine own fault, by reason
of thy sins and iniquities:

shalt discontinue from thine heritage that I gave thee; be removed from
it, and no longer enjoy it: or, "shalt intermit from thine heritage"
(n); shall not till the land, plough and sow, and reap, and gather the
fruits of it: this was enjoined on every seventh year, when the land was
to have its rest, or sabbath, [Exo
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#010), but this law they did not
observe; and now, therefore, whether they would or not, the land should
be intermitted, and not tilled and enjoyed by them. The Targum takes in
the whole of the sense,

"and I will bring an enemy upon your land; and it shall be desolate as
in the year of intermission: and I will take vengeance of judgment upon
you, until I remove you from your inheritance which I have given unto
you;''

the land of Canaan, which was given them for an inheritance:

I will cause thee to serve thine enemies in the land which thou knowest
not; the Babylonians in Chaldea; or, as Jerom thinks; the Romans. Of the
different reading of these words; see Gill on [Jer
15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#013),

for ye have I kindled a fire in mine anger; or by their sins had caused
the anger of the Lord to burn like fire:

which shall burn for ever; as it will in hell, and therefore called
everlasting fire: here it only means until these people and their
country were consumed by the enemy; perhaps some reference is had to the
burning of the city and temple by the Babylonians, or Romans, or both.
These first four verses are left out by the Septuagint interpreters,
Jerom thinks, to spare their own people.

\(l\) "qui sunt apud te", Junius & Tremellius. (m) "Per te", Piscator.
(n) "ita intermissionen facies", Junius & Tremellius; so Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 17:5</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord,.... Here begins a new discourse, or part of one;
or, however, another cause or reason of the ruin and destruction of the
Jews is suggested; namely, their trust in man, or confidence in the
creature, which is resented and condemned:

cursed be the man that trusteth in man; as the Jews did in the Egyptians
and Assyrians; see [Jer 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#036), and in
Abraham their father, and in being his seed, as they did in Christ's
time; and which was trusting in the flesh; and as all such may be said
to do who trust in their natural descent from good men, [Mat
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009), they also trusted in Moses, in
the law of Moses, and in their having, hearing, and obeying it; which
pronounces every man cursed that does not perfectly perform it: they
trusted in themselves, and in their own righteousness; despised others,
and rejected Christ and his righteousness; and brought an anathema upon
them, [Joh 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#045) and all such that
trust in their own hearts, and in their own works, trust in man, in the
creature, in creature acts, and involve themselves in the curse here
denounced. The Jews also, to this day, expect the Messiah to come as a
mere man, and so trust in him as such; and all those that call
themselves Christians, and take Christ to be a mere creature, as the
Arians, and a mere man, as the Socinians, may be said to trust in man,
and entail a curse upon themselves; though we trust in Christ, yet not
as a man, but as he is the true and living God:

and maketh flesh his arm; or his confidence, as the Targum, to lean
upon, and be protected by; man is but flesh, feeble, weak and inactive;
frail and mortal; sinful and corrupt; and so very unfit to make an arm
of, or to depend upon: God, and an arm of flesh, are opposed to each
other; as are also rejoicing in Christ Jesus, and having confidence in
the flesh, [Ch2 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#008),

and whose heart departeth from the Lord: as men's hearts may, under the
greatest show of outward religion and righteousness; and as they always
do, when they put their trust in such things; every act of unbelief and
distrust of the Lord, and every act of trust and confidence in the
creature, carry the heart off from God; every such act is a departing
from the living God; see [Isa 29:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#013).

[Jeremiah 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 17:6</span></span>

For he shall be like the heath in the desert,.... The Vulgate Latin
version renders it, "myrice": and so the Latin interpreter of the
Targum; but the word that paraphrase makes use of according to R. Hai,
mentioned by Kimchi, signifies something that is thorny without, and
eatable within; but this is not likely to be intended here. The
Septuagint version renders it, "wild myrice"; it seems to be the same
that is called "erice", or "ling", and "heath"; which delights to grow
in wild and waste places; hence such with us are called "heaths",
whether this grows upon them or not. It is a low shrub, fruitless and
useless; and, because neither bears fruit nor seed, is reckoned by Pliny
(o) among unhappy plants, and such as are condemned or forbid religious
uses; and very fit to represent such persons as truest in men and in
themselves, and not in the Lord:

and shall not see when good cometh; perceive or receive any advantage by
rain coming upon it; as such persons do not receive any good by the pure
ministration of the word, compared to rain; and so the self-righteous
Jews did not see when the Messiah came, who is goodness itself; nor see
him, and embrace him, nor his righteousness; but rejected him and that;
went about to establish their own, and did not submit to his; nor did
they attain to righteousness, or enjoy eternal life; as is the case of
all self-justiciaries:

but shall inhabit the parched places in the wilderness, in a salt land,
and not inhabited: which became literally true of the land of Judea, for
the rejection of the Messiah, and trust in themselves; see [Deu
29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023) and may fitly represent the
barren pastures of a man's own works of righteousness, which such as
trust in themselves feed upon. All the characters are expressive of
barrenness, as a wilderness, places parched with heat, and where salt
is; for, as Pliny (p) says, where salt is found, it is barren, and
produces nothing.

\(o\) Nat. Hist. l. 13. c. 21. & l. 16. c. 26. & l. 24. c. 9. (p) Nat.
Hist. l. 31. c. 7.

[Jeremiah 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 17:7</span></span>

Blessed is the man that trusteth in the Lord,.... In the Word of the
Lord, as the Targum, in Christ the essential Word of God; see [Psa
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#012) who have a spiritual knowledge of
him, and so trust in him, [Psa 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010)
who have seen the vanity and emptiness of all other objects of trust,
there being no salvation in them, only in him; who betake themselves to
him as their only refuge; lay hold, rest, and rely upon him, as their
Saviour; commit their all unto him; trust him with all their concerns,
respecting life and salvation, and with their immortal souls; and expect
all from him, grace here, and glory hereafter: who trust in his person
for their acceptance with God; in his righteousness for their
justification; in his blood for the pardon of their sins; in his fulness
for the supply of their wants; in his power for protection and
preservation; and in all for eternal life and happiness: and such are
blessed persons; for they are in the utmost safety; they are as Mount
Zion, which can never be removed; they shall want no good thing,
temporal or spiritual, proper for them; they enjoy great peace now, and
in the world to come everlasting glory:

and whose hope the Lord is; the Word of the Lord, according to the
Targum, as before: Christ, who is the Hope of Israel, our hope, and
Christ in us the hope of glory, [Jer
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#008), whose hope is from the Lord, of
which he is the author and giver; and is a good hope, through his grace;
and which has the Lord Jesus Christ for its object; who turn in to him
as prisoners of hope; and lay hold on him, the hope set before them; and
do hope in him for pardoning mercy, salvation, and eternal life. Blessed
men! their hope shall not make them ashamed; they shall not be
disappointed, [Psa 146:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#005).

[Jeremiah 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 17:8</span></span>

For he shall be as a tree planted by the waters,.... Not as a "heath or
shrub", but as a "tree", a green olive tree, a palm tree, a cedar in
Lebanon, a fruitful flourishing tree; and he is one that really is a
tree of righteousness, that is filled with the fruits of righteousness;
and not like one of the trees of the wood, that grows wild, or as a wild
olive tree, but as one "planted" in a garden, vineyard, or field; and is
one that is planted in Christ, in the likeness of his death and
resurrection, and in the house of the Lord; and that not only by means
of the ingrafted word, and of Gospel ministers, who plant and water
instrumentally; but by the Lord himself, as the efficient cause; and
therefore called "the planting of the Lord"; and such plants as shall
never be plucked up, [Isa 60:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#021) and
not like the earth in the wilderness, or trees in dry and barren soils;
but like such that are planted "by the waters", which run about their
roots, and make them fruitful; by which may be meant the love of God,
and the streams of it; the fulness of grace in Christ, and the word and
ordinances, the still waters of the sanctuary, [Psa
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002),

and that spreadeth out her roots by the river; and which is the cause of
the spreading of them: such an one is rooted in Christ, and in the love
of God, which is as a river; with which being watered, he casts out his
roots as Lebanon, as the cedars there; and is both firm and fruitful;
see [Hos 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#005),

and shall not see when heat cometh; shall perceive it, nor be affected
with it, being planted so near a river: or "shall not fear"; which is
the Cetib, or writing of the Hebrew text; and is followed by the
Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions; though the Keri, or marginal
reading, is, "shall not see"; which is followed by the Targum, and by
us, and others. The man that trusts in the Lord, he is not afraid of the
heat of persecution when it comes, nor is he hurt by it; he does not
perceive it, but grows the more under it; when a hypocrite and formal
professor is withered by it; see [Mat
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#006),

but her leaf shall be green; neither fail, nor lose its colour: a
profession of faith is held without wavering; there being a radical
moisture, the truth of grace, a well of living water, springing up into
everlasting life, to supply and support it:

and shall not be careful in the year of drought; for lack of moisture,
having a sufficiency. The man that trusts in the Lord is, or ought to
be, and may he, careful for nothing, but cast all his care on the Lord,
that careth for him: whether this year of drought is to be understood of
famine, in a literal sense; of carelessness in which, or strength of
faith, Habakkuk is a famous instance, [Hab
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#017) or of a famine of the word, in a
spiritual sense, through the persecutions of men; yet even the believer
is not solicitous, or in anxious distress; God provides food for him,
and nourishes him, as he does his church, though forced to fly into the
wilderness:

neither shall cease from yielding fruit; the fruits of grace and
righteousness, the fruits of good works, and which are brought forth by
the good man, the believer in Christ, even unto old age, [Psa
92:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#014) with the whole compare [Psa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003), to which there seems to be an
allusion.

[Jeremiah 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 17:9</span></span>

The heart is deceitful above all things,.... This is the source of the
idolatry and creature confidence of the Jews, sins which were the cause
of their ruin; and though what is here said is particularly applicable
to their hearts, yet is in general true of the heart of every man; which
is "deceitful", and deceiving; and puts a cheat upon the man himself
whose it is: it deceives him with respect to sin; it proposes it to him
under the notion of pleasure; it promises him a great deal in it, but
does not yield a real pleasure to him; it is all fancy and imagination;
a mere illusion and a dream; and what it gives is very short lived; it
is but for a season, and ends in bitterness and death: or it proposes it
under the notion of profit; it promises him riches, by such and such
sinful ways it suggests; but, when he has got them, he is the loser by
them; these deceitful riches choke the word, cause him to err from the
faith, pierce him through with many sorrows, and endanger the loss of
his soul: it promises honour and preferment in the world, but promotes
him to shame; it promises him liberty, but brings him into bondage; it
promises him impunity, peace, and security, when sudden destruction
comes: it deceives him in point of knowledge; it persuades him that he
is a very knowing person, when he is blind and ignorant, and knows
nothing as he ought to know; and only deceives himself; for there is no
true knowledge but of God in Christ, and of a crucified Christ, and
salvation by him; see [Co1 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#018) it
deceives in the business of religion; it makes a man believe that he is
a very holy and righteous man, and in a fair way for heaven, when he is
far from that, and the character it gives him; in order to this, it
suggests to him that concupiscence or lust, or the inward workings of
the mind, are not sin; and it is only on this principle that it can be
accounted for, that Saul, before conversion, or any other man, should be
led into such a mistake, as to conclude that, touching the righteousness
of the law, he was blameless: it represents other sins as mere
peccadillos, as little sins, and not to be regarded; and even puts the
name of virtue on vices; profuseness and prodigality it calls
liberality, and doing public good; and covetousness has the name of
frugality and good economy: it directs men to compare themselves and
their outward conduct with others, that are very profane and dissolute;
and from thence to form a good character of themselves, as better than
others; and as it buoys up with the purity of human nature, so with the
power of man's freewill to do that which is good, and particularly to
repent at pleasure; and it puts the profane sinner upon trusting to the
absolute mercy of God, and hides from him his justice and holiness; and
it puts others upon depending upon the outward acts of religion, or upon
speculative notions, to the neglect of real godliness; see [Jam
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#022). The man of a deceitful heart,
the hypocrite, tries to deceive God himself, but he cannot; he
oftentimes deceives men, and always himself; so do the profane sinner,
the self-righteous man, and the false teacher; who attempts to deceive
the very elect, but cannot; yea, a good man may be deceived by his own
heart, of which Peter is a sad instance, [Mat
26:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#033). The heart is deceitful to a
very great degree, it is superlatively so; "above all", above all
creatures; the serpent and the fox are noted for their subtlety, and
wicked men are compared to them for it; but these comparisons fall short
of expressing the wicked subtlety and deceit in men's hearts; yea, it is
more deceitful to a man than the devil, the great deceiver himself;
because it is nearer to a man, and can come at him, and work upon him,
when Satan cannot: or "about", or "concerning all things" (q); it is so
in everything in which it is concerned, natural, civil, or religious,
and especially the latter. The Septuagint version renders it "deep"; it
is an abyss, a bottomless one; there is no fathoming of it; the depths
of sin are in it; see [Psa 64:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#006) and,
seeing it is so deceitful, it should not be trusted in; a man should
neither trust in his own heart, nor in another's, [Pro
28:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#026), "and desperately wicked":
everything in it is wicked; the thoughts of it are evil; the
imaginations of the thoughts are so; even every imagination, and that
only, and always, [Gen 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#005) the
affections are inordinate; the mind and conscience are defiled; the
understanding darkened, so dark as to call evil good, and good evil; and
the will obstinate and perverse: all manner of sin and wickedness is in
it; it is the cage of every unclean bird, and the hold of every foul
spirit; all sin is forged and framed in it; and all manner of evil comes
out of it, [Rev 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#001) yea, it is
wickedness itself, [Psa 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009), it is so
even to desperation; it is "incurably wicked" (r), as it may be
rendered; it is so without the grace of God, and blood of Christ:

who can know it? angels do not, Satan cannot; only the spirit of a man
can know the things of a man within him; though the natural man does not
know the plague of his own heart; the Pharisee and perfectionist do not,
or they would not say they were without sin; such rant arises from the
ignorance of their own hearts; only a spiritual man knows his own heart,
the plague of it, the deceitfulness and wickedness in it; and he does
not know it all; God only knows it fully, as is expressed in the next
words, which are an answer to the question; see [Co1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#011).

\(q\) "de omnibus", vid. Noldium, p. 548. (r) "et immedicabili malo
affectum", Gussetius; "incurabiliter aegrum", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 17:10</span></span>

I the Lord search the heart,.... The inward parts of it, every room and
corner in it; and know the thoughts of it; all its intents, purposes,
designs, contrivances, and imaginations; all the secret motions of it,
and the wickedness that is in it; so that this is an answer to the
question in the preceding verse; and therefore, though the heart is
deceitful, it cannot deceive him, because he judges not according to
outward appearance; he sees and knows the heart; and none but the Lord,
or he who is Jehovah, can so search the heart as thus to know it;
wherefore, since Christ is said to search the reins and the heart, and
to know the thoughts of men, and to be a discerner of the thoughts and
intents of the heart, he must be Jehovah, and the true God, [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023),

I try the reins; the most inward and remote parts, covered with fat, and
out of sight: these are the seat of the affections; and the Lord tries
these, whether they are towards him or not; and whether sincere or
hypocritical; Christ the omniscient God knew Peter's love to him, and
the sincerity of it; for which he appeals to him as such, [Joh
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#017),

even to give every man accordions to his ways, and according to the
fruit of his doings; to do which it is necessary to search the heart,
and try the reins, the fountain of all actions; and in which the
principles of them are, and according to which they are denominated and
judged of: in the future judgment every secret thing will be brought
into account; the counsels of the heart will be made manifest; the book
of conscience will be opened; and out of it, as well as other books, men
will be judged according to their ways and works; and therefore it is
requisite that the Judge should be the Lord God omniscient, the searcher
and trier of the hearts and reins, as Christ is.

[Jeremiah 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 17:11</span></span>

As the partridge sitteth on eggs, and hatcheth them not,.... Here seems
to be another sin pointed at, as the cause of the ruin of the Jews; as
idolatry and trust in the creature before mentioned; so riches unjustly
got, and these boasted of and trusted in; the folly of which is
illustrated by the simile of a bird sitting on eggs, and not hatching
them; being either addled, or broke by the male through lust, or by the
foot of man or beast, being laid on the ground; Or by a bird which
"gathers" (s), as some; or "hatches", as others, eggs it has not laid;
which being hatched, run away from it, and so not enjoyed by it. The
Targum is,

"as the partridge, or "koraah", which gathers eggs that are not its own,
and nourishes young ones which will not follow it, so, &c.''

whether the partridge is meant by "kore", the word here used, is
uncertain. Bochart (t) thinks the "woodcock", or "snite" or "snipe", is
intended. Jarchi interprets it, by the "cuckoo", which is not likely;
since that does not take away another's eggs, and sit on them; but lays
its own eggs in another's nest, and leaves them to be hatched by it; but
it must be understood rather of such an one that gets the eggs of
another, and hatches them, but cannot keep the young when hatched; and
this is said of the partridge, that when its own eggs are broke, it will
get others, and sit upon them, and hatch them; but being hatched,
knowing her not to be their dam, and hearing the voice of that which is,
run from her to it (u):

so he that getteth riches, and not by right; but by fraud, rapine, and
oppression; such are they that will be rich, that are resolved upon it
at any rate, right or wrong; and such persons may succeed, and become
rich by illicit methods; but then, as such riches may be truly called
"mammon of unrighteousness"; so they will not profit in a time to come,
in a day of wrath; neither are they of long continuance now: for such a
man

shall leave them in the midst of his days; which, according to the
common term of life, and course of nature, he might hope to arrive to;
he shall die, and not enjoy what he has got together; while he is
promising himself much and long happiness, his soul is required of him;
and whose his substance shall be, he knows not; the riches he has heaped
up together, he knows not who shall gather; nor to whom he leaves them,
whether a wise man or a fool: however, this is certain as to himself,

and at his end shall be a fool; he shall appear to be one for getting
riches in an unlawful way; for trusting in uncertain riches; for
promising himself a great deal of pleasure and felicity in them for a
long time, which he could not secure; and for neglecting the true riches
of grace and glory; see [Luk 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019).
The Targum is,

"at his end he is called a wicked man;''

because of the unjust manner in which he has got his riches, and which
appears by his end; every wicked man is a fool. The word here used is
"Nabal"; and as is his name, so is he.

\(s\) "collegit", Vatablus, Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Cocceius; "collegit", Montanus, Schmidt; so R. Sol. Urbin. Ohel Moed,
fol. 82. 1. (t) Hierozoicon, par. 2. l. 1. c. 12. col. 81. (u) Vid.
Frantz. Hist. Animal. Sacr. par. 2. c. 11. p. 414.

[Jeremiah 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 17:12</span></span>

A glorious high throne from the beginning is the place of our sanctuary.
The temple, which was a sanctified place, where the holy God dwelt, his
holy worship was observed, and his holy people met together. Here, from
the beginning of its erection, from the time of its dedication, the Lord
took up his residence; the glory of the Lord filled the house; he set up
his throne in it, a high and glorious one; he dwelt between the
cherubim, over the mercy seat, typical of the throne of grace. Kimchi
and Ben Melech observe that R. Samuel Ben Tibbon is of opinion that the
"caph" of similitude is here wanting; and that it should be interpreted
thus, "as a glorious high throne", &c.: heaven is the high and glorious
throne, where the Lord sits and reigns; and the temple or sanctuary bore
some likeness and resemblance to it; it was a figure of it; and every
place where God is worshipped, and grants his presence, is no other but
"the house of God, and the gate of heaven"; and therefore it was great
wickedness and ingratitude in the Jews, who were so highly favoured of
God, to forsake him, his house, his worship, his word and ordinances, as
the following verses show; and which suggest another reason of their
destruction. The words in connection with the following verse may be
read thus,

"and thou, whose glorious high throne the place of our sanctuary is, O
Lord, the Hope of Israel, &c.''

[Jeremiah 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 17:13</span></span>

O Lord, the Hope of Israel,.... Of all true Israelites; such as are
regenerate persons, and true believers in him; Christ is the author and
giver of that hope that is in them; the door of it unto them; the object
on which it is exercised; the ground and foundation of it, or what gives
encouragement to it; and the person they are hoping for; Old Testament
saints hoped, waited for, and expected his first coming; and New
Testament saints are hoping for his second coming, and to be for ever
with him (w):

all that forsake thee shall be ashamed; who forsake him as the Hope of
Israel, and place their hope elsewhere; in the creature, in themselves,
in their riches, in their righteousness, and profession of religion;
such shall be ashamed of their vain hope; whereas a true hope, a hope
upon the right object, on Christ the Hope of Israel, makes not ashamed;
nor shall the man that has it be ashamed of that. The Targum paraphrases
it,

"all who forsake thy worship shall be ashamed;''

for they forsake their own mercies, who forsake the house and ordinances
of God, and the assembling of themselves together:

and they that depart from me; the prophet; refusing to hear the word of
the Lord by him, which was all one as departing from the Lord. Some
render it, "from thee", as the Vulgate Latin and Arabic versions; and so
the Targum,

"and the ungodly that transgress thy word;''

whose heart departed from the Lord, as in

Jer 17:1 notwithstanding their show of devotion and religion. Some
render the words, "that are chastised by me"; but repent not, and are
not reformed thereby; reading not as the Masorites direct, and we, and
many others, follow; but according to the letters, and retaining them,
(x):

shall be written in the earth; have a name among earthly and carnal men,
and be called so, being sensual and carnal, and minding nothing but
earth and earthly things; and shall not be written among the living in
Jerusalem, or have a name and a place among spiritual men: or they shall
be of a short continuance; their memory shall rot; their names be put
out for ever; and their memorial perish with them; for things written in
the dust do not continue, but are presently destroyed by a puff of wind,
or by the treading of the foot upon them; or they shall die, and return
to the earth, and be laid in the grave, as Jarchi and Kimchi interpret
it; or shall perish eternally, die the second death, being not written
in the Lamb's book of life. The Targum is,

"into hell shall they fall.''

The phrase is opposed to a being written, or having names written in
heaven, [Luk 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020); which is the same
as to be written in the book of life, or to be ordained unto eternal
life, [Phi 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#003); and what is the case
of such who are not written in heaven, but in earth, may be seen in [Rev
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#015);

because they have forsaken the Lord, the fountain of living waters; See
Gill on [Jer 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013).

\(w\) the word here used, sometimes signifies a confluence or collection
of waters, as in [Gen 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010) and
elsewhere, a place to bathe in; hence Fortunatus Scacchus, in Sacror.
Eleaochr. Myrothec. l. 1. c. 23. col. 159. renders it here, "the bath of
Israel", the Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ, whose blood is a fountain
opened, in which sinners wash, and are cleansed from their sins, Zech.
xiii. 1. and this agrees with the latter part of the verse, where the
Lord is called "the fountain of living water"; so De Dieu, on ch. xiv.
8, observes, the word is so used in Exod. vii. 21. and so R. Akiba
interprets the words, saying,

"what is "the meaning of it is that which cleanses the unclean; even so
God cleanses Israel;''

and it is, adds De Dieu, as if you were to call God the pool of Israel,
or a confluence of waters where Israel may be washed from his filth. (x)
"Castigati a me", Schmidt; so Stockius, p. 455, 725, Junius & Tremellius
follow the same reading, only they render the words, not so properly,
"castigationes meae".

[Jeremiah 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 17:14</span></span>

Heal me, O Lord, and I shall be healed,.... These are the words of the
prophet, sensible of his own sins and backslidings, and of the part
which he himself had in these corrupt and declining times; and being
conscious of his own impotency to cure himself; and being fully
satisfied of the power of the Lord to heal him; and being well assured,
if he was healed by him, he should be thoroughly and effectually healed;
therefore he applies unto him. Sins are diseases; healing them is the
forgiveness of them; God only can grant this: or this may have respect
to the consolation of him, whose soul was distressed, grieved, and
wounded, with the consideration of the sins of his people, and the
calamities coming upon them on that account:

save me, and I shall be saved; with a temporal, spiritual, and eternal
salvation; save me from the corruptions of the times, from the designs
of my enemies; preserve me to thy kingdom and glory; there are none
saved but whom the Lord saves, and those that are saved by him are saved
to a purpose; they can never perish:

for thou art my praise; the cause of it, by reason of mercies bestowed;
the object of it, whom he did and would praise evermore, because of his
favours, particularly the blessings of healing and salvation by him; see
[Psa 103:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#001).

[Jeremiah 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 17:15</span></span>

Behold, they say unto me,.... Or, "they are saying unto me" (y),
continually; these were their daily flouts and jeers:

Where is the word of the Lord? that thou hast so often talked of? thou
hast for a long time threatened us with a siege, and famine, pestilence,
and the sword, and captivity, but none of these come to pass; where is
the accomplishment of them? thou hast pretended to have the word of the
Lord for all this; but where is it, or the fulfilment of it? so the
Targum,

"where is that which thou hast prophesied in the name of the Lord?''

the judgments, as punishments for sin, he prophesied of. This has been
always usual in all ages, that when God's judgments threatened have not
been immediately executed, scoffers and mockers have rose up, suggesting
they would never come; see [Mal 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#017);

let it come now; immediately, or we shall not believe it ever will; a
very impudent, daring, and wicked expression: this is like that in [Isa
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#019). The Targum is,

"let it now be confirmed;''

or fulfilled; declaring as their impiety, so their infidelity; not
believing it ever would be fulfilled.

\(y\) "ecce illi sunt dicentes ad me", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 17:16</span></span>

As for me, I have not hastened from being a pastor to follow thee,....
Though he had met with so much ill usage, and was hated by the people
for bringing such messages to them, and was jeered and scoffed at
because his prophecies were not accomplished; yet he had not been hasty,
and solicitous, and importunate with the Lord to dismiss him from his
service; but was willing to continue in his office as a pastor or
prophet, and to follow the Lord fully, and faithfully perform the work
he had called him to, whatever difficulties and discouragements attended
him, or reproaches were cast upon him. Some render the words, "I
hastened not", or "I have not urged", or "pressed to be a pastor after
thee" (z); to which the sense of Kimchi agrees,

"I did not press myself, or was anxious about the matter, that I should
be a shepherd after thee, or a prophet;''

he did not run before he was sent; he did not thrust himself into this
office; he was not forward, but backward to it, as appears from [Jer
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#006); a pastor of the Lord is an under
shepherd; one that has his mission and commission from the Lord; who
obeys him in all things; follows his directions; goes where and with
what he sends him; and such an one was Jeremiah; though it was not what
he sought after, and was pressing for; and this he says to take off the
edge of the people's resentment against him; to which agree the
following words:

neither have I desired the woeful day, thou knowest; he foresaw that
reproaches and calumnies would be cast upon him, and that bonds and
afflictions would abide him wherever he went with his messages and
prophecies; he knew it would be a woeful and miserable day to him,
whenever he was sent as a prophet to this people; and that he should
meet with nothing but sorrow, and trouble, and vexation of spirit; and
therefore it could not be desirable to him, as a man, to be in such an
office, or to be sent on such an errand; to be a messenger of such
terrible things, and to denounce such woeful judgments; and much less
did he desire the execution of them, even though he had prophesied of
them; having not so much regard to his own honour and credit, as an
affection to the people, and a compassionate concern for their welfare;
and for all this he could appeal to the heart searching and rein trying
God. The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac and Arabic versions, render
it, "man's day"; see [Co1 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003); but the
Targum paraphrases it agreeably to the sense given,

"and the evil day which thou shall bring upon them, I have not
desired:''

that which came out of my lips was right before thee; as he could appeal
to the omniscient God for the truth of the above, so for this, that he
delivered nothing by way of prophecy but what he had from the Lord; and
that he delivered out truly and faithfully whatever he had from him; and
it was all done openly and publicly, and in his sight, with all
sincerity and truth; see [Co2 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#017).

\(z\) "ego autem non festinavi ut essem pastor post te", Calvin; "et me
(quod attinet) non ursi esse pastor post te", Noldius, p. 567.

[Jeremiah 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 17:17</span></span>

Be not a terror unto me,.... By deserting him, and leaving him in the
hands of his enemies; or by denying him supports under their reproaches
and persecution; or by withdrawing his gracious presence from him, than
which nothing is more terrible to a good man; or by withholding the
comfortable influences of his Spirit; or by suffering terrors to be
injected into him from any quarter; and more is meant than is expressed;
namely, that God would be a comforter of him, and bear him up under all
his troubles:

thou art my hope in the day of evil: the author and object of his hope;
the ground and foundation of it, from whom he hoped for deliverance,
when it was a time of distress with him, from outward as well as from
inward enemies; he was his hope in a time of outward calamity, and in
the hour of death and day of judgment.

[Jeremiah 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 17:18</span></span>

Let them be confounded that persecute me,.... With words with
reproaches, with scoffs and jeers, saying, "where is the word of the
Lord?" [Jer 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#014); let such be ashamed
that scoffingly put such a question, by seeing the accomplishment of it:

but let not me be confounded; who have delivered it out as the word of
the Lord, that should be surely fulfilled; let not me be brought to
shame by the failure of it and be reckoned as a false prophet:

let them be dismayed; terrified and affrighted when they shall see the
judgments of God coming upon them, which they have jeeringly called for:

but let not me be dismayed; by their not coming, or when they shall
come; but preserve and protect me:

bring upon them the day of evil; of punishment; which they put far away,
and scoff at; though the prophet did not desire the woeful day to come
upon the people in general, yet upon his persecutors in particular.
Jarchi interprets it of the men of Anathoth alone; and which desire of
his did not arise from malice towards them, but from indignation at
their sin and for the glory of the divine Being, whose name was
blasphemed by them:

and destroy them with double destruction; not with two sorts of
judgments, sword and famine, as Jerom; but with an utter destruction,
with breach after breach, destruction after destruction, until they were
entirely destroyed; unless it should have regard to the two times of
destruction, first by the Chaldeans, and then by the Romans.

[Jeremiah 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 17:19</span></span>

Thus said the Lord unto me,.... Here begins a new sermon or discourse,
concerning the sanctification of the sabbath, and a very proper place to
begin a new chapter:

Go and stand in the gate of the children of the people; where there were
great numbers of people passing and repassing; and whither the people
resorted upon one account or another; or where they dwelt. Some
particular gate of the city of Jerusalem seems to be meant; and not the
gate of the temple, as Abarbinel. Some think the sheep gate, and others
the water gate, [Neh 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001); perhaps
rather the latter, since the Nethinims dwelt near it, who were the
Gibeonites, so called, because given to the congregation of Israel, to
be hewers of wood and drawers of water to it; and these were "the
children of the people", of the nations of the world, the old
Canaanites, as well as they were the servants of the people of Israel:
but what particular gate is intended is not certain; it is very likely
it was one that was near the court, by what follows:

whereby the kings of Judah come in, and by which they go out; when they
went out to war and returned; or went to their country houses and came
back; or on any business and occasion whatever. This shows a reason why
the prophet was to go and stand in this gate first; because his message
was to be first delivered to these great personages, who had a personal
concern herein, and who could influence others by their authority and
example:

and in all the gates of Jerusalem; after he had been in the former, and
delivered his message; for it concerned all the inhabitants of the city,
high and low, rich and poor, male and female, young and old; and
therefore he was to go to every gate, and stand and proclaim there, as
being the most public places of resort and concourse, and where people
were continually going and coming.

[Jeremiah 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 17:20</span></span>

And say unto them, hear ye the word of the Lord,.... Concerning the
sanctification of the sabbath; for this was not of human, but of divine
institution:

ye kings of Judah; which must be understood either, as Kimchi thinks, of
the then present king and his sons, so called because they would reign
after him; for, there was but one king at a time; and who, perhaps, at
this time, was Josiah: or else the king and his nobles, the princes of
the land, are meant:

and all Judah and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem, that enter in by
these gates; the people in the several parts of the land of Judea, that
came to Jerusalem either for trade and merchandise, or for worship, and
all that dwelt in the metropolis; for the business the prophet had to
charge them with concerned them all.

[Jeremiah 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 17:21</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, take heed to yourselves,.... That ye sin not
against the Lord, by breaking the sabbath, and so bring wrath and ruin
upon yourselves: or "to your souls" (a); to the inward frame of them,
that they be in disposition for the work of that day; and that they be
wholly engaged therein, even all the powers and faculties of them; and
that they be not taken up in thoughts and cares about other things:

and bear no burden on the sabbath day; as no worldly thoughts and cares
should, cumber the mind, and lie heavy thereon, to the interruption of
spiritual exercises of religion; so neither should any weight or burden
be borne by the body, or carried from place to place; as not by
themselves, so neither by their servants, nor by their cattle, nor in
carts and wagons, nor by any instrument whatever; in short, all servile
work was forbidden:

nor bring it in by the gates of Jerusalem; to be unloaded and sold
there, as wine, grapes, figs, and fish, were, in the times of Nehemiah,
[Neh 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#015).

\(a\) "in animabus vestris", Calvin, Montanus, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 17:22</span></span>

Neither carry forth a burden out of your houses on the sabbath day,....
Not of dirt and soil only, as some restrain the sense; but of any ware
or merchandise, in order to be sold in the city or elsewhere:

neither do ye any work; any servile work, any kind of manufacture,
either within doors or without; or exercise any kind of trade, or barter
and merchandise, or do any sort of worldly business; nothing but what
was of mere necessity, for the preservation of life; see [Exo
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#010);

but hallow ye the sabbath day; or, "sanctify it" (b); by separating it
from all worldly business, and devoting it to the worship of God in
public and private, spending it wholly in acts of religion and piety:

as I commanded your fathers; not Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; but those
that came out of Egypt, to whom, and to their posterity after them, this
commandment was enjoined, [Exo 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#008);
so that this was not a novel injunction, but what was commanded from the
beginning of their civil and church state; from the time of their coming
out of Egypt, and becoming a separate people and nation, under a
theocracy, or the government of God himself; being chosen and set apart
to be a special, peculiar, and holy people to himself, of which the
sanctification of the sabbath was a sign; and was to be observed unto
the Messiah's coming, the sum and substance of it, [Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016).

\(b\) "sanctificate", Cocceius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 17:23</span></span>

But they obeyed not,.... Or, "heard not" (c); so as to observe and do;
that is, their fathers did not; this command was very early disobeyed,
and more or less in all intervening times:

neither inclined their ear; or listened attentively to what was said to
them; but if they heard at all, it was in a very indifferent and
careless manner, as if they cared not whether they heard or not; whereas
persons intent on hearing bow the head, and turn the ear; and if they
have one better than another, will turn that, in order to take in what
they are attentive to; but so did not the Jewish fathers:

but made their neck stiff; or "hard" (d); and would not bend it, to take
upon them the yoke of the commandments: a metaphor taken from untamed
oxen, that will not submit the neck to the yoke, but draw back from it.
The Septuagint and Arabic versions understand all this, not of the
Jewish fathers of old, but of their children, even of the then present
generation, rendering the words, "but hardened their neck more than
their fathers"; they were more stiffnecked, refractory, and disobedient
than they were; this was always the character of this people; as were
the fathers, so were the children, if not worse; see [Act
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#051);

that they might not hear nor receive instruction; about the command of
the sabbath, or any other: or "correction", or "discipline" (e); the
yoke of which they were as unwilling to bear as the yoke of the
commandments, [Jer 31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018).

\(c\) "non audiverunt", Pagninus, Montanus, Schmidt. (d) "sed obturarunt
cervicem suam", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "indurarunt", Pagninus,
Montanus, Schmidt. (e) "discliplinam", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus,
Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 17:24</span></span>

And it shall come to pass,.... Or, "yet it shall come to pass" (f); so
it shall be, notwithstanding all former disobedience and rebellion:

if ye diligently hearken unto me, saith the Lord; or, "in hearing hear"
(g); hearken attentively, and readily obey the command given, before
mentioned, so as

to bring in no burden through the gates of this city on the sabbath day;
to be bought or sold, or to be wrought on or with; and so likewise to
carry nothing out of their houses or city, which, though not expressed,
is understood as before; and this respects not only the city of
Jerusalem, but all other cities and towns in Judea; for the word of the
Lord, concerning this matter, was sent to all Judah, the whole land of
Judea, [Jer 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#020);

but hallow the sabbath day, to do no work therein; one part of the
sanctification of the sabbath lay in a cessation from all servile work,
though not wholly, but also in the observance of religious worship, and
the one was in order to the other; for, unless they abstained from
worldly business, they could not be at leisure to attend divine service.

\(f\) "tamen erit", Gataker; "erit autem", Cocceius. (g) "audiendo
audiveritis", Pagninus, Montanus, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 17:25</span></span>

Then shall there enter into the gates of this city,.... In a very public
and splendid manner:

kings and princes, sitting upon the throne of David; that is, kings,
with the princes of the blood, or with their nobles, who shall be of the
house and line of David; and in a continual succession shall sit upon
his throne, and possess the kingdom of the house of Judah, and rule over
them in great glory, peace, and prosperity:

riding in chariots and on horses, they and their princes, the men of
Judah, and the inhabitants of Jerusalem; some riding in chariots, and
some on horses; the king, with some of the princes of the blood, in one
chariot; his nobles in others, or on horseback; with great numbers of
the citizens of Jerusalem, and people from all parts, flocking to see
them, and join in the procession, and so make it more grand and august:

and this city shall remain for ever; or, "be inhabited for ever" (h); a
long time, and not be destroyed, as has been threatened, or its
inhabitants carried captive.

\(h\) "et inhabitabitur in seculum", Piscator, Cocceius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 17:26</span></span>

And they shall come from the cities of Judah,.... That is, men shall
come from all parts of the land of Judea to the city of Jerusalem, and
to the temple; especially at the times of their solemn feasts, three
times a year, as the law directed:

and from the places about Jerusalem; and from all the towns and villages
adjacent to it, such as Bethany and Bethphage, and many others:

and from the land of Benjamin; which tribe continued with the tribe of
Judah when the rest revolted, and was now with it, and still would
continue with it, and join with it in religious worship, were they
careful to observe what the Lord commanded them:

and from the plain, and from the mountains, and from the south; these
respect the several parts of the land of Judah, which, the Jews (i) say,
was divided into three parts, the mountain, plain or champaign country,
and the valley: the "plain" was that part where Lydda and other cities
were; the "mountain" is the same with the hill country of Judea, [Luk
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039); and the "south" the southern
part of the land, that which is called the wilderness of Judea, of which
see [Jos 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#020). The above Jewish
writers say (k), that from Bethhoron to Emmaus was the mountain or hill
country; from Emmaus to Lydda the plain; and from Lydda to the sea the
valley; now, from all these places should persons come to the temple:

bringing burnt offerings and sacrifices, and meat offerings and incense;
sacrifices and offerings of all sorts, according to the law; hereby
signifying, that if the sabbath was observed, as it would go well with
the kings and princes of Judah, they would keep a splendid court, and
have a numerous retinue, so it would be well with the priests that
served at the altar; sacrifices would be brought to them; of which they
would have their part, as well as God have glory by an obedience to his
laws; and, besides these, other sacrifices would also be brought, as
follows:

and bringing sacrifices of praise unto the house of the Lord; thank
offerings for mercies received and deliverances wrought, as well as
sacrifices for sins committed; and this was one sort of the peace
offerings, [Lev 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#011).

\(i\) Misna Sheviith, c 9. sect. 2. (k) Hieros. Sheviith, foI. 38. 4.

[Jeremiah 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 17:27</span></span>

But if ye will not hearken unto me,.... With respect to this particular
point, more especially:

to hallow the sabbath day; to keep it holy to the Lord in a religious
way, in the exercise of the duties of religion, both public and private:

and not to bear a burden, even entering in at the gates of Jerusalem on
the sabbath day; or, "and go through"; or, so as "to go through" (l) &c;
and may intend either one and the same thing, namely entering in at the
gates with a burden upon the shoulders; or two things, bearing a burden,
and carrying it any where in or out of the city; and an unnecessary
passing and repassing through the gates of the city, whether a man has
or has not a burden upon him, since the sabbath might be violated either
way:

then will I kindle a fire in the gates thereof; where the prophet was to
publish all this, and where the people sinned by passing and repassing,
and carrying burdens in and out on the sabbath day:

and it shall devour the palaces of Jerusalem; the king's palace, and the
palaces of the princes and nobles, as well as the cottages of the poorer
sort:

and it shall not be quenched; until it has utterly destroyed the city:
this was fulfilled by the Chaldeans, [Jer
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013). The Jews say there is no fire
kindled but where the sabbath is profaned; and that Jerusalem was
destroyed because they profaned the sabbath (m).

\(l\) "et intretis per portas", Cocceius, Schmidt. (m) T. Bab. Sabbat,
fol. 119. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 18](jer018)

</div>
