<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer043)  [Next](jer045) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 44](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 44:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 44

This chapter contains a sermon of Jeremiah's to the Jews in Egypt,
reproving them for their idolatry there; their answer to it, expressing
their resolution to continue in their idolatrous practices; and a
denunciation of judgments upon them, of which a sign is given. The
sermon begins with observing to them the destruction of Jerusalem, and
the causes of it, idolatry and contempt of the prophets, [Jer
44:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001); then follows an expostulation
with the present Jews for doing the same things, and exposing themselves
and their posterity to the same punishment, [Jer
44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007); upon which they are threatened
with the sore judgments of God that should come upon them, and cut them
off in general, [Jer 44:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#011); yet such
were the impudence and obstinacy of this people, that they declared they
would not hearken to the prophet, but persist in their idolatry; it
having been better with them when they practised it than when they left
it, [Jer 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015); to which the prophet
replies by observing, that for the idolatry of their fathers their land
was become a desolation and a curse, as at this day, [Jer
44:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#020); and assures them that
destruction would come from the Lord upon them, which he had swore to,
[Jer 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#024); and a sign of it is given;
the delivery of the king of Egypt into the hand of the king of Babylon,
[Jer 44:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#029).

[Jeremiah 44:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 44:1</span></span>

The word which came to Jeremiah concerning all the Jews which dwell in
the land of Egypt,.... Or, "unto all the Jews" (t); the word came to
him, that it might be delivered to them; or, "against all the Jews" (u);
they having gone into Egypt contrary to the will of God, and committing
idolatry; and the word or sermon is full of threatenings and judgments
denounced upon them:

which dwell at Migdol, and at Tahpanhes, and at Noph, and in the country
of Pathros: this prophecy was delivered after the Jews were come to
Tahpanhes, or Daphne; see [Jer 43:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#007);
and had divided themselves, and were settled in different parts of the
kingdom: some continued at Tahpanhes, where were the king's court and
palace: others went to Migdol, a place near the Red sea, just at the
entrance into Egypt, from the land of Canaan, [Exo
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#002); called, by Herodotus, Magdolus
(w); and by Adrichomius (x) said to be distant about a mile and a
quarter from Pelusium, or Sin, the strength of Egypt, [Eze
30:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze030.htm#015); others took up their residence
at Noph, generally thought to be the city of Memphis. The Targum calls
it Mappas; the same which is now called Grand Cairo; or, however, this
city is near the place where Memphis stood: others dwelt in the country
of Pathros, which perhaps had its name from Pathrusim, a son of Mizraim,
[Gen 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#013). It is thought by Bochart
and others to be the country of Thebais in Egypt, the same with the
Nomos Phanturites, or Phaturites, of Pliny (y); and in this country
Jeremiah seems to have been when this word came to him, [Jer
44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015); and from hence sent or carried
it to the other places: saying; as follows:

\(t\) "ad omnes Judaeos", V. L. Castalio, Cocceius, Schmidt; "erga
omnes", Pagninus, Montanus. (u) "Contra omnes Judaeos", Junius &
Tremellius; "de, vel contra", Piscator. (w) Euterpe, sive l. 2. c. 159.
(x) Theatrum Terrae Sanct. p. 121. (y) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 9.

[Jeremiah 44:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 44:2</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,.... In which manner the
prophecies of this book are frequently prefaced; see [Jer
42:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#015);

ye have seen all the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem, and upon
all the cities of Judah; they saw it with their bodily eyes; they could
not but serve it in their minds; nay, had an experimental knowledge of
it; they suffered it in part themselves, and must be convicted in their
own consciences that it was from the hand of the Lord:

and, behold, this day they are a desolation, and no man dwelleth
therein; lie waste, at this very time; the walls are broken down the
houses are demolished; the goods in them carried off; no inhabitants
left, or very few, to rebuild the cities, till the land, and dwell
therein.

[Jeremiah 44:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 44:3</span></span>

Because of their wickedness which they have committed to provoke me to
anger,.... The cause of this desolation was the wickedness they were
guilty of; whereby they provoked the anger of God to bring this
destruction on them. Sin is always provoking unto God; and though it may
not be done on purpose to provoke him, which it sometimes seems to be;
yet it eventually does, and is always the cause of punishment: God never
punishes man without a cause, or for anything but sin:

in that they went to burn incense, and to serve other gods: the
particular wickedness they were guilty of, and which was the cause of
their ruin, was burning incense to idols, and worshipping them, than
which nothing is more provoking to God: and it was an aggravation of
their sin, that they were gods

whom they knew not, neither they, you, nor your fathers; what they were;
from whence they were; their original, and perhaps not their names;
however, did not know that they were gods; nor could they prove them to
be such; nay, might know that they were not: and now, since this was the
sin which brought on the destruction they were eyewitnesses of, it
should have been a caution to them that they went not into the same
idolatrous practices, which yet they did not avoid; taking no warning
from such awful instances of the divine displeasure.

[Jeremiah 44:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 44:4</span></span>

Howbeit, I sent unto you all my servants the prophets,.... As many as he
raised up, and employed in the work and service of prophesying; and
these were many; and as many as they were, he sent them to them, one
after another, to warn them of their sin and danger; but all to no
purpose; which was a further aggravation of their wickedness: nay,
though he was

rising early, and sending them; was very early in his messages to them;
gave them timely warning, and let slip no opportunity of admonishing
them; and this he did constantly; see [Jer
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#013);

saying, Oh, do not this abominable thing that I hate; all sin is
abominable in itself, and hateful to God, especially idolatry; and
therefore should not be done; it should be abominable to men, and
hateful to them, because it is so to God; and after such a remonstrance
as this, to commit it must be very aggravating and provoking.

[Jeremiah 44:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 44:5</span></span>

But they hearkened not, nor inclined their ear,.... To the prophets sent
unto them; to God by the prophets; to the words of his mouth,
particularly to the above pathetic expostulation with them; at least, if
they heard the words said, they did not attend unto them; they had not
such an effect upon them, nor were they wrought upon by them, so as

to turn from their wickedness, to burn no incense to other gods; to turn
from their sins in general, and from their idolatry in particular; one
instance of which is given, and which is put for the whole of idolatrous
worship.

[Jeremiah 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 44:6</span></span>

Wherefore my fury and mine anger was poured forth,.... Like melted
metal, scalding lead, liquefied pitch, or anything of a bituminous and
sulphurous nature, which spreads, is consuming, and very intolerable;
see [Jer 42:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#018);

and was kindled in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem;
which, like a fire, burnt up and destroyed these cities, and
particularly the large and spacious city of Jerusalem:

and they are wasted and desolate, as at this day; now lie in ruins, as
may be seen by everyone; the thing is notorious; this is their present
case; they are become desolate, and so continue.

[Jeremiah 44:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 44:7</span></span>

Therefore now thus saith the Lord, the God of hosts, the God of
Israel,.... The same epithets as before, [Jer
44:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#002); with an addition, that his words
might carry more weight with them:

wherefore commit ye this great evil against your souls; the sin of
idolatry, which is a great evil; a sin against God; a giving the glory
to another, that belongs to him and not only so, but is against the
souls of men; pernicious and ruinous to them, which brings destruction,
even eternal wrath and damnation, on them; and this is an interesting
argument why it should not be committed; nay, it was not only against
God, and against themselves, but against their families, and the
interest of them:

to cut off from you man and woman, child and suckling, out of Judah, to
leave you none to remain; not that they did this great evil or committed
idolatry with this intention, to ruin their families and posterity; but
so it was eventually; hereby they provoked the Lord to anger, to cut off
the men that offered incense to idols; and the women their wives, whom
they allowed so to do; and their children, who were brought up in the
same practices; so that they would have none to succeed them, to bear
their name, and inherit their land; unless God should be merciful, and
not deal according to their deserts; for such was the nature of their
crime, as to deserve an utter extirpation of them.

[Jeremiah 44:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 44:8</span></span>

In that ye provoke me unto wrath with the works of your hands,.... Their
sinful actions, particularly their idolatry, by worshipping images, the
works of men's hands; and though it was the queen of heaven they
worshipped, which their hands made not, yet it was before images they
did that; besides, the things they did to her were the worlds of their
hands, as sacrificing, pouring out drink offerings, and as follows:

burning incense; which they did, not only to her, but

to other gods in the land of Egypt; where they were very numerous:

whither ye be gone to dwell; against the express will and command of
God:

that ye might cut yourselves off; as from the worship of God, so from
being his people, and from being under his care and protection, and from
all privileges temporal and spiritual:

and that ye might be a curse and a reproach among all the nations of the
earth? not that this was their view, end, and design, but this was the
event so it was, that they were looked upon as an accursed people of God
and man, and their names were taken up for a proverb and a reproach
everywhere.

[Jeremiah 44:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 44:9</span></span>

Have ye forgotten the wickedness of your fathers,.... And what judgments
it brought upon them; meaning not their more remote ancestors in the
wilderness, and the idolatry they committed, and the punishment
inflicted upon them for it; but more near, such who lived a little
before the destruction of Jerusalem, and whose sins had brought on that;
and therefore could not be easily forgotten by them; or, if they were
forgotten, it argued great stupidity:

and the wickedness of the kings of Judah, and the wickedness of their
wives; by whom they were drawn into idolatry, particularly Solomon; and
it is in the original text, "the wickedness of his wives" (z); and Dr.
Lightfoot thinks respect is had to Solomon's wives; but it may be
understood distributively of everyone of their wives, as Kimchi and Ben
Melech interpret it (a):

and your own wickedness, and the wickedness of your wives, which you
have committed in the land of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem?
where they had built altars, and worshipped strange gods, they, and
their wives, as well as those who were carried captive; and which were
the cause of all those evils that came upon them; these, being recent
things, could not be forgotten by them; or however should have been
remembered, and that so as to have deterred them from going into such
practices again, as they now did in Egypt.

\(z\) "mala mulierum ejus", Schmidt; "et mala foeminarum ejus",
Cocceius; "uxorum ejus", V. L. Montanus. (a) "Et mala uxorum cujusque
illorum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 44:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 44:10</span></span>

They are not humbled even unto this day,.... Not contrite under a sense
of their sins, nor truly penitent for them; not humbled before God nor
man, so as to acknowledge them, mourn over them, and forsake them. The
Targum is,

"they cease not unto this day;''

that is, from committing the same things; which shows they had no true
humiliation and contrition for them. This is to be understood, not of
the Jews in Babylon only, but chiefly of those in Egypt; there being a
change of person from you to they; the Lord not vouchsafing to speak to
them who were so obdurate and impenitent, but of them, and to some
other, as the prophet, concerning them:

neither have they feared; the Lord; neither his goodness nor his
judgments; or served and worshipped him with reverence and godly fear,
as became them:

nor walked in my law, nor in my statutes, that I set before you, and
before your fathers; a full proof this that they neither had true
repentance for their sins, nor the fear of God in their hearts; for, had
they, these would have led them to obedience to the divine will.

[Jeremiah 44:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 44:11</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,.... Because
of these sins of idolatry, impenitence, and disobedience:

I will set my face against you for evil; to bring the evil of punishment
upon them, for the evil of sin committed by them: this the Lord
determined with himself, and resolved to do; which the phrase, "setting
his face against them", is expressive of, by way of retaliation for
their setting their faces to go down to Egypt, as well as of his wrath
and indignation against them:

and to cut off all Judah; not the whole tribe of Judah; not those that
were in Babylon, which were by far the greatest number of that tribe;
but those that were in Egypt.

[Jeremiah 44:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 44:12</span></span>

And I will take the remnant of Judah,.... Such as remained of that tribe
in the land of Judea after the captivity: and not all of them, but such

that have set their faces to go into the land of Egypt to sojourn there:
who were bent upon going thither, notwithstanding all the remonstrances
made to them to the contrary; and were gone thither, and were now
actually sojourners there: this describes such persons who wilfully, and
of their own accord, went thither; and excepts those who were
over-persuaded or over-powered to go along with them:

and they shall all be consumed, and fall in the land of Egypt; not by
natural death, one after another; but by the judgments of God, as
follows:

they shall even be consumed by the sword and by the famine; by the sword
of the king of Babylon; and by famine, occasioned by a foreign army and
sieges:

they shall die; from the least even unto the greatest, by the sword and
by the famine; which is repeated for the confirmation of it, and to
express the universality of the destruction; that it should reach to
persons of every age, state and condition, rank and degree, young and
old, high and low, rich and poor:

and they shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse,

and a reproach; See Gill on [Jer
42:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#018).

[Jeremiah 44:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 44:13</span></span>

For I will punish them that dwell in the land of Egypt,.... Or "visit";
in a way of wrath and vengeance; meaning not the native inhabitants of
Egypt; though these should be punished, and in whose punishment the Jews
would be involved; but here it means the Jews that dwelt in Egypt, who
went thither contrary to the will of God, and there settled:

as I have punished Jerusalem, by the sword, by the famine, and by the
pestilence; signifying that the same punishment that came upon the
inhabitants of Jerusalem, and other cities of Judea, should come upon
these Jews in Egypt, and as sure as they came upon them; even those
which they thought to have escaped, by leaving Judea, and going to
Egypt.

[Jeremiah 44:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 44:14</span></span>

So that none of the remnant of Judah,.... Which were left in the land of
Judea after the captivity:

which are gone into the land of Egypt to sojourn there, shall escape or
remain; escape either the sword, or the famine, or the pestilence, or
remain in the land of Egypt, or in the land of the living; so general
should be the destruction:

that they should return into the land of Judah, to the which they have a
desire to return there; or, "have lift up their souls (b) to return
there": most earnestly desire it, and have raised hopes and expectations
of it; for it seems that those Jews that went into Egypt did not go with
a design to settle there for ever; but to return to their own land, when
there should be better times, and more safety and security there;
particularly when they thought the affair of the death of Gedaliah would
be no further inquired into:

for none shall return but such as shall escape; out of the hands of
Johanan, and the rest of the captains; and should get out of the land of
Egypt before the Chaldeans came into it. Some understand this of those
that should escape out of Babylon; that none should return to Judea but
those of that captivity, who should be released by the proclamation of
Cyrus. Jarchi interprets it of Jeremiah and Baruch, whom Nebuchadnezzar
removed to Babylon, when Egypt fell into his hands, in the twenty
seventh year of his reign, as is related in the Jewish chronicles (c).

\(b\) "elevant, vel elevantes animam, suam", Pagninus, Vatablus, Calvin;
"attolunt animam suam", Schmidt. (c) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 26. p. 77.

[Jeremiah 44:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 44:15</span></span>

Then all the men which knew that their wires had burnt incense unto
other gods,.... Which was a rite God appointed to be used in his
worship; and is here put for the whole of religious worship, which was
given to idols by the Jewish women; this their husbands knew of, and
winked at, and did not restrain them from it, as they should; they seem
to be themselves irreligious persons, a sort of atheists, who had no
regard for the true God, nor any other gods, and cared not who were
worshipped:

and all the women that stood by; the wives of the men that stood by
their husbands, and other women that stood and heard Jeremiah's sermon,
and were conscious to themselves of being guilty of what they were
charged with by him:

a great multitude, even all the people that dwelt in the land of Egypt,

in Pathros; in that part of Egypt so called, which was Thebais: here it
seems Jeremiah was with that part of the people that took up their
residence there; and by this it appears there was a large number of
them, men and women, and who were all become idolaters, or connivers at,
and encouragers of, such as were: these

answered Jeremiah, saying, one in the name of the rest made a reply, as
follows:

[Jeremiah 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 44:16</span></span>

As for the word that thou has, spoken unto us in the name of the
Lord,.... Which they did not believe that it came from the Lord, but was
a device of the prophet's, and a lie, as in [Jer
43:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#002); and if it did come from the
Lord, their impudence was risen to such a pitch, that they were
determined not to regard it:

we will not hearken unto thee: to thy words; neither to thy
exhortations, reproofs, or menaces, even though thou comest and speakest
in the name of the Lord. This, and what follows, is an unparalleled
instance of the pride, obstinacy, enmity, and rebellion of the carnal
mind against God.

[Jeremiah 44:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 44:17</span></span>

But we will certainly do whatsoever thing goeth out of our own
mouth,.... And not what went out of the mouth of God, or his prophet:
but whoever they had resolved on within themselves to do, and had
declared with their mouths they would, or had vowed with their lips; so
Abarbinel interprets it of a vow; this they were determined to perform,
let God and his prophet say what they would:

to burn incense unto the queen of heaven; which, according to Abarbinel,
was the moon, which is the queen of heaven, as the sun is king; it was
called by the Heathens Coelestis and Urania: but there are some that
think that some great star in heaven, that is king over the rest, is
meant; so the Targum renders it, the star of heaven; which they
understand of the sun, as Kimchi observes; the sun being much worshipped
in Egypt; but Kimchi himself derives the word for "queen", here used,
not from the root which signifies "to reign"; but from another, which
signifies "to work"; and so renders it, "the work", or "frame of
heaven"; the sun, moon, and stars; and so the Syriac version is "the
host of heaven"; See Gill on [Jer
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#018); and to this deity, be it what it
will, they burned incense; and they were determined to continue it, and
all other idolatrous rites and practices particularly:

and to pour out drink offerings unto her; which was another part of
ceremonial worship, which the true God required of the people of Israel;
but were here resolved to give it to another god:

as we have done, we, and our fathers, our kings, and our princes, in the
cities of Judah, and in the streets of Jerusalem; they plead custom and
prescription, antiquity and authority; the examples of ancestors and
kings; the general practice of their nation, both in the metropolis of
it, and in its several cities, where it not only universally obtained,
but was visibly and openly done; and, more, they plead the temporal
advantage of it:

for then had we plenty of victuals, and were well, and saw no evil: had
fulness of bread, and of all provisions; health, peace, and safety; and
no judgment was upon them, seen or felt by them; the sword, famine, or
pestilence. The goddess Coelestis, or the moon, which seems to be here
meant, was, as Tertullian (d) says "pluviarum pollicitatrix", "the
promiser of rains" and so of all good things: or, "were merry" (e), as
the Heathens were at their new moons, when they indulged to their cups,
and lived jovially; hence that of Horace (f).

\(d\) Apolog. c. 23. (e) "et eramus hilares", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator. (f) "Da lunae propere novae, Da noctis mediae, poculum".
Carmin. l. 3. Ode 19.

[Jeremiah 44:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 44:18</span></span>

But since we left off to burn incense to the queen of heaven,.... Or
were restrained from it, as the Targum, through the force of the
prophet's sermons, or by the authority of their governors: this
Abarbinel thinks was in the times of Jehoiakim, Jehoiakim and Zedekiah;
but perhaps it only regards some space of time in the latter part of
Zedekiah's reign, a little before the destruction of Jerusalem, when
they refrained from their idolatry; fearing the wrath of God, and what
was coming upon them; though Kimchi is of opinion that they never
ceased; but they would say, when any evil came upon them, it was because
they ceased to burn incense to the queen of heaven, of were not so ready
to it as at first:

and to pour out drink offerings to her: another part of worship they
performed to her but for a while left off: and from that time they say,

we have wanted all things, and have been consumed by the sword, and by
the famine; wanted all the necessaries of life, meat and drink, and
clothing and a habitation to dwell in; and multitudes were destroyed by
the sword of the king of Babylon; and others perished with famine during
the siege; these evils they imputed to their cessation from idolatry,
when it was the very thing that brought them on them.

[Jeremiah 44:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 44:19</span></span>

And when we burnt incense to the queen of heaven, and poured out drink
offerings unto her,.... Which they owned they did, and which they were
not ashamed of, and were determined to go on with; and were only sorry
that they had at any time omitted such service:

did we make cakes to worship her; or, "to make her glad" (g), as Kimchi;
interpreting the word by an antiphrasis; it having a contrary
signification, to grieve or to make sorrowful; and from hence idols have
their name sometimes, because in the issue they bring grief and trouble
to their worshippers; hence some render it, "to make her an idol" (h);
or them, the cakes, an idol; these had, as Jarchi says, the likeness of
the idol impressed upon them:

and pour out drink offerings unto her, without our men? they own they
did these things but not without the knowledge and consent at least, if
not with the presence, of their husbands; hence these words seem to be
the words of the women. Some indeed think they speak all along, from
[Jer 44:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#016); or one in the name of the
rest; it may be one of Zedekiah's daughters; but however, if the men
spoke what is said in the preceding verses, the women, being provoked,
could hold their peace no longer, but broke in, and uttered these words;
though some render the last clause, "without our principal men" (i); and
so take them to be the words of the people in general; who urge, in
their own defence, that what they did they did with the direction,
approbation, and leading example of their kings and governors.

\(g\) "ad exhilarandum illud", Calvin; "ad laetificaudum eam", Munster,
Pagninus. (h) "Idolificando", Piscator; so Ben Melech; "ut faciamus
illas idolum", Cocceius. (i) "absque praestantibus viris nostris",
Junius & Tremellius.

[Jeremiah 44:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 44:20</span></span>

Then Jeremiah said unto all the people,.... Immediately, being
influenced, directed, and assisted by the Spirit of God; though what he
says, in [Jer 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#021); he does not
declare as coming from the Lord; but what was upon his mind, and was a
full refutation of all that had been said: and which he delivered

to the men, and to the women, and to all the people which had given him
that answer; in which they all agreed, though delivered by one; and to
which he made a reply:

saying; as follows:

[Jeremiah 44:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 44:21</span></span>

That incense that ye burnt in the cities of Judah, and in the streets of
Jerusalem,.... To false gods, to the queen of heaven, to the host
thereof:

ye, and your fathers, your kings, and your princes, and the people of
the land; on which account they pleaded antiquity, authority, and the
general consent of the people, as on their side, which the prophet
allows; but it all signified nothing:

did not the Lord remember them, and came it not into his mind? either
the incense they offered up to strange gods, or the persons that did it?
did he take no notice of these idolatrous practices, and of these
idolaters? he did; he laid up these things in his mind; he showed a
proper resentment of them, and in due time punished for them.

[Jeremiah 44:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 44:22</span></span>

So that the Lord could no longer forbear,.... He did forbear a long
time, and did not stir up all his wrath, but waited to see if these
people would repent of their sins, and turn from them; during which time
of his forbearance, things might be well with them, as they had said,
and they enjoyed peace and plenty; but persisting in their sins, and
growing worse and worse, he could bear with them no longer, but brought
down his judgments upon them. The reason is expressed,

because of the evil of your doings, and because of the abominations
which ye have committed; the incense they had burnt; the drink offerings
they had poured out to idols; and such like idolatrous practices, which
were evil in themselves, contrary to the law and will of God, and
abominable unto him:

therefore is your land a desolation, and an astonishment, and a curse,

without an inhabitant, as at this day; the land of Israel, wasted by the
Chaldeans, and left uncultivated, was like a barren wilderness, to the
astonishment of all that passed through it, who had known what a
fruitful country it had been; the curse of God being apparently on it,
and scarce an inhabitant left in it; which was the case at this present
instant, as the Jews, to whom the prophet directs his discourse, well
knew; and to whom he appeals for the truth of it: now all this was for
the sins, particularly the idolatry, they had been guilty of; as is
further explained in [Jer 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#023).

[Jeremiah 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 44:23</span></span>

And because ye have burnt incense,.... Not to Jehovah, but to the queen
of heaven; which they owned they did, and determined they would;
asserting it was better with them when they did it than when they
omitted it; for which reason the prophet particularly mentions it, and
assigns it as the cause of the present ruin and destruction of their
land, city, and temple:

and because ye have sinned against the Lord; by worshipping idols; all
sin is against the Lord, but especially idolatry:

and have not obeyed the voice of the Lord; by his prophets, who
cautioned them against idolatry, reproved them for it, and told them
what would be the consequence of it; but this they hearkened not unto,
which was an aggravation of their sin:

nor walked in his law; the moral law, according to it; which is a rule
of walk and conversation:

nor in his statutes, nor in his testimonies; as not in the moral law, so
neither in the ceremonial law, and the rites of that; nor in the
judicial law, and the testifications of the will of God in either of
them:

therefore this evil is happened unto you, as at this day: that is, the
desolation on their land, as in [Jer
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#023); See Gill on [Jer
44:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#023).

[Jeremiah 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 44:24</span></span>

Moreover Jeremiah said unto all the people, and to all the women,.... To
all the people in general, and to the women in particular, who had a
principal concern in these idolatrous practices:

hear the word of the Lord, all Judah that are in the land of Egypt; all
of the tribe of Judah that were in Egypt; not in Pathros only, but in
other parts of Egypt; this distinguishes them from those of Judah that
were in Babylon, and in other provinces; and tacitly points at their sin
in going to Egypt, which was the leading step to then fresh acts of
idolatry they had been guilty of; these are called upon to hear the word
of the Lord: what the prophet had said before was what was upon his mind
without immediate inspiration, or as a direct message from the Lord; but
what follows is.

[Jeremiah 44:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 44:25</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,.... Which is an usual
preface to prophecies coming from him:

saying; as follows:

ye and your wives have both spoken with your mouths, and fulfilled with
your hand; they had said they would burn incense to the queen of heaven,
and they had done it; they had been as good as their word, true to it,
though in a bad thing: their words and works agreed, and so did the men
and their wives: the women had before said they did not perform worship
to the queen of heaven without their men; this is acknowledged by the
Lord, and their confession is improved against them:

saying, we will surely perform our vows that we have vowed, to burn
incense to queen of heaven, and to pour out drink offerings unto her;
they thought, because they made a vow that they would do it, that it was
therefore obligatory upon them, and this would be sufficient to justify
them before God, and excuse it to him; whereas nothing that is sinful
ought to be vowed or performed; and to vow and perform in such a case is
doubly criminal: a vow cannot make that lawful which is unlawful; and
the performance of it can never be a laudable action:

ye will surely accomplish your vows, and surely perform your vows; they
were resolutely set upon it, and nothing would hinder their performance
of it; this shows the obstinacy and firmness of their minds: though some
think these words are spoken ironically.

[Jeremiah 44:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 44:26</span></span>

Therefore hear ye the word of the Lord, all Judah that dwell in the land
of Egypt,.... See Gill on [Jer 44:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#024);
since you have made your vows, and will perform them, I will take an
oath, and abide by it:

behold, I have sworn by my great name, saith the Lord; by his name
Jehovah, which is incommunicable, and expressive of his eternity and
immutability; or by himself, his name being himself, and than which he
can swear by no greater, [Heb 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#013);

that my name shall no more be named in the mouth of any man of Judah in
all the land of Egypt, saying, the Lord God liveth: this cannot be
understood of the name of the Lord being called upon them, or of their
being called by his name, and reckoned his people, which is the sense of
Abarbinel; since this respects not a name by which they should be named,
but which they should name; and intends their use of the divine name in
an oath, of which this is a form, "the Lord God liveth": or as sure as
the Lord lives, or by the living God, it is so and so; and especially as
used in their vows to burn incense to the queen of heaven, they vowing
by the living God that they would do so, which must be very abominable
to him; and therefore he solemnly swears there should not be a Jew in
all Egypt that should use it; the reason is, because everyone of them
that did should be cut off, as follows:

[Jeremiah 44:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 44:27</span></span>

Behold, I will watch over them for evil, and not for good,.... To bring
the evil of punishment upon them, the particulars of which are after
mentioned, and not the blessings of goodness, as formerly; and this he
would be as careful and diligent to bring about, as one that watches all
opportunities to do hurt to another; and it must be dreadful to be under
the vigilant avenging eye of God:

and all the men of Judah that are in the land of Egypt shall be consumed
by the sword, and by the famine, until there be an end of them; that is,
the greatest part of them, excepting a few that shall escape, hereafter
mentioned, particularly Jeremiah and Baruch; but as for the main body of
such, who went of their own accord to Egypt, and settled, and fell: into
the idolatry of the country; these should all perish one after another,
till there were none of them left; either by the sword of the king of
Babylon; or by famine, which his army and sieges would produce; or by
pestilence, though not here mentioned, yet is in [Jer
44:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#013).

[Jeremiah 44:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 44:28</span></span>

Yet a small number that shall escape the sword,.... The sword of the
king of Babylon, and the other judgments, and which would be but very
few; "men of number" (k), as in the Hebrew text, which might easily be
numbered; Jeremiah the prophet, and Baruch the son of Neriah, and some
few righteous persons among them, as Kimchi and Abarbinel observe:

shall return out of the land of Egypt into the land of Judah; they shall
make their escape out of the land of Egypt, whither they did not go
willingly; and, by one providence or another, shall come back to their
native country, the land of Judea, When the rest will not; which must be
a distinguishing your to them:

and all the remnant of Judah, that are gone into the land of Egypt to
sojourn there, shall know what words shall stand, mine or theirs; those
that are left of the sword, famine, and pestilence, shall know
experimentally, by facts laid down, whose words have their effect and
accomplishment, stand firm and sure; whether theirs, that promised
impunity and safety, peace and prosperity, in their idolatrous
practices; or the Lord's, which threatened with ruin and destruction.
The Lord is true, and every man a liar; whatever devices are in a man's
heart, the counsel of the Lord, that shall stand.

\(k\) "viri numeri", Montanus, &c.

[Jeremiah 44:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 44:29</span></span>

And this shall be a sign unto you, saith the Lord, that I will punish
you in this place,.... In Egypt, as before threatened; and what follows
is a confirming sign that so it would be; and which, when observed by
some, gave the hint to them to make their escape; though others, being
hardened in their idolatry, impenitence, and unbelief, continued, and
perished:

that ye may know that my words shall surely stand against you for evil;
which sign, when they should see, they might assure themselves that the
threatenings of evil to them would certainly be accomplished, as sure as
they saw the sign given, which is as follows:

[Jeremiah 44:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 44:30</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, behold, I will give Pharaohhophra king of
Egypt,.... Pharaoh was a common name of the kings of Egypt, who usually
had some surname, by which they were distinguished; and the surname of
the then present king of Egypt was Hophra; whom the Septuagint and
others call Vaphres; and, Herodotus (l) Apries. The Targum renders it
Pharaoh the broken; and the Syriac version Pharaoh the lame: now it is
here predicted as a sign of the destruction of the Jews in Egypt, which
should follow after, that God would deliver this king

into the hand of his enemies, and into the hand of them that seek his
life; either into the hands of his rebellious subjects, headed by
Amasis, by whom he was kept alive for a while after taken, and then put
to death, as Herodotus reports; or rather into the hands of
Nebuchadnezzar; for Josephus says (m), that he, in the twenty third year
of his reign, which was four or five years after the destruction of
Jerusalem, having subdued the Syrians, Ammonites, and Moabites, entered
Egypt in a hostile manner, and slew the then remaining king, and set up
another; and this is confirmed by what follows:

as I gave Zedekiah king of Judah into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of
Babylon, and that sought his life; in like manner, and as sure as he had
done the one, he would do the other; and he puts the Jews in mind of
what he had done by him, and which they had full and certain knowledge
of; and might from hence conclude that this also would be accomplished,
here given as a sign of their own ruin; and which, when they saw come to
pass, might know that it was at hand; and, indeed, the king of Egypt, in
whom they trusted, being taken by his enemies, and his country wasted,
they must in course fall a prey to the conqueror.

\(l\) Euterpe, sive l. 2. c. 161, 162, 169. & Melpomene, sive l. 4. c.
159. (m) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 7.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 45](jer045)

</div>
