<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer011)  [Next](jer013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 12:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 12

This chapter contains the prophets complaint of the prosperity of the
wicked, and the Lord's answer to it; an account of the deplorable and
miserable estate of the Jewish nation; and a threatening to the
neighbouring nations that had used them ill; with a promise of
deliverance of the Jews from them, and settlement among God's people in
case of obedience. The prophet's complaint is in [Jer
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001) in which he asserts the justice
of God, yet seems at a loss to reconcile it with the prosperity of the
wicked; and the rather, because of their hypocrisy; and appeals to the
Lord for his own sincerity and uprightness, [Jer
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003) and prays for the destruction of
the wicked, and that the time might hasten, for whose wickedness the
land was desolate, and herbs, beasts, and birds, consumed, [Jer
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003), the Lord's answer, in which he
reproves him for his pusillanimity, seeing he had greater trials than
those to encounter with, and instructs him how to behave towards his
treacherous friends, is in [Jer 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005)
the account of the miserable condition of the Jewish nation is from [Jer
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007), under the simile of a house and
heritage left by the Lord, given up to enemies, and compared to a lion
and a speckled bird, hateful to God, and hated by those about it, [Jer
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007) and of a vineyard destroyed and
trodden down by shepherds, and made desolate, [Jer
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010) even as a wilderness through the
ravage of the sword; so that what is sown upon it comes to nothing, [Jer
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#012) then follows a threatening to
those who had carried the people of Israel captive, with a promise to
deliver the Jews out of their hands, and bring them into their own land,
and settle them among the Lord's people, in case they use diligence to
learn their ways, [Jer 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014), but in
case of disobedience are threatened to be plucked up and utterly
destroyed, [Jer 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#017).

[Jeremiah 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 12:1</span></span>

Righteous art thou, O Lord, when I plead with thee,.... The six first
verses of this chapter properly belong to the preceding, being of the
same argument, and in strict connection with the latter part of it.
Jeremiah appears to be under the same temptation, on account of the
prosperity of the wicked, as Asaph was, [Psa
73:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#001) only he seems to have been more
upon his guard, and less liable to fall by it; he sets out: with this as
a first principle, an undoubted truth, that God was righteous, and could
do nothing wrong and amiss, however unaccountable his providences might
be to men: he did not mean, by entering the list with him, or by
litigating this point, to charge him with any unrighteousness this he
took for granted, and was well satisfied of, that the Lord was
righteous, "though", says he, "I plead with thee" (t); so some read the
words. De Dieu renders them interrogatively, "shall I plead with thee?"
shall I dare to do it? shall I take that boldness and use that freedom
with thee? I will. The Targum is the reverse,

"thou art more just, O Lord, than that I should contend before thy
word:''

yet let me talk with thee of thy judgments; not of his laws, statutes,
word, and ordinances, sometimes so called; but rather of his
providences, which are always dispensed with equity and justice, though
not always manifest; they are sometimes unsearchable and past finding
out, and will bear a sober and modest inquiry into them, and debate
concerning them; the people of God may take the liberty of asking
questions concerning them, when they are at a loss to account for them.
So the Targum,

"but I will ask a question of judgments before thee.''

The words may be rendered, "but I will speak judgments with thee" (u);
things that are right; that are agreeable to the word of God and sound
reason; things that are consistent with the perfections of God,
particularly his justice and holiness; which are founded upon equity and
truth; I will produce such reasons and arguments as seem to be
reasonable and just.

Wherefore doth the way of the wicked prosper? or they prosper in all
their ways? whatever they take in hand succeeds; they enjoy a large
share of health of body; their families increase, their trade
flourishes, their flocks and herds grow large and numerous, and they
have great plenty of all outward blessings; and yet they are wicked men,
without the fear of God, regard not him, nor his worship and ways; but
walk in their own ways which they have chosen, and delight in their
abominations. Some understand this, as Jarchi, of Nebuchadnezzar, to
whom God had given greatness and prosperity, to destroy the house of
God; but by what follows, in the latter part of the next verse, it
appears that God's professing people, the Jews, are meant, and most
likely the priests at Anathoth.

Wherefore are all they happy; easy, quiet, secure, live in peace and
plenty:

that deal very treacherously? with God and men, in religions and civil
affairs.

\(t\) "etiamsi contendam tecum", Cocceius, Gataker. (u) "verum tamen
judicia loquar tecum", Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 12:2</span></span>

Thou hast planted them,.... In the land of Canaan, fixed the bounds of
their habitation, given them a firm and comfortable settlement; for all
the good things, even of the wicked, come from God:

yea, they have taken root; as everything that is planted does not; but
these did, though it was downwards in the earth, on which their hearts
were set, and so were strengthened and established in their worldly
circumstances:

they grow, yea, they bring forth fruit; but to themselves, not to God;
not fruits of righteousness or good works; they grow, not in grace and
holiness, but in their worldly substance; and they brought forth fruit,
not such as were meet for repentance, but they had great riches, and
numerous families; and so the Septuagint and Arabic versions, "they
produce children, and bring forth fruit." The Targum is,

"they become rich, yea, they possess substance.''

Thou art near in their mouth; they often made use of the name of God,
either in swearing by it, or praying to him in an external manner; they
called themselves the Lord's people, and boasted of being his priests,
and employed in his service; they took his covenant, and the words of
his law, into their mouths, and taught them the people, and yet had no
sincere regard for these things:

and far from their reins; from the affections of their hearts, and the
desires of their souls; they had no true love for God, nor fear of him,
nor faith in him. The Targum is,

"near are the words of thy law in their mouth, and far is thy fear from
their reins.''

[Jeremiah 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 12:3</span></span>

But thou, O Lord, knowest me,.... The Lord knew him before he was born,
[Jer 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#005), he knew what he designed him
for, and what use he would make of him; and he knew him now, and loved
him, and cared for him, as his prophet; he knew his sincerity and
faithfulness, and took notice of it, with what integrity he performed
his office, and discharged his duty; and he knew that all his enemies
said of him were scandal and reproach, lies and calumnies.

Thou hast seen me; his inside, his heart, and all in it; for all things
are naked and open to the eyes of an omniscient God:

and tried mine heart towards thee; he had tried him by various
afflictive providences, and his heart was found towards God; the
affections and desires of his soul were towards him, and he remained
faithful and upright before him, and not like the wicked before
mentioned.

Pull them out like sheep for the slaughter; either out of the fold, or
from a fat pasture; so fat sheep are plucked from the rest, in order to
be killed: this shows that their riches, affluence, and plenty, served
but to ripen them for ruin and destruction, and were like the fattening
of sheep for slaughter; which the prophet, by this imprecation, suggests
and foretells would be their case, as a righteous judgment upon them;
see [Jam 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#005).

Prepare them for the day of slaughter; or, "sanctify them" (w); set them
apart for it: this, doubtless, refers to the time of Jerusalem's
destruction by the Chaldeans.

\(w\) "et sanctifica eos", V. L. Montanus; "segrega", Piscator;
"destina", Schmidt; "consecra", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 12:4</span></span>

How long shall the land mourn,.... The land of Judea, being desolate,
and bringing forth no fruit, through the long drought that had been upon
it:

and the herbs of every field wither; for want of rain to come upon it:

for the wickedness of them that dwell therein? this opens the cause, the
reason of this dearth; it was the wickedness of the inhabitants of it:
as the whole earth was originally cursed for the sins of men, so
particular countries have had the marks of God's displeasure upon them,
because of the sins of those that dwell in them. This clause, according
to the accents, belongs to what follows, and may be read in connection
with the next clause; either thus, "the herbs" of every field wither, I
say, "because of the wickedness of the inhabitants of it, which consumes
the beasts and the birds" (x); that is, which wickedness is the cause
not only of the withering of the grass and herbs, but of the consumption
of birds and beasts: or else, by repeating the interrogation in the
preceding clause,

how long shall the earth mourn, &c.;

how long, for the malice of them that dwell in it, are the beasts and
the birds consumed (y)? the one having no grass to eat; and the other no
fruit to pick, or seeds to live upon; the barrenness being so very great
and general.

Because they said; the Jews, the inhabitants of the land, the wicked
part of them, and which was the greater:

he shall not see our last end; either the Prophet Jeremiah, who had
foretold it; but they did not believe him, that such would be their end,
and that he should live to see it; or such was their atheism and
infidelity, that they said God himself should not see it; and so the
Septuagint and Arabic versions read, "God shall not see".

\(x\) So Gussetius, Ebr. Comment. p. 564. (y) Thus Schmidt, after
Luther.

[Jeremiah 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 12:5</span></span>

If thou hast run with the footmen, and they have wearied thee,.... The
Targum introduces the words thus,

"this is the answer which was made to Jeremiah the prophet, concerning
his question; a prophet thou art, like to a man that runs with footmen,
and is weary.''

Then how canst thou contend with horses? or with men on horses: the
sense is, either as Kimchi gives it, thou art among men like thyself,
and thou art not able to find out their secrets and their designs
against thee (see [Jer 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#018)); how
shouldest thou know my secrets in the government of the world, as to the
prosperity of the wicked, and the afflictions of the righteous? be
silent, and do not trouble thyself about these things: or rather, as
thou hast had a conflict with the men of Anathoth, and they have been
too many for thee; they have grieved and distressed thee, and have made
thee weary of my work and service; and thou hast been ready to give out,
and declare that thou wilt be no longer concerned therein; what wilt
thou do, when thou comest to be exercised with greater and sorer trials,
and shalt have to do with the king of Judah and his court, with his
princes and nobles, the sanhedrim at Jerusalem, and the priests and
inhabitants thereof? The Targum interprets the footmen of Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon, and of the good things done to him; and the horses of
the righteous fathers of the Jews, who run like horses to do good works,
and of the much greater good reserved for them; but very improperly:
much better might it be applied, as it is by some, to the Moabites,
Ammonites, and Edomites, who gave the Jews much trouble; and therefore
what would they do with the Chaldean army, consisting of a large
cavalry, and which would come upon them like an impetuous stream, and
overflow, as the swelling of Jordan, as follows?

and if in the land of peace, wherein thou trustedst, they wearied thee;
if in his own native country, where he promised himself much peace,
safety, and security, he met with that which ruffled and disturbed him:

then how wilt thou do in the swelling of Jordan? when it overflowed its
bank, [Jos 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015) and may denote the
pride and haughtiness of the king and princes of Judea, and of the
inhabitants of Jerusalem; and the difficulties that would attend the
prophet's discharge of his duty among them; and the same thing is
signified by this proverbial expression as the former.

[Jeremiah 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 12:6</span></span>

For even thy brethren, and the house of thy father,.... The men of
Anathoth;

even they have dealt treacherously with thee; by laying schemes, and
consulting methods, to take away his life privately; his enemies were
those of his own house; which is oftentimes the case of good men, and
especially of such that are in public office:

yea, they have called a multitude after thee; a multitude of men, which
they gathered together, and instigated to call after him in a clamorous
and reproachful way: or,

they called after thee with a full voice, as the Vulgate Latin (z)
version renders it; and which De Dieu approves of; they not only
gathered a mob about him, and drew men after him, but they hooted him as
he went along, and called aloud after him, giving him the most
reproachful names they could think of:

believe them not, though they speak fair words to thee; this must be
understood of some of them, who did not appear so openly against him, as
to call after him, or gather a mob about him; but of such who pretended
to be his friends, and to have respect for him, and yet had evil designs
against him, and therefore were not to be trusted; their words were not
to be believed; their company to be shunned; nor was he safe in their
houses; nor was it safe for him to be with them, to eat with them, or
converse with them.

\(z\) "illi clamarunt post te plena voce", V. L. Tigurine version,
Calvin; "pleno gutture", Piscator, Cosceius.

[Jeremiah 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 12:7</span></span>

I have forsaken my house,.... The temple, where the Lord took up his
residence, and vouchsafed his presence to his people; this was fulfilled
in the first temple, when it was destroyed by the Chaldeans; and more
fully in the second, when Christ took his leave of it, [Mat
23:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#038) and when that voice was heard in
it, a little before the destruction of Jerusalem, as Josephus (a)
relates,

"let us go hence.''

So the Targum,

"I have forsaken the house of my sanctuary.''

I have left mine heritage: the people whom he had chosen for his
inheritance, whom he prized and valued, took care of, and protected as
such; see [Deu 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009).

I have given the dearly beloved of my soul; whom he heartily loved and
delighted in, and who were as dear to him as the apple of his eye:

into the hands of her enemies; the Chaldeans. This prophecy represents
the thing as if it was already done, because of the certainty of it, and
to awaken the Jews out of their lethargy and stupidity; and by the
characters which the Lord gives of them it appears what ingratitude they
had been guilty of, and that their ruin was owing to themselves and
their sins.

\(a\) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 5. sect. 3.

[Jeremiah 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 12:8</span></span>

Mine heritage is unto me as a lion in the forest,.... Which roars, and
terrifies passengers from going that way; and which rends and tears in
pieces all it meets with. This expresses the clamours of these people
against God and his providences, and their rage, fierceness, and
cruelty, against his prophets, sent in his name.

It crieth out against me; this is to be understood not of the cry of the
oppressed through violence, for this is a cry to God, and not against
him; or of idolaters to idols, as Baal's prophets to him, in the time of
their service; which senses are mentioned by Kimchi: but either of their
charging God with inequality and injustice, in the ways of his
providence; or their blaspheming his name, and speaking ill of his
ministry

Therefore have I hated it; which he showed by leaving his house,
forsaking his heritage, and delivering his people into the hands of
their enemies; the reason of which was not in himself, but them; the
fault was not his, but theirs; this is all to be understood of the
change in the dispensation of the divine Providence towards them;
otherwise the love of God to his chosen in Christ is unchangeable; it is
never turned into hatred, but remains invariably the same, as it did to
those, among these people; who belonged to the election of grace; for,
as the love before expressed to this people in general only respects
external favours and privileges, which they were indulged with above all
people; so this hatred of them signifies the taking away of such
favours, and leaving them to become a prey to their enemies.

[Jeremiah 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 12:9</span></span>

Mine heritage is unto me as a speckled bird,.... Or, "is not mine
heritage unto me as a speckled bird?" (b) as a bird of various colours,
delightful to look at, as the peacock, so Jerom interprets it here; it
was so formerly, but not so now; or as a bird of various colours, and
unusual, which other birds get about, look on, hate, and peck at. Some
think this refers to the motley party coloured religion the Jews had
embraced, consisting of various rites and ceremonies of the Heathens; on
which account they thought they looked beautiful and comely, when they
were hated and rejected of God for them; but the word signifies rather
to be dipped or stained, as with blood, and so denotes a bird of prey
that is stained with the blood of others; a fit emblem of the cruelty of
the Jews, in shedding the blood of the prophets. Some, because a word
near akin to this signifies a finger, render it a "fingered bird" (c);
that is, a bird with talons or claws; like fingers, a ravenous bird, and
it comes to the same sense as before. But the Septuagint take it, to be
not a bird, but a beast, and render it by the hyena; and which Bochart
(d) approves of, since the word in the Arabic language signifies such a
creature; and Schindler observes, that with the Arabians, is the name of
a creature between a wolf and a middling dog, which agrees with the
hyena. The word here used, in the Talmudic (e) language signifies a she
leopard or panther, so called from its variety of spots; and is the
same, as Maimonides says (f), which, in the Arabic language, is called
with the Targumists it is used for a kind of serpents or vipers. So the
valley of Tzeboim is rendered, in the Targum, the valley of vipers, [Sa1
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#018). And it is said (g), the word in
the text,

"this is from a white drop (or seed), and yet it has three hundred and
sixty five kinds of colours, according to the number of the days of a
solar year.''

The birds round about are against her; or, "are not the birds round
about against her?" the birds of prey? they are; meaning the
neighbouring nations, that under Nebuchadnezzar came up against
Jerusalem to take and destroy it.

Come ye, assemble all ye beasts of the field, come to devour; this is an
invitation to the enemies of the people of the Jews, comparable for
their fierceness and savageness to the beasts of the field, to come and
destroy them; and shows that their destruction was by divine permission,
and according to the will of God. Compare with this [Rev
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#018). The Targum interprets it of
those that kill with the sword; kings of the earth, and their armies.

\(b\) So V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin, Jarchi, and Kimchi. (c) "avis
digtata", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Gusetius; "ales unguibus
praedita", Cocceius. (d) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 3. c. 11. col. 830, 838,
839. (e) T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 16. 1. (f) In Misn. Bava Kama, c. 1.
sect. 4. (g) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 7. fol. 6. 2.

[Jeremiah 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 12:10</span></span>

Many pastors have destroyed my vineyard,.... This is a metaphor which is
often used of the people of Israel and Judah; see [Psa
80:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#008), the pastors that destroyed them
are not their own governors, civil or religious, but Heathen princes,
Nebuchadnezzar and his generals. So the Targum paraphrases it,

"many kings slay my people;''

so Kimchi and Ben Melech.

They have trodden my portion under foot; the people of the Jews, that
were his portion, and before called his heritage; whom the Chaldeans
subdued, and reduced to extreme servitude and bondage; and were as the
dirt under their feet, greatly oppressed and despised.

They have made my pleasant portion a desolate wilderness; by pulling
down stately edifices, unwalling of towers, and destroying men; so that
there were none to manure the fields, to dress the vineyards, and keep
gardens and orchards in good case; but all were come to ruin and what
before was a delightful paradise was now like an heath or desert.

[Jeremiah 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 12:11</span></span>

They have made it desolate,.... Which is repeated to denote the
certainty of it; astonishment at it, and that it might be observed:

and being desolate it mourneth unto me; not the inhabitants of it for
their sins, the cause of this desolation; but the land itself, because
of the calamities upon it; it crying to God, in its way, for a
restoration to its former beauty and glory.

The whole land is made desolate; it was not only the case of Jerusalem,
and the parts adjacent, but even of the whole land of Judea:

because no man layeth it to heart, took any notice of the judgment
threatened, foretold by the prophets; nor repented of their sins, for
which they were threatened with such a desolation; nor even were
properly affected with the destruction itself; the earth seemed more
sensible of it than they were; this expresses the great stupidity of
this people.

[Jeremiah 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 12:12</span></span>

The spoilers are come upon all high places through the wilderness,....
Of Judea; or which lay between Chaldea and Judea, through which the
Chaldean army came; called here the "spoilers", because they spoiled and
plundered all places where they came; nor could the high, strong, and
fortified places withstand them, or escape their ravage and fury. De
Dieu renders it, "upon all the plains in the wilderness"; where was
pasture, land for cattle, as Kimchi serves; which were trodden down and
spoiled by the soldiers, and made forage of.

For the sword of the Lord shall devour from the one end; of the land
even the other end of the land; the sword of the Chaldeans is called the
sword of the Lord, because it was drawn by his order and appointment,
and was succeeded by him to do execution; and the calamity which it
brought upon the land reached from one end of it to the other, so
general and; extensive it was.

No flesh shall have peace; no inhabitant of Judea shall be in safety,
but be exposed to the sword, or to captivity.

[Jeremiah 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 12:13</span></span>

They have sown wheat, but shall reap thorns,.... Which may be understood
literally, the land of Judea being cursed for their sins, and become
barren and unfruitful, as the earth originally was for the sin of the
first man, [Gen 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#019), or rather
figuratively, which some interpret of the prophets as Kimchi, sowing the
good seed of the word among the Jews; but it did not take place in them,
and bring forth fruit; instead thereof thorns sprung up, or evil works
were done by them, comparable thereunto; but it seems better to
understand it of the people; not, as Jarchi, of their prayers, which
were not accepted, because unattended with repentance and good works;
but of their schemes, which they thought were prudently laid, in forming
an alliance with Egypt, and sending thither for help against the
Chaldeans, but all in vain; these proved in the issue like thorns,
grievous and vexatious to them. The Septuagint version reads
imperatively, "sow ye": and Jarchi makes mention of a copy, in which the
word was pointed as to be so read, as in [Hos
10:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#012), and may be understood
ironically. The Targum is,

"be ye not like those who sow wheat in untilled land, and can gather
nothing but thorns.''

They have put themselves to pain, but shall not profit; were at a great
deal of pains and trouble to make Egypt their ally, and send thither for
assistance, and all to no purpose. Kimchi's father interprets this of
their uneasiness and grief, at parting with so much money to the king of
Egypt, without having any advantage by it; which is to be preferred to
the sense Jarchi gives, of the people crying to God, and grieving
because not regarded by him. Some render the words, "they have got an
inheritance", as the Vulgate Latin; the land of Canaan, but they will
not be able to keep it; it shall no longer be theirs, or any advantage
to them.

And they shall be ashamed of your revenues; not the prophets of the evil
works of the people, but rather the people of their own evil works; and,
particularly, of their schemes, counsels, and preparations, to secure
themselves against the enemy; of their alliances with other nations, and
of vain confidences; the success not answering to the pains and expense
they had been at; but these failing and disappointing them, would fill
them with shame and confusion.

Because of the fierce anger of the Lord; against which there was no
standing; this being infinitely more powerful than the Chaldean army, by
the means of which it came upon them, and from which no schemes and
alliances could protect them.

[Jeremiah 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 12:14</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord against all mine evil neighbours,.... Or,
"concerning" (h) them; the Egyptians, Philistines, Moabites, Ammonites,
Edomites, Tyre, and Sidon; whom the Lord calls his "neighbours", because
they were near the land of Canaan, where his people dwelt, to whom he
vouchsafed his presence, and where the temple was in which he took up
his residence; and his "evil" neighbours, because they often distressed
and afflicted his people.

That touch the inheritance which I have caused my people Israel to
inherit; meaning not only that they bordered on the land of Canaan, and
so might be said to touch it, but that they did hurt unto it; in which
sense the word touch is used, [Psa
105:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#015), the land of Canaan was an
inheritance which was distributed by lot to the children of Israel, who
were a people dear unto the Lord, as this shows; and therefore they that
touched them, or their inheritance, as to do them any harm, touched the
apple of his eye, and which he resented greatly, [Zac
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#008).

Behold, I will pluck them out of their land; cause them to be carried
captive into other lands, or be destroyed in their own; see Jeremiah
chapters forty six through forty nine: and pluck out the house of Judah
from among them; such of the Jews they had formerly carried captive, or
who had fled to them upon the Chaldean invasion; these the Lord would
cause to come forth from among them, and return them to their own land.

\(h\) "de omnibus", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 12:15</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, after that I have plucked them out,.... Not
the Jews only, but more especially their neighbouring nations; after
they have been plucked up and carried captive, and been in captivity
some time:

I will return, and have compassion on them; or, "have compassion on them
again" (i); by returning their captivity, as is promised, [Jer
48:47](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#047),

and I will bring them again, every man to his heritage, and every man to
his land; this seems to respect the conversion of the Gentiles in the
latter day, when the fulness of them shall be brought in; as the latter
part of the preceding verse may more especially regard the conversion of
the Jews at the same time, when they shall be gathered out of all
nations where they are, and return to their own land.

\(i\) "rursus misereat me illorum", Junius & Tremellius; "rursus
miserabor ipsorum", Piscator; "denuo miserabor ipsorum", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 12:16</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, if they will diligently learn the ways of my
people,.... Not their evil ways of sin or superstition, they sometimes
stray into; but the ways which God has prescribed to them, and has
directed them to walk in, and in which they do walk; and which are to be
learned of the Lord, by a diligent attendance with his people on his
word and ordinances; see [Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003),

to swear by my name, the Lord liveth; that is, to worship and serve the
living God, a self-existent Being, who has life in himself, and of
himself, and not another; and is the fountain, author, and giver of
natural life to all creatures, and spiritual and eternal life to his
true worshippers: swearing is here put for the whole of religious
worship, as in [Deu 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013),

(as they taught my people to swear by Baal;) to worship him, and other
idols:

then shall they be built in the midst of my people; become part of the
spiritual building the church; being laid upon the same foundation of
the apostles and prophets, and built up a holy temple; a spiritual house
for the Lord to dwell in; partaking of the same privileges and
ordinances as the people of God; being fellow heirs, and of the same
body, and partakers of the promise in Christ by the Gospel, [Eph
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#020), it denotes the settlement and
establishment of the Gentiles with the Jews in a Gospel church state. So
the Targum,

"and they shall be established in the midst of my people.''

[Jeremiah 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 12:17</span></span>

But if they will not obey,.... Or "hear" (k); the word of the Lord, and
hearken to the ministers of the Gospel, and be subject to the ordinances
of it; or as the Targum,

"will not receive instruction:''

I will utterly pluck up and destroy that nation, saith the Lord: root it
up from being a nation, strip it of all its privileges and enjoyments,
and destroy it with an everlasting destruction; see [Zac
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016).

\(k\) "audierint", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "audient", Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 13](jer013)

</div>
