<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer003)  [Next](jer005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 4

This chapter begins with several exhortations to repentance; first to
Israel, or the ten tribes, to return to the Lord with their whole
hearts, and put away their abominations, and serve him in sincerity and
uprightness of soul; with promises of rest and safety to themselves; and
that it would have a happy influence on the Gentiles, and issue in their
conversion; who would hereupon bless themselves in the Lord, and glory
in him, [Jer 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001), and next to the
inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, to show a concern for renewing and
sanctifying grace, signified by various metaphors, lest they should be
consumed with the fire of divine wrath, [Jer
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003) and then the destruction of that
land and city is foretold and described, partly by what was introductory
to it, and the proclamation of it, signified by blowing the trumpet, and
setting up the standard, [Jer 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005), by
an account of the destroyers, their cruelty, swiftness, and diligence,
[Jer 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007), and of the destruction
itself, compared to a violent wind, [Jer
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#011), by the effect it should have
upon the inhabitants of all sorts, high and low, [Jer
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#008), and had upon the prophet himself,
[Jer 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010), and by the cause and ground
of it, the sins of the people, which they are called upon to repent of,
[Jer 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014) and by a vision the prophet
had of the dreadful desolation of the land, [Jer
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#023) and by the vain and false hopes
the people would have of their recovery, and the great anxiety and
distress they would be in, [Jer 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030).

[Jeremiah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 4:1</span></span>

If thou wilt return, O Israel, saith the Lord,.... To which they had
been encouraged, and as they had promised they would, and said they did,
[Jer 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#014),

return unto me; with thy whole heart, and not feignedly and
hypocritically, as Judah did, [Jer
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#010). Some render the words (and the
accents require they should be rendered so) "if thou wilt return to me,
O Israel, saith the Lord, thou shalt return" (l); that is, to thine own
land, being now in captivity; or, "thou shalt rest" (m); or "have rest";
so Kimchi interprets the last word; see [Jer
30:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#010), and these words may very well
be considered as the words of Christ, and as spoken by him, when he
entered upon his ministry, who began it with calling the people of the
Jews to repentance, and promising to give them rest; and all such who
return to God by repentance, and come to Christ by faith, find spiritual
rest for their souls now, and shall have an eternal rest hereafter, [Mat
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#017),

and if thou wilt put away thine abominations out of my sight; not only
their sins, but their self-righteousness, and dependence upon it; the
rites and ceremonies of the old law abolished by Christ, together with
the traditions of the elders, by which they made void the commandments
of God; all which were abominations in the sight of the Lord, [Isa
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013),

then shalt thou not remove; from thine own land again when restored, or
further off, into more distant countries, for they were now in
captivity; or rather the words may be rendered, not as a promise, but as
a continuation of what is before said,

and not move to and fro (n); or be unstable and wavering, tossed to and
fro with every wind of doctrine, and precept of men; but be established
in the faith of the Gospel, and steadfast and immovable in every good
work. The Targum is:

"if thou wilt return, O Israel, to my worship, saith the Lord, thy
return shall be received before thy decree is sealed; and if thou wilt
take away thine abominations from before me, thou shalt not be moved;''

or wander about.

\(l\) "si reverteris ad me, O Israel, dicit Jehovah, reverteris",
Gataker, (m) "quiescas", Vatablus; "quiesce apud me", Calvin. (n) "et
non vagaberis", Gatatker; "et non instabilis fueris", Cocceius,

[Jeremiah 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 4:2</span></span>

And thou shalt swear, the Lord liveth,.... Or by the living Lord, by him
and him only; not by the creatures, but by the God of truth. This is
sometimes put for the whole worship and service of God, [Deu
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#013) and for a confession of Christ,
and profession of faith in him, [Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023), compared with [Rom
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#011) and which ought to be done,

in truth, in righteousness, and in judgment; in sincerity, integrity,
and uprightness of soul; in spirit and in, truth; in righteousness and
true holiness:

and the nations shall bless themselves in him, not in Israel, as the
Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, interpret it; but in the Lord, even in the
Messiah, the Lord Jesus Christ, in whom all the nations of the earth
were to be blessed with all spiritual blessings; with which being
blessed, they call and count themselves happy, being pardoned through
the blood of Christ, justified by his righteousness, and having peace,
life, and salvation by him, [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018),

and in him shall they glory; not in themselves, nor in any creature, or
creature enjoyment; but in the Lord, and in what he is to them, wisdom,
righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; in whom all the seed of
Israel, being justified, glory; see [Co1
1:30](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#030). The sense of the words seems to
be, that upon the Gospel being preached by Christ and his apostles to
the Israelites, and some of them being converted, and their abominations
put away, and they cleaving to the Lord, and to his worship; the
Gentiles should have the Gospel sent to them, and receive it, and place
all their blessedness in Christ, and glory in him.

[Jeremiah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 4:3</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord to the men of Judah and Jerusalem,.... The two
tribes of Judah and Benjamin, who were at the time of this prophecy in
their own land; and so are distinguished from Israel the ten tribes, who
were in captivity; unless the same persons should be meant, who were
called by these several names, the people of the Jews; and it was in
Judea that our Lord appeared in the flesh, and to the inhabitants
thereof he ministered, he was the minister of the circumcision; and so
to the inhabitants of Jerusalem, whom he called to repentance, and would
have gathered, [Mat 23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037),

break up your fallow ground; this is ground that lies untilled, not
ploughed, nor sown, on which nothing grows but the produce of nature, as
weeds, thorns, briers, &c. is common to men and beasts, and is trodden
upon, and, so is hard and unsusceptible of seed; which, if it
accidentally falls upon it, makes no impression on it, and is not
received by it; and the breaking of it up is by the plough. The "fallow
ground" fitly represents the hearts of unregenerate men, which are
unopened to the word, and unbroken by it; nor have they the seed of
divine grace sown in them; but are destitute of faith, hope, love, fear,
and the like; there is nothing grows there but the weeds of sin and
corruption; and are like a common beaten road; are the common track of
sin, where lusts pass to and fro, and dwell; and so are hardened and
obdurate, as hard as a stone, yea, harder than the nether millstone; and
who, though they may occasionally be under the word, it makes no
impression on them; it has no place in them, but is like the seed that
falls by the wayside, [Mat 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#004),
unless divine power attends it; for the Gospel is the plough, and
ministers are the ploughmen; but it is the Lord alone that makes it
effectual to the breaking up the fallow ground of men's hearts, [Luk
9:62](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#062), but when the Lord puts his hand
to the plough it enters within, and opens the heart; it is quick,
powerful, and sharp; it cuts deep, and makes long and large furrows,
even strong convictions of sin; it throws a man's inside outward, as the
plough does the earth; and lays all the wicked of his heart open to him;
and roots up the pride, the vanity, and boasting of the creature, and
other lusts; and so makes way for the seed of divine grace to be sown
there:

and sow not among thorns; or, "that ye may not sow among thorns" (o);
for, unless the fallow ground is broken up, it will be no other than
sowing among thorns; and unless the hearts of men are opened by the
power and grace of God, they will not attend to the things that are
spoken; preaching and eating the word will be like sowing among thorns;
cares of this world, the deceitfulness of riches, the pleasures of life,
and the lusts thereof, which are comparable to thorns, because pricking,
perplexing, and distressing, and because vain and unprofitable, choke
the word, and make it unfruitful; see [Mat
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#007), now this exhortation in the text
does not suppose power in man to break up and open his heart; but to
show his want of renewing grace; the necessity of it; and the danger he
is in without it; and to awaken in him a concern for it; see [Eze
18:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#031). The words may be applied to
backsliding professors, since backsliding Israel and Judah are the
persons addressed; and this may be done with great propriety and
pertinence to the simile; for fallow ground is that which has been broke
up and sown, and laid fallow. It is usual to till and sow two years, and
lay fallow a third: and backsliding Christians look very much like
fallow ground; so faithless, so lukewarm, and indifferent; so
inattentive to the word, and unconcerned under it; so barren and
unfruitful, as if they had never had any faith, or love, or good work in
them; so that they need to be renewed in the spirit of their minds; to
have a new face of things put upon them: and to have a clean heart, and
a right spirit, created in them. The Targum is,

"make to yourselves good works, and seek not salvation in sins.''

\(o\) "ut non seratis".

[Jeremiah 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 4:4</span></span>

Circumcise yourselves to the Lord,.... Or, "be ye circumcised", as the
Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions render it. This is to be
understood of the circumcision of the heart, as Kimchi observes; and as
appears from the following words:

and take away the foreskins of your heart, ye men of Judah, and
inhabitants of Jerusalem; this is the true spiritual circumcision; and
they that are possessed of it are the circumcision, the only truly
circumcised persons; and they are such who have been pricked to the
heart, and thoroughly convinced of sin; who have had the hardness of
their hearts removed, and the impurity of it laid open to them; which
they have beheld with shame and loathing, and have felt an inward pain
on account of it; and who have been enabled to deny themselves, to
renounce their own righteousness, and put off the body of the sins of
the flesh: and though men are exhorted to do this themselves, yet
elsewhere the Lord promises to do it for them, [Deu
30:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#006), and indeed it is purely his own
work; or otherwise it could not he called, as it is, "circumcision
without hands", and "whose praise is not of man, but of God", [Col
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#011), and the reason of this
exhortation, as before, is to convince those Jews, who were circumcised
in the flesh, and rested and gloried in that, that their hearts were not
circumcised, and that there was a necessity of it, and they in danger
for want of it; as follows:

lest my fury come forth like fire; to which the wrath of God is
sometimes compared, [Nah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#006) and is
sometimes signified by a furnace and lake of fire, even his eternal
wrath and vengeance:

and burn that none can quench it; such is the fire of divine wrath; it
is unquenchable; it is everlasting, [Mar
9:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#043),

because of the evil of your doings; which are so provoking to the eyes
of his glory; the sins of men are the fuel to the fire of his wrath, and
cause it to burn to the lowest hell, without the least degree of mercy.
The Targum is,

"turn to the worship of the Lord, and take away the wickedness of your
hearts, lest my fury burn as fire, and consume without mercy, because of
the evil of your doings.''

[Jeremiah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 4:5</span></span>

Declare ye in Judah, and publish in Jerusalem, and say,.... Exhortations
to repentance being without effect in general, though they might have an
influence on some few particular persons, the Lord directs the prophet
to lay before the people a view of their destruction as near at hand;
who calls upon some persons as a sort of heralds, to publish and declare
in the land of Judea, and in Jerusalem the metropolis of it, what
follows:

blow ye the trumpet in the land; as an alarm of an approaching enemy,
and of an invasion by him, and of danger from him; and this was to be
done, not in order to gather together, and put themselves in a posture
of defence, to meet the enemy, and give him battle; but to get together,
that were in the fields, and in country villages, and hide themselves
from him:

cry, gather together, and say; or cry with a full mouth, with a loud
voice, that all might hear; which shows imminent danger:

assemble yourselves and let us go into the defenced cities; such as
Jerusalem, and others, where they might think themselves safe and
secure; see [Mat 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016).

[Jeremiah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 4:6</span></span>

Set up the standard toward Zion,.... Not on the tower of Zion, as Kimchi
interprets it; but on some high place, pointing to Zion, and directing
the country people to flee thither for safety; for the setting up of the
standard here is not for enlisting of soldiers in order to fight, but as
a sign of danger, and a direction where to flee from it:

retire; gather yourselves together in order to flee, as the word (p) is
rendered in [Isa 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#031), though some
render it, "be ye strengthened" (q); take heart, and play the man; but
this does not seem so agreeable to the context:

stay not; or, "stand not"; stand not in the place ye are in, but move
from it in all haste, because of present danger:

for I will bring evil from the north; from Babylon, as Kimchi interprets
it; which lay north to the land of Israel; and so designs the captivity
Judah should be brought into there:

and a great destruction or, "breach" (r); which the Babylonians should
make on the inhabitants of Judea and Jerusalem.

\(p\) "congregate vos, sub. ad fugiendum", Vatablus; "confirmate vos ad
fugiendum", Piscator. (q) "Confortamini", V. L. "corroboramiui",
Castalio; "agite viriliter", Munster. (r) "contritionem", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; "confractionem", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 4:7</span></span>

The lion is come up from his thicket,.... Meaning Nebuchadnezzar (s),
from Babylon, who is compared to a lion for his strength, fierceness,
and cruelty; see [Jer 50:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#017) so the
Roman emperor is called a lion, [Ti2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017), agreeably to this the Targum
paraphrases it,

"a king is gone from his fortress;''

or tower; and the Syriac version,

"a certain most powerful king is about to go up as a lion out of his
wood:''

and the destroyer of the Gentiles is on his way; he who had conquered
and destroyed other nations not a few, and these mighty and strong; and
therefore the Jews could not expect but to be destroyed by him. This
tyrant was a type of antichrist, whose name is Apollyon, a destroyer of
the nations of the earth, [Rev 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011).

he is gone forth from his place, to make thy land desolate; from
Babylon, where his royal palace was, in order to lay waste the land of
Judea; and he is represented as being come out, and on the road with
this view, to strike the inhabitants of Judea with the greater terror,
and to hasten their flight, their destruction being determined and
certain:

and thy cities shall be laid waste without an inhabitant; they shall
become so utterly desolate, that there should be none dwelling in them,
partly by reason of the multitudes of the slain, and partly by reason of
multitudes that should flee; and should be laid waste to such a degree,
that they should be covered with grass growing upon them; which is the
signification of the word (t) here used, according to R. Joseph Kimchi.

\(s\) So T. Bab. Megilia, fol. 11. 1. & Sanhedrin. fol 94. 2. (t)
"gramine succrescente obducantur quidam" in Gataker.

[Jeremiah 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 4:8</span></span>

For this gird you with sackcloth, lament and howl,.... That is, because
of this destruction threatened, which was so near at hand, and so sure
and certain:

for the fierce anger of the Lord is not turned back from us. The
Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions, render it "from you" and some
render it "from it" (u); from his purpose and design to destroy the
Jews. Jarchi interprets this of Josiah, and his times, who, though he
turned to the Lord with all his heart, yet the Lord turned not from the
fierceness of his wrath and anger against Judah, [Kg2
23:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#025).

\(u\) "ab illo", i.e. "ab illo proposito", Cocceius; "ab eo", Montanus.

[Jeremiah 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 4:9</span></span>

And it shall come to pass at that day, saith the Lord,.... When
Nebuchadnezzar should be come up from Babylon into the land of Judea,
and lay waste the cities thereof, and besiege Jerusalem:

that the heart of the king shall perish; meaning Zedekiah king of Judah,
who should be in the utmost fright and consternation, not knowing what
to do, being devoid both of wisdom and courage; see [Jer
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004),

and the heart of the princes; who being seized with the same panic, and
at their wits' end, would not be able to give any advice and counsel to
the king; so that the people would have no help from the king and his
nobles, in whom they put their confidence:

and the priests shall be astonished; which Kimchi interprets of the
priests of the high places, the idolatrous priests, whose service would
now cease, and whose idols would not save them:

and the prophets shall wonder; which he also interprets of the false
prophets; as does the Targum; who prophesied peace, and now they shall
see it was a lie they prophesied, since sudden destruction now comes
upon them.

[Jeremiah 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 4:10</span></span>

Then said I, ah, Lord God!.... Expressing great sorrow and concern: this
"ah" is by way of lamentation. The Targum interprets it as a petition,

"and I said, receive my prayer, O Lord God:''

surely thou hast greatly deceived this people and Jerusalem: what the
false prophets did, that God is said to do, because he suffered them to
deceive the people; see [Kg1 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#020).
The Targum ascribes the deception to the false prophets, and not to God,

"surely behold the false prophets deceive this people, and the
inhabitants of Jerusalem;''

or this may be ironically said, because the false prophets pretended to
speak in the name of the Lord; wherefore Jeremiah says, "surely thou
hast greatly deceived", &c. "saying, ye shall have peace"; as the false
prophets did, [Jer 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014),

whereas the sword reacheth unto the soul; takes away the life, many are
slain by it; so the Targum,

"and now behold the sword killeth among the people;''

great slaughter is made by it. L'Empereur (w) observes that the word
here used signifies, in the Arabic language, to educate or bring up; and
then the sense is,

"ah, Lord, thou hast brought up this people with great tenderness, and
promised them all manner of happiness; but now thou thunderest out
threatenings of calamities of all sorts, and death itself; and assigned
a place for the sword to enter into their very souls;''

so the Arabic word used in the version of [Act
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#002).

\(w\) Not. ad Mosis Kimchi, p. 186.

[Jeremiah 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 4:11</span></span>

At that time shall it be said to this people, and to Jerusalem,.... The
inhabitants of Judea and Jerusalem, the people of the Jews; or
"concerning" (x) them, as Jarchi interprets it:

a dry wind of the high places in the wilderness toward the daughter of
my people. The Targum is,

"as the south wind upon the heads of floods of water in the wilderness,
so is the way of the congregation of my people;''

but rather the north wind is designed, since that is a dry one, and the
south wind a moist one; and the rather, since this wind intends
Nebuchadnezzar and his army, which should come from Babylon, from the
north. Some render it, "a neat clean wind" (y); which strips the trees,
lays bare rocks and mountains, carries away the earth and dust before
it, and makes the stones look white and clean: it denotes a very strong,
rushing, stormy, and boisterous wind. The Vulgate Latin version renders
it, "a burning one"; and it represents the force and power with which
the enemy should come, without any opposition or resistance to him; for
a wind on high places, hills, and mountains, and which comes through
deserts and wildernesses, has nothing to hinder it, as Kimchi observes;
whereas, when it blows in habitable places, there are houses, walls,
hedges, and fences, which resist it; and it is observed, that in the way
from Babylon to Judea, which the prophet calls "the daughter of my
people", were many desert places. The Septuagint version is, "the spirit
of error in the desert, the way of the daughter of my people"; which the
Syriac and Arabic versions seem to follow; the former rendering it, "as
the wind that wanders through the paths of the desert, so is the way of
the daughter of my people"; and the latter thus, "there is a spirit of
error in the desert, in the way of the daughter of my people";

not to purity, nor to holiness, as it with the Septuagint renders the
next clause: "not to fan, nor to cleanse"; of which use a more moderate
wind is in winnowing and cleansing the corn from chaff, and light and
useless grain.

\(x\) "de hoc populo", Calvin, Vatablus. (y) "ventus nitidus", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 4:12</span></span>

Even a full wind from those places shall come unto me,.... That is, a
strong one, very vehement; or, "a wind which is fuller than these", as
the Syriac version renders it; which is stronger than those winds which
are fit for fanning and winnowing the chaff from the wheat. Jarchi
interprets it, a wind full of those punishments which God had
threatened, and determined to bring upon this people, and would not turn
from, nor repent of: and the phrase "shall come unto me" regards not the
prophet, nor the people of the Jews, whom he represented, but the Lord
himself; and shows that the wind is at his command, and when he calls,
it comes unto him, and obeys his will, [Psa
148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008) and that all afflictions,
judgments, and punishments for sin, are from him:

now also will l give sentence against them; not the prophet, but the
Lord, who would now call them to his bar, try their cause, reprove them
for their sins, pronounce sentence against them, and execute it. The
Targum is,

"because they have wandered after the false prophets, who prophesied to
them in a spirit of falsehood; therefore the armies of the people,
higher than those, as the wind shall come against them; even now by my
word I will bring them, and pronounce the vengeance of my judgments on
them.''

[Jeremiah 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 4:13</span></span>

Behold, he shall come up as clouds,.... Meaning the lion,
Nebuchadnezzar, [Jer 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#007),

"the king with his army (as the Targum paraphrases it); he shall come up
against them as a cloud that ascendeth and covers the earth.''

"come up against them as a cloud that ascendeth and covers the earth.''

The metaphor denotes the swiftness of his coming, and the multitudes he
should come with, and that darkness and distress he should bring with
him upon the people of the Jews:

and his chariots shall be as a whirlwind; for swiftness, power, and
violence: chariots for war are intended; see [Isa
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#028),

his horses are swifter than eagles: the swiftest of birds. The same
thing is designed as by the other metaphors; the swiftness and
suddenness of the Jews' destruction:

woe unto us, for we are spoiled; their destruction was inevitable, there
was no escaping it; and therefore their case was woeful and miserable.

[Jeremiah 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 4:14</span></span>

O Jerusalem, wash thine heart from wickedness,.... These are the words
of the prophet, or of God by the prophet, showing the cause of all their
ruin and destruction, the wickedness of their hearts; and they are
expressed in such form and language, as to be accommodated to the case
of any unregenerate sinner: every man's heart is wicked, desperately
wicked, even wickedness itself; everything in it is wicked; the
thoughts, and the imagination of the thoughts of the heart, the mind,
the understanding, the will, the conscience, and the affections; and
everything that is wicked is in that: it is the womb in which all sin is
conceived; the shop and forge in which it is wrought; it is the
habitation of every unclean lust; the seeds and principles of all sin
are in it; it is the fountain spring and source of all evil; of all evil
thoughts, words, and actions; all come out of it, and have their rise in
it: and this wickedness is of a defiling nature, and has left a
pollution on it; and what comes out of it defiles the man, that he
stands in need of washing; which cannot be done to purpose by ceremonial
ablutions and sacrifices, by moral acts of righteousness, by humiliation
and tears, nor by submission to Gospel ordinances; nor indeed is this to
be done by man at all, any other way than by faith dealing with the
blood of Christ, by which only the heart is purified: for this is God's
work, as appears from his promises to cleanse his people from all sins;
from their prayers to him, to create in them clean hearts, to wash them
thoroughly from their iniquity, and cleanse them from their sin; from
the sanctifying grace of the Spirit, and the washing of regeneration
ascribed to him; and from the end and efficacy of the bloodshed of
Christ, to cleanse from sin, and purge the conscience from dead works;
and the design of such exhortations as these is to convince men of the
wickedness and pollution of their hearts, of the necessity of being
washed from it, and of their own inability to do it of themselves; and
to lead them to the fountain of Christ's blood, to wash in for sin and
for uncleanness:

that thou mayest be saved; not only with a temporal salvation, which may
be here primarily meant; but with a spiritual and eternal one; for
without purification of the heart there is no salvation: this is the
meetness for the undefiled inheritance; without the washing of
regeneration, there is no seeing nor entering into the kingdom of God;
and unless we are washed by Christ, and in his blood, we can have no
part nor portion with him in the heavenly glory; none shall ascend the
holy hill, or dwell in the holy place, but such who have clean hands,
and a pure heart; without this there is no seeing of God, nor having
communion with him; this is the way in which he saves men, [Tit
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#005),

how long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee? or, "wilt thou
suffer them to lodge within thee?" (z) if the question is of right, the
answer is, they ought not to lodge one night, one hour, one moment; but
if it is of fact, the answer is, they will have a place in the heart as
long as we are in this tabernacle; but the words are spoken by way of
complaint and reproof: the thoughts of men's hearts are vain, are taken
up about vain and foolish things; and these not only pass to and fro,
but have a lodging in the heart; and particularly vain are the thoughts
of those who think themselves pure, and that their hearts are good, and
trust in them; or that they can wash themselves from their wickedness;
and that an outward reformation of life and manners is sufficient; and
who think they can be saved without the washing of regeneration, and the
blood of Christ. The Targum is,

"cleanse thine heart from doing evil, O Jerusalem, that ye may be saved;
how long shall they endure and be stable who do violence, which is in
the midst of thee?''

\(z\) "quousque morari sines", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Jeremiah 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 4:15</span></span>

For a voice declareth from Dan,.... The coming of the enemy, as Kimchi
explains it, Nebuchadnezzar, the king of the Chaldeans; a messenger was
come from Dan, which was on the border of the land of Israel to the
north, on which side Babylon lay, and from whence the evil was to come
predicted; who declared the enemy was approaching, just entering the
land; not that this was now the case in fact, but this is represented in
a prophetic manner, as what would be, in order to arouse and awaken the
Jews to a sense of their sin and danger; see [Jer
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010).

and publisheth affliction from Mount Ephraim: which lay on the border of
the tribe of Benjamin, and nearer to Jerusalem; and this publication
represents the enemy as advancing nearer, and being just at hand. The
word for "affliction" signifies "iniquity" (a); and it denotes, that the
affliction spoken of, which is the destruction of the Jews, and their
captivity in Babylon, were occasioned by their sins. Some think that Dan
and Ephraim are mentioned, because of the calves that were worshipped in
Dan, and in Bethel, which was in the tribe of Ephraim. The Targum
favours this, which paraphrases the words thus,

"for the voice of the prophets that prophesied against them that go into
captivity, because they worshipped the calf, which is at Dan; and they
that bring evil tidings, shall come upon them, because they served the
image which Micah set up in the mount of the house of Ephraim;''

and the Vulgate Latin version is,

"the voice of him that declares from Dan, and that makes known the idol
from Mount Ephraim.''

\(a\) "iniquitatem", Vatablus, Pagninus, Montanus, Schimdt; "vanitatem",
Junius & Tremellius, Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 4:16</span></span>

Make ye mention to the nations,.... This, according to Kimchi, is the
sum and substance of the voice from Dan. It seems to be a summons to the
nations to gather together to join the king of Babylon in his enterprise
against Jerusalem; see [Kg2 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#002),

publish against Jerusalem; what follows:

that watchers come from afar country; from Babylon, which is said to be
a far country, [Isa 39:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa039.htm#003), these are
the soldiers of the king of Babylon; they are called Notzerim; which
word agrees with the latter part of Nebuchadnezzar's name; to which some
(b) think there is some reference, showing that his army is meant. It
should be rendered "besiegers", as it is by some (c); for these were not
Nebuchadnezzar's bodyguard, but his whole army, who were come up to
besiege Jerusalem; and they are compared to watchers and keepers of a
field in the next verse, where another word is used. The Targum is,

"the army of a rapacious people, like the grape gatherers, come from a
far country:''

and give out their voice against the cities of Judah; threaten the ruin
of them; blow the trumpet, the alarm of war; give the orders to besiege;
and, being sure of victory, triumph before the attack is made.

\(b\) R. Joseph Kimchi, R. Jonah, and Ben Melech, but disapproved of by
Abarbinel. (c) "obsessores", Calvin, Buxtorf; a vel "obsedit"; so
Jarchi.

[Jeremiah 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 4:17</span></span>

As keepers of a field, are they against her round about,.... As those
that are set to watch a field, in which are fruit and corn of any sort,
that thieves and robbers, and wild beasts, may not enter to waste and
destroy, and are placed on all sides for that purpose; so the Chaldeans
were round about Jerusalem, that none could make their escape out of it;
see [Kg2 25:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#004),

because she hath been rebellious against me, saith the Lord; it was not
without reason that the Lord suffered the Chaldeans to come against
Jerusalem, besiege, and take it; the inhabitants of it had rebelled
against him, their King and their God; and therefore he delivers them up
into the hands of another lord, and a cruel one; they had provoked him
to anger with their sins, and caused him to stir up his wrath against
them in this way: rebellion against a prince, or against a parent, is a
provoking sin; see [Sa1 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#023).

[Jeremiah 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 4:18</span></span>

Thy way and thy doings have procured these things unto thee,.... The way
in which they walked, which was an evil one; and the actions which they
committed; their idolatries, backslidings, and rebellions, before spoken
of in this and the preceding chapter, were the cause of this siege, and
those calamities coming upon them; they had none to blame but
themselves; it was their own sinful ways and works which brought this
ruin and destruction on them:

this is thy wickedness; the fruit of thy wickedness; or, "this thy
calamity"; that is, is owing to these things; so the word is rendered in
[Psa 141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005),

because it is bitter; not sin, as in [Jer
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019), but the punishment of it; the
calamity before mentioned; which was hard and heavy, and grievous to be
borne, and yet very just; it was by way of retaliation; "they had
bitterly provoked the Lord", as the word may be rendered in the
preceding verse; and now he sends them a bitter calamity, and a heavy
judgment:

because it reacheth unto thine heart; into the midst of them, and
utterly destroyed them. The two last clauses may be rendered, "though it
is bitter, though it reacheth unto thine heart" (d); though it is such a
sore distress, and such an utter destruction, yet it was to be ascribed
to nothing else but their own sins and transgressions.

\(d\) "quamvis amarum sit, quamvis pertigerit", Calvin.

[Jeremiah 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 4:19</span></span>

My bowels, my bowels,.... These are either the words of the people, unto
whose heart the calamity reached, as in the preceding verse; or rather
of the prophet, who either, from a sympathizing heart, expresses himself
in this manner; or puts on an appearance of mourning and distress, in
order to awaken his people to a sense of their condition. The repetition
of the word is after the manner of persons in pain and uneasiness, as,
"my head, my head", [Kg2 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#019),

I am pained at my very heart; as a woman in labour. In the Hebrew text
it is, "as the walls of my heart" (e); meaning either his bowels, as
before; or the "praecordia", the parts about the heart, which are as
walls unto it; his grief had reached these walls, and was penetrating
through them to his heart, and there was danger of breaking that:

my heart makes a noise in me; palpitates, beats and throbs, being filled
with fears and dread, with sorrow and concern, at what was coming on; it
represents an aching heart, all in disorder and confusion:

I cannot hold my peace; or be silent; must speak, and vent grief:

because thou hast heard, O my soul, the sound of the trumpet, the alarm
of war; Kimchi observes, he does not say "my ears", but "my soul"; for
as yet he had not heard with his ears the sound of the trumpet; for the
enemy was not yet come, but his soul heard by prophecy: here is a Keri
and a Cetib, a reading and a writing; it is written "I have heard"; it
is read "thou hast heard", which is followed by the Targum: the sense is
the same, it is the hearing of the soul. The prophet, by these
expressions, represents the destruction as very near, very certain, and
very distressing. The trumpet was sounded on different accounts, as
Isidore (f) observes; sometimes to begin a battle; sometimes to pursue
those that fled; and sometimes for a retreat.

\(e\) "parietes cordis mei", Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius. (f) Orignum
l. 18. c. 4.

[Jeremiah 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 4:20</span></span>

Destruction upon destruction is cried;.... Or, "breach upon breach" (g);
as soon as one affliction is over, another comes on; and upon the news
of one calamity, tidings are brought of another, as in Job's case: it
signifies, that distress and troubles would come thick and fast, and
that there would be no end of them, until there was an utter
destruction, as this phrase signifies, and the following words show.
Kimchi interprets it of the destruction of the ten tribes which came
first, and of the destruction of Judah that came now.

For the whole land is spoiled, or "wasted" (h); that is, the land of
Judea:

suddenly are my tents spoiled, and my curtains in a moment: meaning
either the armies of his people, which dwelt in tents, and were
destroyed at once; or the cities, towns, and habitations of his
countrymen, which he compares to tents, as being easily beat down or
overthrown; and so the Targum interprets it of cities; and the prophet
seems to intimate that this destruction would reach to Anathoth, where
his tent; cottage, and curtains were. So sudden destruction some times
comes, when men are crying Peace, peace, [Th1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003).

\(g\) "contritio super contritionem", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius. (h) "vastata", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus.

[Jeremiah 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 4:21</span></span>

How long shall I see the standard,.... "Ensign" or "banner" displayed;
either by the watchmen placed on high hills or towers, who, when they
see the enemy approaching, lift up their ensign or banner, and blow with
their trumpets, to give the people warning and notice of it, and to call
them to battle, and that they might prepare for the same, as Kimchi
observes; or else by the Chaldean army, which came with colours flying,
trumpets blowing, and set in array for battle, which was very terrible,
as an army with banners is, [Sol 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#004),

and hear the sound of the trumpet? either of the watchmen giving notice
of danger, and summoning to battle, or of the enemy preparing to attack;
see [Co1 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#008).

[Jeremiah 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 4:22</span></span>

For my people is foolish,.... This, as Kimchi says, is the answer of the
Lord to the prophet; for not the prophet says this, but the Lord to the
prophet, giving a reason why this sore destruction came upon the people
of the Jews, and so reconciling his mind to the providence; seeing those
whom he had chosen to be his people, above all people upon the face of
the earth, and who professed themselves to be his people, had acted such
a foolish part as they had done, in backsliding from him, revolting from
his ways and worship, rebelling against him, and in committing such
gross idolatries as they had been guilty of. So a people may be a
professing people, and yet a foolish one; there are foolish professors
of religion; such who take up a profession foolishly, without an
experience of the grace of God; without any true faith in Christ;
without having on the wedding garment of his righteousness; without
laying it upon a good foundation; and without considering the cost and
charge of a profession, and the difficulties and troubles attending it;
and such are they who foolishly trust in it, when they have taken it up;
and hold it foolishly, very remissly, and in a wavering manner; and who
walk not agreeably to it, and at last foolishly drop it:

they have not known me; men may be the people of God by profession, and
yet not know him; not know him so as to glorify him; not know him as
their God, truly and experimentally; not know him in Christ, and have
communion with him through him; not know the Lord Christ himself, the
worth, glory, and excellency of him; their need of him; of his blood to
cleanse them from sin; of his righteousness to justify them; of his
sacrifice to atone for them; and of his fulness to supply their need;
nor know the way of life, peace, and salvation by him, or at most only
notionally, not experimentally; whereas the only true wisdom is to know
Christ, and God in him; this is real and solid knowledge; it is science
truly so called; it is delightful and satisfactory; it is useful and
profitable, and is what issues in eternal life; and let men know what
they will else, if they know not the Lord, they are "sottish children";
they are children indeed in understanding; and though they may be the
children of God by profession, they are not the true and genuine
children of God, since they know neither the Father nor the Son:

and they have no understanding; though they are not without a natural
understanding, or an understanding of things natural and civil, yet they
have no spiritual understanding, or an understanding of spiritual
things; and at best only in a speculative, and not in an experimental
way and manner:

they are wise to do evil; cunning inventors of evil things, crafty
schemers that way, may be full of all wicked subtlety, and expert at
over reaching and defrauding their brethren; when professors of religion
especially ought to be wise unto that which is good, and simple
concerning evil, [Rom 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#019),

but to do good they have no knowledge; to do good, or to do a good thing
well, is to do it according to the revealed will of God, from a
principle of love to him, in the exercise of faith upon him, in the name
and strength of Christ, and with a view to the glory of God; to do good
in this sense, and in such a way and manner, carnal men and carnal
professors have no knowledge, no practical knowledge; they have no
inclination to it, but the reverse; nor do they, nor can they, perform
it: if they had a knowledge how to do it, or a power to perform it,
there would have been, in one age or another, some, more or fewer, that
would have done it; but there is none of all Adam's descendants that
does good, no, not one, [Rom 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009), the
grace of God is absolutely necessary to the right doing of a good work,
and the knowledge of it.

[Jeremiah 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 4:23</span></span>

I beheld the earth,.... The land of Judea, not the whole world; and this
the prophet says, either in spirit, as Jerom; or in prophecy, as Kimchi;
or in a visionary way; for these are not the words of God continued, as
Cocceius, but of the prophet; who, by a prophetic spirit, describes the
dreadful destruction of the Jewish nation, as follows:

and, lo, it was without form, and void; as the first earth or chaos was,
before it was brought into form and order; the same words, "tohu" and
"bohu", are used here, as in [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002),
the land of Judea now was, in the prophet's view of it, like the first
earth, when darkness covered it; no grass sprung out of it, not a tree
to be seen in it, and neither man nor beast as yet upon it, but all an
undigested mass, and in the utmost wild disorder and confusion; and this
may denote not only the natural, but the political, and ecclesiastical,
disorder of the Jewish nation and state:

and the heavens, and they had no light; that were over the land of
Judea;

"their lights did not shine,''

as the Targum paraphrases it; that is, the sun, moon, and stars, which
were darkened by the smoke of the burning of Jerusalem; or which
withdrew their light, as blushing at, and being ashamed of, the
iniquities of his people, and who were unworthy of enjoying the light of
them; and which this phrase may denote.

[Jeremiah 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 4:24</span></span>

I beheld the mountains, and, lo, they trembled,.... At the presence of
God, at the tokens of his displeasure, and at his awful vengeance in the
destruction of the Jews, as they are sometimes said to do, [Psa
68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008),

and all the hills moved lightly; so Kimchi's father says the word used
has the signification of lightness; though Jarchi, from Menachem,
explains it, they were plucked up, and thrown out of their place; and
some render it, were pulled down and destroyed, so the Targum. Mountains
and hills are most stable, and not easily moved, wherefore this is said,
to aggravate the desolation and destruction.

[Jeremiah 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 4:25</span></span>

And I beheld, and, lo, there was no man,.... No people dwelling in it,
as the Targum; the land was without inhabitants, they were either killed
with the sword, or taken and carried captive into Babylon, or fled into
Egypt and other countries:

and all the birds of the heavens were fled; at the sound of the trumpet,
the alarm of war; at the blackness of the heavens, filled with smoke; at
the barrenness of the earth, there being no seed sown; and the earth, as
at the first creation, having no herb, nor trees bearing fruit, and so
no food for birds; and therefore they went elsewhere, both wild and
tame.

[Jeremiah 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 4:26</span></span>

I beheld, and, lo, the fruitful place was a wilderness,.... Or, "I
beheld, and, lo, Carmel was a wilderness"; which was a particular part
of the land of Israel, and was very fertile, and abounded in pastures
and fruit trees, and yet this, as the rest, became desolate as a
wilderness; see [Isa 32:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#015) though it
may be put for the whole land, which was very fruitful; and so the
Targum,

"I saw, and, lo, the land of Israel, which was planted as Carmel, was
turned to be as a wilderness:''

and all the cities thereof; not of Carmel only, but of the whole land:

were broken down at the presence of the Lord, and by his fierce anger;
for though this was done by the Chaldeans, yet it was by the will and
appointment of God, and as a token of his fierce anger against the
people of the Jews, for their sins and transgressions. Jarchi cites a
Midrash Agadah, or an allegorical exposition of this place, which
interprets the "mountains", the Jewish fathers; the "hills", the
mothers, and their merits; "no man", the worthiness of Moses, who was
meeker than any man; and "Carmel", Elijah; without any manner of
foundation.

[Jeremiah 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 4:27</span></span>

For thus hath the Lord said,.... What follows is an explanation and
confirmation of the above vision the prophet had:

the whole land shall be desolate; as he had seen; it should not be
manured, ploughed, and sown, or bring forth fruit; and should be without
inhabitants, at least have very few:

yet I will not make a full end; there should be some inhabitants, who,
with those that should hereafter return from captivity, would repeople
it, rebuild the temple, and restore it to its pristine form and order,
both as to things natural, civil, and ecclesiastical; but though a full
end of them, as a church and people, was not to be made now by the
Chaldeans, yet it would be; as it has been done by the Romans, in the
times of Vespasian and Hadrian.

[Jeremiah 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 4:28</span></span>

For this shall the earth mourn,.... That is, for the full end that will
be made hereafter, though not now; the earth may be said to mourn when
the inhabitants of it do; or when it is destroyed, and is become
desolate, as the Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, explain it; when it is
uncultivated and uninhabited:

and the heavens above be black; with thick clouds, and storms, and
tempests; in allusion to mourners, that are clothed with black: these
figures, of the earth's mourning, and the heavens being clothed in
black, denote the horribleness of that dispensation, when there would be
an utter destruction of the Jewish nation, church, and polity, of which
Daniel prophesies, [Dan 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027),

because I have spoken it; in my word, as the Targum; in the Scriptures
of the Old Testament, by Moses and the prophets:

I have purposed it; or I have thought of it, in my counsel, as the
Targum; it was a thing deliberately devised and determined, and
therefore can never be frustrated, or made void:

and will not repent; of what was purposed and predicted:

neither will I turn back from it; revoke, or retract it; it shall surely
come to pass: the Jews, upon their return from the Babylonish captivity,
and afterwards, might flatter themselves that a full end would not be
made of them, because it was not then done; and therefore these several
strong expressions are used, to confirm and assure them of it; for the
word of God cannot fail, his counsel shall stand; he is not a man, that
he should lie or repent; he will do all his pleasure.

[Jeremiah 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 4:29</span></span>

The whole city shall flee,.... Or, "every city"; for not Jerusalem only
is meant, but every city, or the inhabitants of every city; and so the
Targum paraphrases it,

"all the inhabitants of the land,''

who would be put into a panic, and flee: "for" or

at the noise of the horsemen and bowmen; of which the army of the enemy
would greatly consist: it intimates that the inhabitants of Judea would
not stand a battle; but at hearing the sound of the trampling of the
horses, and the clattering of the bows and arrows, that the men upon
them had, they would flee at once:

they shall go into the thickets, and climb upon the rocks; that is,
either the horsemen and bowmen, who would pursue the inhabitants into
those places: or rather the inhabitants themselves, who would flee
thither to hide themselves from their enemies; namely, get into woods
and forests, and among the thick trees, and cover themselves; and upon
the highest mountains and rocks, and into the holes and caverns of them,
and secure themselves from the enemy; see [Mat
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016), the word for "thickets"
signifies "clouds" (i); and Kimchi interprets it of places as high as
the clouds, as the tops of some mountains are, so that going up to them
is like entering into the clouds; and which are sometimes covered with
thick trees, and look like clouds; but the Targum explains it of woods
or forests:

every city shall be forsaken; of its inhabitants:

and not a man dwell therein; as the prophet had seen in his vision, [Jer
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#025), this was to be when a full end
was made, not by the Babylonians, but by the Romans.

\(i\) "in nubes", Munster, Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 4:30</span></span>

And when thou art spoiled, what wilt thou do?.... Or, "O thou spoiled"
(k), wasted, and undone creature, how wilt thou help thyself? by what
means dost thou think thou canst be delivered? it suggests that her ruin
was inevitable; that she could not be recovered from it by herself, or
any other:

though thou clothest thyself with crimson; and so look like some rich
and noble person; hoping thereby to find mercy, and to have quarter
given and kindness shown:

though thou deckest thee with ornaments of gold; as a person of high and
princely dignity: or rather all this is to be understood of the manner
of harlots, who dress rich and grand, in order to allure men; since it
follows,

though thou rendest thy face with painting; or, eyes (l); which painting
dilates as Jezebel did, [Kg2 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030),

in vain shalt thou make thyself fair; so as to be loved and admired: far
from it:

thy lovers will despise thee; as an old harlot is despised by her former
gallants, notwithstanding all her dressing and painting; yea, their love
is often turned into hatred and abhorrence, as would be the case here,

they will seek thy life; to take it away; so far would there be from
being any ground of expectations of help and deliverance from them.

\(k\) "et tu vastata", Pagninus, Montanus "et tu, res vastata",
Cocceius. (l) "scindes in fuco oculos tuos", Montanus; "rumpes stibio
oculos tuos", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 4:31</span></span>

For I have heard a voice as of a woman in travail,.... So the distress
of the Jews, at the time of their destruction, is compared to the
sorrows of a woman in travail; and a word, that signifies that is used
to express it, [Mat 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#008),

and the anguish as of her that bringeth forth her first child; whose
time is more difficult, her pains sharper, her anguish greater, and,
having less experience, the more impatient:

the voice of the daughter of Zion, that bewaileth herself; her unhappy
condition, and miserable circumstances:

that spreadeth her hands; as persons in distress do, and particularly
women in travail: saying,

woe is me now, for my soul is wearied because of murderers: these
abounded: under the second temple, and was the reason, the Jews say:
(m), of the sanhedrim removing from their usual place in the temple; and
why they ceased from the beheading of the red heifer (n).

\(m\) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 8. 2. (n) Misn. Sota, c. 9. sect. 9.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 5](jer005)

</div>
