<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer051)  [Next](lam000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 52](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 52:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 52

This chapter contains the history of the besieging, taking, and
destroying of Jerusalem; the moving cause of it, the wicked reign of
Zedekiah, [Jer 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#001.md); the instruments
of it, the king of Babylon and his army, which besieged and took it,
[Jer 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#004.md); into whose hands the king
of Judah, his sons, and the princes of Judah, fell; and were very
barbarously and cruelly used by them, [Jer
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#008.md). Then follows an account of the
burning of the temple, the king's palace, and the houses in Jerusalem,
and the breaking down of the walls of it, [Jer
52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012.md); and of those that were carried
captive, and of those that were left in the land by Nebuzaradan, [Jer
52:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#015.md); and of the several vessels and
valuable things in the temple, of gold, silver, and brass, it was
plundered of, and carried to Babylon, [Jer
52:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#017.md); and of the murder of several
persons of dignity and character, [Jer
52:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#024.md); and of the number of those that
were carried captive at three different times, [Jer
52:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#028.md); and the chapter is concluded
with the exaltation of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and of the good
treatment he met with from the king of Babylon to the day of his death,
[Jer 52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031.md).

[Jeremiah 52:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 52:1</span></span>

Zedekiah was one and twenty years old when he began to reign,.... Whose
name was Mattaniah; and who was set on the throne by the king of
Babylon, in the room of his brother's son Jehoiachin, [Kg2
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#017.md);

and he reigned eleven years in Jerusalem; so that he was thirty two
years of age when he was taken and carried captive into Babylon:

and his mother's name was Hamutal the daughter of Jeremiah of Libnah;
see [Kg2 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#018.md).

[Jeremiah 52:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 52:2</span></span>

And he did that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord,.... Though we do
not read of any idolatry he was guilty of; yet he was disobedient to the
word of the Lord, and did not humble himself before Jeremiah the prophet
of the Lord, that spoke in his name; and particularly he rebelled
against the king of Babylon, and violated the oath he made to him, [Ch2
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#012.md);

according to all that Jehoiakim had done; an elder brother of his, who
reigned after Josiah, and before Jehoiachin.

[Jeremiah 52:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 52:3</span></span>

For through the anger of the Lord it came to pass in Jerusalem and
Judah,.... Or, "besides the anger of the Lord that was in", or "against
Jerusalem and Judah" (n); for their many sins and transgressions
committed against him:

till he had cast them out from his presence; out of the land of Judea;
out of Jerusalem, and the temple, where were the symbols of his
presence; so the Targum,

"till he removed them from the land of the house of his Shechinah;''

or majesty:

that Zedekiah rebelled against the king of Babylon: acted a very
perfidious part, and broke a solemn covenant made with him by an oath,
which was highly displeasing to God, and resented by him; the oath being
made in his name, and by one that professed to worship him: this was an
additional sin to those of the inhabitants of Judah and Jerusalem, which
provoked the Lord to anger. According to our version the sense is, that
because of the anger of the Lord for the sins of the Jews, God suffered
Zedekiah to rebel against the king of Babylon, that so he might be
provoked to come against them, and take vengeance on them; or for his
former sins he suffered him to fall into this, to his own and his
people's ruin.

\(n\) "nam praeter iram Jehovae, quae fuit contra Hierosolymam",
Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 52:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 52:4</span></span>

And it came to pass in the ninth year of his reign,.... Of Zedekiah's
reign:

in the tenth month, in the tenth day of the month; the month Tebet,
which answers to part of December and part of January; hence the fast of
the tenth month, on account of the siege of Jerusalem, [Zac
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#019.md);

that Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon came, he, and all his army,

against Jerusalem; from whence it appears that he came in person with
his army at first to Jerusalem; but, during the siege, or some part of
it, retired to Riblah; perhaps upon the news of the king of Egypt's
coming to the assistance of the Jews:

and pitched against it; or encamped against it:

and built forts against it round about; wooden towers, as Jarchi and
Kimchi explain it; from whence they could shoot their arrows and cast
their stones.

[Jeremiah 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 52:5</span></span>

So the city was besieged unto the eleventh year of King Zedekiah. The
siege continued about eighteen months; from the tenth day of the tenth
month, in the ninth of Zedekiah's reign, to the ninth day of the fourth
month, in the eleventh year of his reign; as follows:

[Jeremiah 52:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 52:6</span></span>

And in the fourth month, in the ninth day of the month,.... The month
Tammuz (o), which answers to part of June and part of July; hence the
fast of the fourth month, for the taking of the city, [Zac
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#019.md);

the famine was sore in the city, so that there was no bread for the
people of the land; for the common people; though there might be some in
the king's palace, and in the houses of princes and noblemen, and
officers of the army; yet none for the soldiers, and the meaner sort of
people; who therefore were disheartened and enfeebled, that they could
not defend the city, or hold out any longer: the famine had been before
this time, but was now increased to a prodigious degree, so that the
people had no bread to eat; see [Jer
38:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#009.md).

\(o\) T. Bab. Roshhashana, fol. 18. 2. & Taanith, fol. 28. 2.

[Jeremiah 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 52:7</span></span>

Then the city was broken up,.... Either its gates were broke open, some
one or other of them; or a breach was made in the walls of it, through
which the Chaldean army entered:

and all the men of war fled; the soldiers, with their officers, not
being able to stand before the army of the king of Babylon:

and went forth out of the city by night; at which time, very probably,
the attack was made, and the gates of the city forced open, or the walls
broke down; Josephus (p) says it was taken in the middle of the night:

by the way of the gate between the two walls, which was by the king's
garden; See Gill on [Jer 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004.md);

now the Chaldeans were by the city round about; as part of their army
entered into it, the other part surrounded it; or, however, were placed
at the gates and avenues all around, that none might escape:

and they went by the way of the plain; that is, the men of war or
soldiers that fled, together with King Zedekiah, his family and princes;
see [Jer 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004.md).

\(p\) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 8. sect. 2. Ed. Hudson.

[Jeremiah 52:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 52:8</span></span>

But the army of the Chaldeans pursued after the king,.... Not finding
him in his palace, and being informed of his flight, and which way he
took:

and overtook Zedekiah in the plains of Jericho: See Gill on [Jer
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005.md);

and all his army was scattered from him; when they saw the enemy
pursuing them, and near unto them, they left him, as Josephus (q) says,
and shifted for themselves.

\(q\) Ibid. (Antiqu. l. 10. c. 8. sect. 2. Ed. Hudson.)

[Jeremiah 52:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 52:9</span></span>

Then they took the king,.... King Zedekiah, being left alone, excepting
some few with him:

and carried him up unto the king of Babylon to Riblah in the land of
Hamath; which is supposed to be Antioch in Syria:

where he gave judgment upon him; or "spake with him judgments" (r):
chided and reproached him for his perfidy and ingratitude; expostulated
and reasoned with him upon this subject, exposing his iniquity; and then
passed sentence upon him, which was after executed; See Gill on [Jer
39:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#005.md).

\(r\) "qui cum eo locutus est judicia", Schmidt. So Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 52:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 52:10</span></span>

And the king of Babylon slew the sons of Zedekiah before his eyes,....
Or, however, ordered them to be slain; See Gill on [Jer
39:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#006.md);

he slew also all the princes of Judah in Riblah; who, together with the
king's sons, were taken with him; or, however, were taken in Jerusalem,
and brought to Riblah; which of them is not certain, very probably the
former.

[Jeremiah 52:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 52:11</span></span>

Then he put out the eyes of Zedekiah,.... After he had seen his children
and princes executed, which must be very terrible to him; See Gill on
[Jer 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#007.md);

and the king of Babylon bound him in chains, and carried him to Babylon;
in [Jer 39:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#007.md); it is said, he bound
him, "to carry him" there; here it is affirmed he did carry him thither:
and it is added,

and put him in prison till the day of his death; from this place only we
learn that King Zedekiah was put into a prison, and died a prisoner.

[Jeremiah 52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 52:12</span></span>

Now in the fifth month, in the tenth day of the month,.... Hence the
fast of the fifth month, for the burning of the city, which was the
month Ab, and answers to part of July and part of August, [Zac
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#019.md);

which was the nineteenth year of Nebuchadrezzar king of Babylon; that
is, the nineteenth year of his reign; who reigned in all forty three
years, according to Ptolemy's canon:

came Nebuzaradan captain of the guard, which served the king of Babylon,
into Jerusalem; or "stood before the king of Babylon" (s); ministered to
him, was a servant of his, the provost marshal, or chief marshal; he was
sent, and came from Riblah to Jerusalem, with a commission to burn the
city. In [Kg2 25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008.md); it is said to be
on the "seventh" day of the fifth month that he came thither; here, on
the "tenth" day; which difficulty may be solved, without supposing
different copies, or any error: he might set out from Riblah on the
seventh day, and come to Jerusalem on the tenth; or he might come
thither on the seventh, and not set fire to the city till the tenth; or,
if he set fire to it on the seventh, it might be burning to the tenth,
before it was wholly consumed. The Jews (t) account for it thus,

"strangers entered into the temple, and ate in it, and defiled it, the
seventh and eighth days; and on the ninth, towards dark, they set fire
to it; and it burned and continued all that whole day, as it is said,
[Jer 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#004.md);''

R. Johanan was saying, if I had been in that generation, I should have
fixed on that day, for the greatest part of the temple was burnt on that
day. The authors of the Universal History say (u) it was on Wednesday
the eleventh of the fourth month, answering to our twenty seventh of
July; but, according to the express words of the text, the city was
broke up on the ninth of the fourth month, and burnt on the tenth day of
the fifth month; and which was, according to Bishop Usher (w), the
twenty seventh of August, on a sabbath day, and in the year of the world
3416, and before Christ 588; and is placed by them in the same years;
and by Mr. Whiston (x) in 589; and by Mr. Bedford (y) in the year 587.
This was a month after the taking of the city.

\(s\) "qui setit coram rege", Schmidt. (t) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 29. 1.
(u) Vol 4. p. 189. & vol. 21. p. 61. (w) Annales Vet. Test. p. 131. (x)
Chronological Tables, cent. 10. (y) Scripture Chronology, p 684.

[Jeremiah 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 52:13</span></span>

And burnt the house of the Lord,.... The temple built by Solomon, after
it had stood four hundred and seventy years, six months, and ten days,
according to Josephus (z): but the Jews say it stood but four hundred
ten years (a):

and the king's house; the royal palace; probably that which was built by
Solomon, [Kg1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#001.md);

and all the houses of Jerusalem: of any note or strength:

and all the houses of the great men burnt he with fire; of the princes
and nobles in Jerusalem; it is in the singular number, "and every house
of the great one"; or "every great house" (b); Jarchi interprets it of
the synagogue, where prayer was magnified; and others, he says,
understood it of the schools, where the law was magnified.

\(z\) Autiqu. l. 10. c. 8. sect. 5. (a) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 3. 2.
& Gloss. in ib. (b) "omnem domum magnatis", Cocceius; "omnemque domum
magnam", Pagninus, Montanus, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 52:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 52:14</span></span>

And all the army of the Chaldeans, that were with the captain of the
guard,.... Which he brought with him from Riblah, or were left at
Jerusalem by those that pursued after Zedekiah when the city was taken,
which the captain of the guard now had the command of:

broke down all the walls of Jerusalem round about: See Gill on [Jer
39:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#008.md).

[Jeremiah 52:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 52:15</span></span>

Then Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard carried away captive certain
of the poor of the people,.... That is, of the city, as distinct from
the poor of the land of Judea he left, afterwards observed:

and the residue of the people that remained in the city; that died not
by the sword or famine, and fled not with Zedekiah: or "even the residue
of the people"; and so are the same with the poor people in the former
clause; though Kimchi explains it thus,

"some of the poor of the people he carried captive, and some of them he
left:''

and those that fell away, that fell to the king of Babylon; that fell
off from the Jews, and surrendered to the king of Babylon during the
siege; or that voluntarily came in, and put themselves into the hands of
the captain of the guard:

and the rest of the multitude; of the people, both in city and country.

[Jeremiah 52:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 52:16</span></span>

But Nebuzaradan the captain of the guard left certain of the poor of the
land,.... Of the land of Judea, who lived in the country, and had not
been concerned in defending the city against the Chaldeans:

for vinedressers, and for husbandmen; to look after the vineyards and
fields, and dress and manure them, that the king of Babylon might
receive some advantage by the conquest he had made; See Gill on [Jer
39:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#010.md).

[Jeremiah 52:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 52:17</span></span>

Also the pillars of brass that were in the house of the Lord,.... The
two pillars in the temple, called Jachin and Boaz, which were made of
cast brass, [Kg1 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#015.md);

and the bases; which were in number ten, and which were also made of
cast brass, and were all of one measure and size; and on which the ten
lavers of brass were set, five on the right side and five on the left
side of the house, [Kg1 7:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#037.md);

and the brasen sea that was in the house of the Lord; called the molten
sea; a sea, because of the large quantity of water it held; and brasen
and molten, because made of molten brass, [Kg1
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#023.md);

the Chaldeans broke, and carried all the brass of them to Babylon: they
broke them to pieces, that they might carry them the more easily. This
account is given, and which is continued in some following verses,
partly to show the accomplishment of the prophecy of Jeremiah, [Jer
27:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer027.htm#019.md); and partly to show that what
was left in the temple, at the former captivities of Jehoiakim and
Jeconiah, were now carried clear off.

[Jeremiah 52:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 52:18</span></span>

The cauldrons also,.... Or "pots", as it is rendered, [Kg2
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#014.md); which were made of bright
brass, [Kg1 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#045.md); these were used to
boil the flesh of the sacrifices in:

and the shovels; used to remove the ashes from off the altar of burnt
offerings, and were of brass also: the Targum renders them "besoms",
whose handles perhaps were of brass:

and the snuffers; the Vulgate Latin translates it "psalteries"; and so
Jarchi interprets it of musical instruments; some think "tongs" are
meant:

and the bowls; or "basins"; either to drink out of, or to receive the
blood of the sacrifice:

and the spoons: ladles, cups, or dishes, vessels used about the
sacrifices:

and all the vessels of brass wherewith they ministered; that is, the
priests in the temple:

took they away; the Chaldeans took them away.

[Jeremiah 52:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 52:19</span></span>

And the basins,.... Or "bowls"; these are omitted, [Kg2
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#015.md); they were of gold, [Kg1
7:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#050.md);

and the firepans; or "censers"; these were those of gold, which belonged
to the golden altar, [Kg1 7:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#050.md);

and the bowls; or "basins"; there were a hundred of them made of gold,
[Ch2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#008.md);

and the cauldrons; or "pots"; these are not mentioned, [Kg2
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#015.md); what they should be, that were
either of gold or silver, cannot be said:

and the candlesticks; of which there were ten in number, made of pure
gold, five on the right side, and five on the left, before the oracle,
[Kg1 7:49](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#049.md);

and the spoons; which were also of gold, [Kg1
7:50](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#050.md);

and the cups: the word is rendered "bowls", to cover withal, [Exo
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#029.md); it was some kind of instrument
or vessel used about the shewbread table, made of pure gold; according
to Jarchi, these were little golden forks, upon which they placed the
shewbread, to keep it from moulding; according to the Misna (c), there
were four of them:

that which was of gold in gold, and that which was of silver in silver,
took the captain of the guard away; that is, everything that was of gold
or silver he took away; the golden things by themselves, and the silver
things by themselves, as some think.

\(c\) Menachot, c. 11. sect. 6.

[Jeremiah 52:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 52:20</span></span>

The two pillars, one sea, and twelve brasen bulls,.... The two pillars
of Jachin and Boaz before mentioned, and the molten or brasen sea, with
the twelve bulls or oxen the sea stood upon, [Kg1
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#025.md);

that were under the bases; or "by the bases", as Jarchi; or rather,
"that were instead of bases" (d); for the twelve oxen were the bases on
which the molten sea stood:

which King Solomon had made in the house of the Lord; this is mentioned
to show that these were the selfsame pillars, sea, and oxen, and other
vessels, that Solomon made, that were now carried away; for though Ahaz
took down the sea from off the brasen oxen, and put it on a pavement of
stones, yet it seems not to have been destroyed; and might be restored
to its proper place by Hezekiah, or some other prince;

the brass of all these vessels was without weight; there was no weight
sufficient to weigh them; the weight of them could not very well be
told; they were so heavy, that in Solomon's time the weight of them was
not taken, when they were placed in the temple, so neither when they
were taken away, [Kg1 7:47](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#047.md).

\(d\) "qui erant in loco basium", Piscator,

[Jeremiah 52:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 52:21</span></span>

And concerning the pillars, the height of one pillar was eighteen
cubits,.... As in [Kg1 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#015.md); said to
be thirty five, [Ch2 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#015.md); of the
reconciliation of which; see Gill on [Ch2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#015.md),

and a fillet of twelve cubits did compass it; a thread or line of that
measure encompassed each of the pillars, [Kg1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#015.md);

and the thickness thereof was four fingers; either of the pillar, or the
fillet about it; that is, the brass of it was four fingers thick:

it was hollow; that is, the pillar was hollow.

[Jeremiah 52:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 52:22</span></span>

And a chapiter of brass was upon it,.... Or a coronet of brass, of
molten brass, was set upon the top of the pillar:

and the height of one chapiter was five cubits; as in [Kg1
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#016.md); but in [Kg2
25:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#017.md); the height is said to be but
three cubits; which is reconciled by the Jewish Rabbins thus, the three
superior cubits of it were with ornaments, the two inferior without any;
the whole together was five cubits; but, as ornamented, only three:

with network and pomegranates upon the chapiters round about, all of
brass; the nets were of chequer work, and wreaths of chain work, and
there were seven of them to each chapiter, [Kg1
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#017.md);

the second pillar also, and the pomegranates, were like unto these; one
pillar was exactly like the other, and the ornaments of it the same.

[Jeremiah 52:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 52:23</span></span>

And there were ninety and six pomegranates on a side,.... Or, "to the
wind" (e); to the four winds; towards every corner or wind twenty four,
which make up ninety six:

and all the pomegranates upon the network were an hundred round about;
four, standing upon the four angles, made the ninety six a hundred; in
[Kg1 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#020.md); they are said to be two
hundred; and in [Ch2 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#013.md); are said to
be four hundred upon the two wreaths; which may be accounted for thus,
there were two rows of them on each pillar, in every row were a hundred,
which made two hundred in one pillar, and four hundred in both. These
were the things in the temple carried away in the last captivity.

\(e\) "ad ventum", Montanus; "ad omnem ventum", Tigurine version; so Ben
Melech; "versus ventos", Schmidt; "ventum versus", Piscator; "in
ventum", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 52:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 52:24</span></span>

And the captain of the guard took Seraiah the chief priest,.... That is,
out of the temple, where he was ministering, or fled for safety; this is
supposed to be the father of Ezra, [Ch1
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#014.md);

and Zephaniah the second priest: or deputy priest: the "sagan" of the
priests, as the Targum calls him, who was deputed to minister for the
high priest, in case anything happened which hindered him from
officiating; such an one there always was in later times on the day of
atonement, as appears from the Misna (f); this man is thought to be the
same with Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest, [Jer
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001.md);

and the three keepers of the door; that is, of the temple. The Targum
calls them three "amarcalin"; who had, as Jarchi says, the keys of the
court committed to them. The number seems better to agree with the
"gizbarim" or treasurers; of whom, it is said, they never appoint less
than three treasurers, and seven "amarcalin" (g).

\(f\) Yoma, c. 1. sect. 1. (g) Misn. Shekalim, c. 5. sect. 2.

[Jeremiah 52:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 52:25</span></span>

He took also out of the city an eunuch, which had the charge of the men
of war,.... The master-master-general of the army:

and seven men of them which were near the king's person which were found
in the city; or, "saw the face of the king": or rather, "made to see his
face" (h); these were ministers of state, who were always at court, and
assisted in councils of state, and introduced persons into the king's
presence; in [Kg2 25:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#019.md); they are said
to be but "five"; but Josephus (i) has seven, as here; perhaps two of
them were of less note, and so not reckoned, as Jarchi observes: some
will have it, that the two scribes of the judges are left out; but
others, more probably, Jeremiah and Baruch, who were first taken, and
afterwards dismissed:

and the principal scribe of the host, who mustered the people of the
land; or the scribe of the prince of the army, as the Targum; the
general's secretary:

and threescore men of the people of the land, that were found in the
midst of the city: persons of prime note, who, upon the invasion, betook
themselves from the country to the city of Jerusalem with their effects,
and to defend it. Josephus (k) calls them rulers or governors.

\(h\) "ex videntibus facies, vel faciem regis", Montanus, Piscator; "de
videre facientibus facies regis", Schmidt. (i) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 8.
sect. 5. (k) Ibid.

[Jeremiah 52:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 52:26</span></span>

So Nebuzaradan captain of the guard took them,.... In the city, and made
them captives:

and brought them to the king of Babylon to Riblah; to knew his mind
concerning them; how they should be disposed of; and for him to pass
sentence on them: as he had done on the king of Judah, his sons, and his
princes, in the same place.

[Jeremiah 52:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 52:27</span></span>

And the king of Babylon smote them,.... Or ordered them to be smitten
with the sword; to have their heads cut off, according to Josephus (l):

and put them to death in Riblah in the land of Hamath; these being such,
no doubt, who obstinately defended the city, and persuaded the prince
and people not to surrender the city into the hand of the Chaldeans; and
therefore were put to death in cold blood:

thus Judah was carried away captive out of his own land: at different
times, of which this was the completion; and of which a particular
account is given, even of the number of the captives at these several
times, in [Jer 52:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#028.md).

\(l\) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 8. sect. 5.

[Jeremiah 52:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 52:28</span></span>

This is the people whom Nebuchadnezzar carried away captive in the
seventh year,.... That is, of his reign: in [Kg2
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012.md); it is said to be in the eighth
year of his reign; it being at the latter end of the seventh, and the
beginning of the eighth, as Kimchi observes; this was the captivity of
Jeconiah: the number of the captives then were

three thousand Jews, and three and twenty; but in [Kg2
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014.md); they are said to be ten
thousand; which may be reconciled thus, there were three thousand twenty
and three of the tribe of Judah, here called Jews; and the rest were of
the tribe of Benjamin, and of the ten tribes that were mixed among them;
see [Kg2 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#016.md).

[Jeremiah 52:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 52:29</span></span>

In the eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar,.... Said to be the nineteenth,
[Jer 52:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#012.md); it was at the end of the
eighteenth, and the beginning of the nineteenth, as Kimchi; or this was
before the taking of the city, when he raised the siege, and departed to
meet the king of Egypt, at which time he might carry captive many, as
here said:

he carried away captive from Jerusalem, eight hundred thirty and two
persons; which is more likely to be then done than at the taking of the
city; when it is very probable a greater number was carried captive,
which are not here taken notice of.

[Jeremiah 52:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 52:30</span></span>

In the three and twentieth year of Nebuchadnezzar,.... In this year of
his reign, the Jews say (m), Tyre was delivered into his hands; and he
carried off the Jews in Moab, Ammon, and the neighbouring nations, to
the number after mentioned; though some think these were the poor people
of the land he took from thence, after the murder of Gedaliah, and in
revenge of that:

Nebuzaradan captain of the guard carried away captive of the Jews seven
hundred forty and five persons; all which being put together make the
following sum:

all the persons were four thousand and six hundred; this is the sum
total of the three mentioned captivities.

\(m\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 26. p. 77.

[Jeremiah 52:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 52:31</span></span>

And it came to pass in the seven and thirtieth year of the captivity of
Jehoiachin king of Judah,.... He was eighteen years of age when he was
carried captive; so that he must be now fifty five years old; see [Kg2
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#008.md);

in the twelfth month, in the five and twentieth day of the month; in the
month Adar, which answers to part of February, and part of March: in
[Kg2 25:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#027.md); the favour shown by the
king of Babylon to Jeconiah, after related, is said to be in the twenty
seventh day of the month; it might have been determined and notified on
the twenty fifth, but not executed till the twenty seventh; or it might
be begun to be put in execution on the twenty fifth, and not finished
till the twenty seventh, The Jews, in their chronicle, say (n) that
Nebuchadnezzar died on the twenty fifth, and was buried; that, on the
twenty sixth, Evilmerodach took him out of his grave, and dragged him
about, to abolish his decrees, and to confirm what is said of him in
[Isa 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#019.md); and on the twenty seventh
he brought Jeconiah out of prison; but this is no reconciliation at all;
the former is best;

that Evilmerodach king of Babylon, in the first year of his reign; who
succeeded Nebuchadnezzar, having reigned forty three years; this king is
called by Ptolemy (o) Iloarudamus; by Abydenus (p) Evilmaluruch; by
Josephus (q) Abilamarodach; but by Berosus (r) as here: his proper name
was Merodach, a name of one of the Chaldean idols, [Jer
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#002.md). "Evil" was a nickname, which
signifies "foolish"; he was called "foolish Merodach", on account of his
ill conduct, or bad life: as soon as he came to the throne, he

lifted up the head of Jehoiachin king of Judah, and brought him forth
out of prison; that is, he changed his condition for the better; he
raised him out of a low estate to a more honourable one; he brought him
out of a state of imprisonment and misery into a state of liberty and
honour; what was the reason of this is not easy to say. The Jews have a
tradition, that Nebuchadnezzar, after seven years' madness, coming to
himself, and to his kingdom, and understanding that his son Evilmerodach
had been guilty of mal-administration during that time, and particularly
that he rejoiced at his madness, cast him into prison, where he
contracted a friendship with Jeconiah; and when he came to the throne,
upon the death of his father, released him: but others think that
Jeconiah being a comely young man, when he was brought a captive to
Babylon, and about the age of this prince, he took a liking to him, and,
pitying his case, showed him this favour, as soon as he had an
opportunity.

\(n\) Seder Olam, c. 28. p. 81. (o) Canon, Ed. Bainbridge, p. 48. (p)
Apud Euseb. Evangel. Praepar. l. 9. c. 41. p. 457. (q) Antiqu. l. 10. c.
11. sect. 8. (r) Apud Joseph. contr. Apion. l. 1. c. 20.

[Jeremiah 52:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 52:32</span></span>

And spake kindly unto him,.... Used him with great familiarity, treated
him with great respect: or, "spake good things to him" (s); comforted
him in his captive state, and promised him many favours; and was as good
as his word:

and set his throne above the throne of the kings that were with him in
Babylon; these kings were either petty kings over the several provinces
that belonged to the Chaldean monarchy, that were occasionally at
Babylon; or rather the kings Nebuchadnezzar had conquered, and taken
captive, as Jehoiachin; such as the kings of Moab, Ammon, Edom, &c.
these, notwithstanding they were captives, had thrones of state, partly
in consideration of their former dignity, and partly for the glory of
the Babylonish monarch; now Jehoiachin's throne was higher and more
grand and stately than the rest, to show the particular respect the king
of Babylon had for him.

\(s\) "ac locutus est cum eo bona", V. L. Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 52:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jer 52:33</span></span>

And changed his prison garments,.... Which were filthy, and of an ill
smell; and put on him raiment more comfortable, as well as more
honourable, and suitable to his dignity, and more fit to appear in, in
the presence of the king and his court:

and he did continually eat bread before him all the days of his life:
either at the same table with the king; or at other near him, in his
sight, in the same apartment; though the former seems more likely; and
this he did as long as he lived; either Evilmerodach, or rather
Jeconiah; though perhaps they both died much about the same time. All
this was done about the year of the world 3444, and about five hundred
sixty years before Christ, according to Bishop Usher (t) and Mr. Bedford
(u); the authors of the Universal History (w) place it a year earlier.

\(t\) Annales Vet. Test. p. 138. (u) Scripture Chronology, p. 710. (w)
Vol. 21. p. 64.

[Jeremiah 52:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 52:34</span></span>

And for his diet, there was a continual diet given him of the king of
Babylon,.... This seems to design not food only, and for himself, which
he had daily at the king's table, but all necessary provisions for
himself, family, and servants:

every day a portion, until the day of his death, all the days of his
life; that is, of Jeconiah's; how long he lived after this is not known;
he was now fifty five years of age, and cannot be thought to have lived
a great while after, having been imprisoned so many years; and it is
certain he did not live to the return from the captivity. Of the death
of Zedekiah we have no account, only that he died in prison. The Jews
say (x) he died at this very time, when Jeconiah was advanced. The
account here given of Jeconiah has led some to conclude that this
chapter was not written by Jeremiah; since it cannot be well thought he
should live so long as to the death of this prince; and, besides, had
given an account of the destruction of Jerusalem in the thirty ninth
chapter, which he would hardly repeat: though that he might do, partly
for the sake of new circumstances here added; and partly as an
introduction to the book of the Lamentations, which follows.

\(x\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 28. p. 81.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Lamentations Introduction](lam000.md)

</div>
