<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer035)  [Next](jer037) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 36](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 36:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 36

This chapter gives an account of an impious action of King Jehoiakim's
burning the roll of Jeremiah's prophecies read unto him, and the
consequence of it. The order to write this roll, the time when, the
contents and use of it, are in [Jer
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001); the writing of it by Baruch, the
order of the prophet to read it to the people on such a day, with the
view he had in so doing, [Jer 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#004);
the reading of it by Baruch to the people first, [Jer
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#008); then to the princes, being sent
for by them, upon a report made to them, [Jer
36:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#011); the king being acquainted with
it, Jehudi was sent to fetch the roll, who read it to the king, [Jer
36:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#016); who having heard part of it,
burnt it, notwithstanding the intercession of some of his princes to the
contrary, [Jer 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#022); and who also
ordered the apprehension of Jeremiah and Baruch, who could not be found,
[Jer 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#026); upon this a new roll is
ordered to be written, [Jer 36:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#027);
which was done with some additions to it, respecting the destruction of
the land, and the people in it, by the Chaldeans; and particularly the
death of the king, and his want of burial, [Jer
36:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#029).

[Jeremiah 36:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 36:1</span></span>

And it came to pass in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah
king of Judah,.... Eighteen years before the destruction of Jerusalem:

that this word came unto Jeremiah from the Lord; the following order to
write in a roll all his prophecies he had hitherto delivered:

saying; as follows:

[Jeremiah 36:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 36:2</span></span>

Take thee a roll of a book,.... A roll of parchment, which being wrote
on, and rolled up, was called a book; but books, in those times, did not
consist of leaves cut and stitched together, and bound up, as our books
are, but sheets of parchments being written upon, were glued together,
and then rolled up; hence such writings were called volumes; which name
we still retain, and give to books, though the same practice is not
used:

and write therein all the words that I have spoken unto thee against
Israel, and against Judah; for though Israel was carried captive before
the times of Jeremiah, and his prophecies were chiefly directed against
Judah; yet as there were some of the ten tribes mixed with them, they
were included in these prophecies, and therefore mentioned:

and against all the nations; such as Egypt, Edom, Ammon, and Moab, [Jer
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026);

from the day that I spake unto thee, from the days of Josiah, even unto
this day; that is, from the time the Lord called him to prophesy in his
name, which was in, the thirteenth year of Josiah, who reigned one and
thirty years; and this being the fourth year of Jehoiakim, it must be
the three and twentieth year of his prophesying, and the a course of
full two and twenty years; see [Jer
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#002); now all the sermons, discourses,
and prophecies, he had delivered out against one and another, during
this time, must all be written in one roll or book, that that they might
be read. Kimchi says their Rabbins (n) would have it that this roll was
the book of the Lamentations, called by them "Megallah", or roll.

\(n\) T. Bab. Moed Katon fol. 26. 1.

[Jeremiah 36:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 36:3</span></span>

It may be that the house of Judah will hear all the evil which I purpose
to do unto them,.... Not that there was any uncertainty in God as to the
knowledge of future events, any more than a change in his purposes: he
had purposed to bring evil upon them, which purpose would not be
disannulled; and he knew that the Jews would not hearken to the
prediction of it, or be concerned about it, and repent of their sins,
and reform; but this method he was pleased to take, as being, humanly
speaking, a probable one to awaken their attention, and which would
leave them inexcusable:

that they may return every man from his evil way; repent of it, and
reform:

that I may forgive their iniquity and their sin; by not inflicting on
them the punishment and ruin threatened: where repentance is, remission
of sin is likewise, and both are the gifts of divine grace, when
spiritual and evangelical.

[Jeremiah 36:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 36:4</span></span>

Then Jeremiah called Baruch the son of Neriah,.... One of his disciples,
and whom he had before made use of in the purchase of a field of his
uncle's son, and to whom he gave the evidence of the purchase, [Jer
32:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#012); he was probably a better penman
than the prophet, or a quicker writer; however, he thought proper, for
quicker dispatch, to make use of him as his amanuensis:

and Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the Lord,

which he had spoken unto him, upon a roll of a book; it seems that
Jeremiah had not committed any of his prophecies to writing; and yet it
cannot be thought that by the mere strength of memory he could repeat
every discourse and prophecy he had delivered in the space of two and
twenty years; wherefore it must be concluded, that that same Spirit,
which first dictated the prophecies to him, brought them fresh to his
memory; so that he could readily repeat them to Baruch, who took them
down in writing on a roll of parchment.

[Jeremiah 36:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 36:5</span></span>

And Jeremiah commanded Baruch, saying, I am shut up,.... In prison,
according to Jarchi; but this is not likely, for then there would have
been no occasion for an order to take him, [Jer
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#026). Grotius thinks he was obliged
by the king's order to stay at home; possibly he might be restrained by
the Spirit of God, or had not freedom in his own mind to go abroad;
there might be a restraint, an impulse upon his spirit, by the Spirit of
God. Some think he was under some legal pollution, which made him unfit
to go into the temple: for it follows:

I cannot go into the house of the Lord: labouring either under some
bodily infirmity, or ceremonial defilement, or was forbidden by the
king. What was the true cause is not certain; but so it was, that either
he was discharged, or disabled, or disqualified, from going into the
house of God.

[Jeremiah 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 36:6</span></span>

Therefore go thou, and read in the roll, which thou hast written from my
mouth,.... The roll being finished, Baruch is ordered to read it, which
was the end of writing it: and since the prophet could not go himself,
he sends another in his room, to read

the words of the Lord in the ears of the people, in the Lord's house,

upon the fasting day; the day of atonement; the great fast, which was on
the tenth day of the seventh month, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim; and
so a different time of reading from that in [Jer
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009). This was a very proper time to
read it in, when the people were fasting and humbling themselves before
the Lord; though some think this was a fast proclaimed by Jehoiakim, to
avert the vengeance threatened by the Chaldean army:

and also thou shalt read them in the ears of all Judah that come out of
their cities; to keep the feast of tabernacles; as they did five days
after the fast, or day of atonement; and this seems to be the second
reading of the roll enjoined.

[Jeremiah 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 36:7</span></span>

It may be they will present their supplication before the Lord,.... Or,
"perhaps their supplication will fall" (o); they will present it in an
humble manner before him; alluding to the prostration of their bodies,
and dejection of their countenances, in prayer:

and will return every man from his evil way; not only pray for mercy,
but repent of sin, and reform; without which mercy is not to be
expected:

for great is the anger and fury that the Lord hath pronounced against
this people; a very sore judgment, no less than the utter destruction of
their city, temple, and nation.

\(o\) "forte, vel fortasse cadet deprecatio eorum", Piscator, Schmidt.
So Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Jeremiah 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 36:8</span></span>

And Baruch the son of Neriah did according to all that Jeremiah the
prophet commanded him,.... Here follows Baruch's obedience to the
prophet's commands; which he considered no doubt as the will of the
Lord, who directed the prophet to give the orders he did; and which he
punctually observed, in all respects, as to things, time, and place:

reading in the book the words of the Lord in the Lord's house; the
prophecies of Jeremiah, which came from the Lord, and which he had
transcribed into a book from the mouth of the prophet; these he read
before the people in the temple, a first, if not a second time, before
the reading of it recorded in the following verses.

[Jeremiah 36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 36:9</span></span>

And it came to pass in the fifth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah
king of Judah, in the ninth month,.... This was a different time of
reading the book from the former, enjoined by the prophet, and performed
by Baruch, [Jer 36:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#006); that was on the
tenth day of the seventh month, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim; this
was in the fifth year of his reign, and in the ninth month of the year,
a year and two months after the former, as it should seem; but
Jehoiakim's fifth year beginning in the seventh month after the day of
atonement, this ninth month is to be reckoned not from the beginning of
his fifth year, but from the beginning of the ecclesiastical year in the
spring; so that this was but two months after the former reading:

that they proclaimed a fast before the Lord: this was not an ordinary
fast, or a common annual one of divine appointment, which came in
course, but an extraordinary one, upon some particular occasion. Some
think it was on account of the dearth, drought, and famine in the land,
[Jer 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#001); and others, which seems
most likely, take it to be on account of the calamity threatened the
nation by the Chaldean army. This fast was not in course, but was
proclaimed by the order of the king and his council; and it may be at
the request of the people, at least they, greed and consented to it, and
indeed are represented in the text as the proclaimers; for so the word
"they" is explained in the following clause, which should be rendered,
not

to all the people, but even "all the people in Jerusalem" (p),

and all the people that came from the cities of Judah unto Jerusalem:
these proclaimed the fast; they applied to the government for one, or
however obeyed the king's orders, and published and proclaimed a fast;
not only the inhabitants of Jerusalem, but those who came from other
cities on business, or for safety, or for worship.

\(p\) "omnis populus Hierosolyma", Cocceius; "omnis populus in
Hierosolyma", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 36:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 36:10</span></span>

Then read Baruch in the book the words of Jeremiah in the house of the
Lord,.... The prophecies of Jeremiah he had taken from him in writing on
a roll of parchment; these he read in the temple, in a part of it, after
described:

in the chamber of Gemariah the son of Shaphan the scribe; not a scribe
of the law, or an officer of the temple, but the king's chancellor or
secretary of state; for this is the title, not of Gemariah, who had a
chamber in the temple here mentioned, in which Baruch read his roll, and
was an officer there, but of Shaphan, as the accents show, and as his
title runs elsewhere, [Kg2 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#009); which
chamber was

in the higher court; it looked into it, which some say was the court of
the priests; but into that Baruch, not being a priest, could not enter:
rather, according to Dr. Lightfoot, it was the court of Israel, on the
same ground with it, though parted from it, and divided from the court
of the women by a wall, to which they went by an ascent of fifteen
steps; so that it might with great propriety be called the higher court:

at the entry of the new gate of the Lord's house; the eastern gate, as
the Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, interpret it: here Baruch read his roll,

in the ears of all the people; that were in the court; so that being in
a chamber, he must read out of the chamber window, or in a balcony
before it.

[Jeremiah 36:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 36:11</span></span>

When Micaiah the son of Gemariah, the son of Shaphan,.... Who was
present when Baruch read in the roll to the people in his father's
chamber; but his father was absent, and was with the princes in the
secretary's office at the same time, as [Jer
36:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#012) shows: the son seems to be a
more religious man than the father, unless he was placed as a spy, to
hear and see what he could: however, when he

had heard out of the book all the words of the Lord: which were spoken
by the Lord to Jeremiah, and which Baruch read out of the book he had
written in his hearing; for it is a vain conceit of Abarbinel, that
Micaiah did not hear these words from the mouth of Baruch reading, but
out of the book which he looked into; for then it would have been said,
which he had "seen" or "read" out of the book, and not "heard".

[Jeremiah 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 36:12</span></span>

Then he went down into the king's house,.... The royal palace, which was
not upon the mountain on which the temple stood, but lay lower, and
therefore Micaiah is said to go down to it; with what design he went
thither is not certain, whether out of ill will to Jeremiah and Baruch,
or out of good will, being affected with what he had heard, and desirous
that some steps might be taken by the government to prevent the
calamities coming upon them, according to these prophecies; which latter
seems most probable, since no charge or accusation is brought by him;
and since his father, with others, to whom he gave the account
afterwards, interceded with the king that the roll might not be burnt,
[Jer 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#025); however, immediately after
he had heard the roll read, he went to the king's house:

into the scribe's chamber; the secretary's office; formerly his
grandfather Shaphan's, now Elishama's:

and, lo, all the princes sat there; some of them are mentioned by name:

even Elishama the scribe; or secretary; the prime minister, the
principal secretary of state, and therefore named first, in whose
chamber or office they were:

and Delaiah the son of Shemaiah; who this person was, or his office, is
not known; he is nowhere else made mention of; and who his father was is
not certain:

and Elnathan the son of Achbor; the same that Jehoiakim sent to Egypt to
fetch Uriah from thence, [Jer 26:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer026.htm#022);

and Gemariah the son of Shaphan: who was Micaiah's father, and in whose
chamber Baruch read the roll:

and Zedekiah the son of Hananiah; of this prince also no account is
given elsewhere:

and all the princes; the rest of them, who were either members of the
great sanhedrim, or courtiers; it appears from hence that this court was
very profane and irreligious; for though they had proclaimed a fast, to
make a show of religion, or at the importunity of the people; yet they
did not attend temple worship and service themselves, but were all
together in the secretary's office, very probably about political
affairs.

[Jeremiah 36:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 36:13</span></span>

Then Micaiah declared all the words that he had heard,.... The sum and
substance of them; for it cannot be thought that he should retain in his
memory every word that he had heard; though, as it is very probable he
was much struck and affected with what he had heard, he might remember
and declare a great deal of it:

when Baruch read the book in the ears of the people; and this he also
declared, no doubt, that what he had heard, and then related, were read
by Baruch out of a book; as is clear from the princes sending for
Baruch, and ordering him to bring the roll along with him, as in [Jer
36:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#014).

[Jeremiah 36:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 36:14</span></span>

Therefore all the princes sent Jehudi,.... Who, according to Junius, was
the king's apparitor: he is described by his descent,

the son of Nethaniah, the son of Shelemiah, the son of Cushi; him the
princes sent, being not one of their body, but a servant at court:

to Baruch; who was very probably still in the temple, where Micaiah left
him:

saying, take in thine hand the roll wherein thou hast read in the ears
of the people, and come; that is, to the king's palace, to the
secretary's office, where they were, and bring the roll along with him
he had been reading to the people, and of which Micaiah had given them
some account; and which had such an effect upon them, as to make them
desirous of hearing it themselves;

so Baruch the son of Neriah took the roll in his hand, and came unto
them; which showed great boldness and intrepidity in him, to go at once,
without any hesitation, to court, and appear before the princes with his
roll, which contained things so very disagreeable to the king and his
ministry; but as he had not been afraid to read it publicly before the
people in the temple, so neither was he afraid to read it before the
princes at court.

[Jeremiah 36:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 36:15</span></span>

And they said unto him, sit down now,.... Or, "pray sit down" (q); they
received him very courteously, and treated him with great humanity, and
showed much respect to him, in beseeching him to sit down by them:

and read it in our ears; as he had done in the ears of the people, with
an audible voice, clearly and distinctly, that they might be able to
hear it, so as to understand it:

so Baruch read it in their ears; without any fear or dread, though in
the king's palace, and before an assembly of princes; nor did he excuse
himself on account of weariness, having just read it to the people; or
upbraid the princes with not being in the temple, where they might have
heard it.

\(q\) "sede quaeso", Vatablus, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 36:16</span></span>

Now it came to pass, when they had heard all the words,.... In the roll
or book read by Baruch; they heard them read patiently, which was what
the king afterwards would not do:

they were afraid both one and another; both good and bad; for there were
some of both sorts among them: or, "a man to his friend" (r); they
looked at one another, and knew not what to say to each other, as men
amazed and astonished; they trembled at what they heard, the
threatenings were so terrible, and the calamity threatened so great; and
they consulted together what they should do with this roll, or what
course they should take to avert the threatened vengeance, and
particularly whether they should acquaint the king with it or not; and
which they thought the safest and most prudent part to do:

and said unto Baruch, we will surely tell the king of all these words;
this they said, not to terrify Baruch, or out of any ill will to him;
but partly for their own security, lest they should incur the king's
displeasure, should he come to the knowledge of it any other way; and
chiefly hoping it might have some effect upon him, to cause a
reformation; though of this they were dubious, and rather feared it
would exasperate him; and therefore desired that Baruch and Jeremiah
would hide themselves, [Jer 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#019);
this was the sense of some of them, of those that were good men among
them, and wished things were otherwise than they were.

\(r\) "vir ad socium suum", Montanus; "ad proximum suum", Vatablus; "ad
amicum suum", Pagninus; "erga socium suum", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 36:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 36:17</span></span>

And they asked Baruch,.... The following question, which may seem at
first sight an odd, needless, and trifling one, as some have called it:

saying, tell us now, how didst thou write all these words at his mouth?
this question does not regard the manner of writing them, whether with
ink or not, for that they could see with their eyes, and yet Baruch's
answer seems to have respect to this, as if he so understood them; nor
barely the matter of them, as whether it was the substance of what was
contained in the roll that Jeremiah dictated, and that only, leaving it
to Baruch to use what words he would, or whether the express words were
dictated by him; but rather it seems to have regard to the possibility
of doing it: by the question it appears, that Baruch had told the
princes that the prophet had dictated all these things to him, and he
had taken them down in writing from his mouth; now they wanted more
satisfaction about the truth of this matter. It was a difficulty with
them how it was possible for Jeremiah to recollect so many different
discourses and prophecies, delivered at different times, and some many
years ago, and so readily dictate them to Baruch, as fast as he could
write them; wherefore they desire he would tell them plainly and
faithfully the truth of the matter, how it was, that so they might, if
they could, affirm it with certainty to the king; since, if this was
really fact which he had related, these prophecies originally, and the
fresh dictating of them, must be from the Spirit of God, and would
certainly have their accomplishment.

[Jeremiah 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 36:18</span></span>

Then Baruch answered them,.... At once, without any hesitation, plainly
and fully:

he pronounced all these words unto me with his mouth; that is, the
Prophet Jeremiah delivered by word of mouth, not the substance only of
this roll, but the express words of it, and everyone of them, and that
clearly and distinctly, without any hesitation, or premeditation; by
which it is plain it was by the Spirit of the Lord he did it; neither
matter nor words were Baruch's, but were exactly as they were delivered:

and I wrote them with ink in the book; as they saw with their eyes, and
which was the manner of writing with the Jews so early; Baruch had no
further concern in this matter than to provide pen, ink, and parchment,
and to make use of them as he did, just as the prophet dictated and
directed him.

[Jeremiah 36:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 36:19</span></span>

Then said the princes unto Baruch,.... Being satisfied with his answer:

go hide thee, thou and Jeremiah, and let no man know where ye be. Some
of these princes at least seem to be good men, and believed what was
read to them, and had a value for the prophet and his scribe, and were
concerned for their welfare; and knowing the furious temper of the king,
and his little regard to the prophets; and fearing he would resent what
had been so publicly read to the people, provided against the worst; and
in point of prudence advised Baruch and his master to abscond, and not
let anyone know, no, not their nearest friends, where they were, lest
they should be betrayed; nor did they, the princes, desire to know
themselves. Jeremiah might be in prison, as some have thought, at the
first reading of the roll, which was in the fourth year of Jehoiakim,
and be at liberty now, which was in the fifth year; see [Jer
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#001).

[Jeremiah 36:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 36:20</span></span>

And they went in to the king into the court,.... The inner court, the
king's court, where he usually resided; though very probably they did
not rush in at once; but first sent to know whether the king could be
spoke with, or would admit them, they having something to communicate to
him; which they might do by the person in waiting, by whom they were
introduced:

but they laid up the roll in the chamber of Elishama the scribe; they
did not take it with them, but left it in the secretary's office; and,
no doubt, put it up safe in some chest or scrutoire, as something
valuable, and not to be exposed to everyone; or to be thrown about,
torn, or trampled on, as a book of no use and value: very probably it
was with the consent of Baruch that it was left with them: and this was
a point of prudence in them not to take it with them when they went to
the king:

and told all the words in the ears of the king; that is, the sum and
substance of them; for it cannot be thought they should remember every
word in the roll; but the main of it they did, and rehearsed it in a
very audible manner.

[Jeremiah 36:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 36:21</span></span>

So the king sent Jehudi to fetch the roll,.... The same person the
princes sent to Baruch to come to them, and bring the roll with him,
[Jer 36:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#014). This the king did, out of
curiosity, and to satisfy himself of the truth of what the princes said;
and by this it appears they had told him of the roll, which contained
what they had given him a summary of, and where it was:

and he took it out of Elishama the scribe's chamber; or, "out of the
chamber of Elishama the scribe"; who knew where it was, being present at
the reading of it in the secretary's office, and saw where it was laid;
or, however, was directed by the secretary where it was, and might have
the key of the chest or scrutoire given him in which it was laid:

and Jehudi read it in the ears of the king, and in the ears of all the
princes that stood by the king: as he doubtless was ordered; and which
he did so loudly, clearly, and distinctly, that the king and all the
princes could hear; which princes were those who had heard it before,
and were come to the king to acquaint him with the substance of it; and
who stood by the side of the king, or about him, in honour to him;
though there might be also others besides them, who were before with the
king, and waiting on him; and Abarbinel thinks that other princes
distinct from those that went to the king are meant. When it is said
that Jehudi read the roll in the hearing of the king and princes, it
mast be understood of a part of it only, and not the whole; as [Jer
36:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#023) shows.

[Jeremiah 36:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 36:22</span></span>

Now the king sat in the winter house, in the ninth month,.... The month
Cisleu, which answers to part of November, and part of December; and so
was the midst of winter, and a proper time for the king to be in his
winter house; though, as this was a fast day, it would have been more
proper for him to have been at the worship of God in the temple, [Jer
36:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#009). This winter house probably was a
winter parlour, as distinguished from a summer parlour, [Jdg
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg003.htm#020); and both might be under the same
roof, or parts of the same house; only the one might be more airy and
cool, and the other more close and warm. Kings had their summer and
winter houses; see [Amo 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#015); this
circumstance is mentioned for the sake of what follows, the burning of
the roll; and accounts for there being a fire at hand to do it:

and there was a fire on the hearth burning before him; there was a
stove, or some such vessel or instrument, in which a large fire of wood
was made, at which the king sat to keep himself warm while the roll was
reading, and about which the princes stood.

[Jeremiah 36:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 36:23</span></span>

And it came to pass, that when Jehudi had read three or four leaves,....
Either three or four of the breadths of parchment, which were glued
together, and rolled up; or three or four of the columns in those
breadths. The meaning is, he had read a few of them. The Rabbins (s)
would have it, that three or four verses in the book of the Lamentations
are meant:

he cut it with the penknife; that is, he cut the roll to pieces with a
penknife he had in his hand, or lay near him. It is difficult to say who
it was that did this; whether Jehudi that read the roll, or Jehoiakim
the king that heard it; most interpreters understand it of the latter;
but the connection of the words carries it to the former; for the
nearest antecedent to the relative he is Jehudi; though it is highly
probable he did it at the king's command; or, however, saw by his
countenance and behaviour that such an action would be grateful to him;
and that he was highly displeased with what had been read, and could not
hear any longer with patience:

and cast it into the fire that was on the hearth, until all the roll was
consumed in the fire that was on the hearth; that is, he cast it into
the fire, and there let it lie, until it was wholly consumed; a very
impious action, to burn the word of God; a full evidence of an ungodly
mind; a clear proof of the enmity of the heart against God, and of its
indignation against his word and servants; and yet a vain attempt to
frustrate the divine predictions in it, or avert the judgments
threatened; but the ready way to bring them on.

\(s\) T. Hieros. Moed Katon, fol. 83. 2.

[Jeremiah 36:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 36:24</span></span>

Yet they were not afraid, nor rent their garments,.... They were not
struck with horror at such an impious action as the burning of the roll;
nor afraid of the judgments and wrath of God threatened in it; nor did
they rend their garments in token of sorrow and mourning on account of
either, as used to be when anything blasphemous was said or done, or any
bad news were brought. The Jews from hence conclude, that whenever a man
sees the book of the law torn of cut to pieces, he should rend his
garments (t). The persons here meant are not the princes that first
heard the roll read in the secretary's office, for they were afraid,
[Jer 36:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#016); unless they now dissembled
in the king's presence, or had shook off their fears; however, if they
are included, three must be excepted, whose names are mentioned in [Jer
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#025); and those who are more
especially designed are expressed in the next clause:

neither the king, nor any of his servants that heard all these words;
not all that were in the roll, for they only heard a part; but all that
were in that part, which was enough to make them fear and tremble; but
they were hardened in their sins; and by the hardness and impenitence of
their hearts treasured up wrath against the day of wrath. These servants
of the king seem to be those in waiting, and not the princes that came
to him; however, they were not all of this complexion and character,
since it follows:

\(t\) T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 26. 1.

[Jeremiah 36:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 36:25</span></span>

Nevertheless, Elnathan, and Delaiah, and Gemariah,.... Three of the five
princes mentioned in [Jer 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#012);

had made intercession to the king, that he would not burn the roll; or
suffer it to be burnt; this they did either at first, as soon as the
roll was brought, that if the king should not like it, yet they besought
him that he would not destroy it; or rather when they saw what Jehudi
was going to do with it, either by the express order, or at the
connivance of the king; then they humbly entreated that such an action
might not be done, which gave them a secret horror, though they might
endeavour to hide it as much as possible:

but he would not hear them; or he would not receive it of them, as the
Targum; that is, their supplication and intercession; but either east
the roll into the fire himself, or permitted Jehudi to do it; nor would
he suffer it to be taken out till it was all consumed.

[Jeremiah 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 36:26</span></span>

But the king commanded Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech,.... Or, "the
king's son", as the Targum; though it rather seems to be the proper name
of a person, one of the king's servants; since it is not probable he
would send his own son on such an errand; and had he, he would rather
have been called his own son than the king's son; besides, Jeconiah, who
succeeded him, seems to be his eldest son, and yet he now could not be
more than twelve years of age; whereas this Jerahmeel must be a man
grown; and had he been an elder son, as he must, he would have succeeded
him, unless it can be thought that he died before his father:

and Seraiah the son of Azriel, and Shelemiah the son of Abdeel, to take
Baruch the scribe and Jeremiah the prophet; in order to bring them
before the king, or to imprison them, or put them to death, for which
they might have the king's warrant; the one for prophesying, and the
other for writing out and reading his prophecies; though Baruch may be
called a scribe, not for being the amanuensis of Jeremiah; but because
he was one of the scribes of the law, or doctors of the people:

but the Lord hid them; the princes advised them to hide themselves, and
they did, very probably in a house of some of their friends; but this
would not have been sufficient, had not the Lord took them under his
protection; there was no doubt a special providence concerned for them;
but by what means this preservation was is not known. Kimchi suggests
that these messengers sought for them in the very place where they were,
and could not find them; and conjectures that the Lord set darkness
about them, or weakened the visive faculty of those that searched for
them, that they could not see them.

[Jeremiah 36:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 36:27</span></span>

Then the word of the Lord came to Jeremiah,.... In the place where he
was hid; the Lord knew where he was, for he hid him, and therefore could
send his word to him:

after the king had burnt the roll; either with his own hands, or had
ordered it to be burnt, or connived at the burning of it:

and the words which Baruch wrote at the mouth of Jeremiah; hence the
Jews (u) gather, that when a man sees the book of the law burnt, that he
is bound to rend his garments twice; once for the burning of the paper
or parchment, and again for the burning of the writing; but no other is
meant than the roll, in which the prophecies were written, Baruch took
from the mouth of Jeremiah:

saying; as follows:

\(u\) T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 26. 1.

[Jeremiah 36:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 36:28</span></span>

Take thee again another roll,.... Or a piece of parchment; or rather
several pieces of parchment glued or rolled up together:

and write in it all the former words that were in the first roll, which
Jehoiakim the king of Judah hath burnt; just as when the two tables of
the law were broken, two others were made, and the same laws written on
them; and so here the same Spirit of God, which brought to the mind of
the prophet all his former discourses and prophecies, so that he could
readily dictate them to Baruch, could and did renew them again;
wherefore Jehoiakim's burning of the roll signified nothing: all
attempts to destroy the word of God are in vain; they always have been,
and will be; for the word of the Lord endures for ever.

[Jeremiah 36:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 36:29</span></span>

And thou shall say to Jehoiakim king of Judah,.... Or, "concerning" (w)
him; since the prophet was hid, and he was in quest of him; nor was it
safe for him to appear in person before him; though this may be
understood as what should be put into the second roll, and in that he
addressed to him:

thus saith the Lord, thou hast burnt this roll; or "that roll"; or had
suffered or ordered it to be burnt, giving this as a reason for it:

saying, why hast thou therein written; what the king would have to be a
great falsehood, and which he thought never came from the Lord; but was
a device of Jeremiah, to whom he ascribed the writing of them, though it
was Baruch's, because dictated by him:

saying, the king of Babylon shall certainly come and destroy this land,

and shall cause to cease from thence man and beast? by killing some, and
carrying off others, so that the destruction should be complete. He
takes no notice of himself and his family, as if his concern was only
for the nation; and that he took it ill that anything should be said
which expressed the ruin of that, and might dishearten the inhabitants
of it.

\(w\) "de", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 36:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 36:30</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord, of Jehoiakim king of Judah,.... Or,
"concerning" (x) him; for Jehovah is not here said to be "the Lord of
Jehoiakim", though he was, being King of kings, and Lord of lords; bat
as speaking concerning him, and threatening him, as follows:

he shall have none to sit upon the throne of David; that is, none of his
issue that should reign after him, or succeed him in the throne of David
and kingdom of Judah; for his son Jeconiah reigned but three months,
which is reckoned as nothing, and could not be called sitting upon the
throne; and, besides, was never confirmed by the king of Babylon, in
whose power he was, and by whom he was carried captive; and Zedekiah,
who followed, was not his lawful successor, was brother to Jehoiakim,
and uncle to Jeconiah, and was set up by the king of Babylon in contempt
of the latter; and as for Zerubbabel, he was no king, nor was there any
of this family till the Messiah came:

and his dead body shall be cast out in the day to the heat, and in the
night to the frost. The sense is, he should have no burial but that of
an ass, [Jer 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018); should be cast
into a ditch, and be exposed to the heat of the sun in the daytime, and
to nipping frosts at night, and so putrefy and become nauseous; and
though the body would be insensible of it, yet would it be very
reproachful to the character of a prince, and shocking to any to behold;
and very disagreeable and dreadful for himself to hear and think of.

\(x\) "de", Schmidt, &c.

[Jeremiah 36:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 36:31</span></span>

And I will punish him and his seed and his servants for their
iniquity,.... In cutting the roll pieces, and burning it, as Abarbinel
interprets it; which either was done by himself, or by his order, and
with his connivance; and at which perhaps his sons were present, and
expressed a pleasure in it; an& his servants that stood by assented to
it, excepting three; nor were they afraid of the judgments of God for
it, nor in the least shocked at it, [Jer
36:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#024); though this may be understood
of all their iniquities they had been guilty of, the singular being put
for the plural:

and I will bring upon them, and upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem, and
upon the men of Judah, all the evil that I have pronounced against them;
the sword, famine, and pestilence; the destruction of their land, city,
and temple; and their captivity in Babylon:

but they hearkened not; to what was said to them, neither in the first
nor in the second roll.

[Jeremiah 36:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 36:32</span></span>

Then took Jeremiah another roll,.... Of parchment; several sheets joined
together, which made up a roll or volume:

and gave it to Baruch the scribe, the son of Neriah; who was by office a
public notary or scribe of the law, as well as the amanuensis of the
prophet:

who wrote therein from the mouth of Jeremiah all the words of the book
which Jehoiakim king of Judah had burnt in the fire; not one was lost;
all were recovered again, through the fresh inspiration of the Holy
Spirit, under which Jeremiah dictated the selfsame things in the same
words to Baruch again; so that the king got nothing by burning it, but
an addition of guilt, and a heavier denunciation of wrath and vengeance,
as follows:

and there were added besides unto them many like words; of the same
nature and argument, of the threatening kind more especially. The
Rabbins (y), who take the roll to be the book of Lamentations, very
triflingly observe, that the first roll had only the three alphabets, in
the first, second, and fourth chapters that the addition is the treble
alphabet, in the third chapter the whole of the fifth chapter. Here it
may not be amiss to insert the testimony of Eupolemus (z), an Heathen
historian, concerning Jeremiah and his prophecies in the times of
Jehoiakim.

"Joachim, (for so he calls him,) in his times Jeremiah the prophet
prophesied, being sent of God, to take the Jews sacrificing to a golden
idol, called by them Baal, and to declare unto them the calamity that
was coming upon them; but Joachim would have laid hold on him, and burnt
him alive; then he (the prophet) said that with those sticks they should
prepare food for the Babylonians, and that they should dig canals from
the Tigris and Euphrates when carried captive; wherefore, when
Nebuchadnezzar king of the Babylonians heard what was prophesied by
Jeremiah, he besought Astibares, king of the Medes, to join his forces
with him; and having gathered and joined together the Babylonians and
Medes, a hundred and eighty thousand foot, and a hundred and twenty
thousand horse, with ten thousand chariots, first destroyed Samaria,
Galilee, Scythopolis, and the Jews that inhabited Gilead; and then
marched to Jerusalem, and took alive Joachim king of the Jews; and
having taken out the gold, silver, and brass in the temple, sent it to
Babylon, excepting the ark and the tables in it, for this remained with
Jeremiah;''

compare with this [Jer 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018).

\(y\) Vid. Yalkut & Kimchi in loc. (z) Apud Euseb. Prepar. Evangel. l.
9. c. 39. p. 454.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 37](jer037)

</div>
