<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer044)  [Next](jer046.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 45](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 45:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 45

This chapter contains a prophecy, delivered to Baruch for his personal
use. The time of it is expressed, [Jer
45:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#001.md); a reproof is given him for his
immoderate grief and sorrow, [Jer
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#002.md); the destruction of the land of
Judea is prophesied of; and therefore it was wrong in him to seek great
things for himself at such a time; however, he is assured of his own
safety, [Jer 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#004.md).

[Jeremiah 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 45:1</span></span>

The word that Jeremiah the prophet spake unto Baruch the son of
Neriah,.... Who was his amanuensis or scribe; and this word he spake not
to him of himself, but in the name of the Lord, as coming from him; so
the Targum calls it,

"the word of prophecy which Jeremiah the prophet prophesied concerning
Baruch the son of Neriah:''

when he had written these words in a book at the mouth of Jeremiah; not
what immediately precede, concerning the destruction of the Jews in
Egypt; which were delivered out many years after the writing of the roll
by Baruch here referred to; and which was done, as here said,

in the fourth year of Jehoiakim the son of Josiah king of Judah; which
was eighteen years before the destruction of Jerusalem; so that this
prophecy does not stand in order, which would more properly have
followed the thirty sixth chapter; where we have an account of what
Baruch wrote from the mouth of Jeremiah in a roll, and read to the
people, and after that to the princes; which exposed him to danger, and
caused the grief expressed by him in this chapter; but it being written
to a private person, is postponed to this place:

saying; as follows:

[Jeremiah 45:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 45:2</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel, unto thee, O Baruch. Whom he
knew by name, had a great regard for, and honours with this prophecy;
and, being an Israelite, both in a literal and spiritual sense, he
addresses him as the God of Israel, and as being his covenant God; in
whom he should put his trust, and from whom he might expect safety and
protection in the worst of times; and to whose sovereign will, in all
the dispensations of his providence, he ought to have humbly and
patiently submitted.

[Jeremiah 45:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 45:3</span></span>

Thou didst say, woe is me now!.... What will become of me? I am ruined
and undone; this he said in his heart, if not with his lips, perhaps
both ways; and when the king gave orders for the apprehending of him and
the prophet, being provoked at the roll which he had wrote and read,
[Jer 36:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#026.md);

for the Lord hath added grief to my sorrow; caused him grief upon grief,
sorrow upon sorrow, an abundance of it; for there was a variety of
things which occasioned grief and sorrow; the trouble of his office, as
secretary to the prophet; the reproach east upon him by the people for
it; the grievous things contained in the prophecies he transcribed,
concerning the ruin of his people and nation; the king's displeasure at
the roll, and his burning it; to which was added the danger he was
exposed unto for writing it; and especially, as he might apprehend, for
writing it over again, after it was burnt; to which were annexed new
threatenings, and such as personally concerned the king;

I fainted in my sighing; or "with" it; he sighed and groaned at what he
saw coming upon his country, and particularly upon himself; it quite
overcame his spirits; he sunk and swooned away: or "I laboured in my
sighing" (n); amidst his sighs and groans, he prayed to the Lord, and
laboured in prayer, that he might be delivered from the evils he feared
were coming upon him:

and I find no rest; from his grief, sorrow, and sighing; no cessation of
that; no serenity and composure of mind; no answer of prayer from God.
The Targum is,

"and I found not prophecy.''

And the Jewish commentators, as Jarchi, Kimchi, Abarbinel, and Abendana,
from the ancient Midrashes, interpret this grief of Baruch to be on
account of his not having the gift of prophecy bestowed on him, which he
expected by being a servant of the prophet (o); and represent him as
saying, Joshua ministered to Moses, and the Holy Spirit dwelled upon
him; Elisha ministered to Elijah, and the Holy Spirit rested upon him;
how different am I from all the disciples of the prophets! "woe is me
now!" &c.

\(n\) "in gemitu meo", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Vatanblus, "in suspirio
meo", Cocceius, Schmidt. (o) Vid. Maimon. Moreh Nevochim, par. 2. c. 32.
p. 286.

[Jeremiah 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 45:4</span></span>

Thus shalt thou say unto him,.... This is spoken to Jeremiah, and is an
order from the Lord to him, what he should say in his name to Baruch:

the Lord saith thus, behold, that which I have built will I break down,
and that which I have planted I will pluck up; the Jewish nation, both
as to church and state; which the Lord had built up as a spacious and
beautiful house to dwell in, and had planted as a vineyard, and set it
with pleasant plants; but now would demolish this building, and destroy
this plantation:

even this whole land; not a few cities only, or only Jerusalem the
metropolis, but the whole land of Judea; no part of it but what should
be left desolate. So the Targum,

"even the whole land of Israel, which is mine.''

[Jeremiah 45:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer045.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 45:5</span></span>

Seekest thou great things for thyself? seek them not,.... Riches and
wealth honour and esteem, peace and prosperity; these were not to be
sought after and expected, when the whole nation would be involved in
such a general calamity. Baruch perhaps expected that his reading the
roll to princes would have been a means of preferring him at court, of
advancing him to some post or office, in which he might have acquired
wealth, and got applause, and lived in peace and plenty all his days;
but this was not to be looked for; when, if he observed, the very roll
he wrote and read contained in it prophecies of the general ruin of the
nation. The Jews restrain this to the gift of prophecy they suppose
Baruch sought after, which was not to be enjoyed out of the land of
Canaan:

for, behold, I will bring evil upon all flesh; not upon every individual
person in the world; but upon all the inhabitants of Judea, who should
either die by the sword or by famine, or by pestilence, or be carried
captive, or be in some distress or another:

but thy life will I give unto thee for a prey in all places whither thou
goest; suggesting that he should be obliged to quit his native place and
country, and go from place to place; as he did, after the destruction of
Jerusalem, along with the prophet; and even into Egypt with the Jews
that went there; where his life would be in danger, and yet should be
preserved; he should be snatched as a brand out of the burning, when
Jerusalem was taken; and in other places, when exposed, though he should
lose everything, yet not his life; which should be as dear to him as a
rich spoil taken by the soldier, being a distinguishing mercy.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 46](jer046.md)

</div>
