<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer040)  [Next](jer042.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 41](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 41:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 41

This chapter relates the event of the conspiracy against Gedaliah
Johanan and the princes had informed him of, to which he gave no credit;
but it proved true. An account is given of the murder of Gedaliah, and
of the Jews and Chaldeans with him; and of the perpetrators of it, [Jer
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001.md); and of the chief of them,
Ishmael's treacherous dealing with fourscore men that came from several
parts to the house of God to offer sacrifice, who all perished by his
hands, excepting ten, [Jer 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#004.md); and
of the rest of the people at Mizpah being carried away, in order to be
captives among the Ammonites, [Jer
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#010.md); and of Johanan, and the rest of
the captives, hearing of all this, and coming out to fight with Ishmael;
upon which the people deserted him, and he fled to the Ammonites, [Jer
41:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#011.md); and of Johanan and the people
settling in the way to Egypt, to flee there on occasion, should the
Chaldeans fall on them for what was done to the governor, which they
feared, [Jer 41:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#016.md).

[Jeremiah 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 41:1</span></span>

Now it came to pass in the seventh month,.... The month Tisri, which
answers to part of our September, and part of October; according to the
Jewish (b) chronicle, it was on the third day of this month, fifty two
days after the destruction of the temple, that Gedaliah was slain; on
which day a fast was kept by the Jews, after their return from
captivity, on this occasion, called the fast of the seventh month, [Zac
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#005.md); though, according to Kimchi and
Ben Melech, this event happened on the first day of the month, the
beginning of the new year; but the fast was kept the day following,
because the first day was a festival. Josephus (c) says it was thirty
days after Johanan had departed from Gedaliah, having given him
information of the conspiracy against him:

that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah the son of Elishama, of the seed
royal: not the son of King Zedekiah, but one of the remoter branches of
the family; whether Elishama his father was the same with Elishama the
scribe is not certain, [Jer 36:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer036.htm#012.md); the
Jews have a tradition that he descended from Jerahmeel, whose wife,
Atarah, was the daughter of a Heathen king, and was a proselyte, which
Kimchi on the place relates; see [Ch1
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#026.md); this circumstance, of his being
akin to the royal family, is mentioned, to show that he envied the
governor, and bore him a grudge for the honour he had, thinking that he
had a better title to it, as being of the seed royal:

and the princes of the king, even ten men with him; some of the nobles
of Zedekiah, who fled with him from Jerusalem, and deserted him when he
was pursued and taken, and ever since had remained in the land; even ten
of these joined with Ishmael in the conspiracy against Gedaliah, whom
they bore an ill will to, for going over to the Chaldeans, and envying
the power he was now possessed of. Some think these were ten ruffians,
besides the princes of the king, since it may be rendered, "and the
princes of the king, and ten men with him"; whom Ishmael and the princes
took with them, as fit persons to assassinate the governor; and,
besides, it is thought that eleven men were not sufficient to slay the
Jews and the Chaldeans, as afterwards related; though it may be
observed, that Ishmael, and these ten princes, did not come alone, as it
can hardly be imagined they should, but with a number of servants and
soldiers with them: these

came unto Gedaliah the son of Ahikam to Mizpah: they had been with him
before, to whom he had swore, and given them assurance of security; and
they departed from him to their respective cities, seemingly satisfied;
and now return, to pay him a friendly visit, as they pretended:

and there they did eat bread together at Mizpah; had a feast, and kept
holiday together, it being a new moon, the first day of the month, and
the beginning of the new year too; so that it was a high festival: and
perhaps this season was fixed upon the rather, to cover their design,
and to perpetrate it; pretending they came to keep the festival with
him, and who, no doubt, liberally provided for them; for bread here is
put for all provisions and accommodations.

\(b\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 26. p. 76. (c) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 4.

[Jeremiah 41:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 41:2</span></span>

Then arose Ishmael the son of Nethaniah, and the ten men that were with
him,.... After they had eat and drank well, they rose up from their
seats at table:

and smote Gedaliah the son of Ahikam the son of Shaphan with the sword,

and slew him; they all drew their swords and thrust at him, and were
assisting in the murder of him; though it is probable that it was
Ishmael that gave him the mortal wound, since the phrase, "and slew
him", is singular. Josephus (d) says that Gedaliah prepared a splendid
table, and made a sumptuous entertainment for them, and being drunk
himself, which they observed, took the opportunity and slew him, and all
at table with him:

whom the king Babylon had made governor over the land; which mentioned;
both to aggravate the crime they were guilty of, and to observe the
reason of it, and what it was that prompted them to it; for so the words
may be rendered, "because the king of Babylon had made him governor over
the land" (e).

\(d\) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 4. (e) "quia illum praefecerat",
Vatablus. So Ben Melech.

[Jeremiah 41:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 41:3</span></span>

Ishmael also slew all the Jews that were with him, even with Gedaliah,
at Mizpah,.... Not only those that were at table, but that were in the
city also. Josephus (f) says, that having slain those that were at the
feast with him, he went out in the night, and slew all the Jews in the
city, and the soldiers that were left by the Babylonians in it; but this
cannot be understood of all the individuals there, or of the main body
of the people, for they were carried captive by him, [Jer
41:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#009.md); but of those that opposed him,
or were able to avenge the death of their governor, and he might suspect
would do it:

and the Chaldeans that were found there, and the men of war; or, "even
the men of war" (g); this describes more particularly who they were that
were slain, those of the Jews, and especially the Chaldeans, who were in
military service; either the bodyguards of the governor, or the city
guards, or both, whom Ishmael thought it advisable to cut off, lest they
should fall upon him, and revenge the death of Gedaliah, and prevent his
further designs.

\(f\) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 4. (g) "inquam viros belli", Schmidt;
"bellatores scilicet", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 41:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 41:4</span></span>

And it came to pass, the second day after he had slain Gedaliah,....
That is, the day following, for it was in the night, as Josephus
relates, as before observed, the murder was committed:

and no man knew it; not any out of the city, or in remote parts; for
those that were in the city must be sensible of it; but as yet the
report of it had not reached the neighbourhood, and much less distant
parts; this is observed on account of the following story, and to show
how easily the persons after mentioned were drawn in by Ishmael.

[Jeremiah 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 41:5</span></span>

That there came certain from Shechem, from Shiloh, and from Samaria,....
Places in the ten tribes, and which belonged to the kingdom of Israel;
so that it seems even at this distance of time, though the body of the
ten tribes had been many years ago carried captive, yet there were still
some religious persons sons remaining, and who had a great regard to the
temple worship at Jerusalem:

even fourscore men, having their beards shaven, and their clothes rent,
and having cut themselves; as mourners for the destruction of Jerusalem,
and the captivity of the people. The two first of these rites, shaving
the beard, and rending of clothes, were agreeably to the law; but that
of cutting themselves, their flesh with their nails, or knives, was
forbidden by it, [Lev 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#028.md); so that
these people seemed to have retained some of the Heathenish customs of
the places where they lived; for the king of Assyria had placed colonies
of Heathens in Samaria, and the cities of it, [Kg2
17:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#024.md); these came

with offerings and incense in their hands: a meat offering made of fine
flour, as the word signifies; and incense, or frankincense, which used
to be put upon such an offering, [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001.md);

to bring them to the house of the Lord; but the temple was now
destroyed; wherefore either they thought there was a tabernacle or
sanctuary erected at Mizpah for divine service and sacrifice; or they
intended to offer these offerings on the spot where the temple of
Jerusalem stood; and where they hoped to find an altar, if only of
earth, and priests to sacrifice; though the Jewish commentators, Jarchi
and Kimchi, observe, that when they first set out, they had not heard of
the destruction of the temple, but heard of it in the way; and therefore
came in a mourning habit; but before knew nothing of it; and therefore
brought offerings with them, according to the former; but, according to
the latter, they had heard before they set out of the destruction of
Jerusalem, and the captivity of the people; but not of the burning of
the temple, until they were on their journey.

[Jeremiah 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 41:6</span></span>

And Ishmael the son of Nethaniah went forth to Mizpah to meet them,....
Hearing there was such a number of men upon the road to Jerusalem, in
such a habit, and upon such a design, he thought it advisable to go out
and meet them, and stop them, and decoy them into the city, and there
destroy them; lest, if they should have got any hint of what had been
done by him, they should spread it, and raise the country upon him,
before he had executed his whole design:

weeping all along as he went; pretending equal concern for the
destruction of the land, city, and temple, as they had:

and it came to pass, as he met them; when he came up to them, and some
discourse had passed between them:

he said unto them, come to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam; as if he was
alive, and for whom he had a great respect, and whose character was well
known to these men; and thought that this would be an inducement to come
along with him: this he said either to try them, whether they had heard
anything upon the road of the death of him; or as an argument to come
into the city, suggesting the governor would gladly receive, and
liberally entertain them. This looks as if their design was not to come
to Mizpah, but to go on their way to Jerusalem, had they not been met
with by him, and had he not thus solicited them.

[Jeremiah 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 41:7</span></span>

And it was so, when they came into the midst of the city,.... Where
Gedaliah's house was, to which he invited them; and as they went in, he
shut up the court, as Josephus (h) says, and slew them, as it here
follows:

that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah slew them, and cast them into the
midst of the pit; when he had slain them, the fourscore men he had
enticed into the city, except ten of them, he cast their dead bodies
into a pit near at hand:

he, and the men that were with him; Ishmael and the ten princes, with
what servants they brought with them; these were all concerned in the
death of these men.

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 4.

[Jeremiah 41:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 41:8</span></span>

But ten men were found among them, that said unto Ishmael, slay us
not,.... They begged for their lives, using what follows as an argument
to prevail upon him:

for we have treasures in the field, of wheat, and of barley, and of oil,
and of honey; not that they had then a stock upon the ground at this
time; for this being the seventh month, not only the barley and wheat
harvests had been over long ago, but the rest of the fruits of the earth
were gathered in: but this either means storehouses of such things in
the field; or else that these things were hid in cells under ground, the
land having been invaded, to secure them from the enemy, as is common to
do in time of war; and so Josephus says (i), they promised to deliver to
him things hid in the fields, household goods, clothes, and corn:

so he forbore, and slew them not among their brethren; but saved them,
and kept and carried them with him, in order to take these hidden
treasures, which lay in his way to Ammon; for between Gibeon, where he
was found, [Jer 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#012.md); and Ammon, lay
Samaria, Sichem, and Shiloh; at least it was not far out of his way to
take that course; and thus he appears to be a covetous man, as well as a
cruel one.

\(i\) Ibid. (Antiqu. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 4.)

[Jeremiah 41:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 41:9</span></span>

Now the pit wherein Ishmael had cast all the dead bodies,.... Not only
of those seventy men of Samaria, &c. but

of the men whom he had slain because of Gedaliah; because of their
attachment to him: or, "by the hand of Gedaliah" (k); not by him, as an
instrument; unless, as Jarchi observes, because he rejected the advice
of Johanan, and provided not for his safety, and his people, it was as
if they were slain by him (l); rather the sense is, that they were slain
by the side of him, or in the, place where he was, or along with him
(m); see a like phrase in [Jer 38:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#010.md);
now both the one and the other were cast into one pit: and this

was that which Asa the king had made for fear of Baasha king of Israel;
which was either a ditch that was cast up against the wall that went
round the city; or a large pit or well in the midst of it, to hold water
in it; and this was made by King Asa, either when he built and fortified
Mizpah, [Kg1 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#022.md); or, as the Targum
here, when Baasha king of Israel besieged it; which he made that he
might be provided for with water during the siege; or to hide himself in
it; or stop the enemy from proceeding any further, should he enter:

and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah filled it with them that were slain;
which shows it rather to be a pit or well within the city than a ditch
about it; since it was filled with the slain, with those that were slain
with Gedaliah, and those seventy other persons; and by which he made the
well useless to the inhabitants hereafter.

\(k\) "in manu Gedaliae", Montanus, Vatablus. (l) So T. Bab. Nidda, fol.
61. 1. (m) "Ad latus", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "in loco", some in
Munster; "cum Gedalia", De Dieu, Gataker.

[Jeremiah 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 41:10</span></span>

Then Ishmael carried away captive all the residue of the people that
were in Mizpah,.... All that were not slain by him, that remained after
the slaughter he had made, chiefly the unarmed people; they being men of
war who fell by his sword:

even the king's daughters; whether they were the daughters of Zedekiah,
Jehoiakim, or Jehoiakim, says Kimchi, we know not; but it is most likely
that they were the daughters of Zedekiah the last king, and who was just
taken and carried captive; and so Josephus (n) expressly calls them;
these the king of Babylon regarded not, because they could neither
fight, nor claim the kingdom; only the sons of the king, whom he slew
before his eyes; though it may be these were not his daughters by his
lawful wife, but by his concubines, and so were not properly of the
royal family, and less regarded:

and all the people that remained in Mizpah, whom Nebuzaradan the captain
of the guard had committed to Gedaliah the son of Ahikam; that were not
slain, or carried captive by the Chaldeans; but were left at Mizpah,
under the care and government of Gedaliah:

and Ishmael the son of Nethaniah carried them away captive: so that
those who escaped one captivity fell into another, and even by the hand
of one of their own countrymen:

and departed to go over to the Ammonites; he went from Mizpah with these
captives, in order to carry them to the king of Ammon, and make them his
slaves; who had put him upon this enterprise out of hatred to the Jews,
and to enrich himself with their spoils. Some render it, "to go over
with the Ammonites" (o); which they suppose the ten men to be that came
along with him and the princes, to commit the barbarities they did.

\(n\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 4.) (o) "cum filiis Ammon",
Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 41:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 41:11</span></span>

But when Johanan the son of Kareah,.... The same that is mentioned [Jer
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#008.md); and who had informed Gedaliah of
Ishmael's designs against him, but he would not believe him:

and all the captains of the forces that were with him; his brother
Jonathan, Seraiah, the sons of Ephai, and Jezaniah, [Jer
40:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#008.md);

heard of all the evil that Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had done; in
murdering Gedaliah, and those that were with him, destroying seventy
other persons he had decoyed, and carrying captive the rest of the
people at Mizpah; for though Ishmael kept all this a secret as much as
he could, for fear of these forces, and that he might get off clear to
Ammon; yet, by some means or another, these captains came to hear of it,
who, probably, were not at a great distance from Mizpah.

[Jeremiah 41:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 41:12</span></span>

Then they took all the men,.... All the soldiers that were under their
command; this they did at once, believing the report to be true, as they
had reason to do; since they knew of Ishmael's designs, and had given
notice and warning of them to Gedaliah, though he would not listen to
them:

and went to fight with Ishmael the son of Nethaniah: resolving to give
him battle, and to revenge the innocent blood he had shed, and rescue
the captives out of his hands he was carrying to the Ammonites:

and found him by the great waters that are in Gibeon; taking this road
to the country of Ammon, though it was not quite the direct road; either
to avoid the forces of Johanan; or rather for the sake of the hid
treasure at Shechem, or Shiloh, or Samaria, the ten men had promised him
for their lives. These great waters were the same with the pool at
Gibeon, where the servants of Ishbosheth and the servants of David met,
and sat one on one side, and the other on the other; and where twelve
young men on each side slew one another, and from thence called
Helkathhazzurim, [Sa2 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#012.md); and the
Targum calls it

"the pool of many waters, which were in Gibeon.''

Josephus (p) calls it a fountain in Hebron; which perhaps should be read
Gibeon.

\(p\) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 5.

[Jeremiah 41:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 41:13</span></span>

Now it came to pass, that, when all the people which were with
Ishmael,.... That is, those which he had brought captives from Mizpah;
not those that came with him thither:

saw Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces that
were with him, they were glad; looking upon them as their deliverers;
hoping by their means to be preserved from being carried captives to the
king of Ammon.

[Jeremiah 41:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 41:14</span></span>

So all the people that Ishmael had carried away captive from Mizpah cast
about,.... Or turned about, and wheeled off from Ishmael, and deserted
him at once; not at all regarding his authority, nor fearing his menaces
or his power; being in sight of the captains and their forces, they were
determined to join, and put themselves under their protection, knowing
them to be their friends, and that they, came to deliver them:

and returned, and went unto Johanan the son of Kareah; turned their
backs on Ishmael, and marched directly to Johanan, and the captains of
the forces under them.

[Jeremiah 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 41:15</span></span>

But Ishmael the son of Nethaniah escaped from Johanan with eight
men,.... Of the ten he brought with hin), [Jer
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001.md); two of them being slain in this
skirmish, or taken by Johanan, or they fled another way:

and went to the Ammonites; who had put him upon, or however encouraged
and assisted him in, his wicked attempts; though he returned to them not
according to their wishes, nor with that honour and glory he thought to
have done.

[Jeremiah 41:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 41:16</span></span>

Then took Johanan the son of Kareah, and all the captains of the forces
that were with him,.... After Ishmael had made his escape, whom they did
not think fit to pursue, and the people had committed themselves to
their care and protection; and having brought them to Mizpah again, they
took them from thence, as follows:

all the remnant of the people whom he had recovered from Ishmael the son
of Nethaniah from Mizpah, after that he had slain Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam: those whom he had rescued from Ishmael, and had returned to
Mizpah, be persuaded to go with him from thence; who are more
particularly described, as follows:

even mighty men of war, and the women, and the children, and the
eunuchs, whom he had brought again from Gibeon; or "men, even men of
war" (q); warlike men, soldiers; by which it appears that Ishmael must
have more than ten men with him when he came to Mizpah, as well to do
what he did there, as likewise to carry away such a number of captives,
among which were mighty men, men of war, some of whom he had slain,
besides women and children, to which are added eunuchs, not mentioned
before, such as the king of Judah had in his court; see [Jer
38:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#007.md); but these were of no account
with the Chaldeans; and therefore they left them behind with the poor of
the land; perhaps Ebedmelech might be among them, whose safety and
protection is promised, because of his kindness to Jeremiah, [Jer
39:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#015.md). The Targum calls them princes:
these were brought back by Johanan from Gibeon, where he met with
Ishmael, to Mizpah; from whence they had been carried, and whom he took
from thence again.

\(q\) "mares, viros belli", Schmidt; "nempe vires bellatores", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 41:17</span></span>

And they departed,.... From Mizpah, Johanan, and the captains of the
forces, and all the people rescued from Ishmael:

and dwelt in the habitation of Chimham, which is by Bethlehem: so called
perhaps from Chimham, the son of Barzillai the Gileadite, to whom David
or Solomon might give this place to dwell in, [Sa2
19:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#037.md), [Kg1
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#007.md). The Targum is express for the
former, calling it

"the habitation which David gave to Chimham, the son of Barzillai the
Gileadite;''

and as it was near Bethlehem, it might be a part of the patrimony which
belonged to David, as a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite; which he might
give to Chimham, out of respect to his father Barzillai, who showed
kindness to him when he was obliged to flee from Absalom; which, though
it returned to David's family in the year of jubilee, as all
inheritances did, yet might continue to be called after the name of
Chimham, in commemoration of the royal grant of it to him. Josephus (r)
calls the name of the place Mandra. The reason why Johanan and those
with him pitched on this place was, because it lay in the way

to go to enter into Egypt; where they had an inclination to go; having
still a friendly regard to that people, and a confidence in them, as
appears by some following chapters; and that they might be ready and at
hand to flee thither, should the Chaldeans come against them, which they
feared.

\(r\) Antiqu. l. 10. c. 9. sect. 5.

[Jeremiah 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 41:18</span></span>

Because of the Chaldeans,.... Which clause some think should have been
joined to [Jer 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#017.md). This is a reason
given why they departed from Mizpah, and dwelt at the habitation of
Chimham in the way to Egypt; and which is explained in the next words:

for they were afraid of them; at least this they pretended, that the
Chaldeans would come upon them, and cut them off, and revenge themselves
on them:

because Ishmael the son of Nethaniah had slain Gedaliah the son of
Ahikam, whom the king of Babylon made governor in the land; no doubt it
was provoking to them to hear that the viceroy or deputy governor of the
king of Babylon was slain in this manner; and still more so, as there
were many Chaldeans slain with him; but there was no reason to believe
that the king of Babylon would carry his resentment against the Jews
with Johanan, or take vengeance on them, who had so bravely appeared
against the murderers, and had rescued the captives out of their hands:
this seems only a pretence for their going into Egypt; for though they
were promised safety in Judah by the Prophet Jeremiah, yet they were
still for going into Egypt, as the following chapters show.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 42](jer042.md)

</div>
