<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer041)  [Next](jer043.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 42](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 42:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 42

This chapter contains a request of the Jews to Jeremiah, to pray to the
Lord for them to direct them, and the Lord's answer to it. The request
is made by the captains and all the people, [Jer
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#001.md); which Jeremiah undertook to
present to the Lord, [Jer 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#004.md); they
promising to go according to the direction that should be given, [Jer
42:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#005.md). After ten days an answer is
returned, and the prophet calls the captains and people together to hear
it, [Jer 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#007.md); the purport of which
was, that if they continued in the land of Judah, it would be well with
them, and they would be safe, [Jer
42:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#009.md); but if they went into Egypt,
they should die by the sword, famine, and pestilence, and be a curse and
reproach, and never see their own land more, [Jer
42:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#013.md); they are charged with
dissimulation and disobedience, [Jer
42:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#019.md); and the chapter is concluded
with an assurance of their perishing by the above judgments in the place
they were desirous of dwelling in, [Jer
42:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#022.md).

[Jeremiah 42:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 42:1</span></span>

Then all the captains of the forces,.... Having taken up their residence
at the habitation of Chimham, in their way to Egypt, where they were
desirous of going, and being afraid of the Chaldeans, as they pretended:

and Johanan the son of Kareah; or, "even Johanan" (s); especially and
particularly he, the principal captain and chief spokesman in this
affair:

and Jezaniah the son of Hoshaiah; said to be the son of a Maachathite,
[Jer 40:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#008.md);

and all the people from the least even unto the greatest: a phrase
expressive of the universality of them in the strongest terms:

came near; that is, to Jeremiah; who either was at Mizpah when Gedaliah
was slain, but preserved by the Lord; and though carried captive by
Ishmael with the rest, was rescued by Johanan; and now along with him:
or rather after he had been with Gedaliah at Mizpah, and made a short
stay there, he went to Anathoth, and there abode till now; and when
Johanan took those that were left at Mizpah, he gathered together all
the rest of the Jews in different places to him, in order to go to
Egypt, and among the rest the Prophet Jeremiah; for it can hardly be
thought, had he been at Mizpah when Ishmael was there, he would have
escaped without a miracle.

\(s\) "imprimis Johanan", Schmidt; "nempe Johanan", Piscator, Grotius.

[Jeremiah 42:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 42:2</span></span>

And said unto Jeremiah the prophet,.... That is, some one of them, as
the mouth of the whole body, very probably Johanan:

let, we beseech thee, our supplication be accepted before thee; they
treat the prophet with great respect, and are very humble and
submissive, as if they were very hearty and sincere in their request:

and pray for us unto the Lord thy God; as if they were conscious of
their own inability to pray for themselves, and of their unworthiness to
call God their God; and as if they had a high opinion of, he prophet, as
having an interest in God, and great power with him in prayer, whom he
could not well deny anything:

even for all this remnant; this poor remnant, this handful of people,
left of the sword, famine, and pestilence, left in the land by the
Chaldeans, and who had escaped the cruelty of Ishmael; and for whom it
might be hoped the Lord would still have a regard, since he had so
mercifully and wonderfully preserved them:

for we are left but a few of many, as thine eyes do behold us; the
number of the people had been very large, but by the judgments of the
sword, famine, and pestilence, and captivity, they were greatly reduced;
here was their whole number before the prophet; his eyes beheld them,
and the condition they were in: this they said to move his compassion,
and very likely to suggest to him how improbable it was that they should
ever be able to continue in their own land; but that it would be better
to put themselves under the protection of a neighbouring nation, Egypt,
whither they were inclined to go; and hoped to have a word from the Lord
by the prophet, to direct them thither.

[Jeremiah 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 42:3</span></span>

That the Lord thy God may show us the way wherein we may walk,.... Not
the way of their duty as to religious worship, or their moral
conversation, which was the way of God's commandments, and had been
shown them, and they knew it; but which way they should steer their
course for their safety; they had departed from Mizpah of themselves,
and had taken up their dwelling at Geruthchimham, in the way to Egypt;
whither they had set their faces, and where their hearts were, only they
wanted the Lord's sanction for it, pretending they would be directed by
him:

and the thing that we should do; the steps they should take in order to
proceed; and what they should do before they left their own country, and
went into another.

[Jeremiah 42:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 42:4</span></span>

Then Jeremiah the prophet said unto them, I have heard you,.... He took
notice of what they said to him, and found himself disposed to comply
with their request, and readily granted it:

behold, I will pray unto the Lord your God, according to your words; be
an intercessor for them; use his interest with his God, and their God;
and, on account of relation, might expect to be heard; whom he would
humbly entreat to direct what they should do, as they desired:

and it shall come to pass, that whatsoever thing the Lord shall answer
you, I will declare it unto you; I will keep nothing back from you; but
faithfully make known the whole mind and will of God, just as it is
delivered, be it in what way soever: and though it is not expressed, he
might suggest that he had some doubt on his mind whether they would obey
it or not; and that he expected they would be open and free in declaring
themselves on that point; since he had so readily complied with their
request, and was determined to act the faithful part to them; hence the
following reply:

[Jeremiah 42:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 42:5</span></span>

Then they said to Jeremiah, the Lord be a true and faithful witness
between us,.... Which is the form of an oath; a solemn appeal to God, as
a witness to what they were about to say, and to the sincerity of their
hearts in it; who is true to his word, and faithful to his promises and
threatenings; and who bears a true and faithful testimony, and will do
what is just and right; and yet these people never intended to perform
what they promised; which is a most shocking piece of atheism in a
professing people; and who, at this very time, could not but observe the
judgments of God upon their nation, city, and temple:

if we do not even according to all things for the which the Lord thy God
shall send thee to us; they promise to do everything the Lord should
signify by the prophet as his will; and, if they did not, wish the
severest judgments of God might fall upon them.

[Jeremiah 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 42:6</span></span>

Whether it be good, or whether it be evil,.... Not morally good, or
evil; for nothing but what is good, and not evil, in this sense, can
come from God; but whether pleasantly or profitably good or evil;
whether agreeable or disagreeable, pleasing or displeasing, advantageous
or not; whether it seemed to them good or evil, be it what it would in
their opinion and esteem:

we will obey the voice of the Lord our God, to whom we send thee; this
was well spoken, had they been sincere in it; and had they implored and
depended on the grace of God to have enabled them to obey; but they
spoke not in the uprightness of their hearts; and, did they, it was with
too much confidence of their own strength, and the power of their free
will:

that it may be well with us, when we obey the voice of the Lord our God;
they spoke as if they knew their own interest; for so it was, that it
was well or ill with those people, as they obeyed or disobeyed the voice
of the Lord; and yet they acted not according to it; and, what was worse
still, did not intend it. What a wretched scene of hypocrisy is here!

[Jeremiah 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 42:7</span></span>

And it came to pass after ten days, that the word of the Lord came unto
Jeremiah. Abarbinel thinks it was on the tenth day of the seventh month,
the day of atonement, that the answer was returned; but it is clear,
from the context, that it was ten days from the time the Jews applied to
the prophet to inquire of the Lord for them, and he promised to do it,
that this word came from the Lord to him; not that he was praying all
this while, as some think; but, having spread the case before the Lord,
he waited for an answer; which was deferred, that it might have the
greater weight with it when it came; and that it might appear that it
was not of the prophet himself, a device of his own; and chiefly this
was to mortify these people, who were impatient of an answer; and whose
hypocrisy the Lord knew; and whose disobedience he foresaw; and
therefore did not think fit to give the answer directly, but keep them
in suspense awhile.

[Jeremiah 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 42:8</span></span>

Then called he Johanan the son of Kareah,.... That is, Jeremiah, as soon
as he had received the answer from the Lord, called to Johanan; who,
after the death of Gedaliah, was a person of the greatest authority, and
had the command of the people, to come unto him, and hear what it was:
he either called to him vocally and by name; or he sent a proper
messenger to him, to meet him at some convenient place, to receive it;
and not him only, but

all the captains of the forces which were with him, and all the people,
from the least even unto the greatest; they were all convened together,
as it was proper they should, to hear the word of the Lord; and the
rather, since they all joined in a request to the prophet, [Jer
42:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#001.md).

[Jeremiah 42:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 42:9</span></span>

And said unto them, thus saith the Lord, the God of Israel,.... That had
chosen Israel; had a favour for that people, and bestowed many blessings
on them, and continued in a covenant relation to them; and therefore
what he said should be regarded by them. This preface is made by the
prophet, to show that what he was about to say was not of himself, and
in his own name; but was from the Lord, and who bore a good will to
them; and therefore whatever he said should be taken in good part, and
as what was best for them:

unto whom ye sent me, to present your supplication before him; or, "to
cause your supplication to fall before him" (t); to make it in the most
humble and submissive manner; and which carries in it other arguments to
engage them to obey the word of the Lord he brought to them; both
because they had sent him to the Lord on this errand, to get a word from
him; and by him had entreated him for it, in the most suppliant manner.
The word from the Lord follows:

\(t\) "ut cadere facerem preces vestras coram ipso", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 42:10</span></span>

If ye will still abide in this land,.... In the land of Judea, their
native country, where they had always lived, and where they continued
when their brethren were carried captive; and yet they thought of going
out of it, which the Lord knew; and therefore to encourage them to abide
in it, and not think of departing into Egypt; that if they would take up
their residence in it, and determine to continue there, he thus promises
them:

then will I build you, and not pull you down: and I will plant you,

and not pluck you up; that is, they should be firm and stable, happy and
prosperous; and abound with all kind of blessings, and increase in
numbers, wealth, and riches. The metaphors are taken from building
houses, and planting fields and vineyards:

for I repent me of the evil that I have done unto you; not that he had
done any unjust thing to them; or that he changed his mind concerning
them; but that he had compassion on them, and would change his way and
course of providence towards them, according to his unchangeable will.

[Jeremiah 42:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 42:11</span></span>

Be not afraid of the king of Babylon, of whom ye are afraid,.... Lest he
should revenge the death of Gedaliah upon them, which was a groundless
fear; see [Jer 41:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#018.md); or that they
should be dealt hardly with by him, and be cruelly oppressed, and not
able to live in subjection to him; see [Jer
40:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#009.md);

be not afraid of him, saith the Lord: who, being omniscient, knew they
were; and, being omnipotent, a greater King than the king of Babylon,
the King of king?, they had no reason to fear anything from him, since
they were under his protection:

for I am with you to save you, and to deliver you from his hand; from
his avenging and oppressing hand; though they were not to be delivered
as yet from subjection to him, or being tributaries to him; which they
might be, and yet dwell in peace and safety.

[Jeremiah 42:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 42:12</span></span>

And I will show mercies unto you,.... Bestow blessings of goodness upon
them, out of pure mercy and compassion to them, and not according to
their merits; or I will cause others to show mercy to them, even the
king of Babylon, as follows: God shows mercy to men when he stirs up the
compassion of others towards them:

that he may have mercy upon you; and not avenge the death of Gedaliah,
or any way cruelly oppress them, but show them all the favour they could
wish for or expect under such a government, and in such circumstances;
giving them vineyards and fields, and allowing them to gather the fruits
of them, and enjoy them:

and cause you to return to your own land: this is said, not of the
captives in Babylon, as Kimchi and Abarbinel, since these were not to
return till seventy years were ended; and when they did, it was not by
the order and direction of the king of Babylon, but of the king of
Persia: this is said of those who, from the time that Jerusalem had been
besieged, had deserted their houses and fields, but should have liberty
to return to them; or of those who more lately had been carried captive
by Ishmael, from the places where they had settled, but should be
returned to them again, and live peaceably and comfortably there under
the government and protection of the king of Babylon.

[Jeremiah 42:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 42:13</span></span>

But if ye say, we will not dwell in this land,.... Or continue any
longer in it, but go into Egypt:,

neither obey the voice of the Lord your God; or, "so as not to hearken
to" or "obey", &c. (u); for they did not say in so many words that they
would not obey the voice of the Lord; they had promised they would; but
resolving, against his declared will, that they would not abide in the
land, but go into Egypt, was interpretatively saying they would not obey
his voice.

\(u\) "ita ut non auscultetis", Piscator, Cocceius; "ut non obediatis",
Pagninus, Schmidt; "ut non audiatis", so some in Vatablus.

[Jeremiah 42:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 42:14</span></span>

Saying, no, but we will go into the land of Egypt,.... It was all one as
if they had said, no, we will not obey the voice of the Lord to continue
in our own land; we are determined to go into Egypt, induced by the
following reasons:

where we shall see no war; either internal, or with a foreign enemy; as
both of late in their own land, and which they feared would be again;
but promised themselves exemption from both in the land of Egypt, and
therefore coveted to dwell there:

nor hear the sound of the trumpet; neither hear of wars nor rumours of
wars; not the sound of the trumpet in the armies of the enemy, or among
themselves, to gather together and prepare for battle; or, as Jarchi
thinks, the sound of the trumpet blown by the watchman, giving notice to
the people of the approach of an enemy:

nor have hunger of bread; as they had had while Judea was invaded and
Jerusalem besieged, and a foreign army in the land; and though they had
no reason to fear this now, yet they thought they should be more out of
the danger of it in Egypt, a fruitful country, overflowed by the Nile:

and there will we dwell; in peace, prosperity, and safety: this was
their resolution, to go and abide there; and this their confidence, that
such would be their happy state.

[Jeremiah 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 42:15</span></span>

And now therefore hear the word of the Lord, ye remnant of Judah,.... A
small remnant indeed, a few that were left in the land; who ought
therefore to have admired the distinguishing goodness of Providence in
preserving them in it; where they should have continued and made use of
their privilege, to the glory of God and their mutual good:

thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel; the Lord of armies
above and below, the Lord God omnipotent, and so able to protect them in
their land; and who had a peculiar favour to Israel, and stood in a
particular relation to them, and therefore would do it, of which they
had no reason to doubt; but, disobliging him, what judgments might they
not expect?

if you wholly set your faces to enter into Egypt: are resolved upon it,
and are actually engaged in it; turning their faces from Judea towards
Egypt, and obstinately pursuing it, nor can be reclaimed from it: the
phrase expresses their resolution, impudence, and obstinacy:

and go to sojourn there: to be sojourners and strangers there, as their
fathers had been before; the remembrance of which was enough to set them
against going into Egypt any more.

[Jeremiah 42:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 42:16</span></span>

Then it shall come to pass,.... That the various judgments following
should come upon them:

that the sword, which ye feared, shall overtake you there in the land of
Egypt; that is, the sword; of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, which they
feared they should fall by in Judea; this should come after them in
Egypt, and there overtake them, as it did; Egypt being destroyed by the
king of Babylon, as it was foretold it should, [Jer
46:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer046.htm#025.md);

and the famine, whereof you were afraid, shalt follow close after you
there in Egypt; the famine they were afraid would come upon them in
Judea, should pursue them, overtake them, seize on them, and cleave unto
them, in Egypt; thus the evils they thought to escape, by moving from
one place, should befall them in another; there is no fleeing from the
presence, power, and hand of God:

and there ye shall die; either by the sword, or by famine, or by
pestilence, as in the [Jer 42:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#017.md).

[Jeremiah 42:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 42:17</span></span>

So shall it be with all the men that set their faces to go into Egypt to
sojourn there,.... Not all that went into Egypt, but all that were
resolutely set upon it; that were obstinately bent to go there, and did
go, contrary to the express command of God; for otherwise there were
some that were forced to go against their wills, as Jeremiah, Baruch,
and no doubt others:

they shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence; three
of the Lord's sore judgments; some should die by one, and some by
another, and some by a third; all should die by one or the other:

and none of them shall remain or escape from the evil that I will bring
upon them; that is, none of those who wilfully, and of their own accord,
went down to Egypt; they all perished there, none could escape the hand
of God, or the evil he determined to bring upon them; which is to be
understood of the above judgments.

[Jeremiah 42:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 42:18</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord of hosts, the God of Israel,.... See Gill on
[Jer 42:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#015.md);

as mine anger and my fury hath been poured forth upon the inhabitants of
Jerusalem; like a large hasty shower of rain; or rather like melted
metal, which suddenly and swiftly runs, and spreads itself, and burns
and consumes with a violent heat; such was the wrath of God on
Jerusalem, in the destruction of it by the Chaldeans:

so shall my fury be poured forth upon you, when ye shall enter into
Egypt; as soon as they had well got there, quickly after they were
settled there; for it was in the time of the then present king of Egypt,
Pharaohhophra, and by the then present king of Babylon, Nebuchadnezzar,
that the destruction of Egypt was, in which these Jews suffered:

and ye shall be an execration, and an astonishment, and a curse, and a
reproach; men should be astonished at the hand of God upon them,
reproach them for their sins; and when they made any imprecation on
themselves, it would be in this form, if it be so, let the same
calamities come upon me as upon the Jews in Egypt:

and ye shall see this place no more; and so their case would be worse
than their brethren in Babylon; who, after a term of years were expired,
would return to their own land, which these would never see any more.

[Jeremiah 42:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 42:19</span></span>

The Lord hath said concerning you, O ye remnant of Judah,.... Or, "unto
you" (w); by the mouth of the prophet; or, "against you" (x); that which
was contrary to their inclination and will, as follows:

go ye not into Egypt: this was the express command of God:

know certainly that I have admonished you this day; not to go into
Egypt: or, "have testified unto you" (y); the will of God concerning
this matter; and therefore they could not plead ignorance.

\(w\) "alloquitur vos", Junius & Tremellius; "ad vos", so some in
Vatablus. (x) "Contra vos", Calvin. (y) "contestatus sum vos", Montanus,
Piscator, Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 42:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 42:20</span></span>

For ye dissembled in your hearts,.... Did not honestly and faithfully
declare their intentions; they said one thing with their mouths, and
meant another in their minds; they pretended they would act according to
the will of God, as it should be made known to them by him, when they
were determined to take their own way. Some render it, "ye have deceived
me in your hearts" (z); the prophet, so Kimchi; by that which was in
their hearts, not declaring what was their real intention and design:
or, "ye have deceived your souls" (a); you have deceived yourselves and
one another; I have not deceived you, nor the Lord, but you have put a
cheat upon your own souls: or, "you have used deceit against your souls"
(b); to the hurt of them, to your present ruin and everlasting
destruction:

when ye sent me unto the Lord your God; the prophet did not go of
himself, they desired him to go:

saying, pray for us unto the Lord our God; to be directed in the way
they should go; so that the prophet did nothing but what they desired
him to do:

and according to all that the Lord our God shall say, so declare unto
us, and we will do it; they pressed him to a faithful declaration of the
will of God to them, and promised they would act according to it. Now he
had done all this; he had been wire God, prayed unto him as they
requested, and had brought them his mind and will, and made a faithful
relation of it, and yet they did not attend to it; so that the deceit
was not in him, but in them, as follows:

\(z\) "seduxistis me animis vestris", so some in Vatablus; "fefellistis
me", Munster. So Ben Melech. (a) "Fecistis errare animas vestras",
Pagninus; "fefellistis", Calvin. (b) "Seduxeritis vos contra animas
vestras", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 42:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 42:21</span></span>

And now I have this day declared it unto you,.... The whole will of God,
and had not kept back anything from them:

but ye have not obeyed the voice of the Lord your God; or, "ye will not
obey" (c); the prophet knew they would not obey the command of the Lord
not to go into Egypt, either by his conversation with them during the
ten days the answer of the Lord was deferred, by which he plainly saw
they were determined to go into Egypt; or by their countenances and
behaviour, while he was delivering the Lord's message to them; by what
he observed in them, he knew what was said was not agreeable to them,
and that their mind was to go into Egypt: or he had this, as others
think, by divine revelation; though without that he knew the cast of
this people, and what a rebellious and disobedient people they were, and
had been, never obeying the voice of the Lord:

nor any thing for which he hath sent me unto you: not anyone particular
thing respecting this present affair; nor indeed any of his prophecies
had they regarded, with which he had been sent to them before.

\(c\) "et tamen non vultis parere", Vatablus.

[Jeremiah 42:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 42:22</span></span>

Now therefore know certainly,.... Or, "in knowing know" (d); they might
assure themselves of this, that it would certainly come to pass, and
most justly and deservedly; since it was at their own request the
prophet sought the mind of the Lord for them, and had faithfully related
it to them, and they had promised to observe it; wherefore, should they
go into Egypt, as their inclination scented to be entirely that way,
they must expect what follows:

that ye shall die by the sword, by the famine, and by the pestilence; by
one or other of these, or all of them; some by one, and some by another,
as before threatened; evils they thought to escape by going thither, but
which should surely follow them, and overtake them:

in the place whither ye desire to go and to sojourn; that is, in Egypt,
to which they had a strong inclination, where they greatly desired to
be, pleased themselves with the thoughts of, and which they chose of
their own will and pleasure for their habitation.

\(d\) "sciendo scietis", Schmidt; "sciendo sciatis", Pagninus, Montanus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 43](jer043.md)

</div>
