<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer017)  [Next](jer019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 18:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 18

This chapter expresses the sovereign power of God ever his creatures,
and his usual methods of dealing with them; it threatens destruction to
the Jews for their idolatry; and is closed with the prophet's complaint
of his persecutors, and with imprecations upon them. The sovereign power
of God is expressed under the simile of a potter working in his shop,
and making and marring vessels at pleasure, [Jer
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001.md); the application of which to God,
and the house of Israel, is in [Jer
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#005.md); and is illustrated by his usual
dealings with kingdoms and nations; for though he is a sovereign Being,
yet he acts both in a kind and equitable way; and as the potter changes
his work, so he changes the dispensations of his providence, of which
two instances are given; the one is, that having threatened ruin to a
nation, upon their repentance and good behaviour he revokes the
threatening, [Jer 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007.md); and the other
is, that having made a declaration of good to a people, upon their sin
and disobedience he recalls it, and punishes them for their wickedness,
[Jer 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#009.md); then follows a prophecy of
the destruction of the Jews in particular, in which they are exhorted to
repentance to prevent it; their obstinacy is observed; their folly in
departing from God, and worshipping idols, is exposed; and they are
threatened with utter ruin, [Jer
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#011.md); the conspiracy and evil designs
of the Jews against the prophet, their malice and ingratitude, are
complained of by him, [Jer 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018.md); his
imprecations upon them, and prayers for their destruction, are delivered
out in [Jer 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#021.md).

[Jeremiah 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 18:1</span></span>

The word which came to Jeremiah from the Lord, saying. The word of
prophecy, as the Targum: this is a distinct prophecy from the former,
though it may be connected with it; it referring to the destruction
threatened in the latter part of the preceding chapter.

[Jeremiah 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 18:2</span></span>

Arise, and go down to the potter's house,.... Which, no doubt, was well
known to the prophet; but where it was is not certain. Some think
Jeremiah was in the temple, and this house was beneath it, and therefore
he is bid to go down to it; but of this there is no certainty, nor even
probability: it is most likely that this house was without the city,
perhaps near the potter's field, [Mat
27:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#010.md); and which lying low, he is
ordered to go down to it:

and there I will cause thee to hear my words; there the Lord would tell
him what he had further to say to him, and what he should say to the
people; and where by lively representations, by sensible objects before
him, he would cause him to understand more clearly what he said and
designed to do: as God sometimes represented things to the minds of the
prophets in dreams and visions, setting before them mental objects, and
raising in their minds ideas of things; so sometimes he represented
things to them by real visible objects, and, by similes taken from
thence, conveyed unto them a clear and distinct knowledge of his mind
and will, and they to the people; which was the case here.

[Jeremiah 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 18:3</span></span>

Then I went down to the potter's house,.... He did as the Lord commanded
him; he was obedient to the divine will; he went to hear what the Lord
had to say to him there, and to observe such things, from whence he
might learn instruction for himself and others:

and, behold, he wrought a work on the wheels; the Targum renders it
"upon a seat"; or "his seats", as Junius and Tremellius; but it
signifies not the instrument on which the potter sat while he worked,
but that on which he did his work. The Septuagint version renders it,
"on stones" (n); and R. Jonah (o) says, that in some countries the
potter's instrument is in the likeness of two millstones, the lowermost
is the greatest, and the uppermost is the least. Or rather the word may
signify "frames", or "moulds" (p), made of stone, in which the potter
put his clay, and fashioned it: though I see no reason to depart from
the signification of "wheels", which are used in the potter's work, even
two of them; and so the word here is of the dual number; though one is
more properly called the "wheel", and the other the "lathe", and are
described as follows:

"The "potter's wheel" consists principally in its nut, which is a beam
or axis, whose foot or pivot plays perpendicularly on a free stone sole,
or bottom; from the four corners atop of this beam, which does not
exceed two feet in height, arise four iron bars, called the spokes of
the wheel; which forming diagonal lines with the beam, descend, and are
fastened at bottom to the edges of a strong wooden circle, four feet in
diameter, perfectly like the felloes of a coach wheel; except that it
hath neither axis nor radii; and is only joined to the beam, which
serves it as an axis, by the iron bars. The top of the nut is flat, of a
circular figure, and a foot in diameter. On this is laid a piece of the
clay, or earth, to be turned and fashioned. The wheel thus disposed is
encompassed with four sides of four different pieces of wood, sustained
in a wooden frame: the hind piece, which is that whereon the workman
sits, is made a little inclining towards the wheel: on the fore piece
are placed the pieces of prepared earth: lastly, the side pieces serve
the workman to rest his feet against; and are made inclining, to give
him more or less room, according to the size of the vessels to be
turned; by his side is a trough of water, wherewith from time to time he
wets his hands, to prevent the earth sticking to them.----The potter
having prepared his clay or earth, and laid a piece of it suitable to
the work he intends on the top of the beam, sits down; his thighs and
legs much expanded, and his feet rested on the side pieces, as is most
convenient. In this situation he turns the wheel round, till it has got
the proper velocity; when, wetting his hands in the water, he bores the
cavity of the vessel, continuing to widen it from the middle; and thus
turns it into form, turning the wheel afresh, and wetting his hands from
time to time.----The potter's "lathe" is also a kind of "wheel", but
simpler and slighter than the former; its three chief members are an
iron beam or axis, three feet and a half high, and two inches in
diameter; a little wooden wheel, all of a piece, an inch thick, and
seven or eight in diameter, placed horizontally atop of the beam, and
serving to form the vessel on; and another larger wooden wheel, all of a
piece, three inches thick, and two or three feet broad, fastened to the
same beam at the bottom, parallel to the horizon. The beam, or axis,
turns by a pivot at bottom, in an iron stand. The workman gives the
motion to the lathe with his feet, by pushing the great wheel
alternately with each foot; still giving it a lesser or greater degree
of motion, as his work requires (q).''

Thus Jeremiah saw the potter work, or somewhat like this; for, no doubt,
pottery, as other things, has been improved since his time.

\(n\) , Sept. "super lapide, vel typo", Calvin. (o) Apud Kimchi & Ben
Melech in loc. (p) "Lapideos typos", Calvin; "super formas", Montanus.
(q) Chambers's Cyclopaedia, in the word "Pottery".

[Jeremiah 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 18:4</span></span>

And the vessel that he made of clay,.... Which is the matter the vessel
is made of:

was marred in the hand of the potter; while he was working it; either it
fell, as the Septuagint version renders it, out of his hands, or from
the beam on which it was laid; or was spoiled by some means or other, so
that it was not fit for the purpose he first intended it: or the words
should be read, according to some copies, "and the vessel was marred
which he made, as clay in the hand of the potter" (r); while it was
clay; or moist, as Jarchi interprets it; and while it was in his hands,
forming and fashioning it:

so he made it again another vessel; put it into another form and shape
it would better serve:

as seemed good to the potter to make it; just as he pleased, and as his
judgment in his art directed him; he having power over the clay to mould
it as he would, and as it best answered so to do.

\(r\) "sed corruptum est vas quod ille ficiens (erat) sicud lutum
(solet) in manu figuli", Schmidt, Montanus. So Abarbinel; and thus it is
read in the margin of our Bibles.

[Jeremiah 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 18:5</span></span>

Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. While he was in the
potter's house, and after he had observed his manner of working, and the
change he had made in his work, the Lord spoke to him, and applied it in
the following manner.

[Jeremiah 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 18:6</span></span>

O house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the
Lord,.... Make, and mar, and remake at pleasure? certainly he could. God
is a sovereign Being, and has a sovereign and uncontrollable power over
his creatures; he has an indisputable right unto them, and can dispose
of them as he pleases; he has as good a right to them, and as great
power over them, as the potter has to and over his clay, and a better
and greater; since they are made by him, and have their all from him,
their being, life, and motion; whereas the clay is not made by the
potter; it is only the vessel that is made of the clay by him, which has
its form from him; if therefore the potter has such power over the clay,
which he did not make, as to cast it into another forth as it pleases
him, and especially when marred; the Lord has an undoubted power over
men, and a just right to change their, state and circumstances as he
pleases; nor have they any reason to complain of him, especially when
they have marred themselves by their own sins and transgressions; which
was the present case of the house of Israel, or the Jews; see [Isa
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#016.md);

behold, as the clay is in the potter's hand; and he can form and fashion
it as he pleases, and it is not in the power of the clay to resist and
hinder him:

so are ye in mine hand, O house of Israel; and I can dispose of you as I
please, and put you in what circumstances it seems good unto me, drive
you from your land, and scatter you among the nations; nor can you
hinder me from doing this, or whatever else is my pleasure. And this his
sovereign power and pleasure, and as exercised in a way of mercy and
equity, are exemplified in the following cases.

[Jeremiah 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 18:7</span></span>

At what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
kingdom,.... By way of threatening: or, "the moment I shall speak" (s),
&c; as soon as ever I have declared concerning any people whatever, Jews
or Gentiles; that if they go on in their sins, and remain impenitent,
and do not turn from them, that they must expect I will quickly come out
against such a nation and kingdom in a providential way, as threatened:

to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; as the proprietor of a
garden, when it do not turn to his account, plucks up the plants, and
pulls down the fences, and lets it go to ruin.

\(s\) "momento loquor", Schmidt; "momento eloquor", Junius & Tremellius;
"momento ut loquutus fuero", Tigurine version.

[Jeremiah 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 18:8</span></span>

If that nation against whom I have pronounced,.... Such a sentence as
this, should immediately, upon the above declaration, do as Nineveh did:

turn from their evil; their evil of sin, their evil ways and works, as
an evidence of the truth of their repentance for former sins:

I will repent of the evil that one thought to do unto them; as they
change their course of life, God will change the dispensations of his
providence towards them, and not bring upon them the evil of punishment
he threatened them with; in which sense repentance can only be
understood of God, he doing that which is similar to what men do when
they repent of anything; they stop their proceedings, and change their
outward conduct; so God proceeds not to do what he threatened to do, and
changes his outward behaviour to men; he wills a change, and makes one
in his methods of acting, but never changes his will.

[Jeremiah 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 18:9</span></span>

And at what instant I shall speak concerning a nation, and concerning a
kingdom,.... By way of promise on the other hand: or, "and the moment I
shall speak", &c. as in [Jer 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007.md); in
favour to a people; signifying, that if they do that which is right and
good, and continue therein, it may be expected that I will appear for
and among such a nation and kingdom:

to build and to plant it; to build up its fences that have been broken
down, and to plant it with pleasant plants, and make it prosperous and
flourishing, and protect and defend it, and keep it safe, and in a
secure condition; so that it shall be in very thriving circumstances,
and be out of the power of its enemies to hurt it.

[Jeremiah 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 18:10</span></span>

If it do evil in my sight,.... What is sinful, contrary to the law and
will of God, openly and publicly, in a bold and daring manner:

that it obey not my voice: in my word, and by my prophets, but turn a
deaf ear to them, and slight and despise all instructions, admonitions,
and reproofs:

then I will repent of the good wherewith I said I would benefit them;
or, "do them good" (t); that is, withhold it from them, and not bestow
it on them; but, on the contrary, correct or punish them according to
their deserts. Thus, though God is a sovereign God, yet, in the
dispensations of his providence towards kingdoms and nations, he deals
with them in such a merciful and equitable manner, that there is no just
reason to complain of him; and yet he maintains and keeps up his power
and authority, such as the potter exercises over the clay.

\(t\) "ad benefaciendum ei", Montanus; "ut benefacerem ei", Valablus,
Pagninus; "benefacturum ei", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 18:11</span></span>

Now therefore go to,.... This is the application of the above general
rules of procedure to the people of the Jews, and particularly that
which relates to the destruction of a nation or kingdom, and the
declaration of it in order to reclaim them:

speak to the men of Judah, and to the inhabitants of Jerusalem,

saying, thus saith the Lord; or, "to the man of Judah" (u); the body of
the Jewish nation, and especially the inhabitants of the metropolis of
it; which was the source of sin to the whole kingdom, and on which the
calamity threatened would chiefly come, if not prevented by a
reformation:

behold, I frame evil against you; as the potter frames his clay upon the
wheel, to which the allusion is; which is to be understood of the evil
of punishment, but not of any secret purpose, and settled determination,
in the mind of God to bring it upon them; for that is never disannulled
by himself or others, or ever changed; but some operation in Providence,
which began to work towards their destruction; some providential step
which God had taken, and which threatened their ruin:

and devise a device against you; the same as before; by which it looked
as if he had thought of the matter, and had contrived a scheme, which if
he went on with, would issue in the subversion of their whole state:

return you everyone from his evil way; that so the reformation may be as
general as the corruption was: it supposes a sense of the evil of their
former conduct, and repentance for their sins, of which their forsaking
and abstaining from them would be an evidence:

and make your ways and your doings good; for it is not sufficient barely
to abstain from sin, which is only a negative holiness; but there must
be a performance of good works, a walking in them, a constant series and
course of obedience to God, according to the rule of his word.

\(u\) "ad virum Jehudah", Montanus, Cocceius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 18:12</span></span>

And they said, there is no hope,.... Or, "but they said" (w); not that
there was no hope of the grace and mercy of God, upon their repentance
and reformation, for that is before declared; but that they were so
hardened in their sins, so fixed in their wicked courses, and so
determined to go on in them, that there was no room for the prophet to
hope of ever reclaiming them; signifying, that it was to little purpose
to talk to them, or exhort them; his labour would be in vain; for they
were at a point, and resolved to continue in their evil practices, let
the consequences be what they would. Jarchi's note is,

"but I know that they will say to thee concerning thy words, that we do
not care for them;''

no, not a rush; you may as well hold your peace and say nothing; we are
in no pain about future judgments, these give us no uneasiness. The
Targum is,

"we are turned from thy worship;''

and we are resolved to continue as we are, and not to return to say what
you will:

but we will walk after our own devices; God may take his way, and we
will take ours; he has devised evil against us, you say, and he may
bring it if he pleases; we have devised sin, and we shall go on in it:

and we will do everyone the imagination of his evil heart; whatsoever
our hearts suggest to us as pleasant and agreeable, that we shall do,
let the issue be what it will: it is not to be thought that these people
expressed themselves in so many words; but this was the language of
their hearts, and of their actions, known unto the Lord, and are put
into this form by him, or by the prophet, expressing the real sentiments
of their minds.

\(w\) "sed dixerunt", Schmidt; "sed dicunt", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 18:13</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord,.... This being the case of the people of
the Jews, and they so resolutely bent on their own ways:

ask ye among the Heathen; inquire among the nations of the world, the
Gentiles that know not the true God, and have not the external
revelation of his will, only the dim light of nature to guide them; and
see if anything like this is to be found among them, as with this
people, favoured with the law of God, his word and ordinances to direct
them, and his prophets to teach and instruct them; suggesting that they
were worse than the Heathens, and that it would be more tolerable for
them, one day, than for these people:

who hath heard such things? as expressed in the preceding verses; such
desperate words, such bold and daring expressions, such impious
resolutions; for generally, when persons are reproved and threatened for
sin, they promise amendment; or what is after related concerning their
idolatries; intimating that nothing like it was ever heard of among the
Gentiles; see [Jer 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010.md);

the virgin of Israel hath done a very horrible thing; the congregation
of Israel, as the Targum; the people of the Jews, ironically so called;
because they had been espoused to the Lord as a chaste virgin, and ought
to have remained so, pure and incorrupt in the worship of him; but had
committed spiritual adultery, that is, idolatry; even very gross acts of
it; horrible to hear and think of; enough to make a man's hair stand an
end to be told of; or what was very filthy and abominable, and to be
loathed and detested, which is explained, [Jer
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#015.md); unless it can be thought to
refer to what goes before, concerning their dreadful resolution to
continue in their evil ways.

[Jeremiah 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 18:14</span></span>

Will a man leave the snow of Lebanon, which cometh from the rock of the
field?.... Lebanon was a mountain on the borders of Judea, the top of
which was covered in the summertime with snow, from the whiteness of
which it had its name, Lebanon; as the Alps, for the same reason, which
lie between France and Italy: now, the snow being dissolved by the heat,
ran in flowing streams down the rocks into the field and plain, where
they might be easily come at, and drank of; and would a thirsty
traveller, on a summer's day, pass by such streams as these, and not
drink of them? certainly he would not leave them, but stop and drink; he
must be an unwise man that should do otherwise; and yet this was what
the people of the Jews did; they forsook the Lord, "the fountain of
living waters"; and who, because of the plenty of good things in him,
and flowing from him to them, were as streams from Lebanon; and yet they
left these crystal streams for the black and muddy waters of Sihor, or
idols of Egypt, [Sol 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015.md); or the
words may be rendered, "will a man leave what comes from the rock of the
field for the snow of Lebanon" (x)? that is, will a man neglect to drink
of the water that comes out of a rock in his field, pure and clear, and
is near at hand, and choose to go to Mount Lebanon to drink of the snow
water, which runs down the mountain, and can never be thought so clear
as what comes out of the rock? surely he will not; he must act an unwise
part if he does; and such a part, and worse, did the people of the Jews
act, in forsaking God:

or shall the cold flowing waters which come from another place be
forsaken? or, "strange waters" (y); which come from far, from some
distant rock, being conveyed in pipes, in; which they come cool, and in
flowing streams, for the service of a city and its inhabitants; and who,
having such a privilege, would neglect them, and drink of standing water
in a pond or puddle? or, the words, as the former, may be rendered,
"shall for strange frozen waters, be left flowing ones?" see Grotius.

\(x\) "nunquid deserit aliquis aquam manatem de petra agri, ut biblat
nivem Libani"; so some in Vatablus. (y) "aquae alienae", Schmidt,
Montanus; "peregrinae", De Dieu.

[Jeremiah 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 18:15</span></span>

Because my people hath forgotten me,.... Or, "that they have forgotten
me" (z); this is the horrible thing they have done, which was unheard of
among the Gentiles, who were always tenacious of their gods, and the
worship of them; and that foolish and unwise thing, which was like
leaving pure flowing streams of water for dirty puddles. This is to be
understood of their forsaking the worship of God, as the Targum
interprets it, and following after idols:

they have burnt incense to vanity; to idols, which are vain empty
things, and which cannot give their worshippers what they expect from
them: or, "in vain they burn incense" (a); even to the true God, while
they also sacrificed unto idols; which to do was an abomination to the
Lord, [Isa 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#013.md); and especially
burning incense to idols must be a vain thing; and so the Targum,

"to no profit a they burn incense or spices:''

and they have caused them to stumble in their ways; that is, either the
idols they worshipped, or the false prophets caused the professing
people of the Jews to stumble and fall in the ways into which they led
them: and

from the ancient paths; or, "the paths of eternity" (b); which lead to
eternal life; or which were of old marked out by the revealed will of
God for the saints to walk in; and in which the patriarchs and people of
God, in all former ages, did walk; and which were appointed from
everlasting, and will remain for ever; and these are the good old paths
in [Jer 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#016.md);

to walk in paths, in a way not cast up; a new way, unknown in former
times; an unbeaten track, which the saints had never walked in; a rough
path, unsafe and dangerous; and hence they stumbled, and fell, and came
to ruin; as follows:

\(z\) "quod obliti sunt", Schmidt. (a) "frustra adolebunt, vel adolent",
Pagninus, Calvin. (b) "semitae quae a seculo, seu antiquo", vid.
Schmidt; so Targum; "semitis jam olim praescriptis", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 18:16</span></span>

To make their land desolate,.... Not that this was the intention either
of those that led them out of the right way into those wrong paths, or
of them that went into them; but so it was eventually; this was the
issue of things; their idolatry and other sins were the cause of their
land being desolate; through the ravage of the enemy, let in upon them
by way of judgment; and through the destruction of men by them; so that
there were few or none to cultivate and manure it:

and a perpetual hissing; to be hissed at perpetually by the enemy,
whenever they passed by it, and observed its desolation; thereby
expressing their hatred at its inhabitants; their joy at its desolation;
and their satisfaction in it, which would be for ever; or, as Kimchi
interprets, a long time. This is the present case of the Jews; and has
been ever since their destruction by the Romans; and will be until the
fulness of the Gentiles is gathered in:

everyone that passeth thereby shall be astonished: to see the
desolations made, and the strange alterations in a place once so famous
for fruitfulness and number of inhabitants:

and wag his head; either out of pity, or rather in a way of derision and
exultation; see [Lam 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015.md).

[Jeremiah 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 18:17</span></span>

I will scatter them as with an east wind before the enemy,.... As the
east wind, which is generally strong and boisterous, drives the chaff
and stubble, and anything that is light, before it, and scatters it here
and there; so the Lord threatens to scatter the people of the Jews over
the face of the earth, before their enemies, whom they should not be
able to withstand. It denotes the power of the enemy God would make use
of; the ease with which this should be done; and the utter dispersion of
them; and is their present case:

I will show them the back, and not the face, in the day of their
calamity; that is, will not look upon them in a favourable way, nor with
any pity and compassion for them, nor hear their cries; but turn his
back upon them, and a deaf ear unto them, and give them no help and
relief, or deliver them out of their calamities; but suffer them to
continue upon them, and them to sink under them; see [Pro
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#026.md); which refers to the same time of
calamity as here.

[Jeremiah 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 18:18</span></span>

Then said they, come, and let us devise devices against Jeremiah,....
Being enraged at the judgments threatened them, they propose to enter
into a confederacy and consultation together, to think of ways and means
to stop the mouth of the prophet, and even to take away his life; since
he had told them that God had devised a device against them, they were
for devising devices against him; that so they might walk after their
own devices, without being teased and tormented with this prophet:

for the law shall not perish from the priest; whose business it is to
teach it; we have other priests besides Jeremiah, and we shall seek the
law at their mouths, and not at his; and perhaps these are the words of
the priests themselves, the men of Anathoth; so Jarchi thinks; pleasing
themselves with their character and office, and the perpetuity of it;
that, notwithstanding what Jeremiah had said, there would be a constant
succession of this order of then; nor should the law ever cease from
being aught by them, to whose instruction men ought to listen, and not
to such a prophet:

nor counsel from the wise; we have wise rulers and governors,
counsellors of state, and members of the sanhedrim, and judges of all
controversies, and who are capable of giving advice upon any occasion;
nor shall we ever want such, to whose prudent counsel we do well to
attend, and not to what this babbling man says; does he think to know
better than our statesmen and sages, our counsellors in church and
state?

nor the word from the prophet; we have prophets among us, that prophesy
as well as he, and better things; and whose words of prophecy shall be
fulfilled, when his will not; who assure us that we shall have peace and
prosperity; and therefore let us not regard what this man says, or be
intimidated by his threatenings:

come, and let us smite him with the tongue; by saying all the evil we
can of him: by threatening him with pains and penalties; by loading him
with reproaches and calumnies; by taking away his good name, and
lessening his character and reputation among the people; and so the
Targum,

"let us bear false witness against him;''

or, "let us smite him in the tongue" (c); cut it out, as Abarbinel; or
stop his mouth, and hinder him from speaking any more in this manner to
the people; or, "let us smite him for the tongue" (d); because of the
words he says, or the prophecies he delivers out:

and let us not give heed to any of his words; or, "to all his words"
(e); all which they reckoned his own, and not the words of the Lord. The
Septuagint version is, "and we shall hear all his words"; we shall
provoke him to say all he has to say, and shall hear and have enough out
of his mouth to condemn him; and in all this, and in many other things
that follow, Jeremiah was a type of Christ, to whom Jerom applies the
whole passage.

\(c\) "in lingua", Montanus, Castalio. (d) Propter "linguam istam",
Junius & Tremellius. (e) "ad omnia verba ejus", Gataker; "ad universa
verba ejus", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Jeremiah 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 18:19</span></span>

Give heed to me, O Lord,.... To his prayer, since his enemies would not
give heed to his prophecies; and God does give heed to the cries and
complaints of his ministers, when men will not give heed to their words
and doctrines; they have a God to go to, who will hear them, when men
despise them:

and hearken to the voice of them that contend with me; hear their
reproaches and rantings, their blasphemies and evil speakings, their
lies and falsehoods, and judge between me and them; let it appear who is
in the right; vindicate my cause, and plead with them that plead against
me.

[Jeremiah 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 18:20</span></span>

Shall evil be recompensed for good?.... For all the good that I have
done them, shall this be all the recompence I shall have, to be evilly
treated by them, to have my good name, and even life, taken away by
them? shall this be suffered to be done? and, if it is, shall it go
unpunished? the prophet taxes the people with ingratitude, which he
afterwards instances in, and proves:

for they have digged a pit for my soul; or "life"; they lay in wait to
take it away; or they had formed a design against it, and brought a
charge and accusation against him, in order to take it away, under
colour of law and justice. Kimchi interprets it of poison, which they
would have had him drank of:

remember that I stood before thee to speak good for them, and to turn
away thy wrath from them; he was an intercessor for them with God;
pleaded with him on their behalf, that good things might be bestowed
upon them, and that wrath might be averted from them; so Christ did for
the Jews that crucified him, [Luk
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#034.md); this is an instance of their
ingratitude; that though he had been an advocate for them, stood in the
gap between God and them, and was importunate for their good, yet this
was all the recompense he had from them; they sought his life to take it
away. This kindness of his for them was forgotten by them; but he trusts
the Lord will remember it, and not suffer them to act the base part they
intended; and now he determines no more to plead their cause, but to
imprecate evils upon them, as follows:

[Jeremiah 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 18:21</span></span>

Therefore deliver up their children to the famine,.... To be starved,
and perish by it, as they were in the siege of Jerusalem, both by the
Chaldeans, and the Romans:

and pour out their blood by the force of the sword: or, "upon the hands
of the sword" (f); by means of it; that is, the blood of the parents of
the children; let the one perish by famine, and the other by the sword;
which, when thrust into a man, blood gushes out, and runs upon the sword
to the handle of it:

and let their wives be bereaved of their children, and be widows; let
them have neither husbands nor children; which latter might be a comfort
to them, when they had lost their husbands; but being stripped of these
also, the affliction and distress must be the greater:

and let their men be put to death; or "slain with death" (g); with the
pestilence, as Kimchi rightly interprets it; see [Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008.md); Jarchi understands it of the
angel of death; see [Heb 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#014.md);

let their young men be slain by the sword in battle; such being commonly
employed in military service, as being the most proper persons for it.

\(f\) "super manus gladii", Montanus, Schmidt. (g) "occisi morte",
Pagninus, Montanus, "i.e. peste" Schmidt; "occisi mortis", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 18:22</span></span>

Let a cry be heard from their houses,.... A shrieking of women and
children, not only for the loss of husbands and parents, but because of
the entrance of the enemy into the city, and into their houses, to take
away their lives and their substance; as follows:

when thou shalt bring a troop suddenly upon them; or an army, as the
Targum; either the Chaldean army, or rather the Roman army:

for they have digged a pit to take me, and hid snares for my feet: and
therefore it was a just retaliation, that a troop or army should
suddenly come upon them, and seize their persons and substance; though
Kimchi understands it, as before, of poison, which they would have given
him; but Jarchi, of a suspicion and vile calumny they raised of him,
that he was guilty of adultery with another man's wife; a "whore" being
called a "deep ditch" by the wise man, [Pro
23:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#027); and so it is in the Talmud (h.md).

\(h\) T. Bab. Kama, fol. 16. 2.

[Jeremiah 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 18:23</span></span>

Yet, Lord, thou knowest all their counsel against me to slay me,....
However deep they had laid them; and however unknown they were to him;
or however private and secret they might be thought to be by them; God
is an omniscient God, and knows and sees all things; the thoughts of
men's hearts, and all their secret designs in the dark against his
ministers, people, and interest:

forgive not their iniquity, neither blot out their sin from thy sight;
they had sinned the unpardonable sin; or, however, a sin unto death; for
which prayer for the forgiveness of it was not to be made, [Jo1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#016.md); this the prophet knew: what he
here imprecates, and both before and after, must be considered, not as
flowing from a private spirit, or from a spirit of malice and revenge;
but what he delivered out under a spirit of prophecy, as foretelling
what would be the sad estate and condition of these persons; for,
otherwise, the temper and disposition of the prophet were the reverse;
and he was inclined to sue for mercy for these people, as he often did;
wherefore this is not to be drawn into a precedent and example for any
to follow:

but let them be overthrown before thee; by the sword, famine, and
pestilence: or, "let them be made to stumble before thee" (i); and fall
into perdition; they having made others to stumble in their ways from
the ancient paths of truth and goodness; so that it was but a righteous
thing that they should be punished after this manner; see [Jer
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#015.md);

deal thus with them in the time of thine anger; the set time for his
wrath to come upon them to the uttermost; then do unto them according to
all the imprecations now made; which the prophet foresaw, and believed
he would do; and therefore thus spake.

\(i\) "propellantur in offendiculum coram te", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; "offensi ruant coram te", Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 19](jer019.md)

</div>
