<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer014)  [Next](jer016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 15:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 15

This chapter contains the Lord's answer to the prophet's prayers, in
which he declares himself inexorable, and had resolved on the ruin of
the Jewish nation for their sins; the prophet's complaint of the
hardships he endured, notwithstanding his sincerity and integrity; and
the Lord's promise of protection and deliverance, in case of his
continuance in the faithful discharge of his office. The Lord denies the
request of the prophet, by observing, that if even Moses and Samuel had
been the intercessors for the people, he would not have regarded them,
being determined upon casting them out, and sending them away captive,
[Jer 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001), their punishment is
declared, which was resolved on; some for death, or the pestilence;
others for the sword; others for famine; and others for captivity; and
others to be devoured by dogs, and fowls, and wild beasts, [Jer
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#002), the cause of which were their
sins, particularly their idolatry in the times of Manasseh, [Jer
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#004), wherefore they should have no
pity from men, nor would the Lord any more repent of the evil
threatened, of which he was weary, because of their many backslidings,
[Jer 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#005), which destruction, being
determined, is illustrated by a description of the instrument of it; by
the multitude of widows, and the distress of mothers bereaved of their
children, [Jer 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#007) on which the
prophet takes up a complaint of his being born for strife and
contention, and of his being cursed by the people, though no usurer,
[Jer 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010), when he is comforted with
a promise of being used well by the enemy, both he and his remnant, [Jer
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#011), but as for the people of the
Jews in general, they would never be able to withstand the northern
forces, the army of the Chaldeans; their riches and substance would be
delivered into their hands, and their persons also be carried captive
into a strange land, and the prophet along with them, because of their
sins, and the wrath of God for them, [Jer
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#012), upon which the prophet prays to
the Lord, who knew him, that he would remember and visit him, and avenge
him of his persecutors, and not take him away in his longsuffering; he
urges, that he had suffered rebuke and reproach for his sake; that he
was called by him to his office, which he had cheerfully entered on; he
had his mission, commission, and message, from him, which he received
with the greatest pleasure, signified by eating his words with joy; and
that he had not associated himself with mockers and scoffers at religion
and the word of God; and therefore expostulates why he should be put to
so much pain, and be used as he was, [Jer
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015), wherefore the Lord promises
that, upon condition of doing his work faithfully, he should be
preserved, protected, and delivered, [Jer
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019).

[Jeremiah 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 15:1</span></span>

Then said the Lord unto me,.... In answer to his expostulations and
entreaties, [Jer 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#019),

though Moses and Samuel stood before me; to pray before me, as the
Targum; to make intercession for the people. Standing is a prayer
gesture. The Jews say there is no standing but prayer, or that is meant
when it is mentioned; See Gill on [Mat
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005). Moses and Samuel were named,
because they were eminent for prayer, and had success in it, for the
people of Israel. Of Moses, see [Exo
32:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#011) and of Samuel, see [Sa1
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009) and of both, [Psa
99:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#006). The Arabic version reads "Moses
and Aaron", but wrongly. The Palmists make use of this text to prove the
intercession of saints in heaven for those on earth; but the words are
only a supposition, and not a fact. The meaning is, that supposing that
Moses and Samuel were alive, and made intercession for the people, their
prayers would not be regarded; and such a supposition, as it suggests
that they were not alive, so that they did not stand before him, and
make intercession for Judah; wherefore this is against, and not for, the
intercession of saints in heaven:

yet my mind could not be towards this people; God could have no good
will to them, no delight in them; could not be reconciled to them, or
agree to it, that the favours asked for should be granted them, or that
they should be continued in their own land; and therefore it was in vain
for the prophet to solicit on their account; but, on the other hand, it
is ordered as follows:

cast them out of my sight; or presence; as persons loathsome and
abominable, not to be borne; I cannot look upon them, or have anything
to say to them, in a favourable way:

and let them go forth; from my presence, from the temple, the city, and
out of their own land; that is, declare that so it shall be.

[Jeremiah 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 15:2</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, if they say unto thee,.... As doubtless they
will, when this message is brought to them:

whither shall we go forth? in a jeering scornful manner, not believing
that this would be their case:

then thou shall tell them, thus saith the Lord, such as are for death,
to death; such as were appointed to death, or to die by the pestilence,
which is often signified by death; they shall go forth unto it; or it
shall meet them, and seize upon them, and take them away:

and such as are for the sword, to the sword; who are appointed to die by
the sword of the enemy, into whose hands they should fall by attempting
to escape out of the city, shall perish by it:

and such as are for the famine, to the famine; such as are appointed to
die by that, shall die of it in the city, where they shall be besieged,
and not be able to get out to fetch in any provisions, and where none
can be brought, because of the enemy:

and such as are for the captivity, to the captivity; such as are spared
from the pestilence, sword, and famine, and are designed to be carried
captive into a strange land, shall be taken and carried thither; nor
will it be in their power, or in any other's, to hinder any of the above
things, to which they are appointed of God. According to the Jews, the
latter of these is more grievous than the former; as the sword than
death, and famine than the sword, so captivity than them all (w).

\(w\) T. Bab Bava Bathra, fol. 8. 2.

[Jeremiah 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 15:3</span></span>

And I will appoint over them four kinds, saith the Lord,.... Or four
families (x), and these very devouring ones; that is, four sorts of
punishment; and so the Targum,

"four evil punishments;''

which are after mentioned. These are represented as under God, and at
his beck and command; servants of his, that go and come at his pleasure,
and do his will; and as being over men, and having power and authority
to kill and to destroy by a divine commission:

the sword to slay: the first and chief of the four families or
punishments, which had a commission from the Lord to sheath itself in
his people, the Jews; even the sword of the enemy, the Chaldeans, drawn
against them by a divine order and appointment:

and the dogs to tear; the carcasses of those that are slain with the
sword: or "to draw" (y); as the word signifies; it being the usual way
of dogs to draw and drag the flesh about they are feeding on; this is
another of the four families, and a very voracious one it is:

and the fowls of the heaven, and the beasts of the earth, to devour and
destroy; or "to eat, and to corrupt", the bodies of those that are slain
by the sword. The meaning is, that such should not have a burial, but
should be the food of fowls and wild beasts: these are the other two
destroying families, which have their commission from the Lord for such
service.

\(x\) "quatuor familias, sive cognationes", Vatablus, Tigurine version,
Calvin. (y) "ad trahendum", Calvin, Pagninus, Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Schmidt; so Ben Melech,

[Jeremiah 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 15:4</span></span>

And I will cause them to be removed into all kingdoms of the earth,....
Not only into Babylon, but into other countries; which has had its full
accomplishment in this their last captivity by the Romans: or "I will
give them for a commotion" (z); shaking and trembling; they shall be
like Cain, fugitives and vagabonds, and be in fear and trembling
everywhere, for what is, or is about to come upon them: or "for horror
unto all kingdoms" (a); all that see the calamities and judgments that
come upon them will be struck with dread and horror, plainly seeing the
hand of the Lord in them:

because of Manasseh the son of Hezekiah king of Judah; because of the
idolatry and murder committed by him; and which were the more
aggravated, by having so good a parent, and so religious an education,
and by his high office and dignity as king of Judah; and though these
sins were personally forgiven him, yet, being imitated and continued in
by the Jews, captivity is threatened them. The Targum is,

"because they turned not (or were not converted) as Manasseh;''

and so in the Talmud (b), because Manasseh repented, and they did not;
but this sense the words will not bear, because of what goes before, of
which these are a reason; and because of what follows after, which are
connected with them:

for that which he did in Jerusalem; the innocent blood he shed there,
and the idolatrous worship he there set up; even where the temple was,
the place of God's worship, and which was the metropolis of the nation,
and so set an example, which must influence the whole country.

\(z\) "in commotionem", Calvin, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (a) "In
horrorem", Cocceius. (b) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 102. 2.

[Jeremiah 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 15:5</span></span>

For who shall have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem?.... The inhabitants of
it; their sins being so many, and so heinous, and so aggravated, and so
deserving of punishment, that none could pity their case, or have a
heart of compassion towards them, or even spare reproaching them: or
"who shall bemoan thee?" sympathize and condole with thee, or speak a
comfortable word to thee, or seek to alleviate thy grief and sorrow: or
"who shall go aside to ask how thou doest?" or "of thy peace?" (c) shall
not think it worth their while to go a step out of their way, or turn
into a house, and inquire of thy welfare, or salute thee.

\(c\) "ad petendum de pace tua", Pagninus; "ad interrogandum te de paca
tua", Piscator; "sive prosperitate tua", Junius & Tremellius.

[Jeremiah 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 15:6</span></span>

Thou hast forsaken me, saith the Lord,.... His worship, as the Targum;
and had set up idols, and idol worship; and this was the cause of the
sword, pestilence, famine, and captivity, and of all the evils that
befell them:

thou art gone backward; from the law of the Lord, and from his pure
worship and service, from his ways and from his ordinances; and
therefore it was but just they should go into captivity; hence it
follows:

therefore will I stretch out mine hand against thee, and destroy thee;
his hand of power and vengeance, which when stretched out, and falls
with weight, whether on particular persons, or on a nation, brings
inevitable ruin and destruction with it:

I am weary with repenting; not that the Lord ever changes his mind, or
the counsel of his will; in this sense he is without repentance; but the
conduct of his providence, and the dispensations of it; not executing
the threatenings denounced, but sparing them a little longer, showing
mercy, and exercising patience and longsuffering; but now he was as one
weary and tired out, and was determined to bear no longer with them, but
stir up all his wrath against them, and destroy them.

[Jeremiah 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 15:7</span></span>

I will fan them with a fan in the gates of the land,.... Either of their
own land, the land of Judea; and so the Septuagint version, "in the
gates of my people"; alluding to the custom of winnowing corn in open
places; and by fanning is meant the dispersion of the Jews, and their
being carried captive out of their own land into other countries: or of
the land of the enemy, into their cities, as the Targum paraphrases it;
gates being put for them frequently; whither they should be scattered by
the fan of the Lord; for what was done by the enemy, as an instrument,
is ascribed to him:

I will bereave them of children; which shall die of famine, or
pestilence, or by the sword, or in captivity: I will destroy my people;
which must be when children are cut off, by which families, towns,
cities, and kingdoms, are continued and kept up; and this he was
resolved to do, though they were his people:

since they return not from their ways; their evil ways, which they had
gone into, forsaking the ways of God, and his worship: or,

yet they return not from their ways (d); though fanned with the fan of
affliction, bereaved of their children, and threatened with destruction:
it expresses their obstinate continuance in their evil ways, and the
reason of God's dealing with them as above.

\(d\) "et tamen a viis suis non sunt reversi", V. L. Diodatus,
Genevenses.

[Jeremiah 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 15:8</span></span>

Their widows are increased to me above the sand of the seas,.... Their
husbands being slain; not in the times of Ahaz, when a hundred and
twenty thousand men were slain in one day in Judah, by Pekah the son of
Remaliah, [Ch2 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#006), as Kimchi thinks;
but in the times of Zedekiah, at the siege of Jerusalem, and the taking
of it, and in the Babylonish captivity before predicted. The children of
Israel were to be as the sand of the sea, and were very numerous; and
here the widows are said to be so too, their husbands, who were
numerous, being dead; and this, as it was of the Lord, so it was in his
sight, and according to his counsel and will. Mention is made of "seas",
in the plural, number, there being many in or near Judea, as the Red
sea, the sea of Galilee, and the Mediterranean sea:

I have brought upon them against the mother of the young men a spoiler,
at noonday; that is he would bring upon the Jews, against the mother of
the young men, or mothers of them; for the young men being destroyed by
the spoiler, it was against them; a calamity upon them, and a distress
unto them, who have generally a tender concern for them. The Targum is,

"against the company of their young men;''

the Jews; or against Jerusalem, the mother city, the metropolis of the
nation, full of young men fit for war: or, "against the mother", that
is, Jerusalem, a "young man" (e); meaning Nebuchadnezzar, who came
against Jerusalem in the first year of his reign; and, as some say, in
the eighteenth year of his age; and who came not as a thief in the
night, but as a spoiler at noonday; not in a secret insidious manner,
but openly and with force of arms making his way through the land to
Jerusalem, in defiance of the Jews, and in the face of them:

and I have caused him to fall upon it suddenly; that is, upon the city
of Jerusalem: for though he came openly, his march was quick, and he was
presently at Jerusalem, and laid siege to it at once:

and terrors upon the city; or, "city and terrors" (f); the city was
immediately filled with terrors at the appearance of Nebuchadnezzar and
his army. R. Joseph Kimchi interprets it, "an army and terrors", from
[Sa1 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#016), the Babylonian monarch, at
the head of his army, which spread terrors where he came. Some render
the word, from [Dan 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#013), "a watcher
and terrors" (g): meaning the Chaldean army, called watchers, [Jer
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#016). The Targum is,

"I will bring an army upon them suddenly, and destroy their cities;''

it should be rendered "alienation of mind and terrors": from the use of
the word, in the Arabic language (h).

\(e\) "contra metropolin, juvenem", Junius & Tremellius, De Dieu;
"contra matrem", Piscator; "super matrem, juvenem", Cocceius. (f)
"civitatem et terrores", Montanus; so Schmidt. (g) "Vigilem, vel vigiles
et terrores", Gataker; "vigilias et terrores", Coeceius. (h) Ab
"alteravit, mutavit et turbavit", Golius, Castel. Schindler.

[Jeremiah 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 15:9</span></span>

She that hath borne seven languisheth,.... Either the mother that has
borne many children, seven being put for a large number, now being able
to bear no more, and being bereaved of what she had, and who were her
staff and support, and from whom she had her expectation, faints away,
and dies through grief and trouble; or Jerusalem, which formerly
abounded with young men, is now in a forlorn and destitute state; her
children, the inhabitants of it, being slain with the sword, or dying of
famine and the pestilence. In the Talmud (i), this is interpreted of
seven wicked kings of Israel, as Jeroboam, Baasha, Ahab, Jehu, Pekah,
Menahem, and Hoshea; and elsewhere of seven kings of Judah, thus
reckoned, Jehoram, Joash, Ahaz, Manasseh, Amon, Jehoiakim, and Zedekiah
(k):

she hath given up the ghost; or, "blew out her soul (l)"; her breath
departs; no life can be kept in her; she faints away at the calamities
coming on her:

her sun is gone down while it was yet day; the darkness of affliction,
and the evening of distress and calamity came upon her sooner than was
expected, while in the midst of peace and prosperity that was promised,
and hoped to be enjoyed for a long time to come; see [Amo
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#009),

she hath been ashamed and confounded; of her vain hope, trust, and
confidence:

and the residue of them will I deliver to the sword before their
enemies, saith the Lord; that is; such who died not of the famine and
pestilence, but at the breaking up of the city endeavoured to make their
escape, these fell into the hands of the enemy, and perished by the
sword, as the Lord here predicts; for whatsoever he says certainly comes
to pass.

\(i\) T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 88. 1. (k) Vid. Jarchi & Abendana in loc. (l)
"efflabit animam suam", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "exspiravit
animam suam", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 15:10</span></span>

Woe is me, my mother, that thou hast born me a man of strife,.... Not
that the prophet was a quarrelsome and contentious man, but others
quarrelled and contended with him, and that for no other reason than for
his faithful discharge of his office, under which he ought to have been
easy; but being a man of like passions with others, wishes he had never
been born, than to meet with so much trouble; and seems to blame his
mother for bearing him; or however looked upon himself to be a miserable
man through his birth, and that he was destined from thence to this
sorrow:

and a man of contention to the whole earth; or "land"; the land of
Judea, the inhabitants of it, as the Targum; for with no other had
Jeremiah to do; and it were these only that contended with him, because
he brought a disagreeable message to them, concerning their captivity:

I have neither lent on usury, nor men have lent to me on usury; which
was not lawful with the Jews to do; and therefore such were cursed that
did it: but this is not to be restrained to this particular branch of
business, which was not usual; but has respect to all trade and
commerce; and the meaning is, that the prophet did not concern himself
with secular affairs, but attended to the duties of his office; he
carried on no negotiations with men; he was neither a creditor nor a
debtor; had nothing to do with pecuniary affairs; which often occasions
strifes and contentions, quarrels and lawsuits; and yet,
notwithstanding, could not be free from strife and debate:

yet everyone of them do curse me; that is, everyone of the inhabitants
of the land of Judea, so much known were Jeremiah and his prophecies;
these slighted and set light by both him and his predictions; and wished
the vilest imprecations upon him for his messages to them. The word here
used is compounded of two words, or derived from two roots, as Kimchi
observes; the one signifies to make light or vilify, in opposition to
honour and glory; and the other to curse, in opposition to blessing; and
this is often the case of the ministers of the word, not only to be
slighted and despised, but to be defamed and cursed; see [Co1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#012).

[Jeremiah 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 15:11</span></span>

The Lord said,.... In answer to the prophet's complaint:

verily it shall be well with thy remnant: not with the remnant of his
people, or those that should escape the threatened calamities; but the
sense is, that it should be well with him in his latter end; the
remainder of his days should be comfortable or be spent in peace and
prosperity; and so the Targum,

"if thine end shall not be for good.''

The words are in the form of an oath, as Kimchi and Ben Melech observe;
and the meaning is, that if it is not well with thee in thy last days,
then say I am unfaithful, and not true to my word. According to Donesh,
cited by Jarchi, the word translated "remnant" has the signification of
loosing; and he renders it, "if I loose thee not for good" (m); which
accordingly was done, [Jer 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer040.htm#004), and
this sense is confirmed by the note of the Masorites: "verily I will
cause the enemy to entreat thee well"; or, "if I do not", &c. for it is
also in the form of an oath, as before, as Jarchi notes; and so it was,
Nebuchadnezzar gave charge to Nebuzaradan, the captain of the guard, to
look well to him, and do him no harm; who, when he loosed him, gave him
his choice to go with him to Babylon, or continue in the land, [Jer
39:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#011), or, "verily I will", or, "shall
I not entreat the enemy for thee?" (n) and make him gentle and humane,
so that he shall use thee kindly. Jarchi interprets this of Zedekiah and
his courtiers seeking to Jeremiah, in the time of their distress, to
pray for them, [Jer 37:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer037.htm#002), and to which
sense the Targum inclines,

"if they shall not come and help thee, &c.''

in the time of evil, and in the time of affliction; when the city is
taken, and the people carrying captive.

\(m\) "si non absolvero te in bonum", Schmidt. Vid. De Dieu in loc. (n)
"sed faciam hostem occurrere tibi", Calvin: "annon intervenirem pro te
apud inimicum?" Junius & Tremellius; "nisi interveniam pro te apud
inimicum", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 15:12</span></span>

Shall iron break the northern iron and the steel? Can iron break iron,
especially that which comes from the north, which was harder than the
common iron; or steel, the hardest of all? though the Jews were hard as
iron, they could not prevail against and overcome Jeremiah, who was made
an iron pillar and brasen walls against them, [Jer
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018), and so these words are spoken
for his comfort and encouragement: or they may respect the Jews and the
Chaldeans; and the sense be, that the Jews, as mighty and as strong as
they fancied themselves to be, and boasted that they were, they could
not find themselves a match for the Chaldean army, which came out of the
north; and may be said to be as hard as the northern iron, which came
from the Chalybes, a people in the north, near Pontus, from whom steel
has its name in the Latin tongue; and this sense agrees with what
follows.

[Jeremiah 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 15:13</span></span>

Thy substance and thy treasures will I give to the spoil without
price,.... Not the prophet's substance and treasure; for it does not
appear that he had any, at least to require so much notice; but the
substance and treasure of the people of the Jews, to whom these words
are directed; these the Lord threatened should be delivered into the
hands of their enemies, and become a spoil and free booty to them, for
which they should give nothing, and which should never be redeemed
again:

and that for all thy sins, even in all thy borders; this spoiling of
their substance should befall them because of their sins, which they had
committed in all the borders of their land, where they had built their
high places, and had set up idolatrous worship; or else the meaning is,
that their substance and treasure in all their borders, in every part of
the land, should be the plunder of their enemies, because of their sins.

[Jeremiah 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 15:14</span></span>

And I will make thee to pass with thine enemies,.... Not Jeremiah, but
the Jews, to whom these words are continued. The meaning is, that they
should go along with the Chaldeans out of their own land into theirs:

into a land which thou knowest not; the land of Babylon; and there is
another reading of the words in the margin, "I will cause thee to serve
thine enemies (o), in a land that thou knowest not"; which is followed
by the Targum, Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions. Some render the
words, "I will bring thine enemies from, or through, a land that thou
knowest not" (p); the place from whence they came, and those through
which they came, being at a great distance:

for a fire is kindled in mine anger, which shall burn upon you; meaning
the wrath of God, compared to fire, which was kindled and excited by
their sins, and which would continue upon them until it had destroyed
them.

\(o\) "et servire faciam". (p) "Et adducam inimicos tuos de terra quam
nescis", V. L. "et transire faciam hostes tuos per terram quam nescis",
De Dieu; so Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 15:15</span></span>

O Lord, thou knowest,.... All persons and things; he knew the prophet
and his heart, and all that was in it; his innocence and integrity; all
his afflictions, and what he met with from his enemies; and he knew
them, and all their malicious designs against him:

remember me; with the favour which he bore to his own people, his
covenant with him, his promises to him, and the word on which he had
caused him to hope; because of his trials and troubles, he might seem to
be forgotten by him:

and visit me; in mercy for good; and so the Targum adds,

"that thou mayest do well unto me:''

and revenge me of my persecutors; not so much for his own sake; unless
this is to be attributed to his frailty and infirmity, to the warmth of
his spirit, being a man of like passions with others; for private
revenge ought not to be sought by good men, but for the sake of God and
his glory, in whose cause he was engaged, and on whose account he was
persecuted:

take me not away in thy longsuffering; while thou art bearing with
others, do not take me away by death; or suffer them, whom thou dost
forbear, to take me away, or give them an opportunity thereby so to do;
or when thy longsuffering is at an end, do not involve me in the same
calamity with them. The Targum is,

"do not give delay to my injury;''

or,

"length to my affliction;''

that is, do not delay to take vengeance on my persecutors; and to this
sense Jarchi interprets it,

"do not take my cause, and leave it to thy longsuffering, but hasten and
avenge me;''

and De Dieu proposes such a rendering of the words, "to thy
longsuffering do not bring me" (q); and which sense is favoured by the
Septuagint version:

know that for thy sake I have suffered rebuke; let it appear, and that
even to mine enemies, that it is for thy sake that all this reproach is
cast upon me; and all these afflictions are endured by me, by thy
resentment of their carriage to me.

\(q\) "ne ad longanimitatem tuam adduc me", De Dieu; "nec me capias ad
dilationem irae tua", Gussetius.

[Jeremiah 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 15:16</span></span>

Thy words were found, and I did eat them, The messages he was called to
deliver unto others appeared to him to be of God, and they were as
welcome to him as food is to a hungry man; he cheerfully received them,
treasured them up in his memory, digested them in his mind, and
carefully retained them. So the doctrines of the Gospel, which are the
words of God, and not of men, when by searching and close application
they are found in the Scriptures, and under the ministry of the word,
they are food to souls, sweet, savoury, wholesome, nourishing, and
strengthening; not as merely heard externally, or only assented unto, or
superficially tasted of; but when eaten, as Ezekiel's roll was by him;
and which is done by faith, which receives, feeds upon, and digests the
word; for, unless it is mixed with faith, it is not profitable:

and thy word was unto me the joy and rejoicing of mine heart; the
messages which the prophet was sent with, even those which denounced
grievous things against his people in case of impenitence, were gladly
received by him, and he readily delivered them, hoping that they would
be a means of bringing them to a sense of their sins, and to repentance
for them, and so of preserving them from ruin; and especially those
words or doctrines he had in commission to deliver, which respected the
Messiah, his person, offices, kingdom, righteousness, and grace; the
calling of the Gentiles, and the enlargement of the interest of Christ;
the glory of his name, and the prosperity of his people in the latter
day. The word of the Gospel, when received and eaten by faith, whether
by ministers or people, is productive of spiritual joy and pleasure; the
promises of it being exceeding precious; and the doctrines of it
doctrines of grace, salvation, peace, pardon, and righteousness, by
Christ, who is the sum and substance of them:

for I am called by thy name, O Lord God of hosts; what added to his joy
was, that the name of the Lord was called upon him, or that he was
called a prophet of the Lord: this he looked upon as a high honour done
him; and what still more increased his joy was, that he was a prophet,
not of Baal, that could not hear nor help his prophets and worshippers;
but of the Lord God of hosts and armies, who was able to uphold him,
protect and defend him, against his enemies.

[Jeremiah 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 15:17</span></span>

I sat not in the assembly of the mockers, nor rejoiced,.... With them,
the mockers; or, "those that make merry" (r); as the word is rendered in
[Jer 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#019), and so the Targum,

"those that sing;''

and dance and live jovially; with these the prophet did not associate
himself; such levity being unsuitable to his character as a prophet, and
to those grievous messages he was charged with; and though he had joy,
it was of another kind; it was not carnal, but spiritual; not outward,
but inward; and what arose from the word of the Lord, being found and
eaten by him. Moreover, there were some things which he was obliged by
his office to deliver, that were very distressing to him, and made him
very melancholy; so that he shunned all company and diversion, which
might have been lawfully enjoyed: for this is not to be understood of
the assembly or council of the wicked governors of the nation, and much
less of the refuse of the people, that mocked at the word of God, and
scoffed at the prophets and people of God; but of Jeremiah's friends and
acquaintance, that met and made merry together; with whom he could not
join, because of the sorrowful case in which he was, on account of the
people he was sent unto:

I sat alone, because of thine hand; not because he was obliged to it,
being deserted by men, but of choice; he withdrew from company, kept
himself retired at home in his own house, there meditating upon the word
of God, and mourning over the case of his people; and this he did,
because the afflicting hand of God was upon him, or because the hand and
spirit of prophecy was upon him, and he was charged to denounce very
grievous things against the people; and because the hand of divine power
and authority was over him, to which he ought to be subject, and was
ready to obey:

for thou hast filled me with indignation; either with the indignation of
the people against him, because of his prophecies; or with indignation
against them, because of their sins; or with denunciations of wrath he
was to deliver to them; and so the Targum,

"for thou hast filled me with a prophecy of cursing.''

\(r\) "ludentium", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius; "jocantium",
Vatablus; "hilaria agentium", Gataker.

[Jeremiah 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 15:18</span></span>

Why is my pain perpetual,.... The pain of his mind; his uneasiness for
the good of his people, which was likely to last, having no hope of a
change for the better: or it may design the pain which they gave him by
their reproaches and persecutions of him, which seemed as if they would
have no end:

and my wound incurable, which refuseth to be healed? the same thing is
meant as before. The allusion is to an old ulcer, or obstinate wound,
which no medicine can affect, is desperate and deadly; and such the
prophet reckoned his case to be, or however deprecates it, and
expostulates with God why it should be so:

wilt thou be altogether unto me as a liar, and as waters that fail? such
God cannot be, nor did the prophet think he was; he knew that he was God
that could not lie, and that he was faithful to his promises, and would
not disappoint the faith, hope, and expectations of his people; but he
feared he would be thought to be so by others, by his enemies, who would
triumph over him, and say, where is thy God? did he not promise to make
thee a defenced city, an iron pillar, and brasen walls? is he as good as
his word? is he not like a dry brook, whose waters fail? are not thy
hope and expectation in vain, who hast been trusting to him, and
depending on him? and it is as if the prophet should say, Lord, let them
have no occasion to speak after this manner; nor suffer my faith in thy
promises to fail; show thyself to be as thou art, a covenant keeping
God, and whose faithfulness never fails: to which an answer is returned
in the following verses.

[Jeremiah 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 15:19</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord, if thou return,.... From thine unbelief,
diffidence, and impenitence, and repent of them; expressed in the
preceding verses:

then will I bring thee again; or, "restore thee (s)"; pardon his sin,
and return him to his post and place, to his office and ministry in it,
and confirm and establish him therein:

and thou shalt stand before me; not only as a petitioner for the people;
see [Jer 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001), but as a servant of the
Lord, attending to his word, and waiting his orders, and ready to
execute them. It denotes his stability in his office:

and if thou wilt take forth the precious from the vile; take precious
truths, comparable to gold, silver, and precious stones; truths more
valuable and desirable than thousands of gold and silver, from those
doctrines which are worthless and contemptible, comparable to wood, hay,
and stubble, and everything that is mean and vile; these faithful
ministers should separate one from the other, and not mix and blend them
together: or precious souls, truly gracious ones, who are precious in
the sight of God, are redeemed by Christ, by his precious blood, and are
adorned with the graces of the Spirit; these are to be distinguished
from the vile, from sinners impenitent and unbelieving, that live in
sin, in defiance of the law, and in contempt of the Gospel; a difference
is to be made between them; delivering out comfortable words to the one,
and denouncing severe threatenings to the other; doing the reverse of
the false prophets, [Eze 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze013.htm#022),

thou shalt be as my mouth; to the people; speak what I command thee, and
whatsoever thou sayest shall be as if I had spoken it myself:

let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them; this is said
of the people of the Jews, to whom the prophet was sent; and the sense
is, that he should not at all comply with them, or conform to their
humours, or flatter and sooth them in their sins, as the false prophets
did; but if they returned to him, attended on his ministry, received his
words and messages, and agreed and conformed to him, and followed his
directions and example, it would be very well; but otherwise he was not
in the least to give way to them, or go into any sinful compliance with
them, either with respect to doctrine or practice,

\(s\) "restituam te", Tigurine version.

[Jeremiah 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 15:20</span></span>

And I will make thee unto this people a fenced brasen wall,.... As he
had promised him, when he first called him to his office, [Jer
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#018), and so would not be as a liar to
him:

and they shall fight against thee; by words and blows, by menaces and
imprisonment:

but they shall not prevail against thee; so as to cause him to call in
his words, and contradict his prophecies; or so as to take away his
life:

for I am with thee, to save thee, and deliver thee, saith the Lord; the
presence of God with his ministers is sufficient to save and deliver
them out of all their troubles, and to protect and defend them against
all their enemies; see [Mat 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020).

[Jeremiah 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 15:21</span></span>

And I will deliver thee out of the hand of the wicked,.... The wicked
Jews, Zedekiah and his courtiers, who imprisoned him:

and I will redeem thee out of the hand of the terrible; as kings and
great men of the earth seem to be; or, "the violent", or "strong" (t),
and mighty; that were stronger than he, that would use him with
violence, and inject terror into him.

\(t\) "violentorum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Schmidt;
"fortium", V. L.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 16](jer016)

</div>
