<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer008)  [Next](jer010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 9

This chapter is a continuation of the judgments of God upon the Jews for
their sins and transgressions herein mentioned; illustrated by the
lamentation of the prophet; by calling for the mourning women, and upon
other women that had lost their husbands or children, with an intimation
that none of any rank and class should escape. The prophet is introduced
mourning over the destruction of his people, [Jer
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001.md), and as uneasy at his stay with
them, because of their uncleanness, treachery, lying, unfaithfulness,
and deceit, [Jer 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#002.md), wherefore the
Lord threatens to melt and try them; and for their deceitfulness
particularly to visit them, and avenge himself on them, [Jer
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#007.md), the destruction is described by
the desolation of the mountains and habitations of the wilderness; they
being so burnt up, that there were neither grass upon them, nor beasts
nor birds to be seen or heard about them; and of Jerusalem, and the
cities of Judah, so that there was no inhabitant in them, [Jer
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#010.md), upon which a wise man is
inquired after, to give the true reason of all this, [Jer
9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#012.md) but none appearing, the Lord
gives it himself; which were their disobedience to his law, and their
worship of idols, following the imagination of their own hearts, [Jer
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#013.md) wherefore they are threatened to
be fed with wormwood and gall; to be scattered among the nations, and a
sword sent after them to their utter consumption, [Jer
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#015.md), hence, for the certainty of it,
mourning women are ordered to be called for in haste, to assist them in
their mourning, on account of their distress, [Jer
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017.md), and such as were mothers of
children are bid to teach their daughters and neighbours lamentation,
because of the children and young men cut off by death, and for the
carcasses of men that should fall as dung in the field, and as the
handful after the harvestman, [Jer
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#020.md), and it is suggested that none
should escape; not the wise man by any art or cunning he was master of;
nor the strong man by his strength; nor the rich man by his riches; and
therefore ought not either of them to glory in these things, but in the
Lord, as exercising lovingkindness, judgment, and righteousness in the
earth, [Jer 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023.md), and the chapter is
concluded with a strong asseveration, that the wicked, both circumcised
and uncircumcised, should be punished, [Jer
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#025.md).

[Jeremiah 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 9:1</span></span>

Oh that my head were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears,.... Or,
"who will give to my head water, and to mine eyes a fountain of tears?"
as the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions. The prophet
wishes that his head was turned and dissolved into water, and that tears
might flow from his eyes as water issues out from a fountain; and he
suggests, that could this be, it would not be sufficient to deplore the
miserable estate of his people, and to express the inward grief and
sorrow of his mind on account of it.

That I might weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of my
people; the design of all this is to set forth the greatness and
horribleness of the destruction, signifying that words were wanting to
express it, and tears to lament it; and to awaken the attention of the
people to it, who were quite hardened, insensible, and stupid. The
Jewish writers close the eighth chapter with this verse, and begin the
ninth with the following.

[Jeremiah 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 9:2</span></span>

Oh that I had in the wilderness a lodging place of wayfaring men,....
Such as travellers take up with in a desert, when they are benighted,
and cannot reach a town or village. This the prophet chose, partly that
he might have an opportunity to give vent to his grief, being alone; for
which reason he did not desire to be in cities and populous places,
where he might be amused and diverted while his people were in distress:
and partly to show his sympathy, not being able to bear the sight of
their misery; and also some degree of indignation at their impieties,
which had brought ruin upon them; on account of which it was more
eligible to dwell with the wild beasts of the desert than with them in
his native country: wherefore it follows,

that I might leave my people, and go from them; which of itself was not
desirable; no man chooses to leave his country, his own people, and his
father's house, and go into distant lands and strange countries; and
especially into a wilderness, where there is neither suitable food nor
agreeable company: wherefore this shows, that there must be something
very bad, and very provoking, to lead him to take such a step as this:
the reason follows,

for they be all adulterers; either in a literal or figurative sense; the
latter seems rather intended; for though corporeal fornication and
adultery might greatly prevail among them, yet not to such a height as
that "all" of them were guilty; whereas idolatry did generally obtain
among them: an assembly of treacherous men; not a few only, but in
general they were apostates from God and from true religion, and
treacherous to one another. The Septuagint calls them "a synod"; and
Joseph Kimchi interprets it "a kingdom"; deriving the word from as it
signifies to have rule and dominion; denoting, that the kingdom in
general was false and perfidious.

[Jeremiah 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 9:3</span></span>

And they bend their tongues like their bow for lies,.... Their tongues
were like bows, and their lying words like arrows, which they directed
against persons to their injury; see [Psa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002.md), or, "like their deceitful bow"
(p); to which the Targum agrees,

"they teach their tongues words of falsehood, they are like to a
deceitful bow.''

Most agreeably to the accents the words may be rendered, "they bend
their tongues, their bow is a lie" (q); either deceitful, or carries a
lie in it, and shoots one out of it:

but they are not valiant for the truth upon the earth; which a man
should do everything for, and nothing against; and which he should
earnestly contend for, and not part with or give up at any rate; not
only for the truth of doctrine, for faith, as the Targum; for the
doctrine of faith, the truth of the Gospel, and as it is in Christ; but
for truth between man and man, for veracity, rightness, and integrity:
for they proceed from evil to evil; from one sin to another, growing
worse and worse, as wicked men and deceivers usually do. Kimchi
observes, it may be interpreted, as of evil works, so of the evil of
punishment, from one evil of the enemy to another; or this year they are
smitten with blasting, another with mildew, or with the locust, and yet
they turn not from their evil ways:

and they know not me, saith the Lord; the God of truth, and without
iniquity, and who will severely punish for it; they did not serve and
worship him as the only Lord God. The Targum is,

"the knowledge of my fear they learned not.''

\(p\) "veluti acum falsum", Munster; "quasi arcum mendacii", V. L. (q)
"Et tetenderunt linguam suam, arcus ipsorum mendacium est", De Dieu;
"qui tendunt linguam suam, arcus eorum est mendacium", Schmidt. Approved
by Reinbeck. De Accent. Heb. p. 437.

[Jeremiah 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 9:4</span></span>

Take ye heed everyone of his neighbour,.... Take care of being imposed
upon by them, since they are so given to lying and deceit; be not too
credulous, or too easily believe what is said; or keep yourselves from
them; have no company or conversation with them, since evil
communications corrupt good manners:

and trust ye not in any brother; whether by blood or by marriage, or by
religion, believe not his words; trust him not, neither with your money,
nor with your mind; commit not your secrets to him, place no confidence
in him; a people must be very corrupt indeed when this is the case: or,
"trust ye not in every brother" (r); some may be trusted, but not all
though the following clause seems to contradict this,

for every brother will utterly supplant; or, in supplanting supplant
(s); play the Jacob, do as he did by his brother, who supplanted him
twice; first got the birthright from him, and then the blessing; which
was presignified by taking his brother by the heel in the womb, from
whence he had his name; and the same word is here used, which signifies
a secret, clandestine, and insidious way of circumventing another;

and every neighbour will walk with slanders; go about spreading lies and
calumnies, as worshippers, backbiters, and tale bearers do. The word is
used for a "merchant"; and because such persons went from place to place
with their goods, and made use often times of fraudulent practices to
deceive people, it is applied to one that is guilty of slander and
calumny; [Sol 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#008.md).

\(r\) "et omni fratri ne fidatis", Paganinus. (s) "supplantanto
supplantat", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 9:5</span></span>

And they will deceive everyone his neighbour,.... In conversation, with
lying words; and in trade and commerce, by art and tricking:

and will not speak the truth; with respect to facts they report, or
goods they sell:

they have taught their tongue to speak lies; and become so accustomed to
lying that they cannot do otherwise; it is as it were natural to them:

and weary themselves to commit iniquity; spared no pains to come at it,
nor any in it, and go on even to weariness; are more laborious and
indefatigable in committing sin than good men are in doing good; which
shows great folly and stupidity. The Targum is,

"they are become foolish, they have erred.''

[Jeremiah 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 9:6</span></span>

Thine habitation is in the midst of deceit,.... In the midst of a people
of deceit, as Kimchi and Ben Molech. These are the words of the Lord to
the prophet, showing what a people he dwelt among, and had to do with;
how cautiously and prudently he should act; how little they were to be
trusted to and depended upon; and what little hope there was of bringing
them to true repentance, since there was so much deceit and hypocrisy
among them. The Targum interprets the words not of the habitation of the
prophet, but of the people, thus,

"they sit in the house of their own congregation, and talk of their
iniquities deceitfully;''

and so Jarchi,

"while they are sitting they devise deceitful devices.''

Through deceit they refuse to know me, saith the Lord: or, "because of
deceit" (t); hypocrisy being a reigning and governing sin in them; they
liked not the true knowledge of God, and refused to worship him
according to the revelation of his will.

\(t\) "ob dolum", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 9:7</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord of hosts,.... Because of this deceit and
hypocrisy, and lying:

behold, I will melt them, and try them: as the refiner does his gold and
silver, by putting them into the fire of afflictions, and thereby remove
their dross and corruption from them. So the Targum,

"behold, I will bring distress upon them, and melt them, and try them.''

For how shall I do for the daughter of my people? the sense is, what
could be done otherwise or better? what was more fit or proper to be
done, than to melt and try them, and purge away their sin, "from the
face of the daughter of my people", as the words may be rendered? The
Septuagint version is, "what shall I do from the face of the wickedness
of my people?" and so the Targum,

"what shall I do from before the sins of the congregation of my
people?''

that is, by way of resentment of them, and in order to remove them.

[Jeremiah 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 9:8</span></span>

Their tongue is as an arrow shot out,.... As an arrow out of a bow,
which moves swiftly, and comes with great force; or, "drawn out" (u); as
out of a quiver. The word is used of gold, and rendered "beaten gold",
[Kg1 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#016.md), gold drawn out into
plates; and here of an arrow drawn out of a quiver; and so it is
interpreted in the Talmud (w); or is "wounding", as the Septuagint, or
"slaying" (x); denoting the mischief and injury done to the characters
of men, by a deceitful, detracting, and calumniating tongue. The Targum
is, "as a sharp arrow their tongue"; which pierces deep, and is deadly;
See Gill on [Jer 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#003.md),

it speaketh deceit; deceitful words, by which men are imposed upon, and
are led into wrong ways of thinking and acting:

one speaketh peaceably to his neighbour with his mouth; salutes him in a
friendly manner; wishes him all health, peace, and prosperity; professes
a sincere and cordial friendship for him, and pretends a strong
affection to him:

but in his heart he layeth wait; to draw him into snares, and
circumvent, trick, and defraud him.

\(u\) "extensa, vel tracta", Vatablus (w) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 30. 2. &
Gloss. in ib. (x) Jugulans, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 9:9</span></span>

Shall I not visit them for these things? saith the Lord,.... The Targum
adds,

"to bring evil upon them.''

Shall not my soul be avenged on such a nation as this? the Targum is,

"or of a people whose works are such, shall I not take vengeance
according to my pleasure?''

See Gill on [Jer 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#009.md).

[Jeremiah 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 9:10</span></span>

For the mountains will I take up a weeping and wailing,.... Because of
the desolation of them; because no pasture upon them, nor flocks feeding
there; or "concerning" them, as the Arabic version; or "upon" them (y),
in order to cause the lamentation to be heard the further; but the
former sense seems best, as appears by what follows. The Septuagint,
Syriac, and Arabic versions, read it as an exhortation to others, "take
up a weeping": but they are the words of the prophet, declaring what he
would do.

And for the habitations of the wilderness a lamentation; for the
cottages of the shepherds, erected for their convenience, to look after
their flocks, feeding on the mountains, and in the valleys; for the
wilderness does not denote barren places, but pastures:

because they are burnt up; by the fire of the Chaldeans, who burnt the
cottages, and drove off the cattle:

so that none can pass through them; or there is none that passes
through; as no inhabitant there, so no passenger that way; which shows
how very desolate these places were:

neither can men hear the voice of the cattle; the lowing of the oxen, or
the bleating of the sheep, there being none to be heard, being all
carried off; and indeed no men to hear them, had there been any:

both the fowl of the heavens and the beasts are fled, they are gone; or,
"from the fowl of the heavens to the beasts", &c. (z), the places lying
waste and uncultivated; there were no seed for the fowls to pick up,
which generally frequent places where there is sowing, and where fruit
is brought to perfection; and no pasture for the beasts to feed upon.
Kimchi says these words are an hyperbole. The word "beast", being by
geometry, or numerically, fifty two, the Jews (a) gather from hence,
that for the space of fifty two years no man passed through the land of
Judah; which they reckon from the time that Zedekiah was carried
captive, to the commandment of Cyrus.

\(y\) "super montibus", Cocceius; "super montes", V. L. Pagninus,
Montanus. (z) "ab ave coelorum usque ad bestiam", Schmidt. (a) T. Bab.
Sabbat, fol. 145. 2. & Gloss. in ib. Vid. T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 11. 1,
2.

[Jeremiah 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 9:11</span></span>

And I will make Jerusalem heaps,.... That is, the walls and houses of it
shall be thrown down, and become heaps of stones and rubbish:

and a den of dragons; only inhabited by wild beasts:

and I will make the cities of Judah desolate, without inhabitant; so
that the calamity would be universal; not only Jerusalem, but all the
cities of the land, would be destroyed, forsaken, and uninhabited.

[Jeremiah 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 9:12</span></span>

Who is the wise man that may understand this?.... Not the calamity, but
the cause of it; a man of wisdom would inquire into it, find it out, and
understand it; but the intimation is, that there was not a wise man
among them, at least very few; there were scarce any that took any
notice of these things, or were concerned about them:

and who is he to whom the mouth of the Lord hath spoken; and foretold
this desolation and destruction; meaning a prophet:

that he may declare it; as from the Lord, namely, what follows:

for what the land perisheth, and is burnt like a wilderness, that none
passeth through? that is, what were the sins of the inhabitants of the
land, which brought such distress upon it, and for which it became such
a ruinous heap, and like the heath in the wilderness, so that it had no
inhabitant, nor even a passenger: they must be some very great and
abominable iniquities that were the cause of all this.

[Jeremiah 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 9:13</span></span>

And the Lord saith,.... The Septuagint version adds, "to me"; there
being no wise and understanding man, nor prophet (b), to take up this
affair, and open the cause of it, therefore the Lord undertakes it
himself: the question was put to them, but they not answering it, the
Lord does it,

because they have forsaken my law, which I set before them; in a plain
and easy manner, so as to be readily understood; yet this they attended
not unto, but forsook it, neglected it, and cast it behind their backs.
Kimchi's note on the phrase, "before them", is,

"not in heaven is it, nor beyond the sea is it;''

see [Deu 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011.md),

and have not obeyed my voice; in the law, and by the prophets:

neither walked therein: according to it, as the Lord directed; they
neither hearkened to the voice of the Lord, nor did as they were
instructed by it.

\(b\) Vid. T. Nedarim, fol. 81. 1. & Bava Metzia fol. 85. 1, 2.

[Jeremiah 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 9:14</span></span>

But have walked after the imagination of their own heart,.... What their
own hearts devised, chose, and were best pleased with; See Gill on [Jer
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024.md),

and after Baalim; the idols of the Gentiles; these they served and
worshipped, and not the true God:

which their fathers taught them; which was so far from excusing them,
that it was an aggravation of their sin, that they had continued in
their wicked ways and idolatrous practices, from age to age, from one
generation to another. This then was the cause of their calamity and
destruction; they had forsaken the law of the Lord, and had broken that;
they had chose their own ways, and had been guilty of idolatrous
practices time out of mind; wherefore the Lord had shown much
longsuffering and patience with them, and would now no longer forbear he
was just and righteous in his doings.

[Jeremiah 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 9:15</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord God of hosts, the God of Israel,.... He
calls himself "the Lord God of hosts", of armies above and below, in
heaven and in earth, in opposition to Baalim, the idols of the Gentiles;
which word signifies "lords"; which, though there be many who are called
so, there is but one God, and one Lord, who is God over all, and "the
God of Israel"; who had chosen them, and distinguished them by the
blessings of his goodness; and yet they had forsaken him, and followed
after other gods; by which the eyes of his glory were provoked, and he
was determined to chastise them for it:

behold, I will feed them, even this people, with wormwood; that is, with
straits or difficulties, as the Septuagint version; with bitter
afflictions; such are not joyous, but grievous; which are irksome and
disagreeable, as bitter things, and particularly wormwood, are to the
taste. The Targum is,

"I will bring tribulation upon them, bitter as wormwood:''

and give them water of gall to drink; meaning either of the entrails of
a beast so called, or of the juice of the herb hemlock, as the word is
rendered in [Hos 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#004.md), as Kimchi; or
of the poison of a serpent, as Jarchi; and so the Targum,

"and I will give them the cup of cursing to drink as the heads of
serpents:''

signifying that their punishment would be very severe, though just.

[Jeremiah 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 9:16</span></span>

I will scatter them also among the Heathen,.... Besides the bitter
judgments of famine and pestilence during the siege, what remained of
them should be carried captive out of their own land into foreign
countries, than which nothing could be more distressing:

whom neither they or their fathers have known; a circumstance greatly
aggravating their captivity:

and I will send a sword after them, till I have consumed them; or men
that kill with the sword, as the Targum: it chiefly regards such of them
as were scattered among the Moabites and Ammonites, and especially that
went into Egypt; see [Jer 44:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer044.htm#027.md).

[Jeremiah 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 9:17</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, consider ye,.... The punishment that was
just coming upon them, as Kimchi; or the words that the Lord was about
to say unto them; as follows:

and call for the mourning women, that they may come; the same with the
"praeficae" among the Romans; persons that were sent for, and hired by,
the relations of the dead, to raise up their mourning; and who, by their
dishevelled hair, naked breasts, and beatings thereon, and mournful
voice, and what they said in their doleful ditties in praise of the
dead, greatly moved upon the affections of the surviving relatives, and
produced tears from them. This was a custom that early prevailed among
the Jews, and long continued with them; and was so common, that,
according to the Misnic doctors (c), the poorest man in Israel, when his
wife died, never had less than two pipes, and one mourning woman; See
Gill on [Mat 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#023.md). Now, in order to
show what a calamity was coming on them, and what mourning there would
be, and what occasion for it; the Lord by the prophet, not as approving,
but deriding the practice, bids them call for the mourning women to
assist them in their lamentations:

and send for cunning women, that they may come; such as were expert in
this business, and could mimic mourning well, and had the art of moving
the affections with their voice and gestures.

\(c\) Miss. Cetubot, c. 4. sect. 4.

[Jeremiah 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 9:18</span></span>

And let them make haste, and take up a wailing for us,.... Deliver out a
mournful song, as the Arabic version; setting forth their miseries and
distresses, and affecting their minds with them. The prophet puts
himself among the people, as being a party concealed in their
sufferings, and sympathizing with them, as well as to show the certainty
of then and how soon they would be involved in them:

that our eyes may run down with tears, and our eyelids gush out with
waters; or balls of the eye, as the Targum and Kimchi; these
hyperbolical expressions are used to express the greatness of the
calamity, and that no mourning was equal to it; see [Jer
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001.md).

[Jeremiah 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 9:19</span></span>

For a voice of wailing is heard out of Zion,.... Out of the fortress of
Zion, out of the city of Jerusalem, which was thought to be
inexpugnable, and could never be taken; but now a voice is heard out of
that, deploring the desolation of it:

how are we spoiled? our houses destroyed, and we plundered of our
substance:

we are greatly confounded: filled with shame, on account of their vain
confidence; thinking their city would never be taken, and they were safe
in it:

because we have forsaken the land; the land of Judea, being obliged to
it, the enemy carrying them captive into other countries:

because our dwellings have cast us out; not suffering us to continue
there any longer, as being unworthy of them; or enemies have cast down
our habitations to the earth, as Jarchi; and so the Targum, "for our
palaces are desolate"; the principal buildings in Jerusalem, as well as
the houses of the common people, were thrown down to the ground, or
burnt with fire, and particularly the temple; so that the whole was in a
most ruinous condition, and a fit subject of a mournful song.

[Jeremiah 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 9:20</span></span>

Yet hear the word of the Lord, O ye women,.... Not the mourning women,
but others who had lost their husbands and their children, and had just
reason for real mourning; and therefore they are called upon to it, not
only because they were more tenderhearted than men, as Kimchi observes;
or because they were more attentive to the hearing of the word of God
than men; but because of the paucity of men, such numbers being slain in
the siege, and by the sword; and of the loss the women had sustained,
see [Jer 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#022.md),

and let your ear receive the word of his mouth; by his prophets; so the
Targum,

"let your ear hearken to the words of his prophets:''

and teach your daughters wailing. The Arabic version, "a mournful song";
but not the daughters of the mourning women are meant; but the real
daughters of those who had lost their husbands or children; since it
follows:

and everyone her neighbour lamentation; signifying that the mortality
among them would be very universal, not a family escaping; which is
described in the next verses. This wailing and lamentation was made by
responses, according to the Jews; for they say (d),

"what is lamentation? when one speaks, and all the rest answer after
her, as it is written in [Jer 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#020.md).''

\(d\) Misn. Moed Katon, c. 3. sect. 9.

[Jeremiah 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 9:21</span></span>

For death is come up into our windows,.... Their doors being shut,
bolted, and barred, they thought themselves safe, but were not; the
Chaldeans scaled their walls, broke in at the tops of their houses, or
at their windows, and destroyed them: for the invasion of the enemy, and
the manner of their entrance into them, seem to be described. Death is
here represented as a person, as it sometimes is in Scripture; see [Rev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#008.md) and as coming suddenly and
unawares upon men, and from whom there is no escape, or any way and
method of keeping him out; bolts and bars will not do; he can climb up,
and go in at the window:

and is entered into our palaces; the houses of their principal men,
which were well built, and most strongly fortified, these could not keep
out the enemy: and death spares none, high nor low, rich nor poor; it
enters the palaces of great men, as well as the cottages of the poor.
The Septuagint version is, "it is entered into our land"; and so the
Arabic version; only it places the phrase, "into our land", in the
preceding clause; and that of "into", or "through our windows", in this:

to cut off the children from without, and the young men from the
streets; these words are not strictly to be connected with the
preceding, as though they pressed the end of death, ascending up to the
windows, and entering palaces, to cut off such as were in the streets;
but the words are a proposition of themselves, as the distinctive accent
"athnach" shows; and must be supplied after this manner, and passing
through them it goes on, "to cut off", &c. and so aptly describes the
invading enemy climbing the walls of the city, entering at windows, or
tops of houses, upon or near the walls; and, having destroyed all
within, goes forth into the streets, where children were at play, and
slays them and into courts or markets, where young men were employed in
business, and destroys them. The Jews (e) interpret it of famine.

\(e\) T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 60. 2.

[Jeremiah 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 9:22</span></span>

Speak, thus saith the Lord,.... These are the words of the Lord to
Jeremiah, to go on with his prophecy in his name; so the Targum,

"prophesy, thus saith the Lord:''

even the carcasses of men shall fall as dung upon the open field; or,
"upon the face of the field" (f); this shows the reason why the women
are called to mourning, because the men would fall by the sword in the
open field, and there lie and rot, and become dung upon it. The Targum
is,

"as dung spread upon the face of the field;''

which denotes the great number that should fall, which would cover the
face of the field; the condition they should be in; and the contempt and
neglect they should be had in:

and as the handful after the harvestman, and none shall gather them; as
a handful of corn that is forgot, and left by the harvestman; or as ears
of corn which are dropped by the reaper, or binder, and are usually
gleaned or gathered up by the poor that follow; but in the case referred
to, or supposed, are not gathered; so it would be with these people;
they should be left upon the ground, like a handful forgot, or like ears
of corn dropped, and not gathered up, and there they should lie, and
none should bury them.

\(f\) "super faciebus agri", Montanus, Schmidt; "in facie agri",
Cocceius; "in superficie agri", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 9:23</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, let not the wise man glory in his wisdom,.... Not
in his natural wisdom, or knowledge of natural things: this is often but
an appearance of wisdom, and is science falsely so called; and whatever
is real of this kind is of God; and the best falls short of leading men
to a true and saving knowledge of God; the foolishness of God is wiser
than it; and it is made foolish, destroyed, and brought to nought by
him: nor in evangelical wisdom and knowledge; not in that which is less
common, or what fits men for public usefulness, as ministerial gifts;
for such are received from above; are more for the use of others than a
man's self; there is something better than these, which a man may not
have, and yet have these, which is grace; those may fade, or be taken
away; and a man have them, and be lost eternally: nor in that which is
more general, speculative knowledge of Gospel truths; for if it is
attended with conceit, it is little or nothing that a man knows; if he
is proud of it, his knowledge is not sanctified; and it is no other than
what the devils themselves have: nor in that which is more special;
wisdom in the inward part, or a spiritual and saving knowledge of God in
Christ; this a man has wholly of free grace, and should give the praise
and glory of it to God, and not attribute it to himself:

neither let the mighty man glory in his might; not in his natural might
or strength; this is of God, and is greater in some of the brutes than
in men; and is what God can take away, and does often weaken it in the
way by diseases, and at last destroys it by death; nor in moral
strength, or in the power of free will; which is very weak and
insufficient to do anything that is spiritually good: nor even in
spiritual strength; this is from Christ; it is only through him
strengthening his people that they do what they do; and all supplies and
increase of it are from him; and therefore no room for glorying:

let not the rich man glory in his riches; these come of the hand of God,
and are what he can take away at pleasure; they are very uncertain and
precarious things; there is a better and more enduring substance; these
cannot profit in a day of wrath, nor deliver from death, corporeal,
spiritual, or eternal. And the intention of the words here is to show,
that neither the wise man with all his art and cunning, nor the mighty
man by his strength, nor the rich man through his riches, could save
themselves from the destruction before prophesied of. The Targum
paraphrases them thus,

"thus saith the Lord, let not Solomon the son of David the wise man
praise (or please himself) in his wisdom; nor let Samson the son of
Manoah the mighty man please himself in his might; nor let Ahab the son
of Omri the rich man please himself in his riches.''

[Jeremiah 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 9:24</span></span>

But let him that glorieth glory in this,.... In the Lord alone, as it is
interpreted by the apostle, [Co1 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#031.md),

that he understandeth and knoweth me; or, "in understanding and knowing
me" (g); or, "he understanding and knowing me"; for this clause is
descriptive of the person that is to glory in the Lord, and not of the
thing in which he is to glory; for it is not even in the knowledge of
God that men are to glory, but in the Lord himself; and he that
understands himself as a creature dependent on God, and especially as a
fallen sinful creature; and still more as one regenerated by the grace
of God; he will never glory in himself, but in the Lord; and so, if he
understands divine things, and the scheme of salvation by the grace of
God, and not by the works of men; and if he knows the Lord, he will
never glory in his own wisdom, nor in his own strength, nor in his
riches, nor in his righteousness, nor in any man or creature, but in the
Lord only; and particularly in what follows:

that I am the Lord, which exercise lovingkindness; in such various
instances; in election, redemption, effectual calling, the pardon of
sin, justification, adoption, and eternal life; and towards persons so
very undeserving of any favour; and to have an interest in this exceeds
all things else; it is better than life, and all the enjoyments of it:

judgment; exercising it on Christ, sin being laid, found, and condemned
on him; and through Christ protecting and defending his people; and by
Christ at the last day:

and righteousness in the earth; wrought by Christ here on earth in our
nature, and imputed to his people in their present state, whereby they
have a right to eternal glory:

for in these things I delight, saith the Lord; in showing mercy, grace,
and favour, to miserable and undeserving men; in making his Son an
offering for sin, and bruising him; and in his righteousness, whereby
the law is magnified and made honourable.

\(g\) "intelligendo et sciendo me", Montanus.

[Jeremiah 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 9:25</span></span>

Behold, the days come, saith the Lord,.... Or, "are coming" (h); it
seems to respect the time after the Babylonish captivity, when the
punishment after threatened took place, and not before:

that I will punish all them that are circumcised with the uncircumcised;
Jews and Gentiles together. The circumcised. Jews trusting in their
circumcision, and being, as is said in the next verse, uncircumcised in
heart, were no better than the uncircumcised Gentiles; wherefore both
being transgressors of the law, and despisers of the Gospel of Christ,
are threatened with destruction; see [Rom
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012.md).

\(h\) "dies sunt venientes", Schmidt, Montanus; "venturi sunt", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 9:26</span></span>

Egypt, and Judah, and Edom, and the children of Ammon, and Moab,....
Places and people among which the Jews were dispersed, and whose
punishment is predicted in Jeremiah chapters forty six through forty
nine, and whose countries are now under the dominion of the Turks: (h).

and all that are in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness;
who dwelt in the desert of Arabia; these, according to Kimchi, were the
Kedarenes, and the kingdoms of Hazor, a people that dwelt in the utmost
corners, whom Nebuchadnezzar smote, as Jeremiah foretold, [Jer
49:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#028.md). Jarchi's note is,

"them that are cut off in a corner of the wilderness;''

that live by themselves, and have no communication with other people;
were at the greatest distance, and secure; dwelt alone, and had neither
gates nor bars, as is said of the same people, [Jer
49:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#031.md). The Septuagint version is,
"upon everyone that shaves what is about his face, that dwells in the
wilderness"; and so the Syriac and Arabic versions; to which agrees the
Targum,

"upon all that round the corners of the head, that dwell in habitations
in the wilderness,''

The Arabians used to shave the extreme hairs of the head round about, as
the forehead, temples, and behind the ears, which are the corners of the
head; so Herodotus (i) reports of them, who seem to be meant here;
though some think the Jews are intended, to whom this was forbidden,
[Lev 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#027.md),

for all these nations are uncircumcised; in the flesh; though they were
not punished on this account, because it was not commanded them, as
Kimchi observes; but is mentioned to show that the Jews were no better
than they, though circumcised, and that they should be punished
together:

and all the house of Israel are uncircumcised in the heart; had not the
circumcision made without hands; or were not circumcised in heart, to
love the Lord, fear and serve him; the foreskin of their flesh taken off
availed not so long as that on their heart remained, and they were
stupid, impenitent, and disobedient.

\(h\) Written about 1750. Editor. (i) In Thalia, vel l. 3. c. 8.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 10](jer010.md)

</div>
