<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer001)  [Next](jer003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 2

This chapter contains the prophet's message from the Lord to the people
of the Jews; in which they are reminded of their former favours, in
order to aggravate their sins and transgressions they were chargeable
with; to show their ingratitude and unkindness, and to bring them to a
conviction and acknowledgment of their iniquities, without which
punishment would be inflicted on them. The preface to this message is in
[Jer 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001), and the discourse begins
with an account of their former state and condition when they came out
of Egypt; what kindness was shown them by the Lord, and what was
returned to him by them; what they were to him, and how much regarded by
him, [Jer 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002) and so far were they
from being injured by him, that might cause them to depart from him,
which they are desired to give attention to, that they were followed
with various instances of goodness, which are particularly enumerated;
and yet no notice was taken of them, neither by people, priests,
pastors, and prophets, who were guilty of the grossest ignorance and
wickedness, [Jer 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#004), wherefore the
Lord determines to plead with them and theirs; and charges them with
such idolatry as was not to be found among the Gentiles, [Jer
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#009) the heavens are called upon to be
astonished at it; and the reason given for it, the ingratitude and folly
of this people, [Jer 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012) in order to
reclaim them, the Lord by the prophet proceeds to observe to them the
corrections and chastisement they had already endured, being brought
into bondage, their land wasted, cities burnt, and their glory taken
from them; all which were owing to their revoltings and backslidings,
and by which they might see what an evil and bitter thing sin is in its
effects, [Jer 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#014) and again reminds
them of former favours; how that he loosed them from their yoke and
bonds, when they promised to transgress no more, and yet did more and
more; how he had raised them from a right seed, and planted them a noble
vine, and yet they were sadly degenerated, and were guilty of such
crimes as were not to be removed by anything done by them, [Jer
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020), and notwithstanding all this,
they had the impudence to deny that they were tainted with idolatry,
when they had been so guilty of it in the valley of Hinnom, and
elsewhere; and were comparable to the lustful dromedary and wild ass,
and so fond of strange gods, that they thirsted after them, and were
resolved to follow them, [Jer 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023) and
yet the time would come when all ranks of men among them would be
ashamed of their worship of stocks and stones, and in the time of their
trouble call upon the Lord to save them, when they would be sent to
their gods, who were as numerous as their cities, [Jer
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026) wherefore it was in vain to plead
their innocence, when they were all so guilty, and had received
correction without amendment, and had even slain the prophets of the
Lord, [Jer 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#029) and then the Lord
again upbraids them with their ingratitude to him, who had been so good
and kind to them; with their forgetfulness of him, illustrated by a
maid's not forgetting her ornaments, and a bride her attire; with their
artful methods to entice others to idolatry, and with their shedding of
innocent blood; and yet, after all this, they asserted their innocence,
and affirmed they had never sinned, [Jer
2:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#031), for all which sentence is
pronounced against them, and punishment is threatened them, [Jer
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#036).

[Jeremiah 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 2:1</span></span>

Moreover, the word of the Lord came to me, saying. Here begins the book,
and Jeremiah's first sermon; and the following contains the message he
was sent with, to which the preceding chapter is only a preface or
introduction. The Targum calls it,

"the word of the prophecy from before the Lord.''

[Jeremiah 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 2:2</span></span>

Go, and cry in the ears of Jerusalem,.... Of the inhabitants of
Jerusalem, the metropolis of Judea. The prophet seems now to have been
at Anathoth, and therefore is bid to go from thence to Jerusalem, and
there prophesy before the people in it, as the Targum paraphrases it:

saying, thus saith the Lord, I remember thee; the Lord never forgets his
people, though they sometimes think he does; it cannot be for they are
engraven on the palms of his hands, yea, are set as a seal on his heart;
nor does he forget his covenant with them, nor favours and blessings
promised them: or, "I remember for thee"; or, "to thee" (w): things in
thy favour, and which will be to thy advantage:

the kindness of thy youth; either the lovingkindness of the Lord, which
he had shown unto them; and the benefits, as the fruits thereof, which
he had bestowed upon them in former times, when they were brought out of
Egypt, and into the wilderness, which was the infancy both of their
civil and church state; see [Hos 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001)
and when they received many favours from the Lord, [Jer
31:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#002) or the kindness of the people of
Israel to the Lord, which was influenced and drawn forth by his love to
them; though this can only be understood of some few of them, since the
greater part tempted him, grieved, and provoked him:

the love of thine espousals; for the covenant God made with that people,
when he brought them out of Egypt, was in the form of a marriage
contract; he became their husband, and they became his spouse and bride;
and which is an aggravation of their violation of it, [Jer
31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032) and this love, as before, may be
understood either of the love of God to them, or of their love to him.
The Targum interprets the former clause of the divine goodness to them,
and this of their love to him, paraphrasing the whole thus,

"I remember unto you the blessings of ancient days, and the love of your
fathers, who believed in my word:''

when thou wentest after me; the Lord going before them in a pillar of
cloud by day, and in a pillar of fire by night; even the angel of God's
presence, who was their leader, guide, and preserver:

in the wilderness, in a land that was not sown; where they passed
through many difficulties, and lived upon the providence of God, which,
in a wonderful manner, supported them with the necessaries of life,
which otherwise they could not have had. The Targum is,

"and they walked after my two messengers, after Moses and Aaron, in the
wilderness forty years without food, in a land that was not sown.''

The whole of this may be applied to the case of God's people at first
conversion, when they are as newly born babes, and become young men in
Christ; at which time they are openly espoused to him, having been
secretly betrothed in covenant before; but now, through the efficacy of
the Spirit attending the word, they are made willing to give up
themselves to the Lord, and are espoused to one husband, Christ, [Co2
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#002) at which time also great kindness
and love is expressed both by the Lord to them, by quickening them who
before were dead; by bringing them out of a most miserable condition; by
speaking comfortably to them; by manifesting and applying his pardoning
grace; and by openly taking them into his family: and also by them to
him again; for the grace of love is then implanted, which, as it is
hearty and sincere, is very ardent and fervent; which shows itself by
parting with and bearing all for Christ; and by a concern for his
company and presence; and by a regard to his people, Gospel, ways, and
worship; particularly by following him in his ordinances with great
zeal, fervency, and constancy, even though attended with many
difficulties and discouragements; and though the way may seem to flesh
and blood very unpleasant and unpromising; all which is remembered by
the Lord when forgotten by them; and when their love is become cold to
him, he not only remembers them, and his love to them, which is always
the same, but also their love to him.

\(w\) "recordor tibi", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so Schmidt, and
some in Vatablus; which is preferred by Gussetius, Ebr. Comment. p. 228.

[Jeremiah 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 2:3</span></span>

Israel was holiness unto the Lord,.... When first brought out of Egypt
into the wilderness, by the Lord's choice and separation of them to be a
holy people to him above all others; by covenant with him, and
profession of him; and by his giving them holy laws, and placing a
sanctuary among them; and by their high priest, who represented them in
the most holy place; and had on the front of his mitre written,

holiness unto the Lord; so the spiritual Israel are chosen in Christ to
be holy, and he is made sanctification to them; they are sanctified in
him, and by his Spirit; they are called with a holy calling, and unto
holiness; and, under the influence of grace, live holy lives and
conversations, which the grace of God teaches, and young converts are
remarkable for; their consciences being just awakened, and their hearts
tender:

and the firstfruits of his increase; Israel was the first nation that
God separated for himself; and this being the firstfruits, shows that he
would separate others also, and take out of the Gentiles a people for
his name, which he has since done; and the elect of God among the
Israelites were the firstfruits of his chosen ones elsewhere; it were
some of them that first believed in Christ, and received the firstfruits
of the Spirit; and all converted ones are a kind of firstfruits of his
creatures; the grace they receive at conversion is the firstfruits of a
later increase of it, and even of eternal glory:

all that devour him shall offend; or, "all that eat him shall be guilty"
(x); and be condemned and punished, who eat up the Lord's people, as
they eat bread; see [Psa 53:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#004), these
shall not go unpunished; for his people are as the apple of his eye, and
whoever touches and hurts them fall under the divine displeasure, and
will be looked upon as criminals and offenders, and will be judged and
condemned as such. The allusion is to the eating of the firstfruits,
which only belonged to the priests; nor might any of the increase be
eaten until the firstfruits were brought to them, [Lev
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#010). This is expressed in the
Chaldee paraphrase of the text,

"whosoever eats of them (the firstfruits) is guilty of death; for as the
beginning of the harvest, the sheaf of oblation, whoever eats of it
before the priests, the sons of Aaron, have offered of it upon the
altar, shall be guilty or condemned; so all that spoil the house of
Israel shall be guilty or condemned;''

so Jarchi and Kimchi:

evil shall come upon them, saith the Lord; that is, the evil of
punishment, either in this world, or in that which is to come, or in
both.

\(x\) "rcos fuisse", Junius & Tremellius; "rei peragebantur", Piscator;
"rei fiunt", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 2:4</span></span>

Hear ye the word of the Lord, O house of Jacob, and all the families of
the house of Israel. The Lord, by the prophet, having observed his great
kindness to this people, what they were unto him, and what a regard he
had for them, proceeds to upbraid them with their ingratitude, and
requires an attention to what he was about to say; all are called upon,
because, all were guilty. This respects the two tribes of Judah and
Benjamin, and the several families in them. The ten tribes had been long
carried captive.

[Jeremiah 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 2:5</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, what iniquity have your fathers found in me,....
What injustice or injury has been done them? there is no unrighteousness
in God, nor can any be done by him; or what unfaithfulness, or want of
truth and integrity in performing promises, had they found in him? he
never suffers his faithfulness to fail, or any of the good things he has
promised. So the Targum,

"what falsehood have your fathers found in my word?''

none at all; God is a covenant keeping God:

that they are gone far from me; from my fear, as the Chaldee paraphrase;
from the word and worship, and ways of God:

and have walked after vanity; after idols, the vanities of the Gentiles,
[Jer 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022),

and are become vain? in their imaginations and in their actions, in
their knowledge and in their practice, worshipping idols, as well as
guilty of many other sins.

[Jeremiah 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 2:6</span></span>

Neither said they, where is the Lord?.... They did not ask after him,
nor seek his face and favour, nor worship him, nor took any notice of
the blessings he bestowed upon them:

that brought us up out of the land of Egypt? by means of Moses the
deliverer, with a mighty hand, and outstretched arm; for, though Moses
was the instrument, God was the efficient cause of the deliverance; the
favour was his, and the glory of it ought to have been given to him:

that led us through the wilderness; of "Shur", or of "Sin", the desert
of Arabia, [Exo 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#022) and a dreadful
and terrible one it was:

through a land of deserts and of pits, through a land of drought, and of
the shadow of death; where were scorpions, fiery serpents, drought, and
no water, and so very dangerous as well as uncomfortable travelling; and
yet through all this they were led, and wonderfully supplied and
preserved;

through a land that no man passed through, and where no man dwelt; there
was no passenger in it, nor inhabitants on it, so that there were none
to relieve them; whence it appears, that all their supply, support, and
preservation, were from the Lord. The Jews (y) interpret this of the
first man Adam, after this manner,

"all land, concerning which the first man decreed that it should be
inhabited, it is inhabited; and all land, concerning which he did not
decree it should be inhabited, it is not inhabited; and such they
suggest was this wilderness;''

see [Deu 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#015).

\(y\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 31. 1. & Sota, fol. 46. 2.

[Jeremiah 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 2:7</span></span>

And I brought you into a plentiful country,.... "Into the land of
Carmel", as in the Hebrew text; that is,

"into the land of Israel, which was planted as Carmel,''

as the Targum paraphrases it; with wheat, barley, vines, fig trees,
pomegranates, and olives; a land flowing with milk and honey, [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008), so Ben Melech:

to eat the fruit thereof and the goodness thereof; of vineyards and
oliveyards, which they had not planted, and for which they had never
laboured, [Jos 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos024.htm#013),

but when ye entered ye defiled my land; which the Lord had chosen above
all lands, where he would have a temple built for his worship, and where
he would cause his Shechinah or glorious Majesty to dwell; but this they
defiled by their sins and transgressions, and particularly by their
idolatry, as follows:

that made mine heritage an abomination; by devoting it to the worship of
idols, as the Targum paraphrases it.

[Jeremiah 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 2:8</span></span>

The priests said not, where is the Lord?.... Whose business it was to
draw nigh to God, and offer the sacrifices of the people, and inquire of
God for them; whose lips should keep knowledge, and at whose mouth the
law should be sought, they being the messengers of the Lord of hosts,
[Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007),

and they that handle the law knew me not; the sanhedrim, according to
Jarchi; or the lawyers and scribes, the Rabbins and doctors of the law,
whose business it was to read and explain it; these did not understand
it, nor the mind of God in it; and much less did they know him in a
spiritual and evangelical manner; or as he is in Christ, and revealed in
the Gospel:

the pastors also transgressed against me; kings, as the Targum, Jarchi,
and Kimchi interpret it, who were pastors or shepherds in a civil sense;
whose business it was to feed the people as the shepherd does his flock;
that is, to guide and govern them by wholesome laws, by the laws of God;
but, instead of this, they rebelled against the Lord, and transgressed
his commands:

and the prophets prophesied by Baal; in his name; pretending to be
inspired by that idol, and to receive the spirit of prophecy from him:

and walked after things that do not profit; the gods of the Gentiles,
which could not supply them with the least temporal blessing, and much
less give them spiritual and eternal ones; see [Jer
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#022). This is to be understood of
false prophets, as Ben Melech.

[Jeremiah 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 2:9</span></span>

Wherefore I will yet plead with you, saith the Lord,.... Either
verbally, by reasoning with them, and reproving them for their
ignorance, stupidity, and idolatry; or by deeds, inflicting punishment
upon them; so the Targum,

"therefore I will take vengeance on you, or punish you, saith the
Lord:''

and with your children's children will I plead; who imitate their
parents, and do the same evil things as they, which the Lord knew they
would; and was particularly true of the Jews in the times of Christ, for
which reason wrath came upon them to the uttermost.

[Jeremiah 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 2:10</span></span>

For pass over the isles of Chittim, and see,.... Or, "to the isles of
Chittim" (z); so called from Kittim the son of Javan, [Gen
10:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#004) who, as Josephus says (a),
possessed the island of Chethima, now called Cyprus; and, from that, all
islands, and most maritime places, are, by the Hebrews, called Chittim,
he observes: it may regard all the islands in the Aegean and
Mediterranean seas:

and send unto Kedar; which was in Arabia, and lay to the east, as
Chittim to the west; and so the Targum paraphrases it,

"send to the provinces of the Arabians:''

and consider diligently, and see if there be such a thing; as what is
inquired about in the following verse, a change of deities. All this is
to be understood of the contemplation of the mind, and not of any
corporeal journey to be taken, to inquire into this matter.

\(z\) Sept. "transite ad insulas Cethim", V. L. "ad insulas Cypriorum";
so some in Vatablus; "in insulas", Schmidt. (a) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 6.
sect. 1.

[Jeremiah 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 2:11</span></span>

Hath a nation changed their gods, which are yet no gods?.... Though they
are not by nature gods which they worship, only nominal and fictitious
deities, yet they did not change them for others; but when they once
embraced the worship of them, continued therein; so did the Chittim, the
inhabitants of the isles, who though they traded to distant countries,
from place to place; and so the Kedarenes, who dwelt in tents, and fed
cattle, and moved from one desert to another, and from one pasture to
another, as Jarchi observes; yet they carried their gods with them, and
did not exchange them for new ones where they came. The Jewish writers
say (b), that the Kedarenes worshipped water, and the Chittim fire; and
though they knew that water would quench fire, yet the latter would not
change their gods. Kimchi and Abendana relate it just the reverse, and
say the Kedarenes worshipped fire, and the Chittim water, which is most
likely; and so it is said elsewhere (c).

But my people have changed their glory; the true God, who is glorious in
himself, and whom they should have glorified, and have counted it their
highest honour and glory that they knew him, and were the worshippers of
him; yet they changed him, their glory, into the similitude of an ox
that eateth grass, [Psa 106:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#020),
wherefore it is justly added,

for that which doth not profit; meaning Baal, and such like idols; see
the note on [Jer 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#008).

\(b\) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 5. 2. (c) Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 60.
3.

[Jeremiah 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 2:12</span></span>

Be astonished, O ye heavens, at this,.... Meaning either the angels in
heaven, or the heavens themselves, by a personification:

and be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate, saith the Lord; all which
may be signified by storms and tempests, by thunder and lightning, and
by the sun's withdrawing its light. This is said to aggravate the
wickedness committed, as if the heavens blushed and were ashamed, and
were confounded and amazed at it; and as if, on account of it, the Jews
deserved not the benefit of the heavens, and the orbs in them.

[Jeremiah 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 2:13</span></span>

For my people have committed two evils,.... Not but that they had
committed more, but there were two principal ones they were guilty of,
hereafter mentioned; and it was an aggravation of these crimes, that
they were the professing people of God who had committed them: and it
may be observed, that such sin; they are not without it, nor the
commission of it; and may be left to fall into great sins, and yet
remain his people; covenant interest cannot be dissolved; this should be
considered not as an encouragement to sin, but as a relief under a sense
of sin:

they have forsaken me, the fountain of living waters; this is said of
Christ, [Sol 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015), grace in him is
compared to "water", it being cooling and refreshing, cleansing and
fructifying; and to living water, because it quickens dead sinners,
revives drooping saints, supports and maintains spiritual life, and
issues in eternal life; and because it is perpetual and ever flowing;
and to a "fountain", denoting that the original of it is in Christ, and
the great abundance of it which is in him; it is as water in a fountain,
in us as in streams: now to forsake this fountain is the first of these
evils; which is done when the people of God are remiss in the exercise
of faith on Christ; grow cold in their affections to him, and neglect
his word and ordinances.

And hewed them out cisterns, broken cisterns, that can hold no water;
this is the other evil; and such are the world, and the things in it,
when cleaved unto, and rest and satisfaction are taken in them; the
inventions and ordinances of men, when followed and attended to; moral
duties, and evangelical services, when depended on; and even spiritual
frames, when these are lived upon, and put in the room of Christ; yea,
acts of faith, when they are rested in, and the object not so much
regarded as should be: moreover, what may principally be intended are,
in the first place, forsaking the worship of God, as the Targum
interprets it, the assembling of themselves together to attend his
service and ordinances, which is to forsake their own mercies; and, in
the next place, following after idols, as the same paraphrase explains
it, which have no divinity in them, and can yield no help and relief, or
give any comfort, or afford any supply in time of distress and need. It
is egregious folly to leave a fountain for a cistern, and especially a
broken one: in a fountain the water is living, and always running, and
ever springing up; not so in a cistern, and in a broken cistern there is
none at all.

[Jeremiah 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 2:14</span></span>

Is Israel a servant?.... That he does not abide in the house, in his own
land, but is carried captive, becomes subject to others, and is used as
a slave; so the Targum,

"as a servant;''

is he not the Lord's first born? are not the people of Israel called the
children of the living God? how come they then to be treated not as
children, as free men, but as servants? this cannot be owing to any
breach of covenant or promise on God's part, or to the failure of the
blessing of national adoption bestowed on them; but to some sin or sins
of theirs, which have brought them into this miserable condition:

is he a home born slave? or born in the house, of the handmaid, and so
in the power of the master of the family in whose house he was born,
[Exo 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#004) or the sense is, either
Israel is a servant,

or a son of the family (d), as some render the words; not the former,
being not only the son of a free woman, but Jehovah's firstborn; if the
latter,

why is he spoiled? why is he delivered up to the spoilers? as the
Targum; why should he be given up into the hands of the Babylonians, and
become their prey? is it usual for fathers to suffer their children, or
those born in their house, to be so used? some reason must be given for
it.

\(d\) "filius familias", Munster.

[Jeremiah 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 2:15</span></span>

The young lions roared upon him, and yelled,.... Or, "gave out their
voice" (e); meaning the kings of the nations, as the Targum, Jarchi, and
Kimchi explain it; and are to be understood of the kings of Assyria and
Babylon, and particularly of Nebuchadnezzar; see [Jer
50:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#017) compared to lions for their
strength and cruelty; their "roaring" and "yelling design" the bringing
forth of their armies against Israel, the noise of the battle, the sound
of the trumpet, the alarm of war, and the voice of the warrior:

and they made his land waste; all this is said as past, when it was yet
to come, because of the certainty of it, and the sure accomplishment of
these prophecies; for this respects the future desolation of the land of
Israel at the Babylonish captivity:

his cities are burnt without inhabitant; not only Jerusalem was burnt
with fire, [Jer 52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013), but other
cities in the land of Israel, so that they were not inhabited: or, "they
were desolate or destroyed" (f) as the Septuagint version, so that none
could dwell in them; and so the Targum,

"her cities are desolate, without inhabitant.''

Kimchi's father explains the word by "budded", or brought forth herbs or
plants; for desolate places bring up plants; where there is no
inhabitant, grass grows.

\(e\) "dederunt vocem suam", Montanus, Pagninus; "edunt rocem suam",
Schmidt. (f) "desolatae sunt, sive destructae", Vatablus.

[Jeremiah 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 2:16</span></span>

Also the children of Noph and Tahapanes,.... These were cities in Egypt.
Noph is the same with Moph in [Hos 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#006)
and which we there rightly render Memphis; as Noph is here by the
Targum, Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions; and was
formerly, as Pliny (g) says, the palace of the kings of Egypt. It is the
same that is now called Alcairo, or Grand Cairo. According to Herodotus
(h), it was built by Menes, the first king of Egypt; and who also makes
mention of a city of Egypt, called Momemphis (i). Tahapanes is the same
with Hanes in [Isa 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#004), and here, in
the Arabic version, is called Daphnes; and is thought by some to be the
same with Daphnae Pelusiae, a city in Egypt. This Tahapanes was the
metropolis of Egypt, and the seat of their kings; mention is made of
Pharaoh's house in it, in [Jer 43:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#009),
now the inhabitants of these, called the children of them, and who are
put for the people of Egypt in general, were the allies of the Jews, and
in whom they trusted for help, when attacked by their enemies, [Isa
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#002) and yet

even these have broken the crown of thy head; which is interpreted, by
the Targum, of slaying their mighty men, and spoiling their goods;
perhaps it had its accomplishment when Pharaohnecho king of Egypt came
out against the king of Assyria, and Josiah king of Judah went out to
meet him, and was slain by him at Megiddo; and his son Jehoahaz he put
in bonds, and carried him to Egypt, and put his brother upon the throne,
and took tribute of gold and silver of him, [Kg2
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029).

\(g\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 9. (h) L. 2. vel Euterpe, c. 99. (i) lb. c.
163, 169.

[Jeremiah 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 2:17</span></span>

Hast thou not procured this unto thyself,.... All this desolation and
destruction, both from the Egyptians and the Babylonians; their sin was
the cause of it, their idolatry and forsaking the Lord their God, as
follows: and so the Targum,

"is not this vengeance taken upon thee?''

that is, by the Lord, for their sins and transgressions; he suffered
these nations to make them desolate on that account: to which agrees the
Septuagint version, "hath not he done these things unto thee?" for what
the Egyptians and Babylonians did were done by the will of the Lord, who
suffered them for their correction: and the Arabic version renders it,
"have not I done these things unto thee?" and the Syriac as a prophecy,
as indeed so is the whole, "lo, so it shall be done to thee"; as is
predicted in the foregoing verses, and that for the following reason:

in that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God; as in [Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013); see Gill on [Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013), that is, as the Targum
interprets it, the worship of the Lord thy God, his service, his
statutes, and his ordinances; and followed after idols, and the worship
of them; which is aggravated by the circumstance of time in which this
was done:

when he led thee by the way? who showed thee the right way, and thou
walkedst not in it, as the Targum; the way in which they should have
gone, the way of their duty, and his commandments; and which would have
been pleasant and profitable to them, and secured them from ruin and
destruction.

[Jeremiah 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 2:18</span></span>

And now what hast thou to do in the way of Egypt,.... By worshipping of
idols, in imitation of them; or by sending ambassadors thither for help,
when they had their Lord, their God, so nigh, had they not forsaken him;
nor had Josiah any business to go out against Pharaohnecho, [Ch2
35:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#021) and, contrary to the express
word of God by the Prophet Jeremy, did the Jews which remained in Judea
go into Egypt, [Jer 42:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#019).

To drink the waters of Sihor? which is the river Nile, as Jarchi
interprets it. The Septuagint and Arabic versions render it "the waters
of Geon", or "Gihon": and this also is the same with the Nile, as
Josephus (k) affirms, who says,

"Geon, which runs through Egypt, is the same which the Greeks call
Nile.''

So Jerom (l) from Eusebius,

"Geon is a river, which with the Egyptians is called Nile.''

The Vulgate Latin version renders it, "troubled water"; and such were
the waters of the Nile, which had its name of Sihor from the blackness
of it; and hence, by the Greeks (m), was called Melas; and by the
Latines (n), Melo. Hence, as Braunius (o) observes, it was represented
by a black stone, as other rivers by a white one; for which reason the
black colour was very grateful to the Egyptians; and for the same reason
Osiris, which is the very Nile itself, was reckoned black; and the ox
Apis they worshipped was a black one, at least part of it, and was
covered with black linen cloth; and its priests were also clothed in
black, hence called Chemarim, [Hos
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos010.htm#005).

Or what hast thou to do in the way of Assyria; to go after their
idolatrous practices, or to send to them for help; for this was the
usual method of the Jews; when the Assyrians oppressed them, then they
sent to Egypt for help; and when the Egyptians were upon them, then they
applied to the Assyrians; and in both cases acted wrong, for they ought
to have sought the Lord their God only:

to drink the waters of the river? of the river Euphrates. The sense is,
that they preferred the waters of the Nile and of Euphrates, or the gods
of the Egyptians and Assyrians, or the help of these people, before the
Lord, the fountain of living waters, and his worship and powerful help.
The Targum paraphrases this last clause thus,

"why do ye make covenant with the Assyrian, to carry you captive beyond
the river Euphrates?''

\(k\) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 3. (l) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 91. H.
(m) Eustathius in Dionys. (n) Servius in Virgil. Georg. l. 4. p. 343. &
in Aeneid. l. 1. p. 541. (o) Selecta Sacr. l. 4. c. 9. p. 492, & l. 5.
Exercit. 4. sect. 8. p. 700, 701.

[Jeremiah 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 2:19</span></span>

Thine own wickedness shall correct thee,.... That is, either their
wickedness in going to Egypt and Assyria, and the ill success they had
in so doing might be an instruction to them to act otherwise, and a
correction of their sin and folly; or that their wickedness was a
reason, and a very just one, why they were chastened and corrected of
the Lord:

and thy backslidings shall reprove thee; or be the cause why they were
reproved of God; or their ill success in turning their backs on him, and
going to the creature for help, was a severe rebuke of their sin and
madness. The Targum is,

"I have brought afflictions upon thee, and thou hast not refrained from
thy wickedness; and, because thou art not turned to the law, vengeance
is taken on thee.''

Know therefore and see that it is an evil thing and bitter; or observe
and take notice what evil and bitter things sin, particularly the
forsaking of the Lord and his worship, brings upon persons; for not sin
itself is meant, though that is exceeding sinful, and is a root of
bitterness, however sweet it may be to the taste of a sinner, and
produces bitter effects; but the punishment of sin is meant, or
corrections and reproofs for it; which are evil things, as calamities,
and captivity, and the like; and which are very ungrateful and
disagreeable to flesh and blood; and yet men, going on in a course of
sin, and forsaking the Lord, as it follows, are the cause of these
things:

that thou hast forsaken the Lord thy God; See Gill on [Jer
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#013), this is the source of all the
evil and bitterness experienced by them:

and that my fear is not in thee, saith the Lord God of hosts; this was
the reason of their forsaking the Lord, his ways and worship, because
they had no reverence of him; his fear was not before their eyes, nor on
their hearts; and both were the cause of evil coming upon them; so the
Targum paraphrases the words,

"and know and see, for I have brought evil and bitterness upon thee, O
Jerusalem, because thou hast forsaken the worship of the Lord thy God,
and hast not put my fear before thine eyes, saith the Lord, the God of
hosts.''

[Jeremiah 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 2:20</span></span>

For of old time I have broken thy yoke, and burst thy bands,.... The
yoke of the people, as the Targum expresses it, that was upon their
necks, and the bands in which they were bound by them; referring to the
deliverance of them of old from Egyptian bondage by the hands of Moses,
and out of their several captivities among their neighbours by the means
of the judges, and in their time; though the Vulgate Latin version
renders it, "of old thou hast broken my yoke, and burst my bands"; or
"thy yoke", and "thy bands", as the Septuagint and Arabic versions; the
yoke of the law that the Lord put upon them, and the bands of statutes
and ordinances which he enjoined them; but the former sense is best:

and thou saidst, I will not transgress; here is a double reading; the
Cetib or writing is "I will not serve"; which is followed by the Vulgate
Latin, which so renders it; and by the Septuagint version, "I will not
serve thee"; and which is the sense of the Arabic version, "I will not
subject myself", that is, to the law and will of God; and so the Syriac
version, though to a quite different sense, "I will serve no other god
any more": which agrees with the Keri or reading, which is "I will not
transgress"; and this is confirmed by the Targum, which paraphrases the
words thus,

"and ye said, we will not add any more to transgress thy word;''

and by Jarchi and Kimchi, who interpret it of transgressing the words
and commands of God; both have one and the same sense. For whether it be
read, "I will not serve"; the meaning is, as Kimchi observes, "I will
not serve idols"; or no other god, as the Syriac version: or whether, "I
will not transgress"; that is, the command of the Lord, by serving other
gods. Hillerus (p) reconciles the writing and reading after this manner,
rendering , "I will not serve", and , "I will not pass", to servitude;
though, in another place (q) "I will not pass over", that is, the rivers
of Tigris and Euphrates with the captives; and refers to [Mic
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011), but doubtless reference is had
to the promise of obedience and service, which the Israelites made at
Mount Sinai quickly after their deliverance out of Egypt, [Exo
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#008), but this promise they did not
keep: "when", or "for", or "but", or "although" (r),

upon every high hill, and under every green tree, thou wanderest,
playing the harlot; that is, committing spiritual whoredom or idolatry
with idols, set on high hills and mountains, and under green trees,
groves, and shady places; going from one idol to another, as harlots go
from one stew to another; or as whoremongers go from harlot to harlot.

\(p\) De Arcano Kethib & Keri, p. 27, 28. (q) Ib. p. 89, 90. (r) "nam",
Vatablus, Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius; "atqui", Calvin, Gataker;
"quamvis", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 2:21</span></span>

Yet I had planted thee a noble vine, wholly a right seed,.... It is
usual to compare the people of the Jews to a vineyard, and to vines; and
their settlement in the land of Canaan to the planting of vines in a
vineyard; see [Isa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#001). Kimchi says
this is spoken concerning Abraham; no doubt respect is had to the Jewish
fathers, such as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the twelve patriarchs,
Moses, Joshua, and Caleb, and the like; who, having the true and right
seed of grace in them, became like choice and noble vines, and brought
forth much fruit, and were deserving of imitation by their posterity:

how then art thou turned into the degenerate plant of a strange vine
unto me? like a vine that grows in the woods, and brings forth wild
grapes; so these, their sons, degenerating in practice from their
fathers, became corrupt in themselves, and unprofitable to God. The
Targum of the whole is,

"I set you before me as the plant of a choice vine, all of you doing
truth; but how are you changed before me in your corrupt works? ye have
declined from my worship, ye are become as a vine in which there is no
profit.''

[Jeremiah 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 2:22</span></span>

For though thou wash thee with nitre,.... The word "nitre", is only used
in this place and in [Pro 25:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#020) and it
is hard to say what it is. Kimchi and Ben Melech observe, that some say
it is what is called "alum"; and others that it is a dust with which
they wash the head, and cleanse everything; and so Jarchi says it is a
kind of earth used in cleaning garments; and "nitre" is mentioned by the
Misnic doctors (s) among those things which are used for the washing of
garments, and taking spots out of them; though about what it is they are
not agreed; and it seems the nitre of the ancients is unknown to us (t);
and saltpetre is put in the room of it; and some render the word here
"saltpetre"; and Pliny (u) observes, that nitre does not much differ
from salt, and ascribes to it a virtue of eating out filth, and removing
it; so Aristotle (w) reports of the lake Ascania; that its water is of
such a nitrous quality, that garments, being put into it, need no other
washing. Nitre has its name from "to loose", because it looses the
filth, and cleanses from it:

and take thee much soap. The Septuagint render it, "herb"; and the
Vulgate Latin version, "the herb borith"; which is the Hebrew word here
used; and about the sense of which there is some difficulty. Kimchi and
Ben Melech say some take it to be the same with what is called "soap";
so Jarchi; and others, that it is an herb with which they wash, the same
that is called fullers' herb; but whether it is soap, or fullers' herb,
or fullers' earth, as others, it is certain it is something fullers used
in cleaning garments, as appear from [Mal
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#002), where the same word is used, and
fullers made mention of as using what is signified by it. It has its
name from which signifies to "cleanse" and "purify". The sense is, let
this backsliding and degenerate people take what methods they will to
cleanse themselves from their sins, as by their ceremonial ablutions and
sacrifices, which was the usual method they had recourse to, to purify
themselves, and in which they rested:

yet thine iniquity is marked before me, saith the Lord God; or, "will
retain its spots" (x) these remain; the filth is not washed away; the
iniquity is not hid and covered; it appears very plain and manifest;

yea, shines like gold; or, "is gilded" (y); as the word used signifies.
It is of too deep a die to be removed by such external things; nothing
but the blood of Christ can cleanse from sin, take away its filth,
removes its guilt, and cover it out of the sight of God, so that it can
be seen no more. The Targum is,

"for if you think to be cleansed from your sins, as they cleanse with
nitre, or make white with "borith", or soap; lo, as the mark of a spot
which is not clean, so are your sins multiplied before me, saith the
Lord God.''

\(s\) Misn. Sabbat, c. 9. sect. 5. & Nidda, c. 9. sect. 6. & Maimon &
Bartenora in ib. & in Misn. Celim, c. 10. sect. 1. (t) Schroder.
Pharmacopoeia, l. 3. c. 23. p. 140. (u) Nat. Hist. l. 31. c. 10. (w)
Opera, vol. 1, de Mirabil. p. 705. (x) "Maculas tamen retinebit
iniquitas tua", Schmidt. (y) "nitet, vel splendet, instar anri",
Piscator; "obducat se auro insigni", Junius & Tremellius; so Gussetius
renders the word, "inaurari, auro ebduci"; and who rightly observes,
that whatever is glided, or covered with gold, the more it is washed
with nitre, or soap, the brighter it will appear; and so, whatever other
methods are taken to wash away sin, but seeking for justification by the
grace of God in Christ, it will be but the more manifest, Ebr. Comment.
p. 410.

[Jeremiah 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 2:23</span></span>

How canst thou say, I am not polluted,.... No man can say this; for all
are defiled with sin; but this was the cast and complexion of these
people in all ages; they were a generation of men that were pure in
their own eyes, but were not cleansed from their filthiness; they
fancied that their ceremonial washings and sacrifices cleansed them from
moral impurities, when those only sanctified to the purifying of the
flesh; still their iniquity remained marked before the Lord; they acted
the part of the adulterous woman in [Pro
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#020) to whom they are compared in the
context; and, therefore, as wondering at their impudence, they having a
whore's forehead, this question is put, how and with what face they
could affirm this, and what follows:

I have not gone after Baalim? or, "the Baalim"; the idols of the people,
as the Targum interprets it; for there were many Baals, as Baalzephon,
Baalpeor, Baalzebub, and others:

see thy way in the valley; where idols were set up and worshipped; or
through which the way lay, as Kimchi observes, to the hills and
mountains where idolatry was frequently committed; perhaps no particular
valley is meant, but any in which idols were worshipped, or which they
passed through to the worshipping of them; though the Targum interprets
it of the valley in which they dwelt, over against Baalpeor, so Jarchi
and Abarbinel, when they worshipped that idol; and seems to design the
valley of Shittim, [Num 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001), but
rather, if any particular valley is intended, the valley of Hinnom seems
to bid fair for it; and to this it may be the Septuagint version has
respect, rendering it , "in the sepulchre of the multitude"; multitudes
being burnt and buried here:

know what thou hast done; in the valley, especially in the valley of
Hinnom, where they caused their children to pass through the fire to
Molech:

thou art a swift dromedary. The Targum, Jarchi, and Kimchi, interpret it
a young camel; and so the word in the Arabic language signifies; and the
epithet "swift" better agrees with that than with the dromedary. Curtius
(z) makes mention of dromedary camels of great swiftness; but it may be
this is to be understood, not of its swiftness in running, but of its
impetuous lust, as Calvin observes; and, indeed, each of these creatures
are very libidinous; and therefore these people are compared to them;
See Gill on [Mic 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013), it follows:

traversing her ways; running about here and there after the male,
burning with lust, sometimes one way, and sometimes another; and so
these people sometimes run after one idol, and sometimes another, and
followed a multitude of them. The Targum renders it, "which corrupts or
depraves her ways". De Dieu observes, that the word in the Ethiopic
language, signifies "the evening"; and so may intend walking in the
evening, in the dark, rather than in the light; which, as it is the way
of dromedaries, and almost of all beasts, so of harlots, to whom these
people are likened; and he further observes, that, in the Arabic
language, it signifies to make common, which agrees with adulterous
persons, as these were in a spiritual sense. The word is only used in
this place, and is deduced from, or has some relation to, the word which
signifies a "shoelatchet", [Gen 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#023)
as Jarchi and Kimchi observe; and may denote, as the shoe is bound and
fastened with the latchet, the binding of her ways to her heart, as the
former suggests, the strengthening and confirming of her in her evil
ways, and her constant persisting therein; but the first sense of
running here and there through lust is best; and is approved by Bynaeus
(a) and by Buxtorf (b).

\(z\) (Curtius) L. 5. c. 2. (a) De Calceis Heb. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 4. (b)
Lex. Heb. rad.

[Jeremiah 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 2:24</span></span>

A wild ass used to the wilderness,.... That is, one that has been
brought up in the wilderness, and has been accustomed to live, and run,
and range about there; as men in general are compared to this creature
for its ignorance, stupidity, folly, stubbornness, and unteachableness,
[Job 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012), so the Jewish people are
represented as like unto it, for its wantonness and lust:

that snuffeth up the wind at her pleasure; draws it in at her nostrils,
and snuffs it up; or opens her mouth, and takes it in with her breath;
drinks it in, and swallows it up at her pleasure: or, "with the desire
of her soul" (c); it being grateful and delightful to her. Some read
this clause in connection with rendered "in her occasion"; and
differently translate it. The Targum takes it to have the signification
of "dragons"; or whales; and renders it,

"drinking the wind as a dragon;''

and so Jarchi, who compares it with [Jer
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer014.htm#006) "they snuffed up the wind like
dragons"; and so the Syriac version, "thou hast drawn up the wind like a
wild dog"; others render it, "gathering the wind of her occasion"; or,
"of her meeting" (d); taking it in, and snuffing it up, as she
occasionally met with it in running. The Vulgate Latin version is, "she
drew the wind of her love"; it is reported of the wild ass, that it can
smell its mate afar off, and, by the wind it snuffs, knows where it is;
for which purpose it runs up the hills and mountains to get the scent,
which, when it has, its lust is so violent that there is no stopping of
it till it comes to the place where its mate is: wherefore it follows,

in her occasion who can turn her away? when this violent fit is upon
her, there is no turning her away from pursuing the enjoyment of it;
which is expressive of the eager desire of the Jews after the
worshipping of idols, how bent upon it, and not to be reclaimed from it:

all they that seek her will not weary themselves; knowing that they can
not overtake her, or stop her in her career, or hinder her gratification
of her lust. This may be understood either of those who sought to commit
spiritual adultery or idolatry with the Jews, they need not weary
themselves, being easy to be found by them; or of the prophets that
sought to reclaim them, who, perceiving how stubborn, and untractable,
and irreclaimable they were, would not weary themselves with their
admonitions and reproofs, seeing they were in vain:

in her month they shall find her; not that this creature sleeps one
whole month in a year, as Jarchi dreams, when it may be easily taken;
but the sense is, that when it is with young, and in the last month, and
so is heavy with its burden, it may easily be found and taken; so when
the people of Israel should have filled up the measure of their
iniquity, and the judgment of God was fallen and lay heavy upon them;
then those that sought to return them from their evil ways might find
them, and hope to succeed in reclaiming them, and bringing them to
repentance; agreeably the Septuagint render it, "in her humiliation";
when chastised and humbled by the Lord for her sins. This is not to be
understood of the month of Ab, in which Jerusalem was destroyed, both by
Nebuchadnezzar and Titus; in which month the Jews are sure to be found
confessing their sins, and humbling themselves, as Kimchi, Abarbinel,
and Ben Melech interpret it; nor of the new moon, as others; at everyone
of which, those who sought to join with them in idolatrous practices
might be sure to find them at them.

\(c\) "in, vel pro desiderio animae suae", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius, Vatablus, Schmidt. (d) "ventum occasionis suae", Pagninus
Montanus; "veatum occursus sui", Calvin.

[Jeremiah 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 2:25</span></span>

Withhold thy foot from being unshod,.... That it may not be unshod, be
naked and bare. The sense is, either, as some, do not take long journeys
into foreign countries for help, as into Assyria and Egypt, whither they
used to go barefoot; or wore out their shoes by their long journeys, and
so returned without; or refrain from idolatry, as Jarchi interprets it,
that thou mayest not go naked into captivity; or this is an euphemism,
as others think, forbidding adulterous actions, showing the naked foot,
the putting off of the shoes, in order to lie upon the bed, and
prostitute herself to her lovers; and is to be understood of idolatry:

and thy throat from thirst; after wine, which excites lust; abstain from
eager and burning lust after adulterous, that is, idolatrous practices;
so the Targum,

"refrain thy feet from being joined with the people, and thy mouth from
worshipping the idols of the people.''

The words are paraphrased in the Talmud (e) thus,

"withhold thyself from sinning, that thy foot may not become naked; (the
gloss is, "when thou goest into captivity") refrain thy tongue from idle
words, that thy throat may not thirst:''

this was said by the Lord, or by the prophets of the Lord sent unto
them, to which the following is an answer:

but thou saidst, there is no hope; of ever being prevailed upon to
relinquish those idolatrous practices, or of being received into the
favour of God after such provocations: no; I will never refrain from
them; I will not be persuaded to leave them:

for I have loved strangers; the strange gods of the nations:

and after them will I go; and worship them; so the Targum,

"I love to he joined to the people, and after the Worship of their idols
will I go.''

\(e\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 77. 1.

[Jeremiah 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 2:26</span></span>

As the thief is ashamed when be is found,.... Taken in the fact, or
convicted of it; that is, as the Targum explains it, one that has been
accounted faithful, and is found a thief; for, otherwise, those who have
lost their character, and are notorious for their thefts and robberies,
are not ashamed when they are found out, taken, and convicted:

so is the house of Israel ashamed: of their idolatry, or ought to be; or
"shall be", as the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions render it;
though not now, yet hereafter, sooner or later:

they, their kings, their princes, and their priests and their prophets;
all being guilty; kings setting ill examples, and the people following
them; the priests being priests of Baal, and the prophets false ones.

[Jeremiah 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 2:27</span></span>

Saying to a stock,.... "To a tree" (f); to a piece of wood; that is, to
an image made of it; so the Targum,

"they say to an image of wood;''

what follows:

thou art my father; ascribing that to the idol which belongs to God, who
was their Father that made them, and upheld them, was the author of
their beings, and the God of their mercies:

and to a stone; an image of stone:

thou hast brought me forth: into being; affirming it to be his former
and maker; so the Targum,

"to that which is made of stone, thou hast created me:''

for they have turned their back unto me, and not their face; they turned
their faces to images of wood and stone, and worshipped them; and they
turned their backs upon the Lord, his worship and ordinances, and
apostatized from him; which the Targum thus expresses,

"for they turned their backs on my worship, and did not put my fear
before their faces:''

but in the time of their trouble; when any calamity befalls them, as
famine, pestilence, sword, captivity, and the like:

they will say, arise, and save us; not that they will say so to their
idols, but they will say so to the true God; for notwithstanding they
worshipped idols in time of prosperity, forgetting God their Saviour;
yet in adversity they are brought to their senses, and find that none
but God can save them, and therefore apply to him; to which agrees the
Targum,

"and in the time that evil comes upon them, they deny their idols, and
confess before me, and say, have mercy on us, and save us.''

\(f\) "ligno", V. L. Pagnanius, Montanus, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jer 2:28</span></span>

But where are thy gods that thou hast made thee?.... This is, or would
be, the Lord's answer to them, what is become of your gods? why do not
you apply to them for help in time of trouble? the gods that you have
chosen for yourselves and worshipped; the gods, not that made you, but
whom you yourselves have made:

let them arise, if they can save thee in the time of thy trouble; call
upon them to arise, those statues of wood and stone, those lifeless and
senseless images; let them rise off their seats, and move out of their
places, if they can, and see whether they can save in a time of trouble
and distress; for there is enough of them, if numbers will do:

for according to the number of thy cities are thy gods, O Judah; in
imitation of the Heathens, who had not only in every country, but in
every city and town, a different god, the patron and tutelar deity of
the place; see [Kg2 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#029). The
Septuagint and Arabic versions "add, according to the number of the
ways, or streets, of Jerusalem", they sacrificed to Baal; see [Jer
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#013).

[Jeremiah 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jer 2:29</span></span>

Wherefore will ye plead with me?.... Strive and contend, chide, murmur,
and complain, when evil came upon them, as if the Lord dealt hardly with
them, and as if they had never sinned against him; when their case would
not bear to be brought into judgment and examined openly; what would
they get by that but shame and disgrace?

ye all have transgressed against me, saith the Lord; high and low, rich
and poor, great and small; men of all ranks, degrees, and character;
kings, priests and prophets; and therefore ought not to contend with
God, and charge him with injustice or unkindness, but themselves with
folly and wickedness.

[Jeremiah 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jer 2:30</span></span>

In vain have I smitten your children,.... Or, "for vanity" (g); for vain
speaking, for making vain oaths and vows; so it is explained in the
Talmud (h); but the sense is, that the rod of chastisement was used in
vain; the afflictions that came upon them had no effect on them to amend
and reform them; they were never the better for them:

they received no correction; or instruction by them; see [Jer
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003),

your own sword hath devoured your prophets; as Isaiah, Zechariah, and
Uriah, who were sent to them to reprove and correct them, but they were
so far from receiving their correction, that they put them to death;
though Kimchi mentions it as the sense of his father, and which he
approves of, that this is to be understood, not of the true prophets of
the Lord, but of false prophets; wherefore it is said, "your prophets";
and they had no prophets but false prophets, whose prophecy was the
cause of the destruction of souls, and this brought ruin upon the
prophets themselves; and this sense of the words Jerom gives into; it
follows:

like a destroying lion; that is, the sword of the Lord, according to the
latter sense; the judgments of God, by which the people fall, and their
false prophets with them, were like a lion that destroys and devours all
that come near it. The Septuagint and Arabic versions add,

and ye were not afraid; which confirms what was before said, that
chastisement and correction were in vain.

\(g\) "propter vanitatem, sive vaniloquentiam", Vatablus. (h) T. Bab.
Sabbat, fol. 32. 2. & Cetubot, fol. 72. 1.

[Jeremiah 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jer 2:31</span></span>

O generation, see ye the word of the Lord,.... Take notice of it,
consider it; or, hear it, as the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic
versions. Jarchi and Kimchi think (i) the pot of manna was brought out,
and shown them, to be looked at by them, for the conviction of them, and
confirmation of what follows:

have I been a wilderness unto Israel? no: the Israelites were
plentifully supplied by him when in the wilderness, and since they were
brought into a land flowing with milk and honey; so that they stood in
need of nothing; they had a constant supply of all good things:

or a land of darkness? of misery, distress, and poverty; where no light
of joy, comfort, and prosperity, is; a land that never sees the light,
or enjoys the benefit of the sun, and so is barren and unfruitful; "a
land of thorns", as the Septuagint version; or, "a desert and
uncultivated land", as the Targum, and Syriac and Arabic versions. It
may be rendered, "a land of the darkness of God" (k); that is, of the
greatest darkness, of thick and gross darkness, alluding to that in
Egypt; as the flame of God, and mountains of God, [Sol
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006), as Ben Melech and Kimchi observe:

wherefore say my people, we are lords; and can reign without thee; or we
have kings and princes, and have no need of thee, so Kimchi; but the
word used seems to have another meaning, and to require another sense.
The Targum is, "we are removed"; and the Vulgate Latin version, "we have
gone back"; to which agrees the Jewish Midrash (l), mentioned by Jarchi,
and confirmed with a passage out of the Misna (m), "we are separated
from thee"; we have departed from thee, turned our backs on thee, have
forsaken thee, and left thy ways and worship; and to do so was very
ungrateful, when the Lord had so richly supplied them, that they had not
lacked any good thing; and this sense agrees with what follows:

we will come no more unto thee? some render it, "we have determined"
(n); as having the same sense with the Arabic word, which signifies to
"will" or determine anything; and then the meaning is, we are
determined, we are resolved to come no more to thee, to attend thy
worship and service any more; and so the Targum,

"we will not return any more to thy worship.''

\(i\) So Mechilta apud Yalkut in loc. (k) "terra caliginis Dei",
Gataker, Gussetius; "caliginis Jah", Montanus. (l) Midrash R. Tanchuma,
apud Jarchi in loc. Vid. Yalkut Simeoni, in Ioc. (m) Misn. Trumot, c.
10. sect. 3. & Machshirin, c. 3. sect. 3. (n) "voluimus non veniemus",
&c, De Dieu; "decrevimus non veniemus", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jer 2:32</span></span>

Can a maid forget her ornaments,.... Which she has provided for her
wedding day, and is then to wear, and which may be the next; such as ear
rings, bracelets, and jewels, which are never out of her mind, and can
scarce sleep for thinking of them, how richly she shall be adorned with
them; wherefore it follows:

or a bride her attire? or, "her bindings" (o); her knots about her head
or breast. The word is rendered "head bands" in [Isa
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#020) and here, by the Septuagint
version, "her stomacher"; set with sparkling precious stones; see [Isa
61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010), these things her heart being
set upon, and priding herself with, cannot be forgotten by her, at least
not long:

yet, my people have forgotten me days without number; which shows great
stupidity and ingratitude; the Lord not being so much to them, from whom
they had received so many favours, as the ornaments of a maid, and the
attire of a bride, are to them.

\(o\) "fasciae suae", Tigurine version; "ligaminum suorum", Munster,
Calvin; "ligamentorum suorum", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 2:33](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jer 2:33</span></span>

Why trimmest thou thy way to seek love?.... To seek the love, and gain
the affections and esteem, of the idolatrous nations; as a lascivious
woman dresses herself out in the best manner to excite the lust and move
the affections of her lovers; and as Jezebel, who painted her face, and
tired her head, [Kg2 9:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#030) or dressed
it in the best manner, where the same word is used as here; so the
Targum,

"why dost thou make thy way beautiful, to procure loves (or lovers) to
be joined to the people?''

or the sense is, why art thou so diligent and industrious to make thy
way, which is exceeding bad, look a good one, by sacrifices and
ceremonies, oblations and ablutions, in order to seek and obtain my love
and favour, which is all in vain? it is not to be gained by such
methods:

therefore hast thou also taught the wicked ones thy ways; the wicked
idolatrous nations, to whom they joined themselves; these they taught
their ways of sacrificing, their rites, ceremonies, and superstitions;
or, as Jarchi interprets it, thou hast taught thyself the worst way
among them all; that is, thou hast used thyself to it: there is a double
reading in this clause. The Cetib, or writing, is "I have taught"; as if
they were the words of God, saying, "wherefore I have taught"; or, "will
teach"; that is, by punishing thee;

that thy ways are evil; or, as Kimchi explains it,

"I have taught thee by thy ways that they are evil, and evil shall come
unto thee because of them.''

The Keri, or reading, is "thou hast taught"; which is confirmed by the
Targum; and is followed by the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and other
versions. It is by some rendered, "seeing thou hast taught others thy
evil ways" (p); not content to sin themselves, but taught others to do
so, and yet would be thought good.

\(p\) "Quandoquidem etiam (alios) malas docuisti vias tuas", Noldius, p.
507. vid. No. 1998.

[Jeremiah 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jer 2:34</span></span>

Also in thy skirts is found the blood of the souls of the poor
innocents,.... Either of the innocent infants of poor persons, who were
sacrificed to Moloch; or of the poor prophets of the Lord, whom they
slew, because they faithfully reproved them for their sins; and the
blood of those being found in their skirts is expressive of the
publicness and notoriety of their sin, and also of the large quantity of
blood shed, inasmuch as the skirts of their garments were filled with
it, as if they had trod and walked in blood; see [Isa
63:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#003).

I have not found it by secret search; or, "by digging" (q); there was no
need to dig for it; it lay above ground; it was upon their skirts,
public enough: or, "in ditches", as the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin (r)
versions; as when murders are privately and secretly committed; but
these were done openly. Some read the words, "thou didst not find them
with a digging instrument" (s); so Jarchi interprets the words,

"you did not find them with a digging instrument, or in digging, when
you slew them;''

you did not find them prepared as thieves to break up your houses, or
digging down your walls, and breaking through into your houses, then you
would have been justified by the law in slaying them, [Exo
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002), but this was not the case:

but upon all these; upon all their skirts, and not in ditches, or under
ground; or, "for all these"; thou hast so done; not for their sins, for
theft, or any other; but for their faithful reproofs and rebukes; so
Jarchi, for all these words with which they reproved thee; or for all
these, the idols on whose account, in the worship of them, the blood of
the innocents was shed.

\(q\) "in suffossione", Vatablus, Calvin, De Dieu; "effossione", Junius
& Tremellius; "perfossione", Schmidt. (r) , Sept. "in fossis", V. L. (s)
"Cum perfossorio", Pagninus, Montanus; "sub. instrumento", Grotius;
"terebro", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 2:35](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jer 2:35</span></span>

Yet thou sayest, because I am innocent,.... Or, "that I am innocent";
though guilty of such flagrant and notorious crimes, acting like the
adulterous woman, [Pro 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#020) to whom
the Jews are all along compared in this chapter; which shows the
hardness of their hearts, and their impudence in sinning:

surely his anger shall turn from me; the anger of God, since innocent;
or, "let his anger be turned from me", as the Septuagint and Arabic
versions; pleading for the removing of judgments upon the foot of
innocency, which is pretended:

behold, I will plead with thee; enter into judgment with thee, and
examine the case closely and thoroughly:

because thou sayest, I have not sinned; it would have been much better
to have acknowledged sin, and pleaded for mercy, than to insist upon
innocence, when the proof was so evident; nothing can be got by entering
into judgment with God, upon such a foundation; and to sin, and deny it,
is an aggravation of it: the denial of sin is a double sin, as the wise
man says, whom Kimchi cites.

[Jeremiah 2:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jer 2:36</span></span>

Why gaddest thou about so much to change thy way?.... Or, "by changing
thy way" (t); sometimes going one way, and sometimes another; sometimes
to Egypt, and then to Assyria; seeking sometimes to the one for help,
and sometimes to the other; at one time serving the gods of the one, in
order to curry favour with them, and then the gods of the other, like a
lascivious woman that gads about from place to place to increase her
lovers, and satisfy her lust. The Vulgate Latin version is, "how
exceeding vile art thou become, changing thy ways"; and so Jarchi says,
the word signifies "contempt", or "vileness": deriving it from or to be
"vile" or "contemptible"; and to this sense are the Septuagint and
Arabic versions; but Kimchi derives it from to go; to which our version
and others agree:

thou also shalt be ashamed of Egypt; as they were in the times of
Jehoahaz and Jehoiakim, when Pharaohnecho king of Egypt took the former,
and put him in bands, and carried him into Egypt; and set the latter
upon the throne, and took tribute of him, for which the land was taxed,
[Kg2 23:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#033).

as thou wast ashamed of Assyria; in the times of Ahaz, who sent to the
king of Assyria for help, when Judah was smitten by the Edomites, and
invaded by the Philistines; but when he came to him, he distressed him,
and strengthened and helped him not, [Ch2
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2028.htm#016).

\(t\) "mutando viam tuam", Vatablus, Piscator, Junius & Tremellius.

[Jeremiah 2:37](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jer 2:37</span></span>

Yea, thou shalt go forth from him,.... From the Egyptian, without any
help, and with shame; or, "from this" (u); that is, from this place,
from Jerusalem, and from the land of Judea, into captivity;
notwithstanding all the promised and expected help from Egypt,

[Kg2 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#007),

and thine hands upon thine head; plucking and dishevelling the hair, as
women in distress; so Tamar, when abused by her brother, laid her hand
on her head, and went out crying, [Sa2
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#019),

for the Lord hath rejected thy confidences; those in whom they trusted,
as the Egyptians; so that they should be of no service to them; or them,
because of their trust and confidence in men, when it ought to have been
placed above in himself:

shalt not prosper in them; or because of them, as Kimchi; but shalt go
into captivity.

\(u\) "ab hoc, sub. loco", Gataker; "ab ista", Munster, Grotius; "sub.
terra, etiam hinc exibis", Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 3](jer003)

</div>
