<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer020)  [Next](jer022.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 21:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 21

This chapter contains Jeremiah's answer to King Zedekiah's message to
him; in which he assures him of the destruction of the city of
Jerusalem, and gives advice both to the people and the king. The names
of the persons sent to him are mentioned, [Jer
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001.md); and the errand they were sent
upon, to desire the prophet to pray to the Lord, that the king of
Babylon might be obliged to depart from Jerusalem, [Jer
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#002.md); the answer from the Lord by him
is, that their opposition to the king of Babylon should be fruitless;
that he should be so far from quitting the siege, that he should enter
the city, [Jer 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#003.md); yea, that the
Lord himself would fight against them, and destroy men and beast with
the pestilence; and that such who escaped the sword, famine, and
pestilence, should fall into the hands of the king of Babylon, [Jer
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#005.md); and then some advice is given to
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, to go out and give up themselves to the
Chaldeans; which was the best way to save their lives, since the city
would certainly fall into their hands, and be burnt by them, [Jer
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008.md); and as for the royal family,
they are advised to do justice and deliver the oppressed; the not doing
of which, it is suggested, was the cause of their ruin, [Jer
21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#011.md); and the chapter is closed with
a denunciation of destruction upon the city, notwithstanding the vain
trust and confidence of the inhabitants of it, [Jer
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013.md).

[Jeremiah 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 21:1</span></span>

The word which came unto Jeremiah from the Lord,.... This prophecy
stands out of its proper place, being made in the times of Zedekiah, and
when Jerusalem was besieged by the king of Babylon; whereas, after this,
there are prophecies which were delivered in the times of Jehoiakim and
Jeconiah, who both reigned before Zedekiah; see [Jer
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#011.md), &c.

when King Zedekiah sent unto him Pashur the son of Melchiah; this was
another Pashur from him that is spoken of in the preceding chapter, and
is called "Magormissabib"; he was the son of Immer; this of Melchiah; he
was of the sixteenth course of the priesthood; this of the "fifth":

and Zephaniah the son of Maaseiah the priest; who was of the "twenty
fourth" course; see [Ch1 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1024.htm#009.md); in [Jer
52:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#024.md), he is called the "second
priest"; he was "sagan", or deputy to the high priest: they were both
priests; wherefore the Syriac version renders it in the plural number,
"priests". It may be observed, that the foregoing chapter is concluded
with the prophet's cursing the day of his birth; and the last clause of
it expresses the "shame" he imagined his days would be consumed in; and
the next account we have is of an honour done him by the king, in
sending two priests to him, with a message from him; whereby he tacitly
owned him to be a true prophet of the Lord; as indeed he must now be
convinced by facts that he was. Princes and people, who slight the
ministers of God in time of prosperity, send to them, and are desirous
of their assistance in times of distress:

saying; as follows:

[Jeremiah 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 21:2</span></span>

Inquire, I pray thee, of the Lord for us,.... Or, "seek the Lord now for
us" (n); seek the Lord by prayer and supplication for me and my people,
for this city and the inhabitants of it; entreat him that he would
appear for us, and deliver us out of the hands of the enemy; for this
they said in the name of the king that sent them, who knew that the
prophet had an interest at the throne of grace, and was a favourite of
heaven; and therefore desired him to be an intercessor for them:

for Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon maketh war against us; the same that
is elsewhere called Nebuchadnezzar, commonly called by the Greeks
Nebuchodonosor; he was now come up to Jerusalem, and was besieging it,
as had been predicted:

if so be the Lord will deal with us according to all his wondrous works;
which he had done in times past for that nation; as by bringing them out
of Egypt; driving out the Canaanites before them; delivering them out of
the hands of their neighbours, time after time, when oppressed by them;
and particularly by destroying the Assyrian army in Hezekiah's time,
which was besieging the city of Jerusalem, and causing their king to
depart and flee in haste; and their present case being similar to that,
it is very likely that that was more especially in view:

that he may go up from us; namely, the king of Babylon; that he may rise
up, and raise the siege, and depart into his own country, as Sennacherib
did.

\(n\) "interroga nunc pro nobis", Vatablus: Pagninus; "inquire nunc",
Montanus.

[Jeremiah 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 21:3</span></span>

Then said Jeremiah unto them,.... The two priests, Pashur and Zephaniah,
after he had sought the Lord, and knew his mind and will:

thus shall ye say to Zedekiah; by whom they were sent.

[Jeremiah 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 21:4</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord God of Israel,.... Who had been, still was, and
would be, Israel's God, even the God of such who are Israelites indeed;
though he should, as he would, give up the present generation to ruin
and destruction; they having by their sins forfeited his care and
protection of them; and therefore it was in vain to hope for it from
this character which they bore:

behold, I will turn back the weapons of war that are in your hands; so
that they should do no hurt to the enemy, but recoil upon themselves.
The meaning is, that they should be useless and unserviceable; that they
should neither be defensive to them, nor offensive to their enemies; but
rather hurtful to themselves. It seems to suggest, as if they should
fall out with one another; and, like the Midianites, turn their swords
upon one another, and destroy each other:

wherewith ye fight against the king of Babylon, and against the
Chaldeans which besiege you without the walls; by shooting arrows at
them from within the city; or by sallying out unto them with sword in
hand: this, shows that the Chaldean army, under the command of the king
of Babylon, was now without the walls of Jerusalem besieging it:

and I will assemble them into the midst of this city; either the weapons
of war, as Jarchi and others; which the Chaldeans, breaking into the
city, should cause to be brought in to them in the middle of the city,
and there slay them with them: or rather the Chaldeans, as Kimchi; who,
though now without the walls, and which the Jews thought a sufficient
security for them; yet should not be long there, but the walls would be
broken down, and they should enter the city, and rendezvous their whole
army in the midst of it.

[Jeremiah 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 21:5</span></span>

And myself will fight against you,.... So far from being entreated to do
for them according to his wondrous works in times past, as their friend;
that he will set himself against them as their enemy; and sad it is to
have God for an enemy: if God be for a people, none can be against them
to do them any hurt; but if he is against them, it signifies nothing who
is for them: this must be much more terrible to them than the whole
Chaldean army, and the king of Babylon at the head of them:

with an outstretched hand, and with a strong arm; such as he had used
formerly in delivering Israel out of Egypt, but now in delivering them
into the hands of their enemies; and out of the reach of such a hand
there is no getting; and under the weight of such an arm there is no
supporting; see [Exo 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo006.htm#006.md);

even in anger, and in fury, and in great wrath; because of their sins
and iniquities. This heap of words is used to show the greatness of his
indignation: this was not the chastisement of a father, but the rebuke
of an enemy; not a correction in love, but in hot displeasure; a
punishment inflicted in vindictive wrath by a righteous Judge, appearing
in a warlike manner.

[Jeremiah 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 21:6</span></span>

And I will smite the inhabitants of this city,.... With one or other of
his arrows after mentioned: or, "them that abide in this city" (o); that
do not go out of it, and surrender themselves to the king of Babylon;
see [Jer 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#009.md);

both man and beast; the latter for the sin of the former; particularly
such beasts as were fit for food are meant, whereby the famine would be
increased, and so the greater destruction of men:

they shall die of a great pestilence; both man and beast; a disease
which comes immediately from the hand of God; hence Hippocrates used to
call it , "the divine disease": here it denotes a very uncommon one,
which should sweep away large numbers; called great, both for quality,
or the nature of it, and for the quantity of persons that died of it.

\(o\) "manentes in hac urbe", Gataker.

[Jeremiah 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 21:7</span></span>

And afterwards, saith the Lord God,.... After there should be so great a
mortality among men and beasts:

I will deliver Zedekiah king of Judah, and his servants; the king
himself shall not escape; though he shall not die by the pestilence, or
famine, or sword, yet he shall fall into the hands of the Chaldeans, and
also "his servants", his courtiers, and counsellors:

and the people, and such as are left in this city from the pestilence,

from the sword, and from the famine; such of the inhabitants of the
city, as well as those at court, that died not by the sword, famine, and
pestilence: these should be delivered

into the hand of Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon; who was now with his
army without the walls of the city besieging it:

and into the hand of their enemies, and into the hand of those that seek
their life; the Chaldeans, who were their implacable enemies, and cruel,
and whom nothing would satisfy but their lives:

he shall smite them with the edge of the sword; that is, Nebuchadnezzar
king of Babylon, or, however, the army under his command; for what was
done by the one is ascribed to the other: this is to be understood of
such that fell into their hands upon taking the city, and who
endeavoured to make their escape; see [Jer
39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004.md);

he shall not spare them, neither have pity, nor have mercy; they had no
regard to rank or figure, to age or sex; the sons of the king were slain
before his eyes, and then his eyes were put out; princes were hanged up
by the hand; and no compassion shown to old or young, man or maiden; see
[Jer 52:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#010.md). This verse is remarkably
long.

[Jeremiah 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 21:8</span></span>

And unto the people thou shalt say, thus saith the Lord,.... These are
the words, not of the prophet to the messengers of the king, ordering or
advising them what they each of them should say to the people; for the
message by them is finished; but they are the words of the Lord to the
prophet, directing him what he should say to the people at this critical
juncture:

behold, I set before you the way of life, and the way of death; the way
how to preserve their lives; and which, if they did not choose to take,
would be inevitable death. The allusion seems to be to a phrase used by
Moses, when he gave the law; obedience to which would issue in life, and
disobedience in death, [Deu 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#015.md).

[Jeremiah 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 21:9</span></span>

He that abideth in this city,.... Imagining himself safe there; not
fearing its being taken by the king of Babylon; though it was so often
foretold by the prophet of the Lord that it should:

shall die by the sword, and by the famine, and by the pestilence: by the
first of these, in sallying out against the enemy; and by the other two,
which raged within the city:

but he that goeth out, and falleth to the Chaldeans that besiege you,

he shall live; not fall upon them, as the words may be literally
rendered; so it would describe such that went out of the city and
sallied upon them; whereas it designs such who should go out of the
city, and surrender themselves unto the Chaldeans; submit to them, so as
to obey them, as the Targum adds; such shall have their lives spared:

and his life shall be unto him for a prey; it shall be like a spoil or
booty taken out of an enemy's hands; it shall be with difficulty
obtained, and with joy possessed, as a prey or spoil is.

[Jeremiah 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 21:10</span></span>

For I have set my face against this city,.... Or "my fury", as the
Targum; their sins had provoked the eyes of his glory; he was wroth with
them, and determined to cut them off; his mind was set against them, and
upon their ruin; and there was no turning him from it:

for evil, and not for good, saith the Lord; to bring the evil of
punishment upon them for the evil of their sins, and not do any good
unto them, they were so ill deserving of:

it shall be given into the hand of the king of Babylon; come under his
power and dominion, by the will of the Lord; for it was he that gave it
into his hands, because of the sins of the inhabitants of it:

and he shall burn it with fire; as he did, both the house of the Lord in
it, the temple, the king's house or palace, the stately houses of the
princes and nobles, and even the houses of all the people; see [Jer
52:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#013.md).

[Jeremiah 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 21:11</span></span>

And touching the house of the king of Judah, say,.... Or "to the house
of the king of Judah" (p); that is, his palace, as Calvin understands
it; go to it, and there say as follows, as in [Jer
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#001.md); and some think that this part of
the chapter belongs to that, and was not delivered at the time the
former part of it was; but before the peremptory decree was gone forth,
to deliver the city into the hand of the king of Babylon to be burned
with fire; since, upon a reformation, some hope of pardon and salvation
is yet given. The Syriac version joins this clause to [Jer
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#010.md); "and he shall burn it with
fire, and the house of the king of Judah"; burn the city of Jerusalem,
and particularly the king's palace; but by "the house of the king" is
not meant his dwelling house, but his family, himself, his sons, his
servants, his courtiers and nobles, to whom the following speech is
directed:

hear ye the word of the Lord; and obey it; for not bare hearing is
meant, but a reverent attention to, and a cheerful and ready performance
of, what is heard.

\(p\) "domui regis", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 21:12</span></span>

O house of David, thus saith the Lord,.... This appellation is made use
of to put them in mind of their descent, and to observe to them how much
it became them to follow the example of so illustrious an ancestor, from
whom they had the honour to descend; by doing judgment and justice as he
did, [Sa2 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#015.md); or, otherwise, their
being his seed would not secure them from ruin and destruction:

execute judgment in the morning; be at it early, and dispatch it
speedily; show a hearty regard for it; prefer it to eating and drinking;
and do not delay it to the prejudice of persons concerned. The power of
judgment with the Jews belonged to the king; he was supreme judge in
their courts; they judged, and were judged, the Jews say (q); by whom
judgment was executed in a morning, and not in any other part of the
day; and the case judged ought, as they say, to be as clear as the
morning (r):

and deliver him that is spoiled out of the hand of the oppressor; that
had anything taken from him by force or fraud; that was either robbed or
cheated of his substance; or was refused what he had lent to or
entrusted another with; or was by any ways and means wronged and injured
by another in his person or property. This suggests that things of this
kind were not done, and were the reason why the Lord would deliver them
up into the hands of their enemies, or cause his judgments to fall upon
them:

lest my fury go out like fire, and burn that none can quench it; or put
a stop to it, by all their prayers and entreaties, or by all that they
can say or do:

because of the evil of your doings; it is a sad thing when princes set
bad examples; it is highly provoking to God, whose deputies they are;
and it becomes them to begin a reformation, and lead it on, or they
cannot expect safety for themselves and their people.

\(q\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 19. 1. (r) Ib. fol. 7. 2.

[Jeremiah 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 21:13</span></span>

Behold, I am against thee,.... Or, "behold, I unto thee" (s); to be
supplied either thus, "behold, I say unto thee" (t); what follows; and
therefore take notice of it, attend unto it: or, "behold, I come unto
thee" (u); who bid defiance to all their enemies to come near them, as
in the latter part of the verse. The Targum is,

"lo, I send my fury against thee;''

and the phrase denotes the Lord's opposition to them; his setting
himself against them, and coming out unto them in his great wrath:

O inhabitant of the valley, and rock of the plain, saith the Lord; a
description of Jerusalem; between the lower and higher part of which lay
a valley, called Tyropaeon, which divided the two hills, on which the
city was built (w); yea, the whole city was on high, on a rock, and
around it a valley or plain; and because it was built upon a rock, and
fortified with hills and mountains, the inhabitants of it thought
themselves safe and secure, and even impregnable; hence it follows:

which say, who shall come down against us? who shall enter into our
habitations? who of our neighbours dare to make a descent upon us? or
are so weak and foolish as to attempt to break through our
fortifications, natural and artificial, and enter into our houses, and
take away our persons, and spoil us of our goods? we defy them.

\(s\) "ecce ego ad te", Munster, Montanus. (t) "Ecce tibi dico",
Strigelius; so Luther. (u) "Ecce ad te venio", Pagninus; so Kimchi. (w)
Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 4. sect. 1.

[Jeremiah 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer021.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 21:14</span></span>

But I will punish you according to the fruit of your doings,

saith the Lord,.... The situation of their city, and the strength of its
fortifications, however sufficient they might be thought to keep out an
enemy from annoying them; yet it was impossible to hinder the Lord's
coming among them, as he here threatens to do; and "visit" them, as the
word signifies, in a way of wrath and justice, according to the demerit
of their sins, expressed by "the fruit of their doings"; their
punishment was the reward of their unrighteousness, the effect of their
sinful practices; and, though this was dreadful and terrible, they could
not but own it was just and equitable:

and I will kindle a fire in the forest thereof; not in the forest of
Lebanon, but in the city of Jerusalem; whose houses stood as thick as
trees in a forest, and which many of them, at least the most stately,
might be built or ceiled with cedars from Mount Lebanon and its forest;
though some understand this of the cities and towns about Jerusalem; and
so the Targum renders it, "in its cities"; and the Syriac version, "its
towns"; but these seem rather meant in the following clause:

and it shall devour all things round about it; the mountains and trees
upon them, the cities and towns adjacent.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 22](jer022.md)

</div>
