<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer.md)  
  [Previous](jer007)  [Next](jer009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#001.md)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 8

In this chapter the prophet goes on to denounce grievous calamities upon
the people of the Jews; such as would make death more eligible than
life; and that because of their idolatry, [Jer
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#001.md) and also because of their heinous
backslidings in other respects, and continuance in them, [Jer
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004.md) likewise their impenitence and
stupidity, [Jer 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006.md) their vain conceit
of themselves and their own wisdom; their false interpretation of
Scripture, and their rejection of the word of God, [Jer
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008.md) their covetousness, for which it
is said their wives and fields should be given to others, [Jer
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010.md), their flattery of the people,
and their impudence, on account of which, ruin and consumption, and a
blast on their vines and fig trees, are threatened, [Jer
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#011.md), their consternation is
described, by their fleeing to their defenced cities; by their sad
disappointment in the expectation of peace and prosperity; and the near
approach of their enemies; devouring their land, and all in it; who are
compared to serpents and cockatrices that cannot be charmed, [Jer
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014.md) and the chapter is closed with
the prophet's expressions of sorrow and concern for his people, because
of their distress their idolatry had brought upon them; and because of
their hopeless, and seemingly irrecoverable, state and condition, [Jer
8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#018.md).

[Jeremiah 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 8:1</span></span>

At that time, saith the Lord, they shall bring out the bones of the
kings of Judah,.... That is, either the Chaldeans or the Romans would do
this; for this refers to the destruction of Jerusalem, either by the
former or the latter; and it is certain that Jerusalem was ploughed up
by the Romans, whereby the prophecy in [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012.md) was accomplished; when it is
highly probable the graves were dug up, and the bones of the dead
brought out, and scattered abroad by way of revenge; or it may be that
graves were opened, especially the graves of kings and great men, for
the sake of finding treasure in them: it follows,

and the bones of his princes; of the princes of Judah:

and the bones of the priests; that sacrificed to idols:

and the bones of the prophets: the false prophets; though this might be
the case of the priests and prophets of the Lord; whose bones, in this
general devastation, might be exposed as well as others; which of all
might be thought to be the most sacred: and the bones of the inhabitants
of Jerusalem out of their graves; high and low, rich and poor, male and
female; their graves, in common, were without the city.

[Jeremiah 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 8:2</span></span>

And they shall spread them before the sun and the moon, and all the host
of heaven,.... The stars. This shows, not only that they should be
publicly exposed; but, as it refers to their idolatrous worship of the
sun, moon, and stars, that these deities will not be able to help them;
as they could not prevent their dead bodies being dug up, so neither
could they order or cause them to be gathered together, and buried
again:

whom they have loved; whereas they ought to have loved the Lord their
God, and him only: it means an idolatrous love of and affection for
them; and not the love of them, as creatures for use and delight;
otherwise the light of the sun, moon, and stars, is sweet, and their
influence great; and a pleasant thing it is to behold them, and
especially the former of them, the fountain of light and heat: and whom
they have served; more and besides the Creator of them, whom they should
have served, the Lord of hosts, and him only:

and after whom they have walked; not in a natural and literal sense, but
in a religious one, as is after explained:

and whom they have sought; for advice and counsel, and by making their
prayers and supplications to them:

and whom they have worshipped; by bowing the knee, or kissing the hand;
by offering sacrifices, and burning incense, and putting up petitions to
them; by trusting in them, and expecting good things from them; see [Kg2
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#003.md),

they shall not be gathered, nor be buried: meaning not the men that
should die in those times, but the bones that should be brought out of
the graves; these, having been scattered about, should not be collected
together again, and replaced in their sepulchres:

they shall be for dung upon the face of the earth; that is, they should
lie and rot upon the face of the earth, and crumble into dust, and
become dung for it; see [Psa 83:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#010.md).

[Jeremiah 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 8:3</span></span>

And death shall be chosen rather than life,.... By them that should be
alive in those times, who would be carried captive into other lands, and
be used very hardly, and suffer greatly, by the nations among whom they
should dwell; see [Rev 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#006.md). The
Septuagint version, and those that follow it, make this to be a reason
of the former, reading the words thus, "because they have chosen death
rather than life"; see [Deu 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#019.md), but
the other sense is best, which is confirmed by what follows:

by all the residue of them that remain of this evil family; the nation
of the Jews, become very corrupt and degenerate; so the people of Israel
are called the whole family of Israel, [Amo
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#001.md), now it is foretold, that those
which remained of that people, who died not by famine, or were not slain
by the sword, yet should be in such a miserable condition, as that death
would be more eligible to them than life:

even which remain in all the places whither I have driven them, saith
the Lord of hosts: for, though they were carried captive by men, yet the
thing was of the Lord, and a just punishment upon them for their sins.

[Jeremiah 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 8:4</span></span>

Moreover, thou shalt say unto them,.... The Jews, in Jeremiah's time, in
order to leave them inexcusable, though the Lord had before assured that
they would not hearken to him, [Jer
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#027.md),

thus saith the Lord, shall they fall, and not rise? men, when they fall,
endeavour to get up again, and generally they do:

shall he turn away, and not return? when a man turns out of the right
way into a wrong one, as soon as he is sensible of his mistake, he
returns back; this is usually done among men. This is generally the case
in a natural sense, and might be expected in a moral sense; that whereas
these people had fallen into sin, they would rise again by repentance;
and, having turned from the good ways of God, would soon return again to
them.

[Jeremiah 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 8:5</span></span>

Why then is this people of Jerusalem slidden back by a perpetual
backsliding?.... These people fill into sin, and rise not again by
repentance; they turn out of the good ways of God and religion, and
return not again; they backslide and revolt from the Lord, and they
continue in their revolt and rebellion; their backsliding is an
everlasting one; there is no hope of their repentance and recovery: it
is a vehement and passionate expostulation about the people of the Jews,
founded upon the former general observation, showing them to be the
worst of all people: it is a common saying, "it is a long lane that has
no turning"; but these people, having departed from the Lord, return no
more. A very learned man renders the words, "why does Jerusalem turn
away this people with an obstinate aversion?" (b) that is, the rulers
and governors of Jerusalem, as in [Mat
23:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#037.md) or rather thus, "why does a
stubborn aversion turn away this people, O Jerusalem?" and so they are
an address to the magistrates and inhabitants of Jerusalem.

They hold fast deceit; practise it, and continue in the practice of it,
both with God and man:

they refuse to return: to the Lord, to his worship, and to the right
ways of holiness and truth, from whence they had erred; see [Jer
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#003.md).

\(b\) "quare avertit hunc populum Hierosolyma aversione pertinaci? vel
quare avertit populum hunc", O Jerusalem, "aversio pertinax?" De Dieu.

[Jeremiah 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 8:6</span></span>

I hearkened and heard,.... These are either, the words of the prophet,
as Kimchi and Abarbinel think; who listened and attended to, and made
his observations upon, the words and actions, conduct and behaviour, of
this people, of which he gives an account: or of the Lord himself, as
the Targum; who hearkened to the language of their hearts and actions,
and heard the words of their mouth; all that they spoke against him,
against his prophets, and those that feared his name; all their lying
words, their false swearing; all their oaths and curses, and every idle
expression that dropped from them; all which he takes notice of, and men
are accountable to him for them:

but they spake not aright: what is so in the sight of God and good men;
what is agreeable to right reason, and the word of God; they spoke what
was contrary to all this. Wicked men neither think aright, nor act
aright, nor speak aright.

No man repented him of his wickedness: of his heart, of his lips, and of
his life; no man can repent of himself; no man truly does, without the
grace of God:

saying, what have I done? which question an impenitent man does not put;
but when it is made, the true answer to be returned to it is, that which
is contrary to the nature of God; which is a breach of his law; which a
man has reason to be ashamed of; at which he may be astonished, it being
so exceeding sinful; that which cast the angels out of heaven, Adam out
of paradise, and wicked men down to hell; which is deserving of the
wrath of God, and eternal death; for which a man can never make
atonement himself; and by which he is undone, to all intents and
purposes, without an interest in Christ, and salvation by him.

Every one turneth to his course: which is not a good, but a bad one; sin
is a way, a road, a path, in which men walk; a course, a series of
sinning, a progress and persisting in it; such as the course of this
world, and this course is evil, [Eph
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#002.md),

as the horse rusheth into the battle, which denotes their swiftness to
commit sin, the pleasure they take in it, and their inattention to
danger, and death by it; see [Job
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#021), or overflows (c.md); the
impetuosity of the horse is expressed by the overflowing of a river.

\(c\) "quasi equus ferox", Heb. "inundans", Piscator; "sisut equus
effundens se", Schmidt. So Kimchi and Ben Melech interpret it.

[Jeremiah 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 8:7</span></span>

Yea, the stork in the heaven knoweth her appointed times,.... Of going
and returning; for this is a bird of passage, as Pliny (d) and other
naturalists observe; which goes away as winter approaches, and returns
when that is over. The temperature of the air, as to heat and cold, and
the natural propensity of such birds of passage to breed their young,
are thought to be the incentives to change their habitation; and
wonderful thing it is in nature, that they should know the proper time
of their passage, what places to go to, and how to steer their course
thither; and, as the above naturalist observes, they go and come in the
night:

and the turtle, and the crane, and the swallow, observe the time of
their coming: for these also are birds of passage; the turtle is absent
in the winter, and its coming is a sign of spring, [Sol
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011.md), the crane, according to Aelianus
(e), goes away with the stork, and returns when winter is over; and the
same is observable of the swallow; hence the common saying, one swallow
does not make spring; so Horace (f) uses "hirundine prima" for the
beginning of spring. Where these birds retire to is not known; some
think the swallows fly into Egypt and Ethiopia; but Olaus Magnus (g)
says they lurk in holes, and even under water, where they hang together,
and are sometimes drawn out in clusters, and being brought to the fire,
and thawed, will revive and fly about.

But my people know not the judgment of the Lord; meaning not the
unsearchable judgments of God, or those providential dispensations of
God which are a great deep, and are not clearly discerned and known by
the best of men; but either his own judgments, which are inflicted upon
wicked men as punishments for sin, which yet are not taken notice of,
and duly attended to, as they should be; or rather the law of God, and
his revealed word, which is the rule of judgment and justice, and a
declaration of righteousness, showing what is just and good, and ought
to be done, which they were willingly ignorant of; or else the final and
future judgment of God after death, to which all men must come, and into
which every thought, word, and work, will be brought, and which day
wicked men put far from them; see [Isa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003.md).

\(d\) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 23. (e) De Animal. l. 3. c. 23. (f) Ep. l. 1.
Ep. 7. (g) De Ritu Gent. Septent. l. 19. c. 11.

[Jeremiah 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 8:8</span></span>

How do ye say, we are wise,.... Which they were continually boasting of,
though they were ignorant of the judgment of the Lord, and were more
stupid than the stork, turtle, crane, and swallow:

and the law of the Lord is with us? this was the foundation of their
boast, because the law was given to them, and not to the nations of the
world, which knew not God, and therefore they must be a wise and
understanding people; and this law continued with them, they had it in
their synagogues, and in their houses, and read it, and heard, or at
least they might and ought to have heard and read it, and in this they
trusted; of this character and cast were the Jews in the times of Christ
and his apostles, [Rom 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017.md) to which
agrees the Targum,

"how say ye, we are wise, and in the law of the Lord we trust?''

Lo, certainly in vain made he it; either the law, which was made or
given in vain by the Lord to this people, since they made no better use
of it, and valued themselves upon having it, without acting according to
it; or the pen of the scribe, which was made by him in vain to write it,
as follows:

the pen of the scribes is in vain; in vain, and to no purpose, were the
scribes employed in writing out copies of the law, when either it was
not heard or read, or however the things it enjoined were not put in
practice; or the pen of the scribes was in vain, when employed in
writing out false copies of the law, or false glosses and
interpretations of it, such as were made by the Scribes and Pharisees in
Christ's time, and the fathers before them, by whose traditions the word
of God was made of none effect: and so the Targum,

"therefore, lo, in vain the scribe hath made the lying pen to falsify;''

that is, the Scriptures. The words may be rendered,

"verily, behold, with a lie he wrought; the pen: is the lie of the
scribes (h).''

\(h\) "utique ecce, mendacio operatus est; stylus mendacium scribarum
est", Schmidt. Approved by Reinbeck. De Accent. Heb. p. 435.

[Jeremiah 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 8:9</span></span>

The wise men are ashamed,.... Of the wisdom of which they boasted, when
it would appear to be folly, and unprofitable to them:

they are dismayed and taken; frightened at the calamities coming upon
them, and taken as in a snare, as the wise sometimes are in their own
craftiness, [Job 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#013.md).

Lo, they have rejected the word of the Lord; sent by the prophets, which
urged obedience to the law, and is the best explanation of it; but this
they despised, and refused it:

and what wisdom is in them? to contemn that, which, if attended to,
would have been profitable to them, and the means of making them wise
unto salvation; let them therefore boast of their wisdom ever so much,
it is certain there can be none in persons of such a spirit and conduct.

[Jeremiah 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 8:10</span></span>

Therefore will I give their wives unto others,.... To strangers, to the
Gentiles; than which nothing could be more disagreeable to them, or a
sorer punishment, of a temporal one:

and their fields to them that shall inherit them; or,

to the heirs (i); other and new ones; and who should possess them as if
they were the true and rightful heirs of them.

For everyone from the least even to the greatest is given to
covetousness; from the prophet even to the priest everyone dealeth
falsely; covetousness and false dealing, which prevailed in all ranks
and orders of men among them, were the cause of their ruin: covetousness
is the root of all evil; and to deal falsely, or make a lie, as the
words may be rendered, is diabolical and abominable in the sight of God,
and especially in men of such characters, who were to preach truth to
others; See Gill on [Jer 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#013.md).

\(i\) "haeredibus", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus.

[Jeremiah 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 8:11</span></span>

For they have healed the hurt of the daughter of my people,.... See Gill
on [Jer 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#014.md), [Jer
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#015.md).

[Jeremiah 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 8:13</span></span>

I will surely consume them, saith the Lord,.... Or, "gathering I will
gather them" (k); into some one place, the city of Jerusalem, and there
destroy them. The word is, , expressive of consumption and destruction,
as Jarchi, Kimchi, and Ben Melech observe; and so the Targum,

"destroying I will destroy them, saith the Lord.''

There shall be no grapes on the vine, nor figs on the fig tree, and the
leaf shall fade; some understand this by way of complaint, that there
were no fruit on the vine and fig tree, nor even leaves; which they
allegorically interpret of the fruit of good works being wanting in
them, which was the cause of their ruin. Others think there are
metaphors which describe the manner of their destruction; and so the
Targum,

"and they shall fall, as the grapes fall from the vine, and as the
falling fruit from the fig tree, and as the leaf from the tree.''

Though it rather intends the sterility of the land, and in general the
famine that should attend the siege of Jerusalem. Grapes and figs are
mentioned only, as Kimchi observes, because they were the chief fruits,
and they are put for the whole.

And the things that I have given them shall pass away from them;
whatever they had in their barns and cellars, or were just becoming ripe
in their fields, vineyards, and gardens, should either be blasted, or
rather be taken away and devoured by their enemies, so that they
themselves should not enjoy them. The Targum interprets it of the law
transgressed by them, as the cause of their ruin, and paraphrases it
thus,

"because I have given them my law from Sinai, and they have transgressed
it;''

and so Jarchi,

"this shall be unto them, because I have given them statutes, and they
have transgressed them.''

\(k\) "eolligendo colligam eos", Montanus, Tigurine version. So
Piscator.

[Jeremiah 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 8:14</span></span>

Why do we sit still?.... In the country, where were barrenness and want
of provisions; in the villages and unwalled towns, where they were
exposed to the spoils and ravages of the enemy. These words, with what
follow, are the words of the prophet, in the language of the Israelites,
as Kimchi observes.

Assemble yourselves; this is the gathering together, in order to be
consumed, before threatened, which they themselves were made to do:

and let us enter into the defenced cities; such as Jerusalem, where they
thought they should be safe from their enemies:

and let us be silent there; either promising themselves rest, quietness,
and security; or suggesting that it would be right in them to say
nothing by way of complaint; having no reason to murmur at their
afflictions, since they were no other than what their own sins had
brought upon them:

for the Lord our God hath put us to silence; stopped their mouths that
they could not complain, being convicted in their consciences of their
sins; and brought them into a state of destruction and death, which
makes silent:

and given us water of gall to drink; afflictions bitter and deadly. The
Targum is,

"and hath made us drink the cup of an evil curse, as the heads of
serpents;''

a poisonous and deadly potion:

because we have sinned against the Lord; which they were obliged to own;
though it does not appear that they had true repentance for their sins,
or amended their ways; sometimes confession of sin is made without
either of these.

[Jeremiah 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 8:15</span></span>

We looked for peace,.... Outward prosperity, affluence of temporal
blessings, peace with enemies, and safety from them, which the false
prophets had given them reason to expect; or which last they concluded
and hoped for, from their being in the defenced cities:

but no good came; they were disappointed in their expectation; the good
that was promised them, and they looked for, never came, but all the
reverse:

and for a time of health; or, of healing (l); the political wounds of
the commonwealth of Israel:

and behold trouble! or "terror" (m); at the approach of the enemy,
described in the following verses. The Targum is,

"a time of pardon of offences, and, lo, a punishment of sins.''

Healing, in Scripture, signifies pardon of sin; see [Psa
41:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#004.md).

\(l\) "medelae, vel sanationis", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Schmidt.
(m) "terror", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Schmdit.

[Jeremiah 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 8:16</span></span>

The snorting of his horses was heard from Dan,.... That is, was heard at
Jerusalem. It seems to be a hyperbolical expression, showing the
certainty of the coming of the Assyrian monarch and his army, to invade
Judea, and besiege Jerusalem; the news of which was brought from Dan,
which lay in the further part of the land; see [Jer
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#015.md), and pointing at the way in which
they should come northwards, through Phoenicia and the tribe of Dan,
with a numerous cavalry of horses and horsemen: for, by "his" horses are
meant Nebuchadnezzar's; unless, with Calvin, it can be thought that they
are called the Lord's, because ordered and sent by him, whose war it was
against the people. The Targum paraphrases the words thus,

"because they worshipped the calf that is in Dan, a king with his army
shall come up against them, and carry them captive;''

and so Jarchi interprets it.

The whole land trembled at the sound of the neighing of his strong ones;
his horses, strong and mighty; see [Jdg
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#022.md) where we read of the prancings of
the mighty ones; and here the Targum,

"at the voice of the treading of his strong ones, all the inhabitants of
the earth shall be moved;''

and by the land trembling undoubtedly are meant the inhabitants of the
land, filled with dread and consternation at the noise and near approach
of the Chaldean army.

For they are come, and have devoured the land, and all that is in it;
or, "the fulness of it"; which because of the certainty of it, is
represented as then done: the city, and those that dwell therein;
meaning not only the city of Jerusalem, and the inhabitants of it, but
other cities also, the singular being put for the plural; and so the
Targum,

"the cities, and they that dwell in them.''

[Jeremiah 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 8:17</span></span>

For, behold, I will send serpents, cockatrices, among you,.... The
Chaldeans, comparable to these noxious and hurtful creatures, because of
the mischief they should do unto them. The Targum is,

"for, lo, I will raise up against you people that kill as the destroying
serpents.''

These were raised up by the Lord, and sent by him, just as he sent fiery
serpents among the Israelites in the wilderness, when they sinned
against him; there literally, here metaphorically.

Which will not be charmed: Jarchi says, at the end of seventy years a
serpent becomes a cockatrice, and stops its ear, that it will not
hearken to the voice of the charmer, according to [Psa
58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004.md), the meaning is, that these
Chaldeans would not be diverted from their purposes in destroying of the
Jews by any arts or methods whatever; as not by force of arms, so not by
good words and entreaties, or any way that could be devised.

And they shall bite you, saith the Lord; that is, kill them, as the
Targum interprets it; for the bite of a serpent is deadly.

[Jeremiah 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 8:18</span></span>

When I would comfort myself against terror,.... Either naturally, by
eating and drinking, the necessary and lawful means of refreshment; or
spiritually, by reading the word of God, and looking over the promises
in it:

my heart is faint in me; at the consideration of the calamities which
were coming upon his people, and which were made known to him by a
spirit of prophecy, of which he had no room to doubt. So the Targum
takes them to be the words of the prophet, paraphrasing them,

"for them, saith the prophet, my heart grieves.''

[Jeremiah 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 8:19</span></span>

Behold, the voice of the cry of the daughter of my people,.... This was
what made his heart faint, such was his sympathy with his countrymen,
his people in distress, whom he affectionately calls the daughter of his
people, whose cry was loud, and whose voice he heard lamenting their
case:

because of them that dwell in a far country; because of the Chaldeans,
who came from a far country; see [Jer
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015.md) who were come into their land,
and devoured it; through fear of them, and because of the devastation
they made; hence the voice of their cry: or this is to be understood of
the Jews in a far country, carried captive into Babylon, and the voice
of their cry there, because of their captivity and oppression. So
Abarbinel and the Targum,

"lo, the voice of the cry of the congregation of my people from a far
country;''

and so read the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions.

Is not the Lord in Zion? is not her King in her? these are the words of
the people, complaining of the Lord, calling in question whether he was
in Zion, and whether he was King there; and if he was, how came it to
pass that he did not protect it; that he suffered the city to be taken,
and the inhabitants to be carried captive?

Why have they provoked me to anger with their graven images, and with
their strange vanities? that is, with their idols, and their idolatrous
worship; this is the Lord's answer to them, giving a reason why he
suffered the enemy to come in among them, and prevail over them, namely,
their idolatry. It may be rendered, "with the vanities of a stranger"
(n); of a strange people, or of a strange god.

\(n\) "in vanitatibus alienigenae", Montanus; "sub. populi", Vatablus;
"dei alieni", Pagninus So Ben Melech.

[Jeremiah 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 8:20</span></span>

The harvest is past,.... Which was in the month of Ijar, as Jarchi
observes, and answers to part of April and May:

the summer is ended; which was in the month Tammuz, and answers to part
of June and July:

and we are not saved; delivered from the siege of the Chaldeans; and
harvest and summer being over, there were no hopes of the Egyptians
coming to their relief; seeing winter was approaching; and it may be
observed, that it was in the month of Ab, which answers to part of July
and August, that the city and temple were burnt. These are the words of
the people of the Jews, despairing of help and salvation. So the Targum,

"the congregation of Israel said, the time is passed, the end is up, and
we are not redeemed.''

[Jeremiah 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 8:21</span></span>

For the hurt of the daughter of my people am I hurt,.... These are the
words, not of God, as Jerom; nor of Jerusalem, as the Targum; but of the
prophet, as Kimchi observes, expressing his sympathy with the people in
their affliction: and they may be rendered, "for the breach of the
daughter of my people" (o), which was made when the city was broken up
and destroyed, [Jer 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#007.md).

I am broken; in heart and spirit:

I am black; with grief and sorrow. The Targum is,

"my face is covered with blackness, black as a pot.''

Astonishment hath taken hold on me; at the miseries that were come upon
his people; and there was no remedy for them, which occasion the
following words.

\(o\) "super contritione", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "super
confractione", Schmidt; "ob fractionem", Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 8:22</span></span>

Is there no balm in Gilead?.... Which was famous for it; see [Gen
37:25](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#025.md), or rather turpentine or rosin,
a gum which drops from pine trees and the like; since balm or balsam
grew on this side Jordan, near Jericho and Engedi, and not beyond
Jordan, in the land of Gilead; and rosin is good for healing. Some
render it "treacle", but very wrongly, since, as Calvin observes, that
is a composition of many things,

Is there no physician there? or surgeon, anyone that heals wounds and
bruises; very probably there were many such lived in Gilead, since it
was a place where proper medicines were to be got and applied: this may
be understood of prophets and teachers, who, in a moral and spiritual
sense, are instruments of healing of men, by showing them their evil,
calling them to repentance, and directing where to go for healing or
pardon of sin; namely, to Christ, the alone physician, and to his
precious blood, shed for the remission of sins. Some reference may be
had to Elijah, who was of Gilead, and to the school of the prophets
there, [Kg1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001.md). The Targum is,

"Jeremiah the prophet said, perhaps there are no good works in me, that
I should supplicate for the house of Israel; should I not desire the
doctrine of Elijah the prophet, who was of Gilead, whose words were
healing?''

Why then is not the health of the daughter of my people recovered? that
is, seeing there is balm in Gilead, and a physician there, how comes it
to pass that such medicine is not made use of, and such a physician not
applied to, that health might be restored? This shows the stupidity,
sluggishness, and indolence of the people, and how inexcusable they
were, as well as the prophet's great concern for their welfare; the want
of means of deliverance, or non-attendance to them, or the failure of
them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 9](jer009.md)

</div>
