<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Jeremiah Index](jer)  
  [Previous](jer012)  [Next](jer014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jeremiah Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001)

[Jeremiah](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jer 13:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JEREMIAH 13

In this chapter, under the similes of a girdle and bottles of wine, the
destruction of the Jews is set forth. Some exhortations are given them
to repent and humble themselves, even men of all ranks and degrees among
them; and their sins, the source of their calamities, are pointed out to
them. An order is given to the prophet to get him a linen girdle, with
instructions what to do with it, and which he observed, [Jer
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001), a fresh order to take it and
hide it in the hole of a rock by the river Euphrates, which he
accordingly did, [Jer 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#003) and he is
bid a third time to go and take it from thence, which he did; when he
found it spoiled, and good for nothing, [Jer
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#006), then follows the application of
this simile, or the signification of this sign; that in like manner the
pride of Judah and Jerusalem should be marred, and for their wickedness
and idolatry should become good for nothing, like that girdle; whereas
they ought to have cleaved to the Lord, as a girdle does to a man's
loins, and to have been an honourable people to him, [Jer
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#008). By the simile of bottles filled
with wine is signified that all the inhabitants of the land, king,
priests, prophets, and common people, should be like drunken men, that
should dash one against another, and destroy each other, which the mercy
of God would not prevent, [Jer 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012),
some exhortations are made to the people in general, to be humble, and
confess their sins, and give glory to God, before it was too late; which
are enforced by the prophet's affectionate concern for them, [Jer
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#015) and to the king and queen in
particular, since their crown and kingdom were about to be taken from
them; the cities, in the southern parts, going to be shut up, and not
opened; and even the whole land of Judea, and all its inhabitants, in a
little time would be carried captive, [Jer
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#018), and, to certify them of the
truth of these things, they are bid to look to the north, from whence
the enemy was coming to carry them captive, even the beautiful flock
committed to their care, [Jer 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020),
and to consider what they could say for themselves, when their
punishment should come upon them suddenly, as the sorrows of a woman in
travail, [Jer 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#021) and should they
ask the reason of this, it was owing to the multitude of their
iniquities, and to their habit and custom of sinning, which made their
case desperate, [Jer 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#022), wherefore
a resolution is taken to disperse them among the nations, and that this
should be their lot and portion, because of their many abominations, and
yet not without some concern that they might be purged from their
iniquities, [Jer 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#024).

[Jeremiah 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jer 13:1</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord unto me,.... In a vision, and by the spirit of
prophecy: when this was said is not certain, very likely in the reign of
Jehoiakim; the prophet gives an account of what had been done, the
present tense is put for the past.

Go and get thee a linen girdle; or, "a girdle of linens" (l); a girdle
made of flax or fine linen, which the prophet had not used to wear; and
having none, is bid to go, perhaps from Anathoth to Jerusalem, to "get"
one, or "buy" one: this girdle represents the people of the Jews in
their more pure and less corrupted state, when they were a people near
unto the Lord, and greatly regarded by him, and had a share in his
affections; when they cleaved unto him, and served him, and were to his
praise and glory: "and put it upon thy loins"; near the reins, the seat
of affection and desire, and that it might be visible and ornamental;
denoting what has been before observed: "and" or

but put it not in water or, "bring it not through it" (m); meaning
either before he put it on his loins; and the sense is, that he was not
to wash it, and whiten it, but to wear it just as it was wrought,
signifying that those people were originally taken by the Lord of his
own mercy, and without any merits of theirs, rough, unwashed, and
unpolished as they were: or else, after he had wore it, as Jarchi, when
it was soiled with sweat; yet not to be washed, that it might rot the
sooner: and so may design the corrupt and filthy state of this people,
and the ruin brought thereby upon them, which was not to be prevented.

\(l\) "cingulum linorum", Montanus. (m) "sed per aquam non duces eam",
Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jer 13:2</span></span>

So I got a girdle,.... Or, bought (n) a linen one, as directed:

according to the word of the Lord; his express order and command; the
prophet was not disobedient to the heavenly vision:

and I put it on my loins; without washing it before or after, and wore
it publicly for some time.

\(n\) Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator, Cocceius, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jer 13:3</span></span>

And the word of the Lord,.... The Targum is,

"the word of prophecy from before the Lord:''

came unto me the second time, saying; what distance of time there was
between this order and the former is not known.

[Jeremiah 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jer 13:4</span></span>

Take the girdle which thou hast got, which is upon thy loins,.... Either
he is bid to take it off his loins, on which it was; or to go with it on
them; seeing the taking it off does not seem absolutely necessary; and
go with it to the place directed to in the following words:

and arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock; by
the river side, where the waters, coming and going, would reach and wet
it, and it drying again, would rot the sooner. This signifies the
carrying of the Jews captive to Babylon, by which city the river
Euphrates ran, and the obscure state and condition they would be in
there; and where all their pride and glory would be marred, as
afterwards declared.

[Jeremiah 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jer 13:5</span></span>

So I went and hid it by Euphrates,.... Or, "in" (o) it; in a hole of the
rock, upon the banks of it:

as the Lord commanded me: all this seems to be done not really, but
visionally; it can hardly be thought that Jeremy should be sent on two
such long journeys, on such an account, which would take up a
considerable time to perform it in; but rather that he went and came in
like manner as Ezekiel did, in the visions of God, from Chaldea to
Jerusalem, and from thence to Chaldea again, [Eze
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#003), and so Maimonaides (p) was of
opinion, as Kimchi on the place observes, that all this was done in a
vision of prophecy.

\(o\) "in Euphrate", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin. (p) Moreh
Nevochim, par. 2. c. 46. p. 323.

[Jeremiah 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jer 13:6</span></span>

And it came to pass after many days,.... When the girdle had lain long
in the hole, by the side of Euphrates; this denotes the length of the
Babylonish captivity, which was seventy years:

that the Lord said unto me, arise, go to Euphrates, and take the girdle
from thence, which I commanded thee to hide there; which may denote the
return of these people from captivity, according to the prophecy of
Jeremiah; see [Jer 25:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#011), though this
seems to be visionally done, in order to express the wretched state and
condition these people were in; either before the captivity, which was
the cause of it; or at their return from it, when they were no better
for it.

[Jeremiah 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jer 13:7</span></span>

Then I went to Euphrates,.... In a vision; this is the second journey,
of which See Gill on [Jer 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#005),

and digged; the hole, in process of time, being stopped up with soil or
sand, that were thrown up over it; this digging was in a visionary way;
see [Eze 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#008),

and took the girdle from the place where I had hid it; which he knew
again by some token or another:

and, behold, the girdle was marred; or "corrupted" (q); it was become
rotten by the washing of the water over it, and its long continuance in
such a place:

it was profitable for nothing; it could not be put upon a man's loins,
or be wore any more; nor was it fit for any other use, it was so sadly
spoiled and so thoroughly rotten. It is in the Hebrew text, "it shall
not prosper to all" (r) things; that is, not "to anything" (s), as many
render it.

\(q\) "corruptum erat", Munster, Montanus, Schmidt; "computruerat",
Pagninus. (r) "non proficiet omnibus", Vatablus. (s) "Non prosperabitur
cuiquam", Montanus; "ad ullam rem", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jer 13:8</span></span>

Then the word of the Lord came unto me, saying. Or the word of prophecy
from before the Lord, as the Targum; and now follows the application of
this sign to the thing signified, and the whole intention of it is
opened.

[Jeremiah 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jer 13:9</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, after this manner,.... As this girdle has been hid
in Euphrates, and has been marred and rendered useless; so in like
manner, and by such like means,

will I mar the pride of Judah, and the great pride of Jerusalem; or
their glory, or excellency (t); that which they gloried in, and were
proud of; their city which was burnt, and their temple which was
destroyed by the Chaldeans; their king, princes, and nobles, who were
carried captive into Babylon, by the river Euphrates, and stripped of
all their grandeur, honour, and glory; and so the Targum,

"so will I corrupt the strength of the men of Judah, and the strength of
the inhabitants of Jerusalem, which is much;''

and to which agrees the Syriac version, which renders it,

"the proud or haughty men of Judah, and the many haughty men of
Jerusalem.''

\(t\) "excellentiam", Calvin, Piscator.

[Jeremiah 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jer 13:10</span></span>

This evil people, which refuse to hear my words,.... Sent by the
prophets, to whom they turned a deaf ear; and though they pressed them,
and importunately desired them to give them a hearing, they refused it;
and this showed them to be a bad people, very degenerate and wicked; and
which further appears by what follows:

which walk in the imagination of their heart; which was evil, stubborn,
and rebellious, see [Jer 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#024),

and walk after other gods, to serve them, and to worship them; went to
Egypt and Assyria to pay their adoration to those who were not by nature
gods; and this was the cause of their ruin and destruction:

shall even be as this girdle, which is good for nothing: as they were
corrupt in their practices, and were become useless and unserviceable to
God; so they would be carried captive into a foreign country, where they
would be inglorious, and unprofitable, uncomfortable in themselves, and
of no use to one another.

[Jeremiah 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jer 13:11</span></span>

For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man,.... Being girt tight
unto him:

so have I caused to cleave unto me the whole house of Israel, and the
whole house of Judah; whom he chose above all people, and caused to
approach unto him, and dwell in his courts; whom he favoured with his
presence, and encouraged them to follow after him, and cleave to him in
faith and affection, and with full purpose of heart; so that they were a
people near unto him as a man's girdle is to his loins: and the end of
this was, and would have been, had they continued so,

that they might be unto me for a people; his own people, a special and
peculiar people above all others, peculiarly favoured and blessed by
him, and continue so, and in the enjoyment of all good things:

and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory; for a famous and
renowned people, that should be to the praise and glory of God, and an
honour to him, and an ornament to the profession of him; whereas they
were the reverse:

but they would not hear; the words of the Lord, nor obey his voice; but
served other gods, departed from the Lord, to whom they should have
cleaved, and so became like this rotten girdle.

[Jeremiah 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jer 13:12</span></span>

Therefore thou shalt speak unto them this word,.... The following
parable:

thus saith the Lord God of Israel; what was to be said is prefaced with
these words, to show that it was not a trifling matter, but of moment
and importance, and not to be slighted and despised as it was:

every bottle shall be filled with wine; meaning every inhabitant of
Judea and Jerusalem, comparable to bottles or earthen vessels, as the
Jewish writers interpret it, for their being empty of all that is good,
and for their frailty and brittleness being liable to be broke to
pieces, and to utter ruin and destruction; these are threatened to be
"filled with wine"; not literally taken, such as they loved; though
there may be an allusion to their intemperance, and so this is a just
retaliation for their sins; but figuratively, with the wine of divine
wrath; and their being filled with it denotes the greatness of the
calamities which should come upon them, and be around them on all sides:

and they shall say unto thee; upon hearing the above, and by way of
reply to it:

do we not certainly know; or, "knowing do we not know" (u); can we be
thought to be ignorant of this,

that every bottle shall be filled with wine? every child knows this;
what else are bottles made for? is this the errand thou art sent on by
the Lord? and is this all the knowledge and information that we are to
have by thy prophesying? or what dost thou mean by telling us that which
we and everybody know? what is designed by this? surely thou must have
another meaning in it than what the words express.

\(u\) "an sciendo non scimus", Pagninus, Vatablus, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jer 13:13</span></span>

Then shall thou say unto them,.... Explaining the above words:

thus saith the Lord, behold, I will fill all the inhabitants of this
land; this is the application of the parable, and shows that by every
bottle is meant every inhabitant of Judea:

even the kings that sit upon David's throne; or, "that sit for David on
his throne" (w); that succeed him one after another; more kings may be
meant than one, as Jehoiakim and Zedekiah; or the present reigning king,
and the princes of the brood, are designed; who, though of David's
family, and on his throne, yet this could not secure them from the
calamity threatened:

and the priests; who ministered in holy things; their sacred office and
function would not preserve them from ruin:

and the prophets; the false prophets, as the Targum, that prophesied
smooth things, and prophesied them peace and safety, these should be
involved in the common destruction:

and all the inhabitants of Jerusalem with drunkenness; with tribulation,
as the Targum interprets it; and adds,

"and shall be like a drunken man;''

giddy, stupid, unable to help themselves, or to advise one another.

\(w\) "sedentes Davidi", Montanus, Schmidt, Cocceius; "pro David",
Pagninus, Calvin, Junius & Tremellius.

[Jeremiah 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jer 13:14</span></span>

And I will dash them one against another,.... As drunken men fall foul
on one another, and quarrel and fight; or in allusion to bottles and
earthen vessels they are before compared to; and may denote the internal
broils and contentions among themselves, that instead of assisting each
other in their distress, they would be destroying one another; which was
notorious in the last siege of Jerusalem:

even the fathers and the sons together, saith the Lord; no relation, nor
even age nor sex, being regarded:

I will not pity, nor spare, nor have mercy, but destroy them: the Lord's
hand was in all this; everything was by his permission, and according to
his will; he would not prevent the enemy's invading, besieging, and
taking them, nor hinder themselves from destroying one another; but
suffer a general calamity to come upon them, without showing the least
mercy to them, so great were their sins, and such the provocation.

[Jeremiah 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jer 13:15</span></span>

Hear ye, and give ear,.... Both to what goes before, and what follows
after. The words doubled denote the closest and strictest attention:

be not proud; haughty, scornful, as above all instruction, and needing
no advice and counsel, self-conceited, despising the word of God, and
his messages by his prophets; or, "do not lift up yourselves" (x); above
others, and against God:

for the Lord hath spoken; it is not I, but the Lord; and what he has
said shall certainly come to pass; so the Targum,

"for in the word of the Lord it is so decreed;''

it is in vain to oppose him; his counsel shall stand, and he will do all
his pleasure; none ever hardened themselves against him, and prospered.

\(x\) "ne elevetis vos", Montanus, Pagninus; "exaltetis", Junius &
Tremellius.

[Jeremiah 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jer 13:16</span></span>

Give glory to the Lord your God,.... By confessing sin unto him; by
humiliation for it before him; by believing what he says, hearkening to
his word, and obeying his commands, and living to his honour and glory;
see [Jos 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#019), especially by believing
in Christ, the true God, and true Messiah, embracing his Gospel, and his
ordinances:

before he cause darkness; before the Lord brings on the dark
dispensation threatened, the calamity before spoken of; repent while
space is given, before it is too late; so the Targum,

"before tribulation comes upon you, and ye be like to those that walk in
darkness.''

The Babylonish captivity may be meant, which was a dark day with the
Jews, as is their present case, and which may be included; and it is
applicable to any dark state of the church of God, such as may be now
apprehended as near, through the spread of Popery, the growth of errors
and heresies, the persecution of the saints, the slaying of the
witnesses, the cessation of the Gospel ministry and ordinances for a
while; which is that day of darkness and gloominess, that hour of
temptation that shall come upon all the earth, to try its inhabitants;
happy those that give glory to God by their faith in him, and by keeping
the word of his patience:

and before your feet stumble upon the dark mountains; or, "of twilight";
or, "of the evening"; or rather, "upon the mountains in the evening"
(y); at eventide; at which time it is troublesome and dangerous
travelling on mountains. These may design either the mountains to which
they would flee for shelter, [Mat
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016), or those which lay in the way
to Babylon, over which they should travel when carried captive; or
rather the kingdoms of Babylon and Media, whither they should be
carried, and where they should endure much affliction and hardship; it
being usual to signify kingdoms by mountains; so Babylon itself is, [Jer
51:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#025), perhaps there may be some
allusion, as Sanctus thinks, to Babylon itself, which being situated in
a marshy place, might be generally covered with a cloud or mist, and,
together with the smoke of the city, might look like a dark mountain;
and especially the hanging gardens in it looked at a distance like (z)
mountains with forests on them. It may be applied to the eventide of the
latter day, when many shall stumble and fall through mountains of
difficulties and discouragements in the way of religion; of professing
the pure Gospel and ordinances of it, through the prevailing darkness of
the age, and the persecution of men; and to the evening of life, and the
dark mountains of death and eternity, on which men may be said to
stumble and fall when they die; and when their everlasting state will
appear to be fixed as immovable as mountains; and there will be no more
means of grace, of faith, repentance, and conversion, but blackness of
darkness for evermore, outer darkness, weeping and gnashing of teeth;
wherefore, before this time comes, it behooves persons to be concerned
for the glory of God, and the everlasting welfare of their souls:

and while ye look for light; prosperity and happiness, as the false
prophets gave out they should have; or for help and assistance from the
Egyptians, to whom they sent:

he turn it into the shadow of death, and make it gross darkness; that
is, the Lord, who would disappoint them, and, instead of having that
relief and comfort they were promised, would bring upon them such
shocking calamities, which would be as terrible as death itself, or at
least as the shadow of death, and be like gross darkness, even such as
was in Egypt, which might be felt; see [Isa
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#009).

\(y\) "in montibus crepusculi", Montanus, Piscator; "montibus
caecioribus intempesta nocte", Junius & Tremellius. (z) See Berosus apud
Joseph. Antiqu. l. 10. c. 11. sect. 1. &; Contr. Apion. l. 1. c. 19. &
Curtius, Hist. l. 5. c. 1.

[Jeremiah 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jer 13:17</span></span>

But if ye will not hear it,.... The advice and exhortation now given, to
repent of sin, be humble before God, and glorify him:

my soul shall weep in secret places for your pride; he would no more act
in a public character; but, laying aside his office as a prophet and
public instructor, would retire to some corner, where he might not be
seen or heard, and there lament the sins of the people, particularly
their "pride", which had been the cause of their ruin; or mourn on
account of their glory and excellency, as the word may be rendered,
which would depart from them; their city and temple would be burnt; and
their king, princes, and nobles, and the flower of the nation, carried
into Babylon; so the Jews (a) interpret it of the glory of Israel, which
should cease from them, and be given to the nations of the world; See
Gill on [Jer 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#009);

mine eyes shall weep sore; or, "shedding tears it shall shed tears" (b);
in great abundance, being, as he wished his eyes might be, a fountain of
tears to weep night and day, [Jer 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#001),

and run down with tears; or, "mine eye let down tears" (c); upon the
cheek in great plenty. The phrases are expressive of the sorrow of his
heart for the distresses of his people, and of the certainty of them;
the reason of which follows:

because the Lord's flock is carried away captive: that is, the Lord's
people, as the Targum; to whom he stood in the relation of a shepherd,
and they to him under the character of a flock; and this was what so
sensibly touched the heart of the prophet, that they were a people that
the Lord had an interest in, a regard unto, and among whom he had been
formerly glorified; wherefore it was to the loss of his honour and
interest that these should be given into the hands of their enemies, and
be carried captive; and this troubled him, for nothing lies nearer the
heart of a good man than the glory of God.

\(a\) T. Bab. Chagiga, fol. 5. 2. (b) "et lachrymando lachrymabitur",
Pagninus, Montanus, Schmidt. (c) "et descendet oculus meus lachrymam",
Montanus, "lachrymis", Cocceius; "descendere faciet", Pagninus;
"demittet", Targ.

[Jeremiah 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jer 13:18</span></span>

Say unto the king, and to the queen,.... Jehoiachin, and his mother
Nehushta, as it is generally interpreted by the Jewish commentators, and
others; who, with many princes and officers, were carried captive into
Babylon, [Kg2 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#012) or rather Zedekiah
and his wife; since the captivity after threatened is a perfect and
complete one, which Jehoiachin's was not:

humble yourselves, sit down; or, "sit down humbled" (d); come down from
your thrones, and sit in the dust; humble yourselves before the Lord for
your own sins, and the sins of the people; in times of general
corruption, and which threatens a nation with ruin, it becomes kings and
princes to set an example of repentance, humiliation, and reformation;
though it may be this is rather a prediction of what would be, that they
should descend from their throne, and lose their grandeur, and be in a
low and abject condition, than an exhortation to what was their duty;
since it follows:

for your principalities shall come down; their royal state and
greatness, and all the ensigns of it; and especially such as they had
upon their heads, as the word used denotes, and as the following
explanation shows:

even the crown of your glory; or glorious crown, which should fall from
their heads, or be taken from them, when they should be no more served
in state, or treated as crowned heads.

\(d\) "degite humiliter", Castalio; "abjectissime considite", Junius &
Tremellius; "loco humili considite", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jer 13:19</span></span>

The cities of the south shall be shut up, and none shall open them,....
Meaning the cities of Judah, which lay in the southern part of the land
of Israel, and to the south of Babylon; which might be said to be shut
up, and not in the power of any to open, when besieged by the Chaldean
army; or rather when destroyed, that there were none to go in and out;
though some think the cities of Egypt are intended, which lay south of
Judea, from whence the Jews should not have the relief they expected,
and where they should find no refuge; but the former sense seems best:

Judah shall be carried away captive all of it; it was in part carried
away in Jehoiachin's time, and wholly in Zedekiah's; which seems to be
here respected:

it shall be wholly carried away captive; or, in perfections (e); most
perfectly and completely; the same thing is meant as before, only in
different words repeated, to express the certainty of it.

\(e\) "perfectionibus", Vatablus, Montanus. It is by Schmidt left
untranslated, "Schelomim", which he takes to be the city of Jerusalem,
sometimes called "Solyma"; the inhabitants of which were carried captive
when Judah was; and so Junius and Tremellius translate it; "civita,
pacatorum", and understand it of Jerusalem; which has the signification
of peace in its name.

[Jeremiah 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jer 13:20</span></span>

Lift up your eyes, and behold them that come from the north,.... There
are a Keri and a Cetib of the words "lift up" and "behold"; they are
written in the singular number, and may be considered as directed to the
king, as the words following are; and they are read in the plural
number, the state and whole body of the people being called upon to
observe the Chaldean army, which came from the north; and is represented
as on the march, just at hand to invade, besiege, take, and carry them
captive. The Septuagint version renders it, "lift up thine eyes, O
Jerusalem"; and the Arabic version, "O Israel: where is the flock that
was given thee, thy beautiful flock?" that is, the people, as the Targum
interprets it, which were committed to the care and charge of the king,
as sheep into the hands of a shepherd; and were a fine body of people,
chosen of God and precious, distinguished above all others by wholesome
and righteous laws and statutes, and special privileges; a people who
were a kingdom of priests, a holy nation, and a peculiar people, the
glory of the whole earth; but now carried, or about to be carried,
captive. It is no unusual thing to represent a king as a shepherd, and
his people as a flock, guided, governed, and protected by him, and who
is accountable for his trust to the King of kings; see [Psa
78:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#071).

[Jeremiah 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jer 13:21</span></span>

What will thou say when he shall punish thee?.... Or, "visit upon thee"
(f); that is, either when God shall punish thee for thy sins, thou canst
bring no charge of injustice against him, or murmur and repine at the
punishment inflicted on thee; so Jarchi; to which agrees the Targum,

"when he shall visit on thee thy sin;''

or else, to which the following words seem to incline, when the enemy
shall visit upon thee; so Kimchi and Abarbinel, when the Chaldeans shall
come upon thee, and pay thee a visit, an unwelcome one; yet who wilt
thou have to blame but thyself? so the Septuagint and Arabic versions
render it, "when they shall visit thee"; these words are directed, not
to the king, nor to the queen neither; but to the body of the people,
the Jewish state, represented as a woman; who, upon consideration of
things past, would have a great deal of reason to reflect upon
themselves for what they had done in former times, which had led on to
their ruin and destruction:

(for thou hast taught them to be captains, and as chief over thee;) the
Jews showed the Assyrians the way into their country, used them to come
thither, and taught them how to conquer them, and be masters over them;
or, "hast taught them against thee" (g); to thy hurt and detriment, to
be captains or governors;

for an head, to have the rule over them: this was done by Ahaz, when he
sent to Tiglathpileser king of Assyria to come and save him out of the
hands of the kings of Syria and Israel, [Kg2
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#007) and by Hezekiah, when he showed
the messengers of the king of Babylon all his treasures; these were
invitations and temptations to come and plunder them:

shall not sorrows take thee as a woman in travail? denoting the
suddenness of their calamities; the sharpness and severity of them; and
that they would be inevitable, and could not be prevented.

\(f\) "quando visitabit super te"; Cocceius; "quum visitaverit super
te", Schmidt. (g) "docuisti istos contra te", Piscator.

[Jeremiah 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jer 13:22</span></span>

And if thou say in thine heart,.... Not daring to express it with the
mouth; and which, notwithstanding, God, that knows the heart, was privy
to, and could discern all the secret workings of it; putting such a
question as this:

wherefore come these things upon me? all these calamities, the invasion
and siege of the enemy, famine, sword, captivity, &c.: the answer
returned is,

for the greatness of thine iniquity; the enormous crimes the Jews were
guilty of, such as idolatry, blasphemy, &c. which were attended with
aggravated circumstances: or, "for the multitude of thine iniquity" (h);
their sins being so many, as well as great:

are thy skirts discovered, and thy heels made bare; being obliged to
walk naked and barefoot, their buttocks uncovered, and their legs and
feet naked, without stockings or shoes, as captives used to be led, to
their great shame and disgrace; see [Isa
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#002). The phrases are expressive of
captivity, and the manner of it; the cause of which was the greatness
and multitude of their sins. The Targum is,

"because thy sins are multiplied, thy confusion is revealed, thy shame
is seen.''

\(h\) "propter multitudinem iniquitatis tuae", Pagninus, Montanus,
Vatablus, Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jer 13:23</span></span>

Can the Ethiopian change his skin?.... Or, "the Cushite"; either, as the
Arabic version, the "Abyssine", the inhabitant of the eastern Ethiopia;
properly an Ethiopian, as the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions
render it; or, the "Chusean Arabian"; the inhabitant of Arabia Chusea,
which was nearer Judea than the other Ethiopia, and better known, and
which were of a dark complexion. The Targum renders it, the Indian; and
so does the Syriac version. In the Misna (i) mention is made of Indian
garments, with which the high priest was clothed on the day of
atonement; upon which the gloss (k) is, that they were of linen of the
country of India; and which is the land of Cush (or Ethiopia), as
Jonathan Ben Uzziel interprets [Jer
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023).

"can the Cushite, the Indian, change his skin?''

and it is highly probable, that, in the time of Jeremiah, no other India
was known by the Jews but Ethiopia, or Arabia Chusea, and no other black
people but the inhabitants thereof, or any other than the Arabians; and,
as Braunius (l) observes, it need not be wondered at, that with the
Jews, in those times, Ethiopia and India should be reckoned the same
country; when with the ancients, whatever was beyond the Mediterranean
sea, as Arabia, Ethiopia, and even Judea itself, was called India; so
Joppa, a city of Phoenicia, from whence Andromeda was fetched by
Perseus, is by Ovid (m) said to be in India; so Bochart (n) interprets
the words of the Saracens or Arabians, who are of a swarthy colour, and
some black; and indeed have their name from the same word the raven has,
which is black; and particularly the inhabitants of Kedar were black,
one part of Arabia, to which the allusion is in [Sol
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005). Jarchi interprets the word here
by "the moor", the blackamoor, whose skin is naturally black, and cannot
be changed by himself or others; hence to wash the blackamoor white is a
proverbial expression for labour in vain, or attempting to do that which
is not to be done:

or the leopard his spots? a creature full of spots, and whose spots are
natural to it; and therefore cannot be removed by any means. Some think
a creature called "the ounce", or "cat-a-mountain" is meant, whose spots
are many, and of a blackish colour; but the description well agrees with
the leopard, which is a creature full of spots, and has its name in the
eastern languages, particularly the Chaldee and Arabic, from a word (o)
which signifies "spotted", "variegated", as this creature is; so the
female is called "varia" by Pliny (p), because, of its various spots;
and these spots are black, as the Arabic writers in Bochart (q). The
word here used signifies such marks as are made in a body beat and
bruised, which we call black and blue; hence some render it "livid", or
black and blue spots (r); and these marks are in the skin and hair of
this creature, and are natural to it, and cannot be changed; and it is
usual with other writers (s) to call them spots, as well as the
Scripture:

then may ye also do good, that are accustomed to do evil; signifying
that they were naturally sinners, as blackness is natural to the
Ethiopian, and spots to the leopard; and were from their birth and
infancy such, and had been so long habituated to sin, by custom founded
upon nature, that there was no hope of them; they were obstinate in sin,
bent upon it, and incorrigible in it; and this is another reason given
why the above calamities came upon them. The metaphors used in this text
fitly express the state and condition of men by nature; they are like
the Ethiopian or blackamoor; very black, both with original and actual
sin; very guilty, and very uncomely; and their blackness is natural to
them; they have it from their parents, and by birth; it is with them
from their infancy, and youth upwards; and very hard and difficult to be
removed; it cannot be washed off by ceremonial ablutions, moral duties,
evangelical ordinances, or outward humiliations; yea, it is impossible
to be removed but by the grace of God and blood of Christ. Their sins
are aptly compared to the leopard's spots, which are many and natural,
and difficult to get clear off. What is figuratively expressed in the
above metaphors is more plainly signified by being "accustomed" or
"taught to do evil" (t); which denotes a series and course of sinning; a
settled habit and custom in it, founded on nature, and arising from it;
which a man learns and acquires naturally, and of himself, whereby he
becomes void of fear and shame; and there is a good deal of difficulty,
and indeed a moral impossibility, that such persons should "do good":
nothing short of the powerful and efficacious grace of God can put a man
into a state and capacity of doing good aright, from right principles to
right ends, and of continuing in it; for there is no good in such men;
nor have they any true notion of doing good, nor inclination to it, nor
any ability to perform it: in order to it, it is absolutely necessary
that they should first be made good men by the grace of God; that they
should be regenerated and quickened by the Spirit of God; that they
should be created in Christ Jesus unto good works, and have faith in
him; all which is by the grace of God, and not of themselves.

\(i\) Yoma, c. 3. sect 7. (k) In T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 34. 2. (l) De
Vestitu Sacerdot. Heb. l. 1. c. 7. sect. 9. p. 150, 151. (m) "Andromedam
Perseus nigris portarat ab Indis". De Arte Atnandi, l. 1. (n) Phaleg. l.
4. c. 2. col. 215, 216. (o) Vid. Golium, col. 2459, 2460. Castel. col.
2321, 2322. (p) Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 17. (q) Hierozoic. par 1. l. 3. c.
7. col. 786, 787. (r) "liventee maculas suas", Junius & Tremellius. (s)
Vid. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 19. Juvenal. Satyr. 15. (t) "docti
malefacere", Montanus; "edocti malefacere", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; "qui edocti estis malum", Schmidt.

[Jeremiah 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jer 13:24</span></span>

Therefore will I scatter them as the stubble that passeth away,....
Because of their many sins, and continuance in them, their habits and
custom of sinning, they are threatened with being carried captive into
other nations, where they should be dispersed and separated one from
another, which would make their state and condition very uncomfortable;
and this would be as easily and as swiftly done as the light stubble
which is blown away by every puff of wind; nor would they be able any
more to resist the enemy, and help themselves, than the stubble is to
stand before the wind; as follows:

by the wind of the wilderness; which blows freely and strongly; so the
Chaldean army is compared to a dry wind of the high places in the
wilderness, even a full wind that should scatter and destroy, [Jer
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#011); or, "to the wind of the
wilderness" (u); and so may denote the wilderness of the people, or the
land of Babylon, whither they should be carried captive, and from whence
the wind should come that should bring them thither. Kimchi and Ben
Melech make mention sea wilderness between Jerusalem and Babylon, as
what may be intended.

\(u\) "ad ventum deserti", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius.

[Jeremiah 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jer 13:25</span></span>

This is thy lot,.... Meaning not the king's, or the queen's only, but
the lot of the whole Jewish state:

the portion of thy measures from me, saith the Lord; which were divided
and distributed, and measured out to them by the Lord, who appointed
these calamities to befall them, and brought them upon them, and that in
righteous judgment. The Targum is,

"and the portion of thine inheritance;''

who, instead of having the land of Canaan for their inheritance, to
which the allusion is, and of which they boasted, the land of Babylon
was assigned them, not to be possessors of it, but captives in it; and
instead of having God to be their portion and inheritance, they were
banished from him, and this was but righteous measure; they had measure
for measure:

because thou hast forgotten me; their Maker and Benefactor; the goodness
he had shown them, the mercies and benefits he had bestowed upon them;
or, "my law", as the Arabic version; or, "my worship", as the Targum;
therefore he forgot them, took no notice of them, hid his face from
them, and gave them up into the hands of their enemies:

and trusted in falsehood; either in the Egyptians and Assyrians, who
deceived them; or in their idols, which were falsehood and lying
vanities, and could not help them.

[Jeremiah 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jer 13:26</span></span>

Therefore will I discover thy skirts upon thy face,.... Turn them up, or
throw them over the head or face; that is, expose to public shame and
disgrace; which was done when their city and temple were burnt, and they
were carried captive; hence it follows:

that thy shame may appear; that their sins might appear to themselves
and others, of which they had reason to be ashamed. The allusion is to
the treatment which captive women sometimes meet with, or adulterous
women, to which the Jews are here compared. The Targum is,

"and I also will reveal the confusion of thy sin upon thy face, and thy
shame shall be seen.''

[Jeremiah 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jer 13:27</span></span>

I have seen thine adulteries,.... Not literally such, though they were
greatly guilty of that sin; but figuratively, their idolatries:

thy neighings; expressive of their strong desires after other gods, like
that of adulterers and adulteresses after one another; and both which
are like the neighing of horses. Kimchi thinks this designs their
rejoicing in their evil works:

the lewdness of thy whoredom; their sinful thoughts, and wicked desires,
which were continually after their idols and idolatrous practices:

and thine abominations on the hills in the fields; their idols, which
were abominable to God, and ought to have been so to them; and which
they placed on high hills, and there worshipped them; all which were
seen and known by the Lord, nor could it be denied by them; and this was
the reason of their being carried captive, and therefore could not
complain they had been hardly dealt with; yea, notwithstanding all this,
the Lord expresses a tender and compassionate concern for them:

woe unto thee, O Jerusalem! sad will be thy case, dreadful are the
calamities coming upon thee, unless thou repentest:

wilt thou not be made clean? wilt thou show no concern, land make use of
no means to be cleansed, nor seek for it, where it is to be had? neither
repent of sin, nor reform from it, nor seek to God for his grace,
signified by clean water; or to the blood of Christ, the fountain
opened, which cleanses from it:

when shall it once be? some instances there were of it in the times of
Christ and his apostles; but it will not be completely done until they
seek the Lord, and his Christ, and fear him, and his goodness, in the
latter day; when they shall turn unto him, and all Israel shall be
saved; or, "thou wilt not be cleansed after a long time" (w); this the
Lord foresaw, and therefore pronounces her case sad and miserable.

\(w\) "non mundaberis quousque adhuc, vel post quantum adhuc tempus",
Schmidt; "non mundaberis posthac aliquamdiu"; so some in Vatablus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jeremiah Chapter 14](jer014)

</div>
