<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](pe2003)  [Next](jo1001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

[1 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo1 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 JOHN

The author of this epistle was John, the son of Zebedee, the disciple
whom Jesus loved: he was the youngest of the apostles, and survived them
all. He does not indeed put his name to this epistle, as the Apostles
Paul, Peter, James, and Jude do to theirs; and it is easy to observe,
that when this disciple, in his writings, had any occasion to speak of
himself, it was usually by such a circumlocution, as the disciple whom
Jesus loved, or the other disciple, studiously concealing his name: so
that his not putting his name to this epistle need not create any
scruple about his being the author of it, which everywhere breathes the
temper and spirit of this great apostle; and whoever compares this
epistle, and the Gospel written by him, together, will easily conclude
it to be his, both from the style and subject matter of it: besides, as
Eusebius asserts (a), this epistle was generally received without
scruple, both by ancient and modern writers. It is called "general",
because it was not written and sent to any particular church, or person,
and not because it was for the general use of the churches, for so are
all the particular epistles but because it was written to the Christians
in general, or to the believing Jews in general wherever they were; for
that it was written to the Jews seems evident from [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002.md). It was called, by some of the
ancients, the epistle of John to the Parthians (b); by whom must be
meant not the natives of Parthia but the Jews professing to believe in
Christ, who dwelt in that empire. We read of Parthian Jews a the feast
of Pentecost, [Act 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#009.md), who at that
time might be converted, and, upon their return to their own country,
lay the foundation of a Gospel church state there Dr. Lightfoot (c)
conjectures from a passage in [Jo3 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo3001.htm#009.md)
that this epistle was written to the Corinthians; but there does not
seem to be any sufficient reason for it. As for the time when, and place
where, this epistle was written, it is not easy to say: some think it
was written at Patmos, whither the apostle was banished in the reign of
Domitian, and where he wrote the book of the Revelations; see [Rev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009.md); and here some say he wrote his
Gospel, and this epistle, and that a little before the destruction of
Jerusalem, and which he calls the last time or hour; and that his design
in writing it was to exhort the believing Jews, either in Parthia, or
scattered about in other countries, to brotherly love, and to warn them
against false Christs and false prophets, which were now gone forth into
the world to deceive men; see [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018.md). Others think that it was written
by him, when a very old man, after his return from his exile to Ephesus,
where he resided during his life, and where he died, and was buried. It
is called his "first" epistle general, not that it is the first general
epistle, for the other two are written to particular persons, but is the
first he wrote, and which is general: the occasion, and manifest design
of it, is to promote brotherly love, which he enforces upon the best
principles, and with the strongest arguments, taken from the love of God
and Christ, from the commandment of Christ, and its being an evidence of
regeneration, and the truth and glory of a profession of religion: and
also to oppose and stop the growth of licentious principles, and
practices, and heretical doctrines. The licentious principles and
practices he condemns are these, that believers had no sin in them, or
need not be concerned about it, nor about their outward conversation, so
be they had but knowledge; and these men boasted of their communion with
God, notwithstanding their impieties; and which were the sentiments and
practices of the Nicolaitans, Gnostics, and Carpocratians. The heresies
he sets himself against, and refutes, are such as regard the doctrine of
the Trinity, and the person and office of Christ. There were some who
denied a distinction, of persons in the Trinity, and asserted there was
but one person; that the Father was not distinct from the Son, nor the
Son from the Father; and, by confounding both, tacitly denied there was
either, as Simon Magus, and his followers; regard is had to these in
[Jo1 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022.md) and others, as the
unbelieving Jews, denied that Jesus was the Messiah, or that Christ was
come in the flesh; these are taken notice of in [Jo1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#022.md). Others, that professed to
believe in Jesus Christ, denied his proper deity, and asserted he was a
mere man, and did not exist before he took flesh, of the virgin, as
Ebion and Cerinthus; these are opposed in [Jo1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md). And others denied his real
humanity, and affirmed that he was a mere phantom; that he only had the
appearance of a man, and assumed human nature, and suffered, and died,
and rose again in show only, and not in reality; of which sort were the
followers of Saturninus and Basilides, and which are confuted in [Jo1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md). This epistle is, by Clemens
Alexandrinus (d), called his "greater" or "larger epistle", it being so
in comparison of the other two that follow.

\(a\) Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 24. (b) Augustin. apud Grotium. (c) Hor.
Hebr. in 1 Cor. i. 14. (d) Stromat. l. 2. p. 389.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 1](jo1001.md)

</div>
