<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](jo1000)  [Next](jo1002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

INTRODUCTION TO 1 JOHN 1

In this chapter the apostle gives a summary of the Gospel, and the
evidence of it, and from thence presses to a holy life and conversation,
The sum of the Gospel is Jesus Christ, who is described both as God and
man; his deity is expressed by being that which was from the beginning,
the Word of life, life, and eternal life; his humanity by being the life
manifested in the flesh, of which the apostles had full evidence by the
several senses of seeing, hearing, and handling, and so were capable of
bearing witness to the truth thereof, [Jo1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md). And the ends had in view in
giving this summary, evidence, and testimony, were, that the saints
wrote unto might have fellowship with the apostles, whose fellowship was
with the Father, and his Son Jesus Christ, and that their joy on hearing
these things might be full, [Jo1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003.md).
And the amount of the message declared by them was, that God is light,
or a pure and holy Being, and that there is no darkness of sin, or
unholiness in him; wherefore all such that pretend to communion with
him, and live a sinful course of life, are liars; only such have
fellowship with him, and with his Son, whose blood cleanses them from
all sin, who live holy lives and conversations, [Jo1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005.md), not, that it is to be expected
that men should be clear of the being of sin in this life, only that
they should, as often as they sin, be humbled for it, and confess it
before God, who will forgive them, and cleanse them from all
unrighteousness; but as for those who affirm they have no sin in them,
or any done by them, they are self-deceivers, the truth of grace is not
in them, nor the word of God, and they make him a liar, [Jo1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008.md).

[1 John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 1:1</span></span>

That which was from the beginning,.... By which is meant not the Gospel,
as if the apostle's design was to assert the antiquity of that, and
clear it from the charge of novelty; for though that is called the word,
and the word of life, and is the Spirit which gives life, and is the
means of quickening dead sinners, and brings the report of eternal life
and salvation by Christ, yet the seeing of it with bodily eyes, and
handling it with corporeal hands, do not agree with that; but Jesus
Christ is here intended, who in his divine nature was, really existed as
a divine person, as the everlasting Jehovah, the eternal I AM, which is,
and was, and is to come, and existed "from the beginning"; not from the
beginning of the preaching of the Gospel by John only, for he was before
the Gospel was preached, being the first preacher of it himself, and
before John was; yea, before the prophets, before Abraham, and before
Adam, and before all creatures, from the beginning of time, and of the
creation of the world, being the Maker of all things, even from
everlasting; for otherwise he could not have been set up in an office
capacity so early, or God's elect be chosen in him before the foundation
of the world, and they have grace and blessings given them in him before
the world began, or an everlasting covenant be made with him; see [Joh
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md);

which we have heard; this, with what follows, proves him to be truly and
really man; for when the Word was made flesh, and dwelt among men, the
apostles heard, and saw, and handled him; they not only heard a voice
from heaven, declaring him to be the Son of God, but they often heard
him speak himself, both in private conversation with them, and in his
public ministry; they heard his many excellent discourses on the mount,
and elsewhere, and those that were particularly delivered to them a
little before his death; and blessed were they on this account, [Mat
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016.md);

which we have seen with our eyes: with the eyes of the body, with their
own, and not another's; and they saw him in human nature, and the common
actions of life he did, as eating, drinking, walking, &c. and his many
miracles; they saw him raise the dead, cleanse the lepers, restore sight
to the blind, cause the lame to walk, the dumb to speak, and the deaf to
hear; and they saw him transfigured on the mount. John was one that was
present at that time, and saw his glory, as he also was when he hung
upon the cross, and saw him bleeding, gasping, and dying there; they saw
him after his resurrection from the dead, he showed himself to them
alive, and was seen of them forty days; they saw him go up to heaven,
and a cloud receiving him out of their sight:

which we have looked upon; wistly and intently, once and again, and a
thousand times, and with the utmost pleasure and delight; and knew him
perfectly well, and were able to describe exactly his person, stature,
features, and the lineaments of his body:

and our hands have handled of the Word of life; as Peter did when Jesus
caught him by the hand on the water, when he was just ready to sink; and
as this apostle did, when he leaned on his bosom; and as Thomas did,
even after his resurrection, when he thrust his hand into his side; and
as all the apostles were called upon to see and handle him, that it was
he himself, and not a spirit, which has not flesh and bones as he had.
Now as this is said of Christ, the Word of life, who is so called,
because he has life in himself, as God, as the Mediator, and as man, and
is the author of life, natural, spiritual, and eternal, it must be
understood as he, the Word, is made manifest in the flesh; for he, as
the Word, or as a divine person, or as considered in his divine nature,
is not to be seen nor handled: this therefore is spoken of the Word, or
of the person of Christ, God-man, with respect to his human nature, as
united to the Logos, or Word of God; and so is a proof of the truth and
reality of his human nature, by several of the senses.

[1 John 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 1:2</span></span>

For the life was manifested,.... That is, the Word of life, who is life
itself, the fountain of life, having it as God, in and of himself,
without derivation from, and independent of another, originally and
eternally, and who is the cause, author, and giver of life in every
sense to others; this living God, who from all eternity was invisible,
was in the fulness of time manifested in human nature; see [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md).

And we have seen it; as before with the eyes of their bodies:

and bear witness; for they were both eye and ear witnesses of the Word,
and of the truth of his incarnation, and bore a faithful record to his
proper deity, and real humanity:

and show unto you that eternal life; Jesus Christ, the true God, and
eternal life, as in [Jo1 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020.md); so
called, because he has everlasting life in himself; as he is the living
God, and because he has eternal life for all his people; not only the
purpose and promise of it are in him, but the thing itself; and it is in
his power and gift to bestow it on all the Father hath given to him, and
to them he does give it. The beginning of it lies in the knowledge of
him, and the consummation of it will be in the lasting vision and
enjoyment of him:

which was with the Father; that is, which life, eternal life, and Word
of life, was from the beginning, or from all eternity with God the
Father; which phrase is expressive of the eternal existence of Christ,
as the Word and Son of God, with his Father, his relation to him, his
oneness in nature, and equality with him, and his personal distinction
from him; see [Joh 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md);

and was manifested unto us; in human nature, as before observed, and
that to the apostles, as he was not to the patriarchs and prophets; for
though they saw him in promise, in prophecy, in type, and figure, and he
sometimes appeared in an human form for a short time to them, yet they
did not see him incarnate, in actual union with human nature; nor had
they him dwelling among them, and conversing with them, as the apostles
had; this was an happiness peculiar to them.

[1 John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 1:3</span></span>

That which we have seen and heard,.... This is repeated, both to confirm
and illustrate what had been before said, and to carry on the discourse
to what follows:

declare we unto you; in the ministry of the word; the person and offices
of Christ being the sum and substance of the Gospel ministration, that
declares him to be the true God and eternal life, God over all, blessed
for ever; and truly man, made of a woman, and made under the law; and to
be the only Mediator between God and man, to be prophet, priest; and
King, and to be the alone Saviour and Redeemer: this declares the
greatness and excellency of his salvation, what an able, proper, and
suitable Saviour he is; and what precious promises and spiritual
blessings are in him, even all grace and eternal glory. And this
declaration of him is made in the Gospel, for the following ends and
purposes,

that ye also may have fellowship with us; in hearing, seeing, and
handling of Christ in a spiritual sense; and by enjoying the same
privileges in God's house and family, the same ordinances and spiritual
provisions; joining and partaking with them in all the immunities and
advantages of a Gospel church state here; and by being with them to all
eternity hereafter.

And truly our fellowship is with the Father; the Father of Christ, the
covenant God and Father of his people; and which they have with him,
when under the influence and witnessings of the spirit of adoption, and
can in the strength of faith call him their Father, draw nigh to him
through Christ as such, and are indulged with his presence, and the
discoveries of his love:

and with his Son Jesus Christ; being in union to him, they become
partakers of him, and of his blessings; they receive out of his fulness,
and grace for grace; they are admitted to an intimacy and familiarity
with him; they are had into his chambers of secret retirement; they are
brought into his banqueting house, where his banner over them is love,
and where he sups with them, and they with him; and into this fellowship
are they called by the grace of God, through the Gospel; as also they
have fellowship with the blessed Spirit, though not here mentioned; see
[Co2 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014.md).

[1 John 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 1:4</span></span>

And these things write we unto you,.... Concerning the deity and
eternity of Christ, the Word and concerning the truth of his humanity,
and the manifestation of him in the flesh; and concerning that eternal
life and salvation which is declared in the Gospel to be in him; and
concerning the saints' fellowship one with another, and with God the
Father, and with Jesus Christ:

that your joy may be full; meaning either their spiritual joy in this
life, which has Christ for its object, and is increased by the
consideration of his proper deity, his incarnation and mediation by a
view of free justification by his righteousness, and atonement by his
blood; by a sight of his glorious person by faith, and by intimate
communion with him, and a discovery of his love, which passeth
knowledge: and which joy, when it is large, and very great, may, in a
comparative sense, be said to be full, though not absolutely so, and
being as much as can well be enjoyed in this state; and nothing can more
contribute to it than a declaration of the above things in the Gospel,
and an experimental acquaintance with them, and enjoyment of them: or
else it may intend the joy of the saints in the world to come, in the
presence of Christ, where are fulness of joy, and pleasures for
evermore; and so may express the ultimate glory and happiness of God's
people, which is the chief end, as of his purposes, promises, and
covenant, so of the Gospel, and the declaration of it. The Syriac
version renders it, "that our joy, which is in you, may be full"; it is
the joy of the ministers of the word, when the saints are established in
the faith of Christ's person and offices, and have communion with him,
with which view they declare him, and bear record of him. Some copies
read, our joy.

[1 John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 1:5</span></span>

This then is the message,.... Of God by his Son the Word, or from Christ
by his apostles. The Syriac version renders it, "this is the Gospel";
which is good news from a far country, a message sent from the King of
kings to sinful men: or this is the annunciation, or declaration; that
is, the thing declared, or showed. Some render it, "this is the
promise", that whereas God is light, such who walk in the light shall
have communion with him, and others shall not:

which we have heard of him; of Christ, who has declared him, that he is
light without any mixture of darkness; that is a pure Spirit, and must
be worshipped in a spiritual way; and that only spiritual worshippers
are such as he seeks, and admits to communion with him. Moreover, they
might hear and learn this of Christ, by his telling them that he himself
was light, who is the image of the invisible God, insomuch, that he that
has seen the Son, has seen the Father also. Wherefore, if the one is
light, the other must be likewise; nor is there any coming to the
Father, and enjoying communion with him, but through Christ; all which
our Lord told his disciples. The Ethiopic version reads, "which ye have
heard", very wrongly; for the words regard the apostles, who made a
faithful declaration of the message they heard, and had from Christ,
which is as follows:

and declare unto you that God is light; that is, God the Father, as
distinguished from "him", Christ, of whom they had heard this message,
and from Jesus Christ his Son, [Jo1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007.md), what is declared of him,
agreeably to the report of Christ, is, that he is "light"; that is, as
light is opposed to the darkness of sin; he is pure and holy in his
nature and works, and of such pure eyes as not to behold iniquity; and
so perfectly holy, that angels cover their times before him, when they
speak of his holiness: and as light is opposed to the darkness of
ignorance, he is wise and knowing; he knows himself, his own nature,
being, and perfections, his Son and Spirit, and their distinct modes of
subsisting; he sees clearly all things in himself, all things he could
do, or has determined shall be done; he has perfect knowledge of all
creatures and things, and the darkness and the light are alike unto him,
nor can the former hide from him: he is knowable, and to be discerned;
he is clothed with light, and dwells in it; he may be known by the works
of creation and providence; even the invisible things of him, his
eternal power and Godhead, may be clearly seen and understood by them,
and especially in his word, and most clearly in his Son; it is owing to
the darkness of men, and not to any in and about God, who is light, that
he is so little known as he is: and, like the light, he illuminates
others; he is the Father of lights, the author and giver of all light;
of the light of reason to men in general; and of grace here, and glory
hereafter, to his own people, which are both signified by light; in
whose light they see light; and he refreshes and delights their souls
with the light of his countenance now, and with his glorious presence in
the other world:

and in him is no darkness at all; no darkness of sin; nothing is more
contrary to him, or more distant from him: nor any darkness of error and
ignorance; what is unknown to men, as the times and seasons; what angels
were ignorant of, and even Christ, as man, as the day and hour of
Jerusalem's destruction, were known to the Father; in him is no
ignorance of anything whatever; nor is there any variableness or shadow
of turning in him, as there is in the luminous body of the sun; but God
is always the same pure and holy, wise and knowing Being. It is usual
with the Cabalistic Jews (e), to call the supreme Being light the most
simple light, hidden light, and infinite light, with respect to his
nature, glory, and majesty, and with regard also to his grace and mercy,
justice and judgment; though, as R. Sangart says (f), this is to be
understood of him figuratively.

\(e\) Lex. Cabalist, p. 63, 64. (f) Sepher Cosri, par. 2. sect. 2. fol.
61. 2.

[1 John 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 1:6</span></span>

If we say that we have fellowship with him,.... The Alexandrian copy
reads, "for if we say": that is, if any profess to be partakers of the
divine nature, to be like unto God, and to have communion with him, to
have the light of his countenance, and the discoveries of his love:

and walk in darkness; in the darkness of sin, ignorance, and unbelief,
or are in a state of unregeneracy and blindness; whose understandings
are darkened, and they know not God in Christ, nor have any true sight
and sense of themselves, their sin and danger; and are ignorant of
Christ and his righteousness, and the way of salvation by him; and are
strangers to the Spirit of God, and the work of his grace; and are
unacquainted with the truths of the Gospel; and not only so, but go on
in darkness more and more; prefer it to the light, love it, and the
works of it; have fellowship with them, and choose them; take pleasure
in the ways of sin and wickedness, and continue, and walk on in them; if
such persons pretend to fellowship with God, they are liars:

we lie; it cannot be, it is a contradiction, the thing is impossible and
impracticable; what communion hath light with darkness? or what
fellowship can the throne of iniquity, or those in whom sin reigns, have
with God? for God is light, and were they partakers of him, or like unto
him, or had communion with him, they would consequently be in the light,
and not in darkness, and much less walk in it; wherefore they are liars,

and do not the truth: they do not say the truth, nor act according to
it; they do not act uprightly or sincerely, but are hypocrites, and
pretend to that which they have not; and if they did the truth, they
would come to the light, and not walk in darkness; see [Joh
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#021.md).

[1 John 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 1:7</span></span>

But if we walk in the light,.... Are persons enlightened by the Spirit
of God, so as to have a true sight and sense of sin, to know Christ, and
the way of salvation by him; and are children of the light, and are
going on and increasing in spiritual light and knowledge; walk on in
Christ, the light, by faith, and in the light and truth of the Gospel,
and as becomes it, and as children of light; and as such who are called
out of darkness into marvellous light:

as he is in the light; according to the light which he has given, who is
light itself, is in it, and dwells in it. This "as" denotes not
equality, but likeness: when this is the case, then it is a clear point,
that

we have fellowship one with another; not with the saints, with the
apostles, and other Christians, but with God: "we have mutual
communion", as the Arabic version renders it; God with us, and we with
him. Some copies read, "with him", as in [Jo1
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#006.md); and such a reading the sense
requires; and agreeably to this the Ethiopic version renders it, "and we
are partakers among ourselves with him"; that is, we all jointly and
mutually appear to be like him, and partake of his nature, and have
communion with him; and not only so, but with his Son Jesus Christ, as
appears from our having a share in the cleansing efficacy of his blood:

and the blood of Jesus Christ, his Son, cleanseth us from all sin: there
is a pollution on human nature, which is original, natural, universal,
and internal, and is such that nothing can remove but the blood of
Christ; not ceremonial ablutions and sacrifices, nor moral duties, nor
evangelical performances, or submission to Gospel ordinances, and
particularly baptism, which is not the putting away the faith of the
flesh; nor even the graces of the Spirit, no, not faith, no otherwise
than as it has to do with this blood; for this cleansing is not to be
understood of sanctification, for that more properly belongs to the
Spirit of God, and besides, does not cleanse from all sin; for
notwithstanding this, sin is in the saints: but either of the atonement
of sin, by the sacrifice of Christ, and so of a complete justification
from it by his blood, which is put for both his active and passive
obedience, the one being finished in the other; or rather of the pardon
of sin, procured by the blood of Christ, and the application of that
blood to the conscience, which purges it from dead works, and which has
a continued virtue in it for that purpose. Christ's blood, being applied
by the Spirit of God, has been always cleansing from sin; it had this
virtue in it, and was of this use, even before it was actually shed, to
the Old Testament saints; whence Christ is said to be the Lamb slain
from the foundation of the world; and it has the same efficacy now as
when first shed, and will have to the end of the world; and being
sprinkled upon the conscience, by the Spirit of God, it takes away the
sins of believers, and cleanses from them, as fast as the corruption of
nature rises, or sins appear; and removes them out of their sight, and
speaks peace to their souls; and which is owing, as to the dignity of
Christ's person and the value of his sacrifice, so to his continual
intercession, advocacy, and mediation; and which reaches to all sin,
original and actual, secret and open sins; sins of heart, thought, lip,
and life; sins of omission and commission, greater or lesser sins,
committed against light and knowledge, grace and mercy, law and Gospel,
all but the sin against the Holy Ghost; and in this Christ was the
antitype of the scape goat, of which the Jews say (g), that

"it atoned for all the transgressions of the law, whether small or
great, sins of presumption, or of ignorance, known, or not known, which
were against an affirmative or negative command, which deserved cutting
off (by the hand of God), or death by the sanhedrim.''

The Arabic and Ethiopic versions render it, "from all our sins"; and
this must be ascribed to the greatness of his person, as the Son of God;
wherefore the emphasis lies on these words, "his Son": the Son of God,
who is equal with God, and is truly and properly God: as it must be the
blood of man that must, according to the law, be shed, to atone for and
expiate sin, and cleanse from it, and that of an innocent man, who is
holy, harmless, and without sin; so it must not be the blood of a mere
man, though ever so holy, but the blood of one that is God as well as
man; see [Act 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#028.md). The divine nature
of the Son of God, being in union with the human nature, put virtue into
his blood to produce such an effect, which still continues, and will, as
long as there is any occlusion for it.

\(g\) Misn. Shebuot, c. 1. sect. 6.

[1 John 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 1:8</span></span>

If we say that we have no sin,.... Notwithstanding believers are
cleansed from their sins by the blood of Christ, yet they are not
without sin; no man is without sin: this is not only true of all men, as
they come into the world, being conceived in sin, and shapen in
iniquity, and of all that are in a state of unregeneracy, and of God's
elect, while in such a state, but even of all regenerated and sanctified
persons in this life; as appears by the ingenuous confessions of sin
made by the saints in all ages; by their complaints concerning it, and
groans under it; by the continual war in them between flesh and spirit;
and by their prayers for the discoveries of pardoning grace, and for the
fresh application of Christ's blood for cleansing; by their remissness
in the discharge of duty, and by their frequent slips and falls, and
often backslidings: and though their sins are all pardoned, and they are
justified from all things by the righteousness of Christ, yet they are
not without sin; though they are freed from the guilt of sin, and are
under no obligation to punishment on account of it, yet not from the
being of it; their sins were indeed transferred from them to Christ, and
he has bore them, and took them and put them away, and they are redeemed
from them, and are acquitted, discharged, and pardoned, so that sin is
not imputed to them, and God sees no iniquity in them in the article of
justification; and also, their iniquities are caused to pass from them,
as to the guilt of them, and are taken out of their sight, and they have
no more conscience of them, having their hearts sprinkled and purged by
the blood of Jesus, and are clear of all condemnation, the curse of the
law, the wrath of God, or the second death, by reason of them; yet
pardon of sin, and justification from it, though they take away the
guilt of sin, and free from obligation to punishment, yet they do not
take out the being of sin, or cause it to cease to act, or do not make
sins cease to be sins, or change the nature of actions, of sinful ones,
to make them harmless, innocent, or indifferent; the sins of believers
are equally sins with other persons, are of the same kind and nature,
and equally transgressions of the law, and many of them are attended
with more aggravating circumstances, and are taken notice of by God, and
resented by him, and for which he chastises his people in love: now
though a believer may say that he has not this or that particular sin,
or is not guilty of this or that sin, for he has the seeds of all sin in
him, yet he cannot say he has no sin; and though he may truly say he
shall have no sin, for in the other state the being and principle of sin
will be removed, and the saints will be perfectly holy in themselves,
yet he cannot, in this present life, say that he is without it: if any
of us who profess to be cleansed from sin by the blood of Christ should
affirm this,

we deceive ourselves; such persons must be ignorant of themselves, and
put a cheat upon themselves, thinking themselves to be something when
they are nothing; flattering themselves what pure and holy creatures
they are, when there is a fountain of sin and wickedness in them; these
are self-deceptions, sad delusions, and gross impositions upon
themselves:

and the truth is not in us; it is a plain case the truth of grace is not
in such persons, for if there was a real work of God upon their souls,
they would know and discern the plague of their own hearts, the impurity
of their nature, and the imperfection of their obedience; nor is the
word of truth in them, for if that had an entrance into them, and worked
effectually in them, they would in the light of it discover much sin and
iniquity in them; and indeed there is no principle of truth, no veracity
in them; there is no sincerity nor ingenuity in them; they do not speak
honestly and uprightly, but contrary to the dictates of their own
conscience.

[1 John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 1:9</span></span>

If we confess our sins,.... Not to one other; for though it is our duty
to confess our faults to our fellow creatures and fellow Christians
which are committed against them, yet are under no obligation to confess
such as are more immediately against God, and which lie between him and
ourselves; or at least it is sufficient to confess and acknowledge in
general what sinful creatures we are, without entering into particulars;
for confession of sin is to be made to God, against whom it is
committed, and who only can pardon: and a man that truly confesses his
sin is one that the Spirit of God has convinced of it, and has shown him
its exceeding sinfulness, and filled him with a godly sorrow for it, and
given him repentance unto salvation, that needeth not to be repented of;
and who, under such a sight and sense of sin, and concern for it, comes
and acknowledges it before the Lord, humbly imploring, for Christ's
sake, his pardoning grace and mercy; and such obtain it:

he is faithful and just to forgive us our sins: forgiveness of sin here
intends not the act of forgiveness, as in God, proceeding upon the
bloodshed and sacrifice of Christ, which is done at once, and includes
all sin, past, present, and to come; but an application of pardoning
grace to a poor sensible sinner, humbled under a sense of sin, and
confessing it before the Lord; and confession of sin is not the cause or
condition of pardon, nor of the manifestation of it, but is descriptive
of the person, and points him out, to whom God will and does make known
his forgiving love; for to whomsoever he grants repentance, he gives the
remission of sin; in doing of which he is faithful to his word of
promise; such as in [Pro 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013.md); "and
just"; in being "true", as the Arabic version adds, to his word; and
showing a proper regard to the blood and sacrifice of his Son; for his
blood being shed, and hereby satisfaction made to the law and justice of
God, it is a righteous thing in him to justify from sin, and forgive the
sinner for whom Christ has shed his blood, and not impute it to him, or
punish him for it; though the word here used may answer to the Hebrew
word which sometimes carries in it the notion and idea of mercy and
beneficence; hence mercy to the poor is sometimes expressed by
righteousness; and the righteous acts of God intend his mercies and
benefits unto men; see [Dan 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#027.md); and
so forgiveness of sin springs from the tender mercies of our God, and is
both an act of justice and of mercy; of justice, with respect to the
blood of Christ, and of pure grace and mercy to the pardoned sinner: the
following clause,

and to cleanse us, from all unrighteousness, is but the same thing
expressed in different words; for all unrighteousness is sin, and to
cleanse from sin is to remove the guilt of it, by an application of the
blood of Christ for pardon. The antecedent to the relative "he" in the
text, is either God, who is light, and with whom the saints have
fellowship; or his Son Jesus Christ, who is the nearest antecedent, and
who, being truly God, has a power to forgive sin.

[1 John 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 1:10</span></span>

If we say that we have not sinned,.... Have never sinned, in time past
as well as now; deny original sin, and that men are born in sin, but
affirm they come into the world pure and holy; and assert that
concupiscence is not sin; and so not regarding internal lusts and
desires as sinful, only what is external, fancy they have so lived as to
have been without sin: but if any of us give out such an assertion,

we make him a liar: that is, God, who in his word declares that the
wicked are estranged from the womb, and go astray as soon as they be
born, speaking lies; that his own people are transgressors from the
womb; that all have sinned and come short of his glory; and that there
is none that does good, no, not one, but all are under sin, under the
power and guilt of it, and become filthy by it, and so obnoxious to the
wrath of God:

and his word is not in us; either Christ the Word of God, or rather the
word of God which declares these things; no regard is had unto it; it
"is not with us", as the Syriac and Ethiopic versions render it; it is
not used and attended to as the rule and standard of truth, but is east
away and despised; at least it has no place in the hearts of such, nor
does it work effectually; for, was this the case, they would have other
notions of themselves than that of sinless creatures. The apostle has
regard either to the Gnostics, a set of heretics of this age, who
fancied themselves pure, spiritual, and perfect, even in the midst of
all their impurities, and notwithstanding their vicious lives; or to
judaizing Christians, and it may be to the Jews themselves, who
entertained such sort of notions as these of being perfect and without
sin (h).

\(h\) Vid. T. Bab. Temura, fol. 15. 2. & Bava Kama, fol. 80. 1. T.
Hieros. Sota, fol. 24. 1. &. Chagiga, fol. 77. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 2](jo1002.md)

</div>
