<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 John Index](jo1.md)  
  [Previous](jo1003)  [Next](jo1005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 John Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001.md)

[1 John](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jo1 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 JOHN 4

In this chapter the apostle cautions against seducing spirits; advises
to try them, and gives rules by which they may be known, and by which
they are distinguished from others; and then returns to his favourite
subject, brotherly love. He exhorts the saints not to believe every man
that came with a doctrine to them, but to try them, since there were
many false teachers in the world; and gives a rule by which they may be
tried and judged, as that whatever teacher owns Christ to be come in the
flesh is of God, but he that does not is not of God, but is the spirit
of antichrist that should come, and was in the world, [Jo1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001.md), but, for the comfort of those to
whom he writes, he observes, that they were of God, and had overcome
these false teachers, through the mighty power of the divine Spirit in
them, who is greater than Satan, and all his emissaries, [Jo1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004.md). He distinguishes between seducing
spirits, and faithful ministers of the word; the former are of the
world, speak of worldly things, and worldly men hear them; but the
latter are of God, and they that have any spiritual knowledge of God
hear them; but such as are not of God do not heal them, by which may he
known the spirit of truth from the spirit of error, [Jo1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#005.md). And then the apostle returns to
his former exhortation to brotherly love, which he enforces by the
following reasons, because it is of God, a fruit of his Spirit and
grace, and because it is an evidence of being born of God, and of having
a true knowledge of him; whereas he that is destitute of it does not
know him, seeing God is love, [Jo1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007.md), and having affirmed that God is
love, he proves it, by the mission of his Son, to be a propitiation for
the sins of such that did not love him, and that they might live through
him; wherefore he argues, that if God had such a love to men, so
undeserving of it, then the saints ought to love one another, [Jo1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#009.md). Other arguments follow, engaging
to it, as that God is invisible; and if he is to be loved, then
certainly his people, who are visible; and that such who love one
another, God dwells in them, and his love is perfected in them; and that
he dwells in them is known by the gift of his Spirit to them, [Jo1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012.md), and that God the Father so loved
the world, as to send his Son to be the Saviour of it, before asserted,
is confirmed by the apostles, who were eyewitnesses of it; who also
declare, that whoever confesses the sonship of Christ, God dwells in
him, and he in God; and who had an assurance of the love of God to them,
who is love itself; so that he that dwells in God, and God in him,
dwells in love, [Jo1 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#014.md). And great
are the advantages arising from hence, for hereby the saints' love to
God is made perfect; they have boldness in the day of judgment, since as
he is, so are they in this world, and fear is cast out by it, [Jo1
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#017.md), but lest too much should be
thought to be ascribed to love, that is said to be owing to the love of
God to them, which is prior to theirs to him, and the reason of it, [Jo1
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#019.md). And the chapter is closed with
observing the contradiction there is between a profession of love to
God, and hatred of the brethren, seeing God, who is invisible, cannot be
loved, if brethren that are seen are hated; and also the commandment,
that he that loves God should love his brother also, [Jo1
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020.md).

[1 John 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jo1 4:1</span></span>

Beloved, believe not every spirit,.... The apostle having mentioned the
word "spirit" in the latter part of the preceding chapter, takes an
occasion from thence to return to what he had been suggesting in the
"second" chapter, concerning the many antichrists that then were, and
whom he points out, and here cautions against. By "every spirit" he
means, either every doctrine that is pretended to come from the Spirit
of God, or every teacher, who professes to be qualified and sent by him,
and to have his light, knowledge, and doctrine from him. Every true
minister of the Gospel has the Spirit, and the gifts of the Spirit, more
or less, to qualify him for his work; he is separated, and called to it
by him, and receives his spiritual light find knowledge from him; it is
he that teaches him sound doctrine, and leads him into all truth, as it
is in Jesus, and brings every necessary truth to his remembrance; and
who succeeds his ministrations to the good of souls: but there are some
who call themselves the ministers of the Gospel, who, though they may
have some natural abilities, and a share of human learning, and a
notional knowledge of things, yet have never received either grace or
gifts from the Spirit; nor have they been ever called by him; nor are
their ministrations according to that divine word which is inspired by
him, nor attended with his demonstration and power; wherefore, though
some professing to have the Spirit of Christ are to be believed, yet not
everyone; and though the Spirit is not to be quenched in any, nor
prophesying to be despised, yet care should be taken what is heard and
received: some persons are so obstinate and incredulous as not to
believe anything that is declared, be the evidence what it will; as the
Jews would not believe Christ and his apostles, though what they said
agreed with Moses and the prophets, and was confirmed by miracles; and
others are too credulous; at once receive every teacher, and embrace
every upstart doctrine: this they should not do,

but try the spirits whether they are of God; not by human reason,
especially as carnal and unsanctified; for though the doctrines of the
Gospel are not contrary to true reason, they are above it, and not to be
judged of by it, and are disapproved of and rejected by carnal reason;
but by the word of God, which is the standard of all doctrine; and
whatever agrees with that is to be received, and what does not should be
rejected. And so to do is very commendable, as appears from the instance
of the Beraeans, who on this account are said to be more noble than
those of Thessalonica, [Act 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#011.md); and
from the commendation of the church at Ephesus, [Rev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#002.md). And this is what every believer,
every private Christian should do; to them it belongs to read and search
the Scriptures, and prove all things, and judge for themselves of the
truth of doctrine; and to such a probation or trial of the spirits,
spiritual light, knowledge, judgment, sense, experience, and divine
guidance are necessary, which should be asked of God, and an increase
thereof; and all such diligent searchers, and humble inquirers, are
capable of making judgment of persons and doctrines, whether they are
from the Spirit of God or not, for the Spirit of God never speaks
contrary to his word: and the reason why such a trial should be made is,

because many false prophets are gone out into the world: such who
pretended either to a revelation of future things, and to foretell
things to come; or rather to a gift of prophesying, or preaching in
Christ's name, to be "prophets" and spiritual men, and ministers of the
word, but were "false" ones; who either predicted what did not come to
pass, or rather preached false doctrine, by corrupting the word, and
handling it deceitfully, and so imposed upon and ruined the souls of
others, as well as deceived their own: and there were not only one, or
two, or a few of these, but "many", as our Lord had foretold, [Mat
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011.md); and which makes the reason the
stronger for not believing every spirit, but trying them; and the
rather, since they were not sent of God, hot called out by his churches,
but were "gone out" of themselves; of their own heads, and without any
mission from God or man: and "into the world" too; they were in every
part of it, and especially where there were any churches of Christ; into
which they first crept in privily, and at unawares, but afterwards
became public preachers of the word, and then separating from them, set
up openly in the world for themselves.

[1 John 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jo1 4:2</span></span>

Hereby know ye the Spirit of God,.... This is a rule by which believers
may know whether a man professing to have the Spirit of God, and to be
called and sent by him, and whether the, doctrine he preaches, is of him
or not:

every spirit that confesseth that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh,

is of God; or of the Spirit of God; that is, every doctrine which
carries this truth in it; or every man that owns, and professes, and
publishes this doctrine concerning Christ, is on the side of God and
truth; and which contains several articles in it, respecting the person
and office of Christ; as that he existed before he came in the flesh,
not in the human nature, or as man, or as an angel, but as the Son of
God, as a divine person, being truly and properly God; so that this
confession takes in his divine sonship, and proper deity, and also his
true and real humanity; that the Messiah was incarnate, against the
Jews, and was God and man in one person; and that he was really man, and
not in appearance only, against the heretics of those times: and it also
includes his offices, as that Jesus of Nazareth was the Christ, the
Messiah, which the Jews denied, and that he was the anointed prophet,
priest, and King; and so is a confession or acknowledgment of all the
doctrines of the Gospel, which came by him, as a prophet; and of his
satisfaction, sacrifice, and intercession, as a priest; and of all his
ordinances and commands as a King; and that he is the only Saviour and
Redeemer of men. Now, whoever owns and declares this system of truth,
"is of God"; not that everyone that assents unto this, or preaches it,
is born of God; a man may believe, and confess all this, as the devils
themselves do, and yet be destitute of the grace of God; but the spirit,
or doctrine, which contains these things in it, is certainly of God, or
comes from him; or whoever brings these truths with him, and preaches
them, he is, so far as he does so, on the side of God and truth, and to
be regarded.

[1 John 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jo1 4:3</span></span>

And every spirit that confesseth not,.... The proper deity and sonship
of Christ, his true and real humanity, and his Messiahship; or any of
his offices, doctrines, and ordinances; or his satisfaction and
righteousness; or that peace, pardon, justification, life, and
salvation, are by him; all which are meant by what follows,

that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh: this clause is left out in the
Ethiopic version, and that without hurting the sense, since it is easily
supplied from the preceding verse; and the Alexandrian copy, and the
Vulgate Latin version, only read "Jesus": and the latter reads the whole
thus, "and every spirit that dissolves Jesus"; that separates the two
natures, human and divine, in him, and makes two persons of them; or
denies either of them, either that he is truly God, or really man, or
denies him to be Jesus, the Saviour; who, as much as in him lies,
destroys his person, office, and work, and makes void his obedience,
sufferings, and death:

is not of God; neither he nor his doctrine are of God; his doctrine
cannot come from God, being contrary to the word of God; and he himself
is neither born of God, nor on his side.

And this is that spirit of antichrist: who is against Christ, or opposes
himself to him; as he who denies his sonship, his deity, his humanity,
his offices, and his grace, manifestly does; every doctrine that is
calculated against these truths is the spirit and doctrine of
antichrist:

whereof you have heard that it should come, and even now already is it
the world; in the false teachers, the forerunners of antichrist; See
Gill on [Jo1 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018.md).

[1 John 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jo1 4:4</span></span>

Ye are of God, little children,.... This, with what follows, is said for
the comfort of the saints, and to deliver them from the fears of being
drawn aside by the delusions of the false prophets, and antichrists;
since they belonged to God, were his elect, and therefore could not be
finally and totally seduced; they were the children of God by adopting
grace, and could not become the servants of men; they were born of God,
and so were kept by the power of God unto salvation, as all that are
begotten unto a lively hope are; they were enlightened by the Spirit of
God, and had a discerning of truth from error, and therefore could not
be imposed upon:

and have overcome them; the false prophets, being in a good cause,
fighting the good fight of faith, and having good weapons, particularly
the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God, and invincible
arguments from thence; and also gracious assistance from the Spirit of
God, who gives a mouth that none can shut, and wisdom that none can
resist; as well as an inward experience of the truth, and power of
Gospel doctrines: a testimony within themselves, which will stand the
whole shock and opposition of the enemy: the Vulgate Latin version
reads, "and have overcome him"; antichrist, whose spirit was then in the
world; or the world itself, or Satan, the god of the world; and so the
Ethiopic version reads, "and have overcome the evil one", as in [Jo1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#013.md); the reason of which victory, and
which adds to the comfort and support of saints in their present
warfare, is,

because greater is he that is in you, than he that is in the world; by
"he that is in the world" is meant either the devil, the prince and god
of the world, and who goes up and down in it, dwells in the hearts of
the men of it, under whose influence they are, and in whom he works
effectually; or antichrist, whose spirit was now in the world, and whose
doctrine was propagated by the false teachers, in whom he began to
appear; but he that is in the saints, either God who dwells in them, and
their in him, [Jo1 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#015.md); is mightier
than the man of sin, and his emissaries, to keep and preserve from all
corruptions, and every false way; or Christ, who dwells in their hearts
by faith, and is stronger than the strong man armed, and able to save
and deliver out of his hands; or the Spirit of God; and so the Arabic
version reads, "the Spirit that is in you"; who is in the saints, as a
spirit of regeneration and sanctification, as a spirit of adoption, and
the earnest of their inheritance; he is able to carry on the work of
grace in them, and finish it, and will do it; and he, as a spirit of
truth, is more powerful than the spirit of error; and when the enemy
comes in like a flood, or pours in a flood of errors and heresies, he
lifts up a standard against him, causes him to fly, and secures the
saints from being carried away with it: compare with this the Septuagint
version of [Psa 124:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#001.md), "if it had not
been the Lord who was on our side"; which render it thus, "if the Lord
had not been in us".

[1 John 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jo1 4:5</span></span>

They are of the world,.... That is, the false prophets and teachers that
were gone into the world, and had the spirit of antichrist in them;
these were as they were when they came into the world, under the
pollution, guilt, and dominion of sin, in a state of unregeneracy,
carnality, and darkness; they properly belonged unto it, and walked
after the course of it, and were under the influence of the god of it,
who led them into error; and were sensual, and indulged themselves in
worldly lusts, and were seeking after worldly things; supposed that gain
was godliness, and had men's persons in admiration because of advantage;
their nature and disposition, their principles and practices, and their
ends and views, were worldly; and were quite different from Christ and
his apostles, [Joh 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#014.md),

therefore speak they of the world; they speak the wisdom of the world,
or that in which the world thinks wisdom lies, and cry up for true
knowledge, and right principles; and this they do with the enticing
words of man's wisdom, or in words which man's wisdom teacheth; speaking
great swelling words of vanity, which take with vain and carnal minds;
and preach doctrines suited to their own taste, and the taste of others,
as carnal and worldly men; such as the purity of human nature, in its
first conception and birth, its freedom from any original corruption,
and from any concern with the sin of Adam, only with actual sin of its
own; and the power of it to do that which is good, keep the law of God,
and obtain his favour; the non-necessity of any internal work of
efficacious grace, a reformation of life and manners being thought
sufficient to render a man acceptable to God, and prepare him for
eternal happiness; the doctrine of justification and salvation by works;
all which are pleasing to carnal men: hence it follows,

and the world heareth them; the wicked of the world; worldly and
unregenerate men attend on their ministry, approve of what they deliver,
and receive it with pleasure, and believe it: this expresses both the
quality of the hearers of false teachers, that they are that part of the
world, the worse part of it, which lies in wickedness; and the quantity
of them, the greater part of the world, as it was foretold by Christ,
and his apostles, that they should deceive many, that many should follow
their pernicious ways, and that they should draw many disciples after
them; wherefore the numbers that attend such persons, as it need not be
wondered at, since both preachers and hearers, and the doctrines
preached and heard, are all alike, they are of the world, so it should
not be stumbling to the people of God.

[1 John 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jo1 4:6</span></span>

We are of God,.... Not only as the chosen of God, the children of God,
regenerated ones, and believers, but as ministers of the Gospel; they
were chosen, and called, and sent of God to preach the Gospel, and were
qualified for it, by gifts received from him, and had their doctrine
from him, as well as their commission and mission: they were not of the
world, and therefore did not speak of the world, nor things suited to
worldly men; but being of God, they spoke the words of God, which were
agreeable to him, which made for the glory of the three divine Persons,
and were consistent with the divine perfections; which maintained the
honour and dignity of the persons in the Godhead; which magnified the
grace of God in salvation, and debased the creature:

he that knoweth God; not only as the God of nature and providence, but
as in Christ, and that not only professionally, but practically; that
has an experimental knowledge of him, that knows him as exercising
lovingkindness, having tasted of his grace and goodness; that knows him
so as to trust in him, and love him; for such a knowledge of God is
meant, as has true real affection to him joined with it; so that it is
he that loves his name, his glory, his truths, and his ordinances: he

heareth us: not only externally, constantly attending on the ministry of
the word, as such do; but internally, understanding what is heard,
receiving it in love, cordially embracing it, and firmly believing it,
and acting according to it:

he that is not of God; who is not born of God, but is as he was when
born into the world, and is of it: and who does not righteousness, nor
loves his brother, nor confesses the divinity, humanity, and offices of
Christ, and so is not on the side of truth, nor has the truth of grace
in him; see [Jo1 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010.md); such a man

heareth not us; he is a mere natural man, a carnal and unregenerate man;
and such an one cannot attend on a Gospel ministry, or receive Gospel
doctrines, which are with him senseless, stupid, and foolish notions,
yea, foolishness itself; nor can he know and understand them through
ignorance, and want, of a spiritual discerning; they are hard sayings,
and he cannot hear, nor bear them; and when this is the case, it is a
plain token of unregeneracy, and that such persons are not of God; see
[Joh 8:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#047.md).

Hereby know we the spirit of truth, and the spirit of error; the
difference between truth and error; can distinguish one from another,
and discern who are the true ministers of Christ, and who are the false
teachers; for not only the word of God, the Scriptures of truth, are the
test and standard, the touchstone to bring them to, and try them by; and
the doctrines they severally bring show who they are; but even their
very hearers distinguish them. Spirits, or men pretending to the Spirit
of God, may be known in a great measure by their followers; they who
have the spirit of error, and are of the world, they are followed, and
caressed, and applauded by the men of the world, by unregenerate
persons; they who have the spirit of truth, and are of God, they are
heard and approved of, and embraced by spiritual men, by such who know
God in Christ, and have tasted that the Lord is gracious.

[1 John 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jo1 4:7</span></span>

Beloved, let its love one another,.... The apostle having finished what
he proposed to say concerning the trying of spirits, returns to his
former exhortation to brotherly love, and which comes with fresh force
and strength; for since worldly men follow, hear, embrace, and cleave to
the false teachers; such as are of God, and on the side of truth, should
love one another, and their faithful ministers, and stand fast in one
spirit by the truths of the Gospel, in opposition to every error:

for love is of God: to love one another is the command of God, it is his
revealed will, and is well pleasing in his sight; it comes from him, is
a gift of his grace, and a fruit of his Spirit, and which he teaches
regenerate ones to exercise:

and everyone that loveth God, as the Alexandrian copy reads, or Christ,
and the saints, who seem to be particularly meant:

is born of God; for love to the brethren is an evidence of regeneration;
See Gill on [Jo1 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#014.md);

and knoweth God; he knows God in Christ, and therefore loves those who
have the grace of God in them, and the image of Christ upon them; he
knows the mind and will of God, being taught of God to love the
brethren; and he knows the love of God, and has had an experience of the
grace of God, which influences him to love the saints.

[1 John 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jo1 4:8</span></span>

He that loveth not, knoweth not God,.... If a man loves not the children
of God, those that are born of him, he does not know, so as to love God,
the Father of them; for to pretend love to God, the begetter of them,
whom he sees not, and not love those who are begotten by him, and are
visible objects of respect, is a contradiction, and cannot be
reconciled: see [Jo1 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020.md). This clause
is left out in the Ethiopic version, and is transposed in the Syriac
version, which reads the text thus, "for God, is love, and whoever
loveth not, knoweth not God". By which reading, the following reason
stands in close connection with [Jo1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#007.md).

For God is love; he loves himself; there is an entire love between the
three divine Persons, who are in the strictest, and in the most
inconceivable and inexpressible manner affected to each other; their
love is natural and essential: God loves all his creatures as such, nor
does he hate any of them, as so considered; and he bears an everlasting,
unchangeable, and invariable love to his elect in Christ Jesus; of which
an instance is given in the following verses, and is a reason why the
saints should love one another; that they might be like their heavenly
Father, by whom they are begotten, and of whom they are born, and whose
children they are; seeing he is love itself, and in his breast is
nothing else but love. So the Shekinah is, by the Cabalistic Jews (t),
called "love".

\(t\) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 15. 1. & Lex. Cabal. p. 43, 44.

[1 John 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jo1 4:9</span></span>

In this was manifested the love of God towards us,.... The love of God
here spoken of, and instanced in, is not his general love to all his
creatures, which is shown in the make of them, and in the support of
them in their beings, and in his providential care of them, and kindness
to them; but his special love towards his elect, and which was before it
was manifested; it was secretly in his heart from everlasting, and did
not begin to be at the mission of Christ into the world, but was then in
a most glaring manner manifested: there were several acts of it before,
as the choice of them in Christ, the appointment of him to be their
Saviour, and the covenant of grace made with him on their account; these
were more secret and hidden; but now the love and kindness of God
appeared, broke forth, and shone out in its glory; this is a most
flagrant and notorious instance of it, in which it is exceedingly
conspicuous; this is a most clear proof, a plain and full demonstration
of it:

because that God sent his only begotten Son into the world; the sender
is God the Father, who is distinguished from the Son that is sent; of
which act of sending; see Gill on [Rom
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#003.md) and See Gill on [Gal
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#004.md); and for him, who is that God
against whom we have sinned, and is that lawgiver that is able to save,
and to destroy, and of purer eyes than to behold iniquity, to send his
Son to be the Saviour of sinful men is an amazing instance of love; and
which appears the more manifest, when it is observed that it is "his
only begotten Son" that is sent; of which See Gill on [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md); and the place he was sent into
is the world, where his people are, and where their sins are committed,
he came to expiate; and where he was treated with great indignity and
contempt, and suffered many things, and at last death itself: the end of
his mission was,

that we might live through him; who were dead in Adam, dead in sin, and
dead in law, and could not quicken themselves; nor obtain eternal life
for themselves, by their performances. Christ came, being sent, that
they might have life, and that more abundantly than Adam had in
innocence, or man lost by the fall; and accordingly they were quickened
together with him; when he was quickened, after he had been put to
death, they were virtually and representatively quickened and justified
in him; and in consequence of his death and resurrection from the dead,
they are regenerated and made spiritually alive, and live unto
righteousness; and through his righteousness wrought out for them, and
imputed to them, they are in a legal sense alive unto God, and alive and
comfortable in their own souls, living by faith on Christ, and have a
right and title to eternal life; and which they also have through him,
and which is chiefly intended here; for the design is not only that they
may live spiritually and comfortably here, but eternally hereafter.

[1 John 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jo1 4:10</span></span>

Herein is love,.... The love of God, free love, love that cannot be
matched: herein it is manifested, as before; this is a clear evidence of
it, an undoubted proof, and puts it out of all question:

not that we loved God: the love of God is antecedent to the love of his
people; it was when theirs was not; when they were without love to him,
yea, enemies in their minds, by wicked works, and even enmity itself,
and therefore was not procured by theirs; but on the contrary, their
love to him is caused by his love to them; hence his love, and a
continuance in it, do not depend on theirs; nor does it vary according
to theirs; wherefore there is good reason to believe it will continue,
and never be removed; and this shows the sovereignty and freeness of the
love of God, and that it is surprising and matchless:

but that he loved us; that is, God; and so the Syriac version reads,
"but that God himself loved us". The Vulgate Latin version adds, first,
as in [Jo1 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#019.md); the instance of this
love follows:

and sent his Son to be the propitiation for our sins: this is a
subordinate end to the other, mentioned in [Jo1
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#009.md); for, in order that sinful men may
possess everlasting life and happiness, it is necessary that their sins
be expiated, or atonement be made for them, which is meant by Christ's
being a propitiation for them; that the justice of God should be
satisfied; that peace and righteousness, or love and justice, should be
reconciled together; and kiss each other; and that all obstructions be
removed out of the way of the enjoyment of life, which are brought in by
sin; and that the wrath of God, which sin deserved, be averted or
appeased, according to our sense apprehension of it; for otherwise the
love of God people is from everlasting, and is unchangeable, never
alters, or never changes from love to wrath, or from wrath to love; nor
is the love of God procured by the satisfaction and sacrifice of Christ,
which are the effects of it; but hereby the way is laid open for the
display of it, and the application of its effects, in a way consistent
with the law and justice of God. This phrase is expressive of the great
love of Christ to his people, and of his substitution in their room and
stead; and so it is used among the Jews for a substitution in the room
of others, , "to express the greatness of love" (u); See Gill on [Rom
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025.md) and See Gill on [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003.md).

\(u\) Misn. Negaim, c. 2. sect. 1. Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. Misn.
Sanhedrin, c. 2. sect. 1. & Jarchi & Bartenora in ib. vid. T. Bab. Yoma,
fol. 23. 1. & Succa, fol. 20. 1.

[1 John 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jo1 4:11</span></span>

Beloved, if God so loved us,.... As to send his Son to be a propitiatory
sacrifice for our sins, and to obtain eternal life for us through his
sufferings and death: the apostle uses the same language his Lord and
master did, [Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016.md);

we ought also to love one another; for those who are the objects of
God's love ought to be the objects of ours; and if God has loved our
fellow Christians and brethren to such a degree, as to send his Son to
die for them, we ought to love them too; and if we are interested in the
same love, the obligation is still the greater; and if God loved them
with so great a love, when they did not love him, but were enemies to
him, then surely we ought to love them now they are become the friends
of God, and ours also; as God loved them freely, and when unlovely, and
us likewise in the same manner, and under the same circumstances, then
we ought to love, and continue to love the saints, though there may be
something in their temper and conduct disagreeable: God is to be
imitated in his love; and his love to us, which is unmerited and
matchless, should influence and engage us to the love of the brethren,
who have a far greater claim to our love than we can make to the love of
God; and which indeed is none at all, but what he is pleased to give us.

[1 John 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jo1 4:12</span></span>

No man hath seen God at any time,.... The same is said by the Evangelist
John, [Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md); but here it is
observed with a different view, and upon another account; there it
signifies that no man has seen and looked into the counsels and designs
of God, and been able to make a discovery and declaration of his mind
and will, his love and grace, and which is there ascribed to the Son of
God; see Gill on [Joh 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md); but here
the sense is, that whereas God is invisible in his nature, and
incomprehensible in his being and perfections, so that there is no
coming to him, and seeing of him, and conversing with him in a familiar
way, and so not of loving him as he is in himself, and ought to be
loved, as one friend sees, converses with, and loves another, and finds
his love increased by sight and conversation; then we ought to love the
saints and people of God, who are visible, may be seen, come at, and
conversed with, see [Jo1 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020.md); for
this clause stands among the arguments and reasons for brotherly love:

if we love one another God dwelleth in us; not as he does in his Son, by
union of nature; nor as in heaven, by the displays of his glory; nor as
in the whole world, by his omnipresence and power; but by his Spirit,
and the communications of his love, and by his gracious presence and
communion, which he indulges the saints with; for such who love one
another, as they appear to have the Spirit of God, of which that grace
is a fruit, so they are by the Spirit built up a fit habitation for God,
and by which Spirit he dwells in them; and such may expect the presence
of God, for they who live in peace, the God of love and peace shall be
with them:

and his love is perfected in us; not that love of God, with which he
loves his people; for that admits of no degrees, and is not more or less
in itself, or in his heart; but is always invariably and unchangeably
the same, and is full, complete, and perfect in his own breast, as it
was from all eternity; and does not pass by degrees, or gradually rise
from a love of benevolence to a love of complacency and delight, or
increase as our love does to him and to one another, on which it has no
dependence: nor is this love perfected in the saints in this life; that
is to say, they have not perfect knowledge and enjoyment of it; nor have
they all the effects of it bestowed upon them, and applied unto them;
the perfection of it, in this sense, will be in heaven: but the love
with which God is loved is here designed; and it is called his, because
he is both the object and the author of it; and this is no effect as to
degrees; yea, sometimes, instead of abounding and increasing, it goes
back, it is left, and waxes cold; and it will not have its completion
till the saints come to heaven, and then it will be in its full
perfection and glory, when faith and hope shall be no more: but the
sense is, that this grace of love is sincere and hearty, and without
dissimulation; it is unfeigned love; and it is in deed and in truth, and
not in word and in tongue only; and this appears to be so, by the love
which is shown to the brethren, the children of God; so that love to God
in the saints is perfected by love to the brethren, just in such sense
as faith is made perfect by works, [Jam
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#022.md), that is, is made to appear to be
genuine, right, and true.

[1 John 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jo1 4:13</span></span>

Hereby know we that we dwell in him, and he in us,.... That there is a
communion between God and us, and a communication of his love and grace
to us, and an exercise of grace upon him; for God dwells in his people
by his Spirit and grace, and they dwell in him by the exercise of faith
and love upon him: and this is known,

because he hath given us of his Spirit: not of the essence and nature of
the Spirit, which is the same with the nature of the Father and of the
Son, and is incommunicable; but either of the gifts of the Spirit, which
are divided to every man as he pleases, and which being bestowed on men,
and used by them, for the profit and advantage of the church of God,
show that God is with them, and dwells among them of a truth; or of the
graces of the Spirit, such as faith, hope, and love, which are each the
gifts of God; and these being bestowed and exercised, are proofs of the
mutual indwelling of God and his people; See Gill on [Jo1
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#024.md).

[1 John 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jo1 4:14</span></span>

And we have seen, and do testify,.... This seems to be particularly said
of the apostles, who had a clear discerning of the love and grace of
God, manifested in the mission of Christ into the world; for though no
man had seen his nature and his person, yet they had seen his love, and
the exceeding riches of his grace, which he had shown forth in Christ
Jesus; and they had also seen Christ, God manifest in the flesh; they
had seen his glory, as the glory of the only begotten of the Father;
they had seen him with their bodily eyes; they had seen his works and
miracles; they had seen him dying and risen again from the dead, and go
up to heaven; they were witnesses, and eyewitnesses of him, and bore a
faithful testimony of him, and for him, and particularly set their seal
to this truth,

that the Father sent the Son to be the Saviour of the world; not of
every individual person in it, for there are some that will go into
everlasting punishment, and even a world that will be condemned; Christ
is not in fact the Saviour of all the individuals of human nature, and
therefore was not sent to be such; for if he was, the end of his mission
is not fully answered; nor of the Jews only, but of the Gentiles also,
and who are chiefly intended by "the world"; See Gill on [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002.md); and even of all the elect of God,
styled his people, his sheep, his friends, his church, and the sons of
God; and it may be said of all that believe in him throughout the whole
world, without any distinction of nation, age, sex, state, or condition:
and Christ is the Saviour both of the souls and bodies of these, from
all their sins, original and actual; from the power of Satan, the
bondage and curse of the law, and wrath to come, and he is the only,
able, willing, and complete Saviour, and who saves with an everlasting
salvation.

[1 John 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jo1 4:15</span></span>

Whosoever shall confess that Jesus is the Son of God,.... The only
begotten of the Father; that he is not a mere man, as the Jews, and
Ebion and Cerinthus said, but a divine person, equal with the Father;
which contains all that relates to the dignity of his person, and his
fitness for his office as a Saviour, and which was the test of faith in
those times, and the grand article of belief: not that a bare assent to
this had what followed annexed to it; for the devils believed and owned
that Jesus was the Son of God; and so might, and did, unregenerate
persons, as the centurion at the cross of Christ, who know nothing what
communion with God is; but this confession is such as is attended with a
believing in Christ from the heart unto righteousness, life, and
salvation, and a cheerful obedience to his ordinances and commands, from
a principle of love to him, and faith in him, things not to be found in
devils and carnal men; see [Rom 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009.md).

God dwelleth in him, and he in God; See Gill on [Jo1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013.md); this should encourage to an open
and hearty confession of Christ as the Son of God, and Saviour of
sinners, and to a public profession of his name, and faith in him, and
an holding it fast without wavering.

[1 John 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jo1 4:16</span></span>

And we have known and believed,.... Or have a full assurance and
knowledge of, and faith in,

the love that God hath to us; shown as in many instances, so more
especially in sending his Son to be the propitiation for our sins, to be
the Saviour of us, and that we might live through him.

God is love; See Gill on [Jo1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#008.md),

and he that dwelleth in love; who dwells by faith upon the love of God
as displayed in Christ, and abides in the exercise of love to God and to
the saints:

dwelleth in God, and God in him; See Gill on [Jo1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#013.md); the last clause, "and God in
him", is left out in the Syriac version.

[1 John 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jo1 4:17</span></span>

Herein is our love made perfect,.... Or love with us; which some
understand of the love of God towards his people, and which is shed
abroad in them: this indeed removes all fear of an awful judgment, and
renders that amiable and desirable; and such who are interested in it,
shall stand in that day with intrepidity and boldness; and this sense
may seem to be favoured by the Syriac version, which reads, "his love
with us"; and especially by the Vulgate Latin version, which renders it,
"the love of God with us"; but it is best to understand it agreeably to
the context, of our love to God, which is with and in our hearts; and
which is made, or made to appear to be perfect, true, and genuine, by
our love to the brethren; since the love of God to us does not admit of
degrees, nor does it, or the reality and sincerity of it, depend upon
our love to the saints; See Gill on [Jo1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012.md);

that we may have boldness in the day of judgment; not of men's judgment,
when brought before judges, governors, and kings, for the sake of Christ
and the Gospel, and stand at their bar, where saints, who have true love
to God and Christ and the brethren, have stood with great courage and
intrepidity, and shown much boldness, and used great freedom of speech;
nor of judgment in this life, which sometimes begins at the house of
God, though the saints often have great boldness and presence of mind,
and freedom of expression both to God and man in a day of affliction, as
Job had; but of the future judgment, which, though it will be very awful
and solemn, Christ the Judge will appear with great majesty and glory,
and all men will stand before him, and the books will be opened, and the
judgment will proceed with great strictness and justice, and will issue
in the everlasting perdition of devils and wicked men, yet the saints
will have boldness in it: while evil men and devils tremble at the
thoughts of it now, they rejoice and are glad; they love it, look for
it, long for it, and hasten to it; and will stand fearless, and without
the least dread, while others will flee to the rocks, and into the holes
of the earth; and they will use freedom of speech with Christ, as the
word here signifies; they will sing his new song, and ascribe the glory
of their salvation to him, and express their praises of him, and love to
him, then and to all eternity: and this boldness the saints may be said
to arrive at through a perfect, or sincere, and genuine love of the
brethren; for by this they know they are born again, and are born to an
inheritance incorruptible, which they have both a meetness for, and a
right unto; and knowing hereby that they are passed from death to life,
they justly conclude they shall not enter into condemnation, and
therefore are not afraid of the awful judgment: hereby they know that
their faith is right, and that therefore they are manifestly the
children of God; and if children, then heirs, and so shall be saved, and
have everlasting life:

because as he is, so are we in this world; which may be understood
either of God, to whom the saints are like; for such who are born again,
as those who love the brethren are, they are partakers of the divine
nature, and bear a resemblance to God, even in this present state of
things; and as it becomes them to be holy in all manner of conversation,
as he is holy, and to be merciful to wicked men, as he is merciful, so
to love the saints as he does, and to be kind, tenderhearted, and
forgive one another, as he for Christ's sake has forgiven them; for as
God is love, they should be all love likewise; or of Christ, see [Jo1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#003.md); and that with respect to God; as
he is the Son of God, so are they the sons of God; he by nature, they by
grace and adoption; as he is loved by God with an everlasting and
unchangeable love, with a love of complacency and delight, so are they
loved by him with the same kind of love, even while they are in this
world; and as he is the chosen of God, and precious, so they are chosen
in him, and unto salvation by him. The Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic
versions, render it, "as he was": and the sense may be, as he was in
this world, so are they; and which may regard not so much likeness in
nature, though there is an agreement in that, excepting sin, but the
sameness of state and condition; as he was a man of sorrows, attended
with afflictions, loaded with reproaches, and followed with the
persecutions of men, so are they; nor need they wonder that they are the
objects of the world's hatred and contempt, since he was also; as he was
tempted by Satan, forsaken by his friends, and deserted by his God, so
sometimes are they in this world; and as he went through a variety of
sufferings, and death itself, to glory, so through many tribulations do
they enter the kingdom: moreover, as he now is in heaven, so are they in
this world; even as he is in heaven, so are they representatively in
him, while in this world; and as he is righteous, being justified and
acquitted from all the charge of sin he took upon him, and therefore
will appear a second time without sin, so they are completely righteous
in him: and once more, as he is, so they are, or should be in this
world; they should be holy as he is holy, and be humble, meek, and
patient, as he is, and walk as he walked; and particularly love the
saints and one another, as he does; and which seems to be greatly
intended here, and must be understood not of an equality, but of a
likeness. The Arabic version reads the words conditionally, and as
depending on the preceding clause, "if as he was, we are in this world";
and then the sense is, that the saints shall have boldness in the day of
judgment, provided they are in this world as Christ was.

[1 John 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jo1 4:18</span></span>

There is no fear in love,.... In the love of the brethren; where that
is, there is no fear: so far as that prevails and gains ground, fear
removes; not the filial fear of God, the new covenant grace of fear,
which is the beginning of wisdom, and is consistent with faith, hope,
love, and spiritual joy; but either the fear of men, which brings a
snare: those that truly love Christ, his Gospel, and his people, they
are not afraid of men; the spirit of power, love, and of a sound mind,
is opposite to a spirit of fear, nor can they stand together; and such
strength there is sometimes in brotherly love, that the saints are not
afraid of death itself, but freely lay down their lives for one another;
see [Jo1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#016.md); or it may be rather,
that they are not afraid of the day of judgment, and of hell and
damnation; where hatred of the brethren has place, there is a fear and
dread of these things, as were in Cain; but those that love the
brethren, they know they are passed from death to life, and shall not
enter into condemnation, and therefore are in no fear of any of these
things:

but perfect love casteth out fear; when love to the brethren appears to
be perfect, that is, genuine and sincere, and a man knows that from the
bottom of his heart he sincerely loves the saints, he concludes from
hence, as he may, the truth of his faith, which works in this way; and
this frees him from the fears of men and devils, and of the future
judgment and wrath to come. The Jews have a saying (w),

"worthy is his portion that rules over the place of fear, for lo, there
is nothing that rules over the degree of "fear" but "love".''

Because fear hath torment: it distresses a man, fills him with anguish,
and makes him restless and uneasy, and keeps him in servitude; through
the fear of men, of the devil, death, judgment, and hell, he is all his
lifetime, or as long as this fear lasts, subject to bondage: or "fear
has punishment", as it may be rendered, and is by the Vulgate Latin
version; it is a punishment itself to a man; and its being criminal
deserves punishment, and is punishable; see [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008.md);

he that feareth is not made perfect in love; or "by love"; that is, he
that is possessed, and under the power of a servile fear of punishment,
is one who is not, by the love to the brethren, made to appear to
himself to be a sincere lover of God, and true believer in Christ; for
was he, he would not be in fear of destruction and death, since whoever
truly loves God, and believes in Christ, shall certainly be saved;
though such persons, at times, may not be without their doubts and
fears.

\(w\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 87. 1.

[1 John 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jo1 4:19</span></span>

We love him, because he first loved us. Lest love to God, and so to one
another, should be thought to be of ourselves, and too much be ascribed
unto it, the apostle observes, that God's love to us is prior to our
love to him; his love is from everlasting, as well as to everlasting;
for he loves his people as he does his Son, and he loved him before the
foundation of the world; his choosing them in Christ as early, and
blessing them then with all spiritual blessings, the covenant of grace
made with Christ from all eternity, the gift of grace to them in him
before the world began, and the promise of eternal life to them so soon,
show the antiquity and priority of his love: his love shown in the
mission and gift of his Son was before theirs, and when they had none to
him; and his love in regeneration and conversion is previous to theirs,
and is the cause of it; his grace in regeneration brings faith and love
with it, and produces them in the heart; and his love shed abroad there
is the moving cause of it, or what draws it first into act and exercise;
and the larger the discoveries and applications of the love of God be,
the more does love to him increase and abound; and nothing more animates
and inflames our love to God, than the consideration of the earliness of
his love to us, of its being before ours; which shows that it is free,
sovereign, distinguishing, and unmerited. Some read the words as an
exhortation, "let us love him"; and others as in the subjunctive mood,
"we should love him", because, &c. some copies read, "we love God", and
so the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic versions, and the Alexandrian
copy, read, "because God first loved us": and so some others.

[1 John 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jo1 4:20</span></span>

If a man say I love God, and hateth his brother,.... Than which
profession nothing can be more contradictory, not black and white, or
hot and cold in the same degree:

he is a liar; it is not truth he speaks, it is a contradiction, and a
thing impossible:

for he that loveth not his brother whom he hath seen; his person, which
might have drawn out his affection to him; and something valuable and
worthy in him, which might have commanded respect; or his wants and
distresses, which should have moved his pity and compassion:

how can he love God whom he hath not seen? it cannot be thought he
should; the thing is not reasonable to suppose; it is not possible he
should; See Gill on [Jo1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#012.md).

[1 John 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jo1 4:21</span></span>

And this commandment have we from him,.... Either "from God", as the
Alexandrian copy and the Vulgate Latin version read; and that to love
the brethren is a commandment of God, is clear from [Jo1
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023.md); or from Christ, for it is also a
command of his, even his new commandment, which he has given, and his
people have received from him:

that he who loveth God, love his brother also; see [Joh
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034.md); which is an argument persuading
to attend to the one as well as to the other; for the same command that
requires the one, requires the other: and he that transgresses it in one
case, is a transgressor of it, as well as in the other.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Chapter 5](jo1005.md)

</div>
