<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job016)  [Next](job018.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 17:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 17

In this chapter Job not only enlarges upon the reason given in the
preceding chapter, why he was desirous of an advocate with God, and one
to plead his cause with him for him, [Job
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001.md); but adds other reasons taken
from the usage of his friends, from the impossibility of any but a
divine Person being his surety; and of anyone being provided and
appointed as such but by God himself; from the insufficiency of his
friends to judge of his cause, and from the condition and circumstances
he was in, [Job 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002.md); then he takes
notice of the effects his present case would have on good men, that
though they might be astonished at it, they would be filled with
indignation against hypocrites, and would not be moved and stumbled by
his afflictions to apostatize from and desert the good ways of God, [Job
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008.md); after which he addresses his
friends, and either calls upon them to renew the dispute with him, or
repent of their notions, and join with him in his sentiments, [Job
17:10](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010.md); and lastly describes his state
and circumstances, according to his apprehension of things, observing
the shortness of his life, and the darkness of the dispensation he was
under, through one thing and another, [Job
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#011.md); that he had nothing but the
grave in view, which, and its attendants, he had made very familiar with
him, [Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013.md); and that he had no
hope of restoration to a better condition, as to his outward
circumstances, and that he, and his hopes his friends would have him
entertain, and they also, would go down together to the grave, and there
should lie in the dust, and rest together till the morning of the
resurrection, [Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015.md).

[Job 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 17:1</span></span>

My breath is corrupt,.... Through the force of his disease, which made
it have an ill smell, so that it was strange and disagreeable to his
wife, [Job 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#017.md); passing through his
lungs, or other parts, which were affected with some disorder, or as
frequently is the case of dying persons, and so Job thought himself to
be. The word (n) used has the signification of pain, even of the pains
of a woman in travail; and so may signify, that Job drew his breath with
great pain, as people troubled with an asthma do, or dying persons in
the hiccups, or just fetching their last breath; or "my spirit" (o), as
it may be rendered, that is, his vital spirits which were exhausted and
spent, there were scarce any left in him; or "my mind" (p), or soul,
which was overwhelmed with grief, and so disturbed, that he was not
himself, but in a manner distracted with the terrors of God, and the
severity of his hand upon him:

my days are extinct; here Job corrects himself; he had spoken of a few
years before, but it is as if he should say now, why do I talk of a few
years, when I have but a few days to live, and even those are as good as
gone? meaning not only his days of prosperity, which were at an entire
end, as he thought, but the days of his natural life; the lamp of life
was almost burnt out, the oil was spent, the wick was just extinguished,
it was like the snuff of a candle going out:

the graves are ready for me; the place of his fathers' sepulchres, the
burial place of his ancestors, where many graves were; or he may have
respect to various things into which the dead are put, as into so many
graves; as besides their being rolled up in linen, as was the way of the
eastern countries, there was the coffin, a sort of a grave, and which
sometimes was made of stone; and then the place dug in the earth, more
properly called the grave, and often over that a sepulchral monument was
erected; so that there was grave upon grave. Job does not seem to have
any respect to the usage of kings, and great personages, preparing
stately monuments for themselves while living, such as the pyramids of
Egypt, built by and for their kings, as is supposed; for the words "are
ready" are not in the text, only supplied, though they are also by the
Targum; they are very short and significant in the original text, "the
graves for me", or they are mine; the grave is my property, my house,
where I expect shortly to be, and there to abide and dwell until the
resurrection, and which was desirable to him; "a grave to me"; that is
all that I desire, or can expect; here he wished to be, as he did not
doubt he quickly should be; and it is as if he should say, I am ready
for that, and so Jarchi paraphrases it; and happy is the man that is
ready for the grave, for death, and eternity, for the coming of his
Lord, having the grace of God wrought in him, and the righteousness of
his living Redeemer on him, which was Job's case; such an one shall go
into the nuptial chamber at once, and be received into everlasting
habitations.

\(n\) Pineda. (o) "spiritus meus", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius, &c. (p) "Anima mea", Piscator, Schmidt.

[Job 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 17:2</span></span>

Are there not mockers with me?.... Meaning not irreligious persons, such
as make a mock at sin, a jest of religion, a laugh at good men, sneer at
the doctrines and ordinances of God, and scoff at things future, as the
coming of Christ, the resurrection of the dead, and a future judgment;
with whom it is very uncomfortable to be, as well as with any sort of
profane men, and such there were no doubt in Job's time; but he seems to
design his friends, by whom be thought himself mocked, and who were, as
he imagined, scorners of him, [Job
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#004.md); and therefore for this reason
entreats his case might be heard, and his cause pleaded:

and doth not mine eye continue in their provocation? or "lodge all
night" (q); his sense is, that they were continually provoking him with
their words, their scoffs and jeers, their censures and calumnies, and
the weak reasons and arguments they made use of to support their charges
and suspicions; these dwelt upon his mind not only in the daytime but in
the night, so that he could not get a wink of sleep for them; their
words were so teasing and distressing, and they acted such a cruel part
to him, and stuck so close to him, and hung upon his thoughts, that he
could not get clear of them in the night season; but his mind ran upon
them, which kept him waking, that he could not close his eyelids for
thinking of them.

\(q\) "pernoctat", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius, Schmidt,
Michaelis, Schultens.

[Job 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 17:3</span></span>

Lay down now,.... A pledge that thou wilt provide a surety, appoint and
admit one to plead for me, and that thou wilt hear my cause, and
determine it; or "put now", or "put, I pray thee" (r), thy heart and
mind to me and my case, to my petition and request, and grant it:

put me in a surety with thee; appoint, provide, and place a surety for
me with thee, and let him appear to do his work and office: such an one
Jesus Christ is; he is of God the Father's appointing to be the Mediator
between God and men, and who himself voluntarily engaged and agreed to
be the surety of the better testament; and this was known to the Old
Testament saints, and to Job; and his prayer was the prayer of faith:
and this work and office Christ performs; he was surety for his people
from eternity, he drew nigh to God on their account, and struck hands
with his Father, or covenanted and agreed with him about the salvation
of his people, and the manner of it; he gave his word, his bond, to his
Father for them, that he would save them; and upon that suretyship
engagement of Christ all the Old Testament saints were pardoned,
justified, and glorified; he promised and bound himself to pay all their
debts, to satisfy for all their sins, to bring in an everlasting
righteousness for them, and to bring them all safe to heaven and
happiness; in order to which, he put himself in their room and stead,
and laid down his life a ransom for them; upon which Job might say, and
so may every believer, what follows,

who is he that will strike hands with me? that will enter the lists,
litigate and dispute the point with me, or bring any charge or
accusation against me, having such a surety to answer for me, such an
advocate to plead my cause, such a Mediator between God and man, who has
made reconciliation for sin, brought in everlasting righteousness, and
satisfied law and justice, see [Rom
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033.md); or else the sense is, "who is
he", besides him that is a surety of God's appointing and providing,
"can strike bands with me?" or be a surety for me? there is no other
Mediator, Saviour, or Redeemer, besides him; if he had not undertaken
the cause of his people, and the redemption of them, it must have ceased
for ever, no other was equal to such a work; so that here is another
reason used with the Lord to provide a surety, since no other could to
any purpose.

\(r\) "pone nunc", Montanus; "poae quaeso", Pagninus, Piscator,
Mercerus, Cocceius, Schmidt; "sub cor tunm", Vatablus.

[Job 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 17:4</span></span>

For thou hast hid their heart from understanding,.... That is, the
hearts of his friends, and therefore they were unfit to undertake his
cause, or be sureties for him, or be judges in it. It is the same thing
as to hide understanding from their hearts, which God sometimes does in
a natural sense; when men like not the knowledge of him, as attainable
by the light of nature, he gives them up to reprobate minds, minds void
of knowledge and judgment in things natural; and sometimes, in a
spiritual sense, he hides men's hearts from the knowledge of things
divine and evangelical, and even this he does from the wise and prudent
of this world; yea, sometimes he hides the knowledge of his providential
dealings with men from his own people, as he did from Asaph, Jeremiah,
Habakkuk, and others; and, as it seems, from Job's friends, who
therefore mistook his case, and were very unfit and insufficient to
determine it:

therefore shalt thou not exalt them; to such honour and dignity, to be
umpires, arbitrators, or judges in the case of Job; this God had
reserved for another, Elihu, or rather himself, who decided the
controversy between Job and his friends, and declared in his favour, and
that they had not spoken the thing that was right of him, as his servant
Job had done, [Job 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#007.md);

[Job 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 17:5</span></span>

He that speaketh flattery to his friends,.... As Job's friends did to
him when they promised great outward prosperity, and a restoration to
his former state, and to a greater affluence upon his repentance and
reformation; or when they spoke deceitfully for God, pretending great
regard to the honour of his justice and holiness, and therefore insisted
on it that he must be a wicked man and an hypocrite, that was afflicted
by him, as Job was:

even the eyes of his children shall fail; so hateful are some sins to
God, and particularly deceitful tongues, and flattering lips, that he
will punish them in their posterity; the eyes of their children shall
fail for want of sustenance, and while they are looking in vain for
salvation and deliverance out of trouble, see [Exo
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#004.md).

[Job 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 17:6</span></span>

He hath made me also a byword of the people,.... Either Eliphaz, or God;
for whatsoever befell him, whether more immediately by the hand of God,
or by any instrument, the ascribes it to him, as being suffered in
Providence to befall him; as when he became a byword or proverb to the
people in common, to whom an example might be set by one or more of
Job's friends. The name of Job is to this day a byword or proverb among
men, both for his poverty and his patience; if a man is described as
very poor, he is said to be as poor as Job; or if very patient under his
afflictions, he is said to be as patient as Job; but as neither of these
are to the disgrace of Job, something else seems rather intended here,
even something to his reproach; as when a man was represented as a very
wicked man, or an hypocrite, it used to be said, such an one is as
wicked a creature, and as arrant an hypocrite, as Job:

and aforetime I was as a tabret; the delight of the people, who, when he
appeared in the public streets, came out and went before him, singing,
and dancing, and beating on tabrets, and such like musical instruments,
to express their joy upon the sight of him; but now it was otherwise
with him, and he whom they could not sufficiently extol and commend, now
knew not well what to say bad enough of him; such a change in the
sentiments and conduct of men must needs be very chagrining: or
"aforetime I was as a lord", as Ben Gersom, from the use of the word in
[Dan 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan003.htm#002.md); as he supposes; he was like
a lord or nobleman, or as one in some high office, and now as the
offscouring of all things; or it denotes what he was "before them", the
people, in their sight at present, and should be: the word used is
"Tophet", which Aben Ezra takes to be the name of a place, and as it
seems of that place where children were offered to Moloch, and which
place was in being, and such practices used by the Canaanites in the
times of Job; and this place, which was also called the valley of
Hinnom, being afterwards used for hell, led the Targum to paraphrase the
words thus, "and hell from within shall I be"; and so Sephorno, in
appearance hell to all that see me; and in general it may signify that
he was, or should be, avoided, as any unclean place, very ungrateful and
disagreeable, as that place was; or as anything abominable, and to be
loathed and rejected, and this way go several interpreters (s); though
some think respect is had to the punishment of tympanization, in which
sufferers were beaten upon in several parts of their bodies, as if men
were beating upon a tabret or drum, which gave great pain and torment,
see [Heb 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#035.md); and with such like
cruelty and indignity Job suggests he was or should be used; and
therefore begs for a surety, for one to interpose and plead on his
behalf; let the carriage of men to him be what it will, that is here
referred to; compare with this [Psa
69:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#011.md).

\(s\) Schmidt, Michaelis, Schultens.

[Job 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 17:7</span></span>

Mine eye also is dim by reason of sorrow,.... Through excessive weeping,
and the abundance of tears he shed, so that he had almost lost his
eyesight, or however it was greatly weakened and impaired by that means,
which is often the case, see [Psa 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#007.md);

and all my members are as a shadow; his flesh was consumed off his
bones, there were nothing left scarcely but skin and bone; he was a mere
anatomy, and as thin as a lath, as we commonly say of a man that is
quite worn away, as it were; is a walking shadow, has scarce any
substance in him, but is the mere shadow of a man; the Targum interprets
it of his form, splendour, and countenance, which were like a shadow;
some interpret it "my thoughts" (t), and understand it of the formations
of his mind, and not of his body, which were shadows, empty, fleeting,
and having no consistence in them through that sorrow that possessed
him.

\(t\) "cogitationes meae", Pagninus, Bolducius, Codurcus, so Ben Gersom.

[Job 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 17:8</span></span>

Upright men shall be astonished at this,.... Such as were upright in
heart, and in their walk conversation, sincere and honourable in their
profession of religion, these would be amazed at the afflictions of Job,
and the unkindness of his friends; it is hereby suggested, that it would
be then, and in ages to come, a matter of surprise to truly gracious
persons, when they should hear of such sore afflictions laid upon so
good a man, and he told what censures, calumnies, and reproaches, were
cast upon him by his friends; this would be so astonishing, that they
would not know how to believe it, and still more at a loss how to
account for it, that such things should be permitted in Providence,
there being reason to believe the truth of them:

and the innocent shall stir up himself against the hypocrite; that is,
such, who though they are not free from sin, yet live holy and harmless
lives and conversations among men, so that they are not chargeable with
any gross iniquity, or what is scandalous and unbecoming their
character; these shall rise up with indignation against such persons as
pretend to a great deal of sanctify and devotion, and yet have no
charity or love to an afflicted saint, but censure and reproach him, and
add affliction to his affliction. Thus Job retorts the charge of
hypocrisy his friends brought against him upon them; for he seems
tacitly to design them, and delivers these words as a kind of solace to
himself; that though he was thus used by them at that time, yet good men
in future time would have different apprehensions of him, and rise up
and vindicate his name and character.

[Job 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 17:9</span></span>

The righteous also shall hold on his way,.... He that is righteous, not
in appearance but really, not in a legal but in an evangelic sense; who
is justified by the righteousness of Job's living Redeemer, who lives by
faith on his righteousness, and in consequence of that in holiness of
life and conversation; such an one being in Christ the way of
righteousness and salvation, and walking in the paths of faith,
holiness, and truth, and in all the tracks of religious worship, private
and public, he will persevere therein, and will not on any account
depart out of the right way into which he has been led and directed.
This is opposed to a going back, as some do, and to a turning to the
right hand or the left, as others, and to a standing still, being
stumbled, offended, and discouraged; and it supposes a progress, a going
forward in the way, so as not to be moved out of it by their own, or the
afflictions of others, by the reproaches and persecutions of men, the
temptations of Satan, the snares, riches, honours, and pleasures of the
world, or through darkness, desertion, and unbelief; they may indeed
have many slips and falls, and be almost, but not altogether, out of the
way, and never finally or to perdition; which is owing not to their
conduct and care, might and strength, but to the power of God, and the
supplies of his grace, to Christ and his strength, and to the Spirit and
his influence, guidance, and direction:

and he that hath clean hands shall be stronger and stronger; or "add
strength" (u); increase in it. This character is opposed to one of an
immoral life and conversation, and describes one that is not guilty of
any notorious crime, that does not live in any known sin, but in the
general course of his life is upright and sincere, holy, harmless, and
inoffensive; such a man as he is already a partaker of spiritual grace
and strength, and so, as he wants more, it is given him; his spiritual
strength is renewed, he goes from one degree of it to another, and even
while walking in the way of God he finds an increase of it; yea, that
itself is strength unto him; as his day is his strength is, to assist
him in religious services, to enable him to resist his enemies, and
endure afflictions, and continue in the good ways of God.

\(u\) "addet fortitudinem", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Job 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 17:10</span></span>

But as for you all, do ye return, and come now,.... This is an address
to his three friends, all and everyone of them, who he perceived were
nettled with his reply, and were either departing, or preparing for a
rejoinder; and being conscious of his innocence, and satisfied of the
goodness of his cause, and having nothing to fear from them, boldly
challenges them to go on with the dispute; for though they were three to
one, he was a match for them all; or else he calls upon them to turn and
repent of what they had said to him, to relinquish the bad notions and
ill opinion they had of him, and to retract their hard speeches and
unjust censures, and return to a friendly and amicable conversation; or
however, that they would come and sit down quietly, and patiently hear
what he had further to say to them for their information and
instruction, which they stood in great need of:

for I cannot find one wise man among you; that took his case right, was
capable of judging of it, and speaking pertinently to it, and of
administering comfort to him in it; they were physicians, but not
skilful ones; comforters, but miserable ones; had not the tongue of the
learned, to speak a word in season; disputants, but wranglers, and knew
not where the pinch of the controversy lay; and their arguments were
weak and worthless, and their judgment and sense of things not deserving
any regard, see [Co1 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#005.md).

[Job 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 17:11</span></span>

My days are past,.... Or "passed away", or "passed over" (w); not that
they passed over the time fixed and appointed by God, for there is no
passing the bound settled by him, [Job
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#005.md); but either the common term of
man's life was passed with Job, or he speaks of things in his own
apprehension; he imagined his death was so near, that he had not a day
longer to live; his days, as he before says, were extinct, were at an
end, he should never enjoy another day; and therefore it was folly to
flatter him with a promise of long life, or encourage him to expect it;
which he may mention as a proof of there being not a wise man among
them, since they all suggested this in case of repentance; or his
meaning is, that his good days, or days of goodness, as Jarchi
interprets it, were past; his days of prosperity were at an end, and
evil days were come upon him, in which he had no pleasure; nor had he
any reason to believe it would be otherwise with him:

my purposes are broken off; Job doubtless had formed in his mind great
designs of good things, natural, civil; and religious, concerning the
enlargement of his temporal estate, the settlement of his children in
the world, making provision for the poor, supporting and enlarging the
interest of true religion, the reformation of his Heathenish neighbours,
and the spread of divine truths among them; but now they were all
frustrated, he was not in a capacity of carrying them into execution,
and was obliged to drop them, and think no more of them, nor was there
with him any prospect of ever renewing them; they were "rooted up" (x),
or plucked up, as some render the word, so that there was no likelihood
of their ever rising up again, and coming to any effect:

even the thoughts of my heart; or "the possessions" (y) of it, as the
thoughts are; they are the things of a man, which especially belong to
him; they are the inheritance of his mind, what none have a right unto,
and a claim upon, but himself, nor can any know but himself, and to whom
he discovers them: now the thread of these is broken off at death, they
then cease; not that the mind or soul of man ceases to be, or ceases to
be a thinking being, it still thinks; but only its thoughts are not
employed about the same things in a future state, or in the state after
death, as in this, see [Psa 146:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa146.htm#004.md).

\(w\) "transierunt", Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (x) "evulsae sunt",
Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator; "radicitus evulsae sunt", Michaelis. (y)
"possessiones", Montanus, Vatablus, Piscator, Cocceius, Schmidt;
"haereditariae possessiones", Schultens; so Drusius & Michaelis.

[Job 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 17:12</span></span>

They change the night into day,.... Meaning either his friends, by what
they had said unto him, or the thoughts of his heart, which comes to the
same sense; these being in the night season employed about what had been
said to him in the day, insomuch that he could get no sleep, the night
was as broad day unto him; or they put the day before the night,
contrary to the order of nature, as Noldius (z) observes, whereas the
night is before the day, [Gen 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#005.md); his
friends promising him long days, and an age clearer than noon day, as
bright as the morning, [Job 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#017.md);
when the night of death was coming on, and he was hastening to the dark
and silent grave:

the light is short because of darkness; the morning light, or light of
the day, when that comes continues but for a short time, because of the
darkness of the evening, which quickly follows; or because of the
darkness of fiction, which fills it up, and makes it uncomfortable; or
the light of prosperity, could it be enjoyed, is but short, because of
the darkness of adversity; or "the light is near" (a), as in the
original text; though Jarchi interprets the word "short" as we do;
Noldius renders it, "the light is rather nearer than darkness" (b);
after the night has been spent without sleep, the morning light is
nearer than darkness; that may soon be expected, and so an end to sleep
and rest.

\(z\) Ebr. Part. Concord. No. 1931. (a) "propinquam", Pagninus,
Montanus; so Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, &c. (b) Ib. p. 642.

[Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 17:13</span></span>

If I wait, the grave is mine house,.... Not that Job put an "if" upon,
or made a doubt of waiting upon God in private or public; or of waiting
for him, his gracious appearances to him, answers of prayer, performance
of promises, and deliverance out of trouble; and especially of waiting
his appointed time till his change came, and hoping and expecting
eternal life and happiness; all which he determined to do, and did, see
[Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015.md); but he says this with
respect to the advice of his friends, which should it be taken, the
issue of would be no other than what he here suggests; they had
intimated, that if he repented and reformed, he might hope for and
expect a peaceable tabernacle, and a prosperous habitation, a line
house, and affluent circumstances, [Job
5:24](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#024.md). Now, says he, should I listen to
this, and endeavour to cherish some hope and expectation of small
things, and put myself in a waiting posture for them, alas! how soon
would it be over, for what other house can I rationally expect but the
grave? and this is what I have upon; I think of no other house than
that, which is man's long home, the house appointed for all living;
there I shall dwell, and make my abode until the morning of the
resurrection, and I look for no other; and if I should, I am well
assured! should be disappointed:

I have made my bed in the darkness: in the dark grave, where the light
of the body is extinct, and where the light of the sun comes not; in
houses there are various apartments, some for work and business, as is
the shop; others for eating and drinking, as the dining room; and others
for sleep and rest, as the bedchamber; now in the house of the grave
there is no mention of any but the latter; for there is no work and
device in the grave, nor eating and drinking there; but it is a bed
where the weary saint lies down and rests upon from all his toil and
labour, until he awakes at the resurrection: now Job had settled the
matter with himself, he had laid it out in his own mind, and taken a
kind of pleasure in the prospect of it; that he had got a house to move
into, when he was dislodged from the earthly house of his tabernacle,
and where he had made himself, in his own thought, an easy bed, on which
he should lay his weary limbs, and take his sleep and rest, until the
heavens be no more.

[Job 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 17:14</span></span>

I have said to corruption, thou art my father,.... Not to the
corruptible seed, of which he was begotten; nor to the corruption or
purulent matter of his boils and ulcers, and the worms his flesh was now
clothed with, [Job 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#005.md); but to that
corruption his body would turn to in the grave, lying long enough to see
it, which Christ's body did not, [Psa
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#010.md); that is, "to the pit of
corruption" (c), as it may be rendered, meaning the grave, so called
because in it dead bodies corrupt and putrefy: in houses are families
consisting of various persons, of different relations, who dwell
together in friendship and harmony, very lovingly and familiarly, as
father and mother, brother and sister; so in the grave, the dwelling
house of men, there are inhabitants that dwell together, as if they were
familiar friends and acquaintance; and with these, Job claims kindred,
such as corruption, rottenness, dust and worms, and these he speaks
unto, not only very familiarly, but very respectfully; the note of Bar
Tzemach is,

"I honour the grave as a son a father, that it may receive me quickly;''

yea, he speaks as not ashamed of the relation, but is fond of it; "I
called" or "cried" (d) that is, aloud, with great vehemency and
affection:

to the worm, thou art my mother and my sister; these are the rather
mentioned, because the relation is near, and they are very loving and
tender, and abide in the house, see [Pro
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#004.md); he calls these his mother and
sister, as the above Jewish commentator observes, because the might lie
in their bosom; by all this Job would represent how familiar death and
the grave were to him, and how little he dreaded them; yea, how
desirable they were to him, since he should be at home, and among his
relations and friends.

\(c\) "foveam", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Drusius, &c. (d)
"vocavi", Montanus; "clamavi", Mercerus.

[Job 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 17:15</span></span>

And where is now my hope?.... Not the grace of hope, which was in his
heart; and though it might sometimes be low in exercise, it could not be
lost; it is an anchor, sure and steadfast, and is one of the graces that
always abides, and never disappoints and makes ashamed; nor the object
of hope, eternal glory and happiness in another world, that is laid up
in heaven, and for which he was looking and waiting by faith; but his
hope of outward happiness, and of being restored to his former state of
prosperity, or a better, which his friends encouraged him to; this had
no place in him, nor did he see any reason to cherish it; all ground and
foundation of it was removed, as he apprehended; there was nothing on
which he could build such an hope as that, see [Job
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#011.md);

as for my hope, who shall see it? that is, which his friends would have
him hope for, a line house, a large estate, a numerous family, honour
and respect among men, long life, and an abundance of outward peace and
happiness; this he was firmly persuaded he should never see, being just
going into the grave, nor his friends that suggested these things to
him, nor anybody else; though indeed what he himself truly hoped for
might be rightly thus described, being things not seen by the eye of the
body, nor by carnal sense and reason, but are the invisible glories and
realities of another world, for "hope that is seen is not hope", &c.
[Rom 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#024.md); but Job does not design
these, but the former.

[Job 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 17:16</span></span>

They shall go down to the bars of the pit,.... He himself, and his
friends, and the hopes they would have him entertain; these should all
go down together to the grave, and there lie barred and locked up; these
hopes, so as never to rise anymore, and the bodies of himself, and his
friends, till loosed by him who has the keys of hell and death: or "the
bars shall go down to the grave"; the members of his body, as Jarchi,
which are the bars of it, as some in Bar Tzemach; the strength and
support of it, as particularly the bones, these shall go down to the
grave, and there turn to rottenness and dust; and therefore, as if he
should say, as he elsewhere does, "what is my strength, that I should
hope?" [Job 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#011.md);

when our rest together is in the dust; which is man's original, and to
which he returns, and in which the dead lie and sleep until the
resurrection; and where they are at rest from all adversity and
affliction of body, mind, and estate; from all the troubles and
vexations occasioned by wicked men, and from all disputes, wranglings,
contentions, and animosities among friends, which would be the case of
Job, and his friends, when their heads were laid in the dust, and which
he supposed would quickly be; and therefore it was in vain for them to
feed him with hopes of outward happiness, and for him to entertain them;
it best came them both to think of death and the grave as near at hand,
where their controversies would be buried, and they would be good
friends, and lie quietly together, and take their rest until they should
awake and rise to everlasting life.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 18](job018.md)

</div>
