<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job029)  [Next](job031.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 30:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 30

Job in this chapter sets forth his then unhappy state and condition, in
contrast with his former state of prosperity described in the preceding
chapter: things had taken a strange turn, and were just the reverse of
what they were before; he that was before in such high esteem and credit
with all sorts of men, young and old, high and low, rich and poor, now
is had in derision by the meanest and basest of men, whose characters
are described, [Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001.md); and the
instances of their contempt of him by words and gestures are given, [Job
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009.md); he who enjoyed so much ease of
mind, and health of body, is now filled with distresses of soul, and
bodily diseases, [Job 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015.md); and he
who enjoyed so much of the presence of God, and communion with him, and
of his love and favour, was now disregarded, and, as he thought, cruelly
used by him, who not only had destroyed his substance, but was about to
bring him to the grave, [Job 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#020.md);
all which came upon him, though he had a sympathizing heart with the
poor, and them that were in trouble, and when he expected better things,
[Job 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025.md); and he close the chapter,
lamenting his sad and sorrowful circumstances, [Job
30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029.md).

[Job 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 30:1</span></span>

But now they that are younger than I have me in derision,.... Meaning
not his three friends, who were men in years, and were not, at least all
of them, younger than he, see [Job
15:10](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#010.md); nor were they of such a mean
extraction, and such low-lived creatures, and of such characters as here
described; with such Job would never have held a correspondence in the
time of his prosperity; both they and their fathers, in all appearance,
were both great and good; but these were a set of profligate and
abandoned wretches, who, as soon as Job's troubles came upon him,
derided him, mocked and jeered at him, both by words and gestures; and
which they might do even before his three friends came to him, and
during their seven days' silence with him, and while this debate was
carrying on between them, encouraged unto it by their behaviour towards
him; to be derided by any is disagreeable to flesh and blood, though it
is the common lot of good men, especially in poor and afflicted
circumstances, and to be bore patiently; but to be so used by junior and
inferior persons is an aggravation of it; as Job was, even by young
children, as was also the prophet Elisha, [Kg2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#023.md); see [Job
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#018.md);

whose fathers I would have disdained to have set with the dogs of my
flock; either to have compared them with the dogs that kept his flock
from the wolves, having some good qualities in them which they had not;
for what more loving or faithful to their masters, or more vigilant and
watchful of their affairs? or to set them at meat with the dogs of his
flock; they were unworthy of it, though they would have been glad of the
food his dogs ate of, they living better than they, whose meat were
mallows and juniper roots, [Job 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#004.md);
and would have jumped at it; as the prodigal in want and famine, as
those men were, would fain have filled his belly with husks that swine
did eat; but as no man gave them to him, so Job disdained to give the
meat of his dogs to such as those; or to set them "over" (m) the dogs of
his flock, to be the keepers of them, to be at the head of his dogs, and
to have the command of them; see the phrase in [Sa2
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#008.md); or else to join them with his
dogs, to keep his flock with them; they were such worthless faithless
wretches, that they were not to be trusted with the care of his flock
along with his dogs. It was usual in ancient times, as well as in ours,
for dogs to be made use of in keeping flocks of sheep from beasts of
prey, as appears from Orpheus (n), Homer (o), Theocritus (p), and other
writers: and if the fathers of those that derided Job were such mean,
base, worthless creatures, what must their sons be, inferior to them in
age and honour, if any degree of honour belonged to them?

\(m\) "super canes", Noldius, p. 739. No. 1825. (n) De Lapidibus,
Hypoth. ver. 53, 54. (o) Iliad. 10. , &c. v. 183. & Iliad 12. v. 303.
(p) , &c. Idyll. 5. v. 106. & Idyll. 6. v. 9, 10.

[Job 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 30:2</span></span>

Yea, whereto might the strength of their hands profit me,.... For though
they were strong, lusty, hale men, able to do business, yet their
strength was to sit still and fold their hands in their bosoms, so that
their strength was of no profit or avail to themselves or others; they
were so slothful and lazy, that Job could not employ them in any
business of his to any advantage to himself; and this may be one reason,
among others, why he disdained to set them with the dogs of his flock to
keep it; for the fathers seem to be intended all along to [Job
30:8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#008.md); though it matters not much to
which of them the words are applied, since they were like father like
son:

in whom old age was perished? who did not arrive to old age, but were
soon consumed by their lusts, or cut off for their sins; and so the
strength and labour of their hands, had they been employed, would have
been of little worth; because the time of their continuance in service
would have been short, especially being idle and slothful: some
understand it of a lively and vigorous old age, such as was in Moses;
but this being not in them, they were unfit for business, see [Job
5:26](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#026.md); or they had not the endowments
of old age, the experience, wisdom, and prudence of ancient persons, to
contrive, conduct, and manage affairs, or direct in the management of
them, which would make up for lack of strength and labour. Ben Gersom,
Bar Tzemach, and others, interpret the word of time, or the time of
life, that was perished or lost in them; their whole course of life,
being spent in sloth and idleness, was all lost time.

[Job 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 30:3</span></span>

For want and famine they were solitary,.... The Targum interprets it,
without children; but then this cannot be understood of the fathers;
rather through famine and want they were reduced to the utmost
extremity, and were as destitute of food as a rock, or hard flint, from
whence nothing is to be had, as the word signifies, see [Job
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#007.md);

fleeing into the wilderness in former time desolate and waste: to search
and try what they could get there for their sustenance and relief,
fleeing through fear of being taken up for some crimes committed, or
through shame, on account of their miserable condition, not caring to be
seen by men, and therefore fled into the wilderness to get what they
could there: but since men in want and famine usually make to cities,
and places of resort, where provision may be expected; this may be
interpreted not of their flying into the wilderness, though of their
being there, perhaps banished thither, see [Job
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#005); but of their "gnawing" (q.md), or
biting the dry and barren wilderness, and what they could find there;
where having short commons, and hunger bitten, they bit close; which,
though extremely desolate, they were glad to feed upon what they could
light on there; such miserable beggarly creatures were they: and with
this agrees what follows.

\(q\) "qui rodebant in solitudine", V. L. "rodentes siccitatem",
Schultens.

[Job 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 30:4</span></span>

Who cut up mallows by the bushes,.... Which with the Troglodytes were of
a vast size (r); or rather "upon the bush" (s) or "tree"; and therefore
cannot mean what we call mallows, which are herbs on the ground, and
grow not on trees or bushes; and, besides, are not for food, but rather
for medicine: though Plutarch (t) says they, were the food of the meaner
sort of people; so Horace (u) speaks of them as such; and the word in
the original is near in sound to a mallow; but it signifies something
salt, wherefore Mr. Broughton renders it "salt herbs"; so Grotius, such
as might grow by the seaside, or in salt marshes; and in Edom, or
Idumea, where Job lived, was a valley of salt, see [Kg2
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007.md). Jarchi says it is the same with
what the Syrians in their language call "kakuli", which with them is a
kind of pulse; but what the Turks at this day call "kakuli" is a kind of
salt herb, like to "alcali", which is the food of camels (x) the
Septuagint render the word by "alima"; and, by several modern learned
men, what is intended is thought to be the "halimus" of Dioscorides,
Galen, and Avicenna; which is like unto a bramble, and grows in hedges
and maritime places; the tops of which, when young and tender, are
eaten, and the leaves boiled for food, and are eaten by poor people,
being what soon filled the belly, and satisfied; and seem to be the same
the Moors call "mallochia", and cry about the streets, as food for the
poor to buy (y): however it appears upon the whole to be the tops or
leaves of some sort of shrub, which Idumean people used to gather and
live upon. The following story is reported in the Talmud (z) concerning
King Jannai, who

"went to Cochalith in the wilderness, and there subdued sixty fortified
towns; and, upon his return, he greatly rejoiced, and called all the
wise men of Israel, and said unto them, our fathers ate "malluchim" (the
word used in this text of Job) at the time they were employed in
building the sanctuary; so we will eat "malluchim" on remembrance of our
fathers; and they set "malluchim" on tables of gold, and they ate;''

which the gloss interprets herbs; the name of which, in the Syriac
language, is "kakuli"; the Targum is, who plucks up thorns instead of
eatable herbs. Some (a) render the word "nettles", see [Job
30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007.md);

juniper roots for their meat, or "bread" (b); with the roots of which
the poor were fed in time of want, as Schindler (v) observes: that bread
may be, and has been made out of roots, is certain, as with the West
Indians, out of the roots of "ages" and "jucca" (c); and in particular
juniper roots in the northern countries have been used for bread (d);
and there were a people in Ethiopia above Egypt, who lived upon roots of
reeds prepared, and were called "rhisophagi" (e), "root eaters": some
render the words, "or juniper roots to heat", or "warm with" (f), as the
word is used in [Isa 47:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa047.htm#014.md); and coals
of juniper have in them a very great and vehement heat, see [Psa
120:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa120.htm#003.md); but if any part of the juniper
tree was taken for this purpose, to warm with when cold, one should
think the branches, or the body of the tree, should be cut down, rather
than the roots dug up: another sense is given by some (g), that meat or
bread is to be understood of the livelihood these persons got by digging
up juniper roots, and selling them: there are others that think, that
not the roots of juniper, but of "broom" (h), are meant, whose rape, or
navew, or excrescence from the roots of it, seem to be more fit food.
All this agrees with the Troglodytes, whom Pliny (i) represents as
thieves and robbers, and, when pressed with famine, dig up herbs and
roots: cutters of roots are reckoned among the worst of men by Manetho
(k).

\(r\) Diodorus Siculus, l. 3. p. 175. (s) "super virgulto", Montanus,
Schultens; "super arbustum", Bochart. (t) In symposio septem sap. (u)
"-----me pascunt olivae. Me cichorea levesque malvae". Carmin. l. 1.
Ode. 31. & Epod. Ode. 2. (x) Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 4. p. 760.
(y) lbid. vid. Reinesium de Lingua Punic. c. 9. S. 20, 21. (z) T. Bab.
Kiddushin, fol. 66. 1. (a) David de Pomis Lexic. fol. 80. 3. (b) "panis
eorum", Montanus, Michaelis, Schultens. (v) Lexic. col. 1775. (c) Pet.
Martyr. de Angleria, decad. 1. l. 1. (d) Olaus Magnus, de Ritu Gent.
Septent. l. 12. c. 4. (e) Diod. Sic. l. 3. p. 159. (f) "Ad calefaciendum
se", Pagninus; so Kimchi, Sepher Shorash rad, (g) Hillerus apud
Schultens in loc. (h) "radix genistarum", Michaelis, Schultens; so some
in Mercerus, Drusius, & Gussetius, p. 839. (i) Nat. Hist. l. 37. c. 8.
(k) Apotelesm. l. 5. v. 183.

[Job 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 30:5</span></span>

They were driven from among men,.... From towns and cities, and all
civil society, as unfit to be among them; not for any good, it may be
observed, but for crimes that they had done, like our felons, and
transported persons:

they cried after them as after a thief; as they were driven and run
along, the people called after them, saying, there goes a thief; which
they said by way of abhorrence of them, and for the shame of them, and
that all might be warned and cautioned against them; and, generally
speaking, such as are idle and slothful, and thereby become miserable,
are pilferers and thieves.

[Job 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 30:6</span></span>

To dwell in the cliffs of the valleys,.... Or "brooks" (l), in such
hollow places as were made by floods and streams of waters:

in caves of the earth, and in the rocks; where they betook themselves
for fear of men, and through shame, being naked and miserable not fit to
be seen: Job has respect to the Horites and Troglodytes, his neighbours,
who dwelt in such places chiefly.

\(l\) "torrentium", Tigurine version, Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Job 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 30:7</span></span>

Among the bushes they brayed,.... Like wild asses; so Sephorno, to which
wicked men are fitly compared, [Job
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012.md); or they "cried", or "groaned"
(m), and "moaned" among the bushes, where they lay lurking; either they
groaned through cold, or want of food; for the wild ass brays not but
when in want, [Job 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#005.md);

under the nettles they were gathered together; or "under thistles" (n),
as some, or "under thorns", as (o) others; under thorn hedges, where
they lay either for shelter, or to hide themselves, or to seize upon a
prey that might pass by; and so were such sort of persons as in the
parable in [Luk 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk014.htm#023.md); it not being
usual for nettles to grow so high as to cover persons, at least they are
not a proper shelter, and much less an eligible one; though some render
the words, they were "pricked" (p), blistered and wounded, a word
derived from this being used for the scab of leprosy, [Lev
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#006.md); and so pustules and blisters are
raised by the sting of nettles: the Targum is,

"under thorns they were associated together;''

under thorn hedges, as before observed; and if the juniper tree is meant
in [Job 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#004.md), they might be said to be
gathered under thorns when under that; since, as Pliny (q) says, it has
thorns instead of leaves; and the shadow of it, according to the poet
(r), is very noxious and disagreeable.

\(m\) "clamabant", Vatablus, Mercerus; so Ben Gerson; "gemebant",
Michaelis; so Broughton. (n) "sub carduis", Vatablus. (o) "Sub
sentibus", V. L. "sub vepreto aliquo", Tigurine version; "sub vepribus",
Cocceius; "sub spina", Noldius, p. 193. Schultens. (p) "pungebantur",
Junius & Tremellius; "se ulcerant", Gussetius, p. 565. so Ben Gersom;
"they smarted", Broughton. (q) Nat. Hist. l. 16. c. 24. (r) "Juniperi
gravis umbra----" Virgil. Bucolic. Eclog. 10.

[Job 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 30:8</span></span>

They were children of fools,.... Their parents were fools, or they
themselves were such; foolish children, or foolish men, were they that
derided Job; and their derision of him was a proof of it: the meaning is
not that they were idiots, or quite destitute of reason and natural
knowledge, but that they were men of slender capacities; they were
"Nabal like", which is the word here used of them; and, indeed, it may
easily be concluded, they could not have much knowledge of men and
things, from their pedigree, education, and manner of living before
described; though rather this may signify their being wicked men, or
children of such, which is the sense of the word "fool" frequently in
the Psalms of David, and in the Proverbs of Solomon; and men may be
fools in this sense, as having no understanding of divine and spiritual
things, who yet have wit enough to do evil, though to do good they have
no knowledge:

yea, children of base men, or "men without a name" (s); a kind without
fame, Mr. Broughton renders it; an infamous generation of men, famous
for nothing; had no name for blood, birth, and breeding; for families,
for power and authority among men, having no title of honour or of
office; nor for wealth, wisdom, nor strength, for which some have a
name; but these men had no name but an ill one, for their folly and
wickedness; had no good name, were of no credit and reputation with men;
and perhaps, strictly and literally speaking, were without a name, being
a spurious and bastardly breed; or living solitary in woods and deserts,
in cliffs and caves; they belonged not to any tribe or nation, and so
bore no name:

they are viler than the earth; on which they trod, and who are unworthy
to tread upon it; and out of which their vile bodies were made, and yet
were viler than that which is the basest of the elements, being most
distant from heaven, the throne of God (t); they were not so valuable as
some parts of the earth, the gold and silver, but were as vile as the
dross of the earth, and viler than that; they were crushed and bruised,
and "broken" more than the earth, as the word (u) signifies; they were
as small and as contemptible as the dust of the earth and the mire of
the streets, and more so; or than the men of the earth, as Aben Ezra
observes, than the meanest and worst, and vilest of men: Mr. Broughton
renders it, "banished from the earth"; smitten, stricken, and driven out
of the land where they had dwelt, [Job
30:5](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#005.md); whipped out of it, as some
translate the word (w), as vagabonds; as a lazy, idle, pilfering set of
people, not fit to be in human society; and by such base, mean, lowly
people, were Christ and his apostles ill treated; see [Mat
23:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#033.md).

\(s\) "absque nomine", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus; so Beza, Mercerus,
Piscator, Drusius, Michaelis, Cocceius. (t) See Weemse's Observat.
Natural. c 3. (u) "contriti", Montanus, Bolducius; so the Targum. (w)
"Flagellati", Schultens.

[Job 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 30:9</span></span>

And now am I their song,.... The subject of their song, of whom they
sung ballads about the streets, in public places, and at their festivals
and merriments, as Christ the antitype of Job was the song of the
drunkard, [Psa 69:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#012.md); see [Lam
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#014.md); or the meaning may be, they
rejoiced in his afflictions and calamities, and made themselves merry
with them, which was cruel and inhuman, as David's enemies did in his,
and those abject, mean, base people, like those that derided Job: and so
the Edomites rejoiced over the children of Judah, in the day of their
destruction, and as the inhabitants of Popish countries will rejoice
over the witnesses when slain, and make merry, [Psa
35:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#015.md);

yea, I am their byword: all their talk was about him continually, and at
every turn would use his name proverbially for an hypocrite, or a wicked
man; and thus Christ, of whom Job was a type, became a proverb in the
mouth of the Jews, [Psa 69:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#011.md); and as
the Jews themselves now are with others, [Jer
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer024.htm#009.md).

[Job 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 30:10</span></span>

They abhor me,.... As it is no wonder they should, since his inward and
most intimate friends did, [Job 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#019.md);
they abhorred him, not for any evil in him; Job was ready enough to
abhor that himself, and himself for it, as he did when sensible of it,
[Job 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006.md); but for the good that was
in him, spoken or done by him; which carried in it a reproof to them
they could not bear; see [Amo 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#010.md);
they abhorred him also because of his present meanness and poverty, and
because of his afflictions and distresses; and particularly the diseases
of his body; so Christ was abhorred by the Scribes, Pharisees and elders
of the people, the three shepherds his soul loathed, and their soul
abhorred him for his meanness and for his ministry: and even by the
whole nation of the Jews, by the body of the people, particularly when
they preferred Barabbas, a thief and a murderer, to him, [Mar
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#007.md); see [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008.md);

they flee from me; as from some hideous monster, or infectious person,
as if he had the plague on him, or some nauseous disease, the stench of
which they could not bear; so Christ his antitype was used by: his
people; when they saw him in his afflictions they hid their faces from
him, did not care to look at him, or come nigh him, [Isa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#003.md);

and spare not to spit in my face; not in his presence only, as some
think, which is too low a sense, but literally and properly in his face,
when they vouchsafed to come near him; in this opprobrious way they used
him, than which nothing was a greater indignity and affront; and we need
not scruple to interpret it in this sense of Job, since our Lord, whose
type he was in this and other things, was so treated, [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006.md).

[Job 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 30:11</span></span>

Because he hath loosed my cord,.... Not his silver cord, for then he
must have died immediately, [Ecc 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#006.md);
though it may be understood of the loosening of his nerves through the
force of his disease, and the afflictions he endured from God and man,
see [Job 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017.md); or rather of the
shattered state and condition of his family and substance; which, while
he enjoyed, he had respect and reverence from men; but now all being
loosed, scattered, and destroyed, he was treated with derision and
scorn; or, better still, of his power and authority as a civil
magistrate, by which, as with a cord, he bound many to subjection and
obedience to him, and which commanded reverence of him; but this being
now loosed and removed from him, persons of the baser sort behaved in an
insolent manner towards him; there is a "Keri", or a marginal reading of
this clause, which we follow; but the "Cetib", or written text, is "his
cord"; and so Mr. Broughton renders it, "he hath loosed his string";
which he explains of the string or rein of his government, that holdeth
base men from striving with the mighty, and which comes to the same
sense; for the power and authority Job had as a governor were of God,
and which he had now loosened; the allusion may be to the string of a
bow, which being loosed, it cannot cast out the arrow; and respect may
be had to what Job had said, [Job
29:20](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#020.md), "my bow was renewed in my
hand"; it then abode in strength, and its strength was renewed; but now
he had lost his power and strength, at least it was greatly weakened,
that he could not defend himself, nor punish the wicked:

and afflicted me; that is, God, who is also understood in the preceding
clause, though not expressed. Job's afflictions were many, and there
were second causes of them, who were the movers, instruments, and means
of them, as Satan, the Sabeans and Chaldeans, yet they were of God, as
the appointer, orderer, and sender of them; and so Job understood them,
and always as here ascribed them to him; wherefore there was a just
cause for them, and an end to be answered by them, and it became Job
patiently to bear them, and to wait the issue of them: now, on this
account, the above persons were emboldened and encouraged to use Job in
the ill manner they did:

they have also let loose the bridle before me; the restraints that were
upon them when Job was in his prosperity, and had the reins of
government in his hand; these they now cast off, and showed no manner of
reverence of him, nor respect for him; and the bridle that was upon
their mouths, which kept them from speaking evil of him while he was in
power, now they slipped it from them, and gave themselves an unbounded
liberty in deriding, reproaching, and reviling him; see [Psa
39:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#001.md); and this they did before him, in
his presence and to his face, who before were mute and silent.

[Job 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 30:12</span></span>

Upon my right hand rise the youth,.... "Springeth", as Mr. Broughton
translates the word; such as were just sprung into being, as it were;
the word (n) seems to have the signification of young birds that are not
fledged; have not got their feathers on them, but are just got out of
the shell, as it were; and such were these young men: some render the
word the "flower" (o); as if the flower of men, the chief and principal
of them, were meant, such as were Job's three friends, who are here
distinguished from the mean and baser sort before spoken of; but the
word even in this sense signifies young men, who are like buds and
flowers just sprung out, or who are beardless boys, or whose beards are
just springing out; so the young priests are in the Misnah (p) called
"the flowers of the priesthood": now such as these rose up, not in
reverence to Job, as the aged before did, but in an hostile way, to
oppose, resist, reproach, and deride him; they rose up on his right
hand, took the right hand of him, as if they were his superiors and
betters; or they stood at his right hand, took the right hand to accuse
him, as Satan did at Joshua's; see [Psa
109:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#006.md);

they push away my feet; they brought heavy charges and violent
accusations against him, in order to cast him down, and trample upon
him; nor would they suffer him to stand and answer for himself; he could
have no justice done him, and so there was no standing for him. If this
was to be understood literally, of their pushing at him to throw him
down to the ground, or of an attempt trip up his heels, so that his feet
were almost gone, and his steps had well nigh slipped, it was very rude
and indecent treatment of him indeed:

and they raise up against me the ways of their destruction; as, in
besieging a town, mounts, forts, and batteries are raised to destroy it,
so those persons made use of all ways and means to destroy Job; or they
trod upon him, and made him as a path or causeway to walk upon, in order
utterly to destroy him. Mr. Broughton renders the words, "they cast upon
me the causes of their woe", imputed all their calamities and miseries
to him, reproached him on that account, and now were resolved to revenge
themselves on him.

\(n\) "pullities", Schultens. (o) "Flos", Schmidt, Michaelis. (p) Misn.
Sanhedrin, c. 1. sect. 7.

[Job 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 30:13</span></span>

They mar my path,.... Hindered him in the exercise of religious duties;
would not suffer him to attend the ways and worship of God, or to walk
in the paths of holiness and righteousness; or they reproached his holy
walk and conversation, and treated it with contempt, and triumphed over
religion and godliness:

they set forward my calamity; added affliction to affliction, increased
his troubles by their reproaches and calumnies, and were pleased with
it, as if it was profitable as well as pleasurable to them, see [Zac
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015.md);

they have no helper; either no person of note to join them, and, to
abet, assist, and encourage them; or they needed none, being forward
enough of themselves to give him all the distress and disturbance they
could, and he being so weak and unable to resist them; nor there is "no
helper against them" (q); none to take Job's part against them, and
deliver him out of their hands, see [Ecc
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc004.htm#001.md).

\(q\) "adversus illos", Beza, Schmidt, Michaelis; so Noldius, p. 514.

[Job 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 30:14</span></span>

They came upon me as a wide breaking in of waters,.... As when a wide
breach is made in the banks of a river, or of the sea, the waters rush
through in great abundance, with great rapidity and swiftness; and with
a force irresistible; and in like manner did Job's enemies rush in upon
him in great numbers, overwhelming him in an instant, and he not able to
oppose them; or as, when a wide breach is made in the wall of a city
besieged, the besiegers pour themselves in, and bear down all before
them: and thus Job in a like violent manner was run upon, and bore down
by the persons before described:

in the desolation they rolled themselves upon me; as when a breach is
made in a bank of a river, or of the sea, the waters roll themselves,
one wave and flood over another; or, as when a breach is made in a wall,
"in the broken place they tumble"; as Mr. Broughton renders it; the
soldiers tumble one over another in haste, to get possession and seize
the plunder: in such like manner did Job's enemies roll themselves on
him, in order to crush and destroy him; and it may be rendered, "because
of the desolation" (r), because of bringing calamity on him in order to
make him desolate; they came pouring in upon him with all their numbers,
force, and strength, to bear him down, and crush him to the earth, as
grass may be rolled upon, and beaten down by heavy bodies.

\(r\) "pro desolatione", Pagninus, Montanus; "propter vestalionem",
Noldius, p. 3. No. 1864.

[Job 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 30:15</span></span>

Terrors are turned upon me,.... Not the terrors of a guilty conscience,
for Job had a clear one, and held fast his integrity; nor the terrors of
a cursing and condemning law, for he knew he was justified by his living
Redeemer, and his sins forgiven for his sake; nor the terrors of death,
for that he had made familiar to him, and greatly desired it; nor the
terrors of a future judgment, for there was nothing he was more
solicitous for than to appear before the judgment seat of God, and take
his trial there; but the afflictions that were upon him from the hand of
God that was turned on him, who now hid his face from him, and withheld
the influences of his grace and layout, and appeared as an enemy, and as
a cruel one to him; the reason of all which he knew not, and this threw
him into consternation of mind, and filled him with terror. Some (s)
read the words

"my glory is turned into terrors;''

instead of being in the honour and glory, prosperity and happiness, he
had been in, he was now possessed of terrors and distresses of various
kinds: others render the words, "he is turned against me, as terrors",
or "into terrors", or "with them" (t); God cannot be turned or changed
in his nature, in his will, counsel, purposes, and decrees, nor in his
love and affection to his people; but he may turn in the outward
dispensations of his providence according to his unchangeable will, as
from evil to good, [Jon 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#009.md); so from
doing good to evil, [Isa 63:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#010.md); this
is complained of by the church, [Lam
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#003.md); and deprecated by Jeremiah, [Jer
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#017.md); or there is "a turn, terrors
are upon me"; there was a very visible turn in Job's affairs in many
respects, in his health, substance, and family, and particularly in
this; while he was in his office as a civil magistrate, and in all the
glory of it, he was a terror to evil doers; and young men, when he
appeared, hid themselves for fear of him; but now those impudently rise
up against him, and are terrors to him: or there is an "overthrow" (u),
an overturning of things, as of his civil and temporal affairs, so of
his spiritual ones; instead of that peace, serenity, and tranquillity of
mind he had enjoyed; now nothing but terror and distress of mind on
account of his afflictions and troubles:

they pursue my soul as the wind; terrors one after another; they pursued
him closely, with great swiftness, and with a force irresistible, like
the wind; they pursued his soul, his life, and threatened the taking
away of it: the word for soul is not the usual word for it; it signifies
"my principal one", as in the margin, as the soul is the principal part
of man, the immortal breath of God, the inhabitant in the tenement of
the body, the jewel in the cabinet, immaterial and immortal, and of more
worth than the whole world; or "my princely one", being of a princely
original, is from God, the Father of spirits, of a noble extract: Mr.
Broughton renders it my "nobility", having princely rule and government
in the body; that using the members of the body as its instruments; and
especially it may be said to have such rule, when grace is implanted in
it, as a ruling governing principle; and the Targum is, my principality
or government: it may be rendered, "my free" (w), liberal, ingenuous,
and munificent one: Job had such a generous and beneficent soul; but now
all means of exercising generosity and liberality were cut off from him;
and particularly he had find a free ingenuous one, as he was actuated by
the free spirit of God, [Psa 51:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#012.md),
where this word is used; but now terrors pursuing him, a spirit of
bondage unto fear was brought upon him: some (x) consider it as an
apostrophe to God, "thou pursues, my soul, O God", &c. but rather the
meaning is, a distress or affliction pursued it, or everyone of the
above terrors:

and my welfare passeth away as a cloud; or "my salvation" (y); not
spiritual and eternal salvation, that was firm and stable, being fixed
by the unalterable decree of God, secured in the covenant of grace, and
engaged for to be wrought out by his living. Redeemer, and of which he
had an application by the Spirit of God, and was possessed of the
blessings of it; and though the joys and comforts of it, and views of
interest in it, may go off for a while, yet Job seems to have had a
strong faith of interest in it, and a lively and well grounded hope of
its being his, [Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015.md); but his
temporal salvation, health, and happiness, were gone suddenly, swiftly,
utterly, entirely, totally, as a cloud dissolved into rain, or
dissipated by the rays of the sun, or driven away with the wind, so as
to be seen no more; nor had he any hope of its being restored to him:
some understand this, as Sephorno, of the salvation with which he had
saved others; but it was no more in the power of his hands, and the
remembrance of it was gone from those who shared in it; see [Hos
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#004.md).

\(s\) So some in Bar Tzemach in loc. (t) "conversus est contra me, sicut
terrores", Schmidt; "in meros terrores, vel cum terroribus", Michaelis.
(u) "Eversio", Schultens. (w) "principalem meam", Mercerus; "meam
principem", Vatablus, Piscator; "meam spontaneam", Pagninus, Montanus,
Michaelis; "meam ultroneam", Drusius; "generosum meam spiritum",
Schultens. (x) Schmidt. (y) "salus mea", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Job 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 30:16</span></span>

And now my soul is poured out upon me,.... Either in prayer to God for
help and deliverance; or rather he was dissolved as it were in floods of
tears, because of his distress and anguish; or his spirits were sunk,
his strength and courage failed, and his heart melted, and was poured
out like water; yea, his soul was pouring out unto death, and he was, as
he apprehended, near unto it; his body was so weakened and broken by
diseases, that it was like a vessel full of holes, out of which the
liquor runs away apace; so his life and soul were going away from him,
his vital spirits were almost exhausted:

the days of affliction have taken hold upon me; afflictions seize on
good men as well as others, and on them more than others; and there are
certain times and seasons for them, appointed and ordered by the Lord;
and there is a limited time, they are not to continue always, only for
some days, for a time, and but a little time, and then they will have an
end; but till that time comes, there can be no deliverance from them;
being sent they come, coming they seized on Job, they laid hold on him,
they "caught" him, as Mr. Broughton renders it, and held him fast, and
would not let him go; nor could he get clear of them till God delivered
him, who only can and does deliver out of them in his own time and way.

[Job 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 30:17</span></span>

My bones are pierced in me in the night season,.... Such was the force
of his disease, that it pierced and penetrated even into his bones, and
the marrow of them; and such the pain that he endured in the muscles and
tendons about them, and especially in the joints of them, that it was as
if all his bones were piercing and breaking to pieces; he was in a like
condition the sick man is described in [Job
33:19](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#019.md); and as David and Hezekiah were,
[Psa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002.md); and what aggravated his case
was, that this was "in the night season", when he should have got some
sleep and rest, but could not for his pain: some render the words by
supplying them thus; God, or the disease, or the pain, pierced my bones
in the night season; or "the night pierced my bones from me"; so Mr.
Broughton; but rather they may be rendered, and the sense be,

"in the night season everyone of my bones pierce "the flesh" that is
upon me:''

his flesh was almost wasted and consumed, through the boil and ulcers on
him, and he was reduced to a mere skeleton; and when he laid himself
down on his bed, these pierced through his skin, and stuck out, and gave
him exquisite pain:

and my sinews take no rest; being contracted; or his nerves, as the word
in the Arabic language signifies, as is observed by Aben Ezra, Jarchi,
Donesh, and others; which were loosened, and the animal spirits were
sunk, and he so low and dispirited, that he could get no rest: or the
pulsatile veins and arteries, as Ben Gersom and Elias Levita (a), in
which the pulse beats, and which beats with less strength when persons
are asleep than when awake; but such was the force of Job's disease,
that it beat even in the night, when on his bed, so strongly, that he
could take no rest for it; the pulse beats, as physicians say (b), sixty
times in a minute, and double the number in a burning fever, and which
might be Job's case. Some take the word in the sense of fleeing or
gnawing (c), as it is used [Job 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#003.md);
and interpret it either of his enemies, who pursued after him, and had
no rest in their beds, but went out in the night to inquire and hear
what they could learn concerning him and his illness, whether it was
become greater (d); or who devoured him by their calumnies and
detractions, and could not sleep unless they did mischief to him; see
[Pro 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016.md); or of the worms with which
his body was covered, and which were continually gnawing, never rested,
nor suffered him to take any rest; the Targum is, they that gnash at me
rest not.

\(a\) In Tishbi, p. 67. So Lud. Capellus in loc. (b) Scheuchzer. Physic.
Sacr. vol. 4. p 764. (c) "et rodentia mea", Schultens; "fugientia membra
mea", so some in Michaelis. (d) Vid. Bar Tzemach in loc.

[Job 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 30:18</span></span>

By the great force of my disease is my garment changed,.... Either the
colour of it, through the purulent matter from his ulcers running down
upon it, or penetrating through it; or by reason of it he was obliged to
shift himself, and to have a change of raiment very frequently; or the
supplement, "of my disease", may be left out, and the sense be, with
great force, through main strength, and with much difficulty, his
garment was changed, was got off from him, sticking so close to him, and
another put on:

it bindeth me about as the collar of my coat; his disease encompassed
him about on all sides as the collar or edge of his coat encompassed his
neck, and cleaved as close, and was as tight unto him as that, and
threatened him perhaps with a suffocation or strangling; see [Job
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#015.md); the allusion is to garments used
in the eastern countries, which were only open at top and bottom; at the
top there was a hole to put the head through when put on, and a binding
about it, and a button to it, or some such thing, which kept it tight
about the neck; see [Exo 28:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#032.md).

[Job 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 30:19</span></span>

He hath cast me into the mire,.... As Jeremiah was literally; here it is
to be understood in a figurative sense; not of the mire of sin, into
which God casts none, men fall into it of themselves, but of the mire of
affliction and calamity; see [Psa
40:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#002.md); and which Job here ascribes to
God; and whereby he was in as mean, abject, and contemptible a
condition, as if he had been thrown into a kennel, and rolled in it; and
he speaks of it as an act of God, done with contempt of him, and
indignation at him, as he apprehended it. Some Jewish writers (e)
interpret it, "he taught me in the mire", or "it taught me"; his
disease, his ulcers taught him to sit down in the mire, or in the midst
of ashes, [Job 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008.md); but though this
reading might admit of a good sense, as that Job was taught, as every
good man is, many useful lessons in and by afflictions; yet it seems to
be a sense foreign from the words:

and I am become like dust and ashes; a phrase by which Abraham expresses
his vileness, meanness, and unworthiness in the sight of God, [Gen
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#027.md); Job, through the force of his
disease, looked like a corpse, or one half dead, and was crumbling and
dropping into the dust of death and the grave, and looked livid and ash
coloured; and even in a literal sense was covered with dust and ashes,
when he sat among them, [Job 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/job002.htm#008.md);
though here it chiefly respects the miserable, forlorn, and contemptible
condition in which he was.

\(e\) Vid. Jarchi & Bar Tzemach in loc.

[Job 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 30:20</span></span>

I cry unto thee, and thou dost not hear me,.... Which added greatly to
his affliction, that though he cried to the Lord for help and
deliverance, yet he turned a deaf ear to him; and though he heard him,
as undoubtedly he did, he did not answer him immediately; at least not
in the way in which he desired and expected he would: crying is
expressive of prayer, and supposes distress, and denotes vehemence of
spirit:

I stand up; in prayer, standing being a prayer gesture, as many observe
from [Jer 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer015.htm#001.md); See Gill on [Mat
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005.md); or he persisted in it, he
continued praying, was incessant in it, and yet could obtain no answer;
or this signifies silence, as some (f) interpret it; he cried, and then
ceased, waiting for an answer; but whether he prayed, or whether he was
silent, it was the same thing:

and thou regardest me not; the word "not" is not in this clause, but is
repeated from the preceding, as it is by Ben Gersom and others; but some
read it without it, and give the sense either thus, thou considerest me
whether it is fit to receive my prayer or not, so Sephorno; or to renew
my strokes, to add new afflictions to me, as Jarchi and Bar Tzemach; or
thou lookest upon me as one pleased with the sight of me in such a
miserable condition, so far from helping me; wherefore it follows.

\(f\) Jarchi, Ben Gersom, and Bar Tzemach.

[Job 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 30:21</span></span>

Thou art become cruel to me,.... Or "turned", or "changed" (g), to be
cruel to me. Job suggests that God had been kind and gracious to him,
both in a way of providence, and in showing special love and favour to
him, in a very distinguishing manner; but now he intimates his
affections were changed and altered, and these were alienated from him,
and his love was turned into an hatred of him; this is one of the
unbecoming expressions which dropped from his lips concerning God; for
the love of God to his people is never changed; it remains invariable
and unalterable, in all dispensations, in every state and condition into
which they come; there may be some of God's dispensations towards them,
which may have the appearance of severity in them; and he may make use
of instruments to chastise them, which may use them cruelly; but even
then his heart yearns towards them, and, being full of compassion,
delivers out of their hands, and saves them, [Jer
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#014.md);

with thy strong hand thou opposest thyself against me; God has a strong
hand and arm, and none like him, and sometimes he puts forth the
strength of it, and exerts his mighty power in afflicting his people,
and his hand presses them sore, and they can scarcely stand up under it;
and then it becomes them to humble themselves under the mighty hand of
God, and patiently bear it; and sometimes they take him to be their
adversary, an enemy unto them, and filled with hatred of them,
indignation against them, setting himself with all his might and main to
ruin and destroy them; and this is a sad case indeed, to have such
apprehensions of God, though unjust ones; for, as if God be for us, who
shall be against us? so if he be against us, it signifies little who is
for us; for there is no contending with him, [Job
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#003.md).

\(g\) "mutatus es", V. L. Tigurine version; "versus es", Beza, Piscator;
so Drusius, Cocceius, Vatablus, Michaelis, Mercerus, Schultens.

[Job 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 30:22</span></span>

Thou liftest me up to the wind,.... Of affliction and adversity, to be
carried up with it, and tossed about by it, as chaff or stubble, or a
dry leaf, being no more able to stand up against it than such things are
to oppose the wind; though some interpret this of God's lifting him up
in his state of prosperity, in which he was very visible and conspicuous
to all, and enjoyed much light and comfort; but then he raised him to
such an estate, with a view to cast him down, and that his fall and ruin
might be the greater; and so this is observed as a proof of his being
become cruel to him:

thou causest me to ride upon it; seemingly in great pomp and state, but
in great uncertainty and danger, being at best in a slippery place, in
very fickle circumstances, as the event showed; or rather the sense is,
that he was swiftly carried into destruction, as if he rode on the wings
of the wind to it, and was hurried thither at once, as soon as he was
taken up with the tempest of adversity:

and dissolvest my substance; his outward substance, his wealth and
riches, his family, and the health of his body, all which as it were
melted away, or were carried away as with a flood; and so as the
metaphor of a tempestuous wind is used in the former clause, here that
of an overflowing flood, which removed from him what seemed to be the
most solid and substantial: the word is sometimes used for wisdom, and
even sound wisdom, [Pro 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#007.md); wherefore
some have interpreted it of his being at his wits' end, of losing his
reason and understanding, and which were at least disturbed and
confounded by his afflictions; but his discourses and speeches show the
contrary, and he himself denies that wisdom was driven from him, [Job
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#013.md).

[Job 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 30:23</span></span>

For I know that thou wilt bring me to death,.... Quickly and by the
present affliction upon him; he was assured, as he thought, that this
was the view and design of God in this providence, under which he was to
bring him to death and the grave; that he would never take off his hand
till he had brought him to the dust of death, to that lifeless dust from
whence he had his original; otherwise, that he would he brought thither,
sooner or later, was no great masterpiece of knowledge; every man knows
this will be the case with him as with all; death is become necessary by
sin, which brought it into the world, and the sentence of it on all men
in it, and by the decree and appointment of God, by which it is fixed
and settled that all should die; and this is confirmed by all experience
in all ages, a very few excepted, only two persons, Enoch and Elijah,
[Gen 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#024.md), sometimes the death of
persons is made known to them by divine revelation, as to Aaron and
Moses, [Num 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012.md); and sometimes it
may be gathered to be nigh from the symptoms of it on the body; from
growing diseases, and the infirmities of old age; but Job concluded it
from the manner of God's dealing with him, as he thought in wrath and
indignation, determining to make an utter end of him:

and to the house appointed for all living; the grave, which is the house
for the body when dead to be brought unto and lodged in; as the "house
not made with hands, eternal in the heavens", [Co2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001.md), is for the soul in its separate
state, until the resurrection morn; which house or grave is man's "long
home", [Ecc 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#005.md); and this is prepared
and appointed for all men living, since all must die; and all that die
have a house or grave, though that is sometimes a watery, and not an
earthy one; however the dust of everybody has a receptacle provided for
it, where it is reserved until the time of the resurrection, and then it
is brought forth, [Rev 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#013.md); and this
is by divine appointment; the word used signifies both an appointed time
and place, and is often used of the Jewish solemnities, which were fixed
with respect to both; and also of the people or congregation that
attended them; the grave is the general rendezvous of mankind, and both
the time when and the place where the dead are gathered and brought unto
it are fixed by the determinate will and counsel of God.

[Job 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 30:24</span></span>

Howbeit he will not stretch out his hand to the grave,.... Or, "verily"
(h), truly he will not, &c. I am well assured he never will, meaning
either he never would stretch out his hand to shut up the grave; or
rather keep it shut, and prevent Job from going down into it; or to open
it, and fetch him out of it when in it: God is indeed able to do either
of these, and has done it; sometimes, when persons are brought as it
were to the gates of death and the grave, he says to them, Return; yea,
when they are brought to the dust of death, he prevents them going into
the grave, by restoring them to life before carried thither, as the
Shunammite's son, [Kg2 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#032.md); Jairus's
daughter, [Mar 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#041.md); and the widow's
son of Nain, even when he was carrying to his grave, [Luk
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#012.md); some have been laid in the
grave, and God has stretched out his hand, and raised them up again; as
the man that was laid in Elisha's grave, [Kg2
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#021.md), and Lazarus after he had lain
in the grave some days, [Joh 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039.md);
but such things are not usually done; in common, when a man dies, and is
laid in the grave, he rises not again, till the heavens be no more; and
this Job was persuaded would be his case:

though they cry in his destruction; that is, though the friends and
relations of the sick person, or the poor that he has been kind and
bountiful unto, should cry unto God, while he is destroying him by the
diseases upon him, and which threaten him with destruction, that he
would spare his useful and valuable life; yet he is inexorable, and will
not hear, but go on with what he intends to do, and takes him off by
death, and lays him in the grave, "the pit of destruction", [Psa
55:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#023.md), so called because it wastes and
consumes bodies laid in it; and when once laid there, all cries for a
restoration to life again are vain and fruitless. Some take these words
as expressed in a way of solace, as if Job comforted himself with this
thought under his present afflictions, that, when once he was brought to
death and the grave, there would be an end of all his sorrow; the hand
of the Lord, that was now stretched out on him in a terrible way, would
be no longer stretched out on him; he would then cease to afflict him,
and he should be where the weary are at rest; and so the last clause is
read with an interrogation, "is there any cry", or "do any cry, in his
destruction?" (i); no, when death has done its office, and the body is
laid in the grave, there is no more pain nor sorrow, nor crying; all
tears are wiped away, and there is no more sense of afflictions and
sufferings; they are all at an end. Mr. Broughton renders these words as
to the sense the same, and as in connection with the following ones,
"and prayed I not when plague was sent? when hurt came to any, thereupon
cried I not?" and so do some others (k).

\(h\) "verum", Mercerus; profecto, Drusius, Bolducius; "sane", Tigurine
version. (i) "aut clamant aliqui post obitum suum?" Tigurine version;
"si in contritione ejus eis clamor?" Montanus, Bolducius. (k) Junius &
Tremellius.

[Job 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 30:25</span></span>

Did not I weep for him that was in trouble?.... In outward trouble,
whether personal in his own body, or in his family, or in his worldly
affairs, or from wicked men, the men of the world; or in inward trouble,
in soul trouble, on account of indwelling sin, the breakings forth of
it, the lowness of grace, as to exercise, the hidings of God's face, and
the temptations of Satan: or "for him that is hard of day" (l); with
whom times are hard, the days are evil, with respect either to things
temporal or spiritual; now Job had a sympathizing heart with such
persons; he wept with them that wept; his bowels yearned towards them;
he felt their sufferings and their sorrows, which is a Godlike frame of
soul; for God, in all the afflictions of his people, is afflicted; a
disposition of mind like that of the living Redeemer, who cannot but be
touched with the feeling of the infirmities of saints, having been in
all points tempted as they; and is a fruit of the Spirit of God, and
very becoming the relation the saints stand in to one another, being
members of the same body, and of each other; and therefore, when one
member suffers, all the rest should sympathize with it, and, being
brethren, should be loving, pitiful, and courteous to each other; and
should consider that they also are in the body, and liable to the same
distresses, whether outward or inward:

was not my soul grieved for the poor? in general, and especially for the
Lord's poor, for such in all ages have been chosen and called by him;
for these Job was grieved at heart, when he saw their distress through
poverty; and he not only expressed his concern for them by tears and
words, but by distributing liberally to their necessities, [Job
31:17](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#017.md); and by which he showed his
grief was real, hearty, and sincere, as here expressed; his soul was
grieved, and he was sorry at his very heart for them: some render the
words, "was not my soul like a pool of water?" (m) not only his head and
his eyes, as Jeremiah's on another account, but his soul melted, and
flowed like water with grief for them; and others, as Mr. Broughton,
"did not my soul burn for the poor?" with sorrow for them, and an ardent
desire to relieve them; see [Co2 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2009.htm#012.md);
now this was the frame of Job's mind in the time of his prosperity, very
different from that in [Amo 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#004.md); and
was certain and well known; he could appeal to all that knew him for the
truth of it, it being what, none could deny that had any knowledge of
him; yea, he could appeal to an omniscient God, he was now speaking to,
for the truth of it; nay, it is delivered in the form of an oath, "if I
did not weep", &c. (n), as in [Job
31:16](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#016.md).

\(l\) "ob durum die", Montanus, Mercerus, Drusius; "cui dura crant
tempora", Junius & Tremellius; "ei cui durus dies", Cocceius. (m)
"restagnavit", some in Mercerus. (n) "si non deflevi", Tigurine version;
"si non flevi", Piscator.

[Job 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 30:26</span></span>

When I looked for good,.... As he thought he might reasonably expect it,
since he had shown such a sympathizing spirit to persons in trouble, and
such pity and mercy to the poor: in the time of his prosperity, he
looked for a continuance of the good things he enjoyed, and expected to
have had them for many years to come, and to have died in the possession
of them, [Job 29:18](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018.md); and even in his
adversity, though he had received evil things at the hand of God, which
he took patiently; yet at first he did not think they would always
continue, but that there would be a turn of affairs, and he should again
receive good at his hands; and he had been looking for it, as good men
have reason to expect it; since God is good and does good, and
especially to his own people, and has laid up goodness for them that
fear him, and such an one Job was; and has promised good things unto
them, both temporal and spiritual; for godliness and godly men have the
promise of this life, and of that which is to come: but Job was
disappointed in his expectation; for, says he,

then evil came unto me, the evil of affliction, one upon the back of
another, even when in the height of his prosperity; and since repeated
evil, new afflictions, came upon him by the appointment, order, and
direction of God:

and when I waited for light; for the light of outward prosperity, such
as he had formerly enjoyed; and for the light of God's countenance,
which he most earnestly sought after, and longed for, and was in a
waiting posture for it, as good men have reason to be; since light is
sown for them in the purposes and decrees of God, in his counsel and
covenant, in his Gospel, and the promises of it; and therefore should
wait for the springing of it up, as the husbandman does for the
springing up of the corn sown in the earth, and lying under the clods;
and seeing that to the upright there arises light in darkness; and
though God hides his face from them, for a moment, he will have mercy on
them, and therefore should wait his time to be gracious to them; but Job
had waited long, and, as he thought, to no purpose: for

there came darkness; the darkness of adversity, still thicker and
darker, and no appearance of spiritual light and favour, or any
discoveries of the love of God to him, or enjoyment of his presence; see
[Jer 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#015.md).

[Job 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 30:27</span></span>

My bowels boiled, and rested not,.... All contained within him, his
heart, lungs, and liver, in a literal sense, through a violent fever
burning within him; or figuratively, being under great distress and
trouble, by reason of his afflictions, outward and inward, see [Jer
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#019.md);

the days of affliction prevented me; came sooner upon him than he
thought; he did not expect the evil days to come, and the years draw
nigh in which he should have no pleasure, until he was more advanced in
years, and the time of his dissolution was at hand; they came at once,
and unawares, upon him, when he looked not for them: some render the
word "met me" (o), unexpectedly; or rather, they "rushed upon me" (p),
in an hostile way; came in troops, and invaded and surrounded him, see
[Job 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#012.md).

\(o\) "occurrerunt mihi", Piscator, Cocceius. (p) "Incursarunt me",
Schultens.

[Job 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 30:28</span></span>

I went mourning without the sun,.... So overwhelmed with grief, that he
refused to have any comfort from, or any advantage by the sun; hence Mr.
Broughton renders it, "out of the sun"; he did not choose to walk in the
sunshine, but out of it, to indulge his grief and sorrow the more; or he
went in black attire, and wrapped and covered himself with it, that he
might not see the sun, or receive any relief by it: or "I go black, but
not by the sun" (q); his face and his skin were black, but not through
the sun looking upon him and discolouring him, as in [Sol
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#006.md); but through the force of his
disease, which had changed his complexion, and made him as black as a
Kedarene, or those that dwell in the tents of Kedar, [Sol
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#005.md); and he also walked without the
sun of righteousness arising on him, with healing in his wings, which
was worst of all:

I stood up, and I cried in the congregation: either in the congregation
of the saints met together for religious worship, where he cried unto
God for help and deliverance, and for the light of his countenance, [Job
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#020.md); or such was the extreme anguish
of his soul, that when a multitude of people got about him to see him in
his distressed condition, he could not contain himself, but burst out
before them in crying and tears, though he knew it was unbecoming a man
of his age and character; or he could not content himself to stay within
doors and soothe his grief, but must go abroad and in public, and there
expressed with strong cries and tears his miserable condition.

\(q\) "non propter solem", Vatablus; "non a sole", Junius & Tremellius,
Drusius, Mercerus; "non ob solem", Piscator.

[Job 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 30:29</span></span>

I am a brother to dragons, and a companion to owls. Or ostriches, as the
Targum, Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions; either
he was obliged to dwell with such persons as were comparable to these
creatures for their devouring words, hissing noise, and venomous
speeches, or for want of compassion, and for their cruelty, as David is
said to be among lions, [Psa 57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004.md); or
also, he was like unto them, being solitary and alone, all his friends
and acquaintance standing at a distance from him, as these creatures
love lonesome and desolate places; or because of the wailing and howling
noise they make, to which his mournful notes bore some resemblance; see
Gill on [Mic 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008.md); or because, when
these creatures cry and howl, and make a noise, no mercy is shown to
them, none pities or regards them; and so it was with him; though he
stood and cried in ever so public a manner, none had any compassion on
him.

[Job 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">job 30:30</span></span>

My skin is black upon me,.... Either through deep melancholy, as may be
observed in persons of such a disposition, through grief and trouble; or
rather through the force of his disease, the burning ulcers and black
scabs with which he was covered, as the Jews were through famine, in
their captivity, [Lam 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#008.md);

and my bones are burnt with heat; with the heat of a burning fever;
which not only made his inwards boil, but reached to his bones, and
dried up the marrow of them. Galen says (r) that bones may become so dry
as to be crumbled into sand: the Syriac version is

"my bones are burnt as his who is in a hot wind;''

such as were common in the eastern countries, which killed men at once,
and they became as black as a coal (s).

\(r\) Apud Bartholin. de Cruce, sect. 12. p. 107. (s) See Gill on [Job
27:21](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#021.md).

[Job 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/job030.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">job 30:31</span></span>

My harp also is turned to mourning,.... Which he used, as David, either
in religious worship, expressing praise to God thereby, or for his
recreation in an innocent way; but now it was laid aside, and, instead
of it, nothing was heard from him, or in his house, but the voice of
mourning:

and my organ into the voice of them that weep; another instrument of
music, which had its name from the pleasantness of its sound, and was of
early use, being first invented by Jubal, [Gen
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#021.md); but not that we now so call,
which is of late invention: those instruments which Job might have and
use, both in a civil and in a religious way, were now, through
afflictions, become useless to him, and neglected by him; or these
expressions in general may signify, that, instead of mirth and joy he
was wont to have, there were nothing now to be heard but lamentation and
woe; see [Lam 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#015.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 31](job031.md)

</div>
