<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Job Index](job.md)  
  [Previous](job019)  [Next](job021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#001.md)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 20:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 20

Zophar and his friends, not satisfied with Job's confession of faith, he
in his turn replies, and in his preface gives his reasons why he made
any answer at all, and was so quick in it, [Job
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#001.md); and appeals to Job for the truth
of an old established maxim, that the prosperity of wicked men and
hypocrites is very short lived, [Job
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004.md); and the short enjoyment of their
happiness is described by several elegant figures and similes, [Job
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#006.md); such a wicked man being obliged,
in his lifetime, to restore his ill gotten goods, and at death to lie
down with the sins of his youth, [Job
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#010.md); his sin in getting riches, the
disquietude of his mind in retaining them, and his being forced to make
restitution, are very beautifully expressed by the simile of a sweet
morsel kept in the mouth, and turned to the gall of asps in the bowels,
and then vomited up, [Job 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#012.md); the
disappointment he shall have, the indigent and strait circumstances he
shall be brought into, and the restitution he shall be obliged to make
for the oppression of the poor, and the uneasiness he shall feel in his
own breast, are set forth in a very strong light, [Job
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017.md); and it is suggested, that not
only the hand of wicked men should be upon him, but the wrath of God
also, which should seize on him suddenly and secretly, and would be
inevitable, he not being able to make his escape from it, and which
would issue in the utter destruction of him and his in this world, and
that to come, [Job 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023.md). And the
chapter is, concluded with this observation, that such as before
described is the appointed portion and heritage of a wicked man from
God, [Job 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#029.md)

[Job 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 20:1</span></span>

Then answered Zophar the Naamathite,.... Notwithstanding the sad
distressed condition Job was in, an account of which is given in the
preceding chapter, enough to pierce a heart of stone, notwithstanding
his earnest request to his friends to have pity on him, and
notwithstanding the noble confession of his faith he had made, which
showed him to be a good man, and the excellent advice he gave his
friends to cease persecuting him, for their own good, as well as for his
peace; yet, regardless of these things, Zophar starts up and makes a
reply, and attacks him with as much heat and passion, wrath and anger,
as ever, harping upon the same string, and still representing Job as a
wicked man and an hypocrite;

and said, as follows.

[Job 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 20:2</span></span>

Therefore do my thoughts cause me to answer,.... Or "to return" (a) and
appear upon the stage again, and enter the lists once more with his
antagonist; he suggests as if he had intended to have said no more in
this controversy, but observing what Job had said last, could not
forbear replying: "therefore" because he had represented him and his
friends as cruel persecutors of him, as men devoid of all humanity,
pity, and compassion, and endeavoured to terrify them with the
punishments of the sword, and the judgment of God to come; these
occasioned many "thoughts" in him, and those thoughts obliged him to
give an answer; they came in so thick and fast upon him, that out of the
abundance, his heart suggested to him he could not but speak, he was
full of matter, and the spirit within him, the impulse upon his mind,
constrained him to make a reply; and he seems desirous of having it
understood that his answer proceeded from thought; that he did not speak
without thinking, but had well weighed things in his mind; and what he
was about to say was the fruit of close thinking and mature
deliberation:

and for this I make haste; because his thoughts crowded in upon him, he
had a fulness of matter, an impulse of mind, promptitude and readiness
to speak on this occasion, and for fear of losing what was suggested to
him, he made haste to give in his answer, perhaps observing some other
of his friends rising up before him. The Targum is,

"because my sense is in me;''

and so other Jewish writers (b); be apprehended he had a right sense of
things, and understood the matter in controversy full well, and
therefore thought it incumbent on him to speak once more in it:
Gussetius (c) renders it, "because of my disquietude"; the uneasiness of
his mind raised by what Job had said, that he would have them know and
consider there was a judgment; and he intimates he had considered it,
and was fearful that should he be silent, and make no reply, God would
condemn him in judgment for his silence; and therefore he was in a hurry
to make answer, and could not be easy without it; and for his reasons
for so doing he further explains himself in [Job
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#003.md).

\(a\) "reducunt me, q. d. in scenam"; Cocceius, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Drusius. (b) Ben Gersom, Bar Tzemach, Sephorno; and so
Montanus. (c) Ebr. Comment. p. 246.

[Job 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 20:3</span></span>

I have heard the check of my reproach,.... He took it that Job had
reproached him and his friends, by representing them as hardhearted men,
and persecuting him wrongly in a violent manner; and he had observed the
"check" or reproof given for it, by bidding them beware of the sword,
and lest the punishment of it should be inflicted on them; and if that
should not be the case, yet there was a righteous judgment they could
not escape. Now Zophar heard this, but could not hear it with patience;
be could not bear that he and his friends should be insulted, as he
thought, in this manner; and therefore it was he was in such baste to
return an answer; though some (d) think he here pretends to a divine
oracle, like that which Eliphaz makes mention of in the beginning of
this dispute, [Job 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#012.md), &c. which he
had from God, and from which he had heard the "correction of his
reproach" (e), or a full confutation of the thing Job had reproached him
with; and being thus divinely furnished, he thought it his duty to
deliver it:

and the spirit of my understanding causeth me to answer; or his rational
spirit, his natural understanding, furnished him at once with an answer;
he had such a clear insight into the controversy on foot, and such a
full view of it, that he thought himself capable of speaking very
particularly to the matter in hand, and to the conviction and confusion
of Job; nay, his conscience, or the spirit of his conscience, as Mr.
Broughton renders it, not only readily dictated to him what he should
say, but obliged him to it; though some think he meant the Holy Spirit
of God, by which he would be thought to be inspired; that he "out of his
understanding" (f), enlightened by him, caused him to answer, or would
answer for him, or supply him with matter sufficient to qualify him for
it; and this he might observe to Job, in order to raise his attention to
what he was about to say.

\(d\) Schmidt. (e) "correctionem ignominiae meae", Pagninus, Montanus;
so Schmidt, Michaelis. (f) "ex intelligentia mea", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Mercerus, Drusius, Schmidt, Michaelis.

[Job 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 20:4</span></span>

Knowest thou not this of old,.... Or "from eternity" (g), from the
beginning of time, ever since the world was; as if he should say, if you
are the knowing man you pretend to be, you must know this I am about to
observe; and if you do not know it, you must be an ignorant man, since
it is an ancient truth, confirmed by all experience from the creation;
not that Job could know it so early, he was not the first man that was
born, nor was he made before the hills, but was of yesterday, and
comparatively knew nothing; but the sense is, that this about to be
delivered was an old established maxim, of which there had been numerous
instances,

since man, or "Adam",

was placed upon earth; referring to the putting of Adam in Eden to dress
the garden, and keep it; and every man, ever since, is placed on earth
by the ordination, and according to the will of God, where and for
purposes he pleases: the instances Zophar might have in view are perhaps
the expulsion of our first parents out of paradise, the vagabond state
of Cain, the destruction of the old world by a flood, and of Sodom and
Gomorrah by fire from heaven; which show that God, sooner or later,
gives manifest tokens of his displeasure at sin and sinners, by his
punishment of them for it. What he means is as follows.

\(g\) "ab aeterno", Junius & Tremellius, Drusius, Codurcus, Schmidt,
Michaelis.

[Job 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 20:5</span></span>

That the triumphing of the wicked is short,.... Their outward prosperity
and felicity, of which they make their boast, and in which they glory
and triumph for a while; at first Job's friends set out with this
notion, that the wicked never flourished and prospered, but it always
went ill with them in Providence; but being beat out of that, they own
they may be for a small time in flourishing and prosperous
circumstances, but it is but for a small time; which may be true in many
instances, but it is not invariable and without exception the case: the
sense is, it is but a little while that they are in so much mirth and
jollity, and triumph over their neighbours, as being in more
advantageous circumstances than they; this is said in the original text
to be "from near" (h); it is but a little while ago when it began; and;
as the Targum paraphrases it, it will be quickly ended:

and the joy of the hypocrite but for a moment; the word "wicked", in the
former clause, may signify the same person here called the "hypocrite";
but inasmuch as that signifies one restless and troublesome, one that is
ungodly, and destitute of the fear of God, that has nothing in him but
wickedness, who is continually committing it, and is abandoned to it; it
might be thought not to apply to the character of Job, whom Zophar had
in his view, and therefore this is added as descriptive of him: an
hypocrite is one who seems to be that he is not, holy, righteous, good,
and godly; who professes to have what he has not, the true grace of God,
and pretends to worship God, but does not do it cordially, and from
right principles; and who seeks himself in all he does, and not the
glory of God: now there may be a joy in such sort of persons; they may
hear ministers gladly, as Herod heard John, and receive the word with
joy, as the stony ground hearers did, [Mar
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#020.md); they may seem to delight in the
ways and ordinances of God, and even have some tastes of the powers of
the world to come, and some pleasing thoughts and hopes of heaven and
happiness; as well as they triumph in and boast of their profession of
religion and performance of duties, and rejoice in their boastings,
which is evil; but then this is like the pleasures of sin, which are but
for a season, or like the crackling of thorns under a pot, which make a
great noise and blaze, but soon over, [Ecc
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#006.md); and so their joy in civil as well
as religious, things. It is possible Zophar might be so ill natured as
to have reference to Job's triumph of faith, [Job
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#025.md); and by this would suggest, that
his faith in a living Redeemer, and the joy of it he professed, would be
soon over and no more; which shows what spirit he was of.

\(h\) "de propinquo", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Job 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 20:6</span></span>

Though his excellency mount up to the heavens,.... Though, in worldly
grandeur and glory, he should arrive to such a pitch as the Assyrian
monarch was ambitious of, as to ascend into heaven, exalt his throne
above the stars of God, and be like the Most High; or be comparable to
such a tree, by which the greatness of Nebuchadnezzar's kingdom is
expressed, the height whereof reached unto heaven, [Isa
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#012.md);

and his head reach unto the clouds; being lifted up with pride, because
of his greatness, and looking with contempt and scorn on others; the
Septuagint version is, "if his gifts ascend up to heaven", &c. which
well agrees with an hypocrite possessed of great gifts, and proud of
them; as Capernaum was highly favoured with external things, as the
presence of Christ, his ministry and miracles, and so said to be exalted
unto heaven, yet, because of its impenitence and unbelief, should be
brought down to hell, [Mat 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023.md).

[Job 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 20:7</span></span>

Yet he shall perish for ever like his own dung,.... Not only in this
world, but in the world to come, both in his outward substance here, and
in his body in the grave, and in his soul to all eternity, and that in
the most shameful and disgraceful manner; he shall perish in his own
corruption, and like his own dung inevitably, which is never returned to
its place again: dead bodies were reckoned by the ancients as dung, and
the carcasses of men are rather to be cast out than dung (i); and the
Arabians used, to bury in dunghills even their kings (k); to which some
(l) think the allusion is:

they which have seen him shall say, where is he? such as formerly gazed
at him, in his prosperity, with wonder and amazement at his grandeur and
greatness, now being removed from his outward splendour, or from the
world, by death, ask where he is, not being able to see him in his
former lustre, nor in the land of the living; see [Job
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#010.md).

\(i\) Heraclitus apud Strabo. Geograph. l. 16. p. 539. (k) Strabo, ib.
(l) Pineda in loc.

[Job 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 20:8</span></span>

He shall fly away as a dream, and shall not be found,.... Either as a
dream which is forgotten, as Nebuchadnezzar's was, and cannot be
recovered; or as the matter and substance of a dream, which, though
remembered, is a mere illusion; as when a hungry or thirsty man dreams
he eats or drinks, but, awaking, finds himself empty, and not at all
refreshed; what he fancied is fled and gone (m), and indeed never had
any existence but in his imagination, [Isa
29:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa029.htm#008.md);

yea, he shall be chased away as a vision of the night; either the same
as a nocturnal dream, or what a man fancies he sees in his dream; or
like a mere spectre or apparition, which is a mere phantom, and, when
followed and pursued, vanishes and disappears; so such a man before
described is chased out of the world, and is seen in it no more, see
[Job 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#018.md); the first clause,
according to Sephorno, refers to the generation of the flood, and the
second to the slaying of the firstborn of Egypt in the night.

\(m\) , Pindar. Pythia, Ode 8.

[Job 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 20:9</span></span>

The eye also which saw him shall see him no more,.... In this world,
concerned in the affairs of life, and busy in worldly employments, and
especially in the grandeur he sometimes was, if not removed by death;
but the former sense seems most agreeable by what follows,

neither shall his place any more behold him; the men of his place, as
Ben Gersom, those that lived in the same place he did; or he shall not
be seen, and known, and acknowledged any more as the master, owner, and
proprietor of the house he formerly dwelt in; this seems to be taken
from Job's own words in [Job 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#010.md). The
above Jewish commentator interprets this verse of Pharaoh and the
Egyptians, whom Moses and the Israelites would see no more, [Exo
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#029.md).

[Job 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 20:10</span></span>

His children shall seek to please the poor,.... In this and some
following verses the miserable state of a wicked man is described, and
which begins with his children, who are often visited in wrath for their
parents' sins, especially when they tread in their steps, and follow
their example; and it is an affliction to parents to see their children
in distress, and particularly on their account, and even to be
threatened with it. According to our version, the sense of this clause
is, that after a wicked man's death his children shall seek to gain the
good will and favour of the poor who have been oppressed by him, that
they may not reproach them, or take revenge on them, or apply to the
civil magistrate to have justice done them; but Jarchi renders the
words,

"the poor shall oppress or destroy his children;''

and so the margin of our Bible, who, being enraged with the ill usage of
their parents, shall fall upon them in great wrath, and destroy them,
[Pro 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#003.md); and the same Jewish writer
restrains the words to the men of Sodom, who were oppressive and cruel
to the poor; or rather the sense is, that the children of the wicked man
shall be reduced to such extreme poverty, that they shall even seek
relief of the poor, and supplicate and entreat them to give them
something out of their small pittance; with which others in a good
measure agree, who render the words, "his children shall please, being
poor" (n); it shall be a pleasure and satisfaction to those they have
been injurious to, to see their children begging their bread from door
to door, see [Psa 109:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa109.htm#005.md);

and his hands shall restore their goods: or "for his hands", &c. (o);
and so are a reason why his children shall be so reduced after his death
as to need the relief of others, because their parent, in his lifetime,
was obliged to make restitution of his ill gotten goods, so that in the
end he had nothing to leave his children at his death; for this
restitution spoken of is not voluntary, but forced. Sephorno thinks
reference is had to the Egyptians lending jewels and other riches to the
Israelites, whereby they were obliged to repay six hundred thousand men
for their service.

\(n\) "filii ejus placabunt, mendici", Montanus. (o) So the English
annotator.

[Job 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 20:11</span></span>

His bones are full of the sins of his youth,.... Man is born in sin, and
is a transgressor from the womb; and the youthful age is addicted to
many sins, as pride, passion, lust, luxury, intemperance, and
uncleanness; and these are sometimes brought to mind, and men are
convinced of them, and corrected for them, when more advanced in years;
and if not stopped in them, and reformed from them, they are continued
in an old age; and the effects of them are seen in bodily diseases,
which a debauched life brings upon them, not only to the rottenness and
consumption of their flesh, but to the putrefaction of their bones;
though this may be understood of the whole body, the bones, the
principal and stronger parts, being put for the whole, and denote that
general decay and waste which gluttony, drunkenness, and uncleanness,
bring into, see [Pro 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#011.md); Some
interpret this of "secret" sins (p), as the word is thought to signify,
which, if not cleansed from and pardoned, will be found and charged on
them, and be brought into judgment, and they punished for them, [Psa
90:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#008.md);

which shall lie down with him in the dust: to be in the dust is to be in
the state of the dead, to lie in the grave, where men lie down and sleep
as on a bed; and this is common to good and bad men, all sleep in the
dust of the earth, but with this difference, the sins of wicked men lie
down with them; as they live in sin, they die in their sins; not that
their sins die with them, and are no more, but they continue on them,
and with them, and will rise with them, and will follow them to
judgment, and remain with them after, and the guilt and remorse of which
will be always on their consciences, and is that worm that never dies:
of such it is said, that they "are gone down to hell with their weapons
of war"; with the same enmity against God, against Christ, and his
people, and all that is good, they had in their lifetime: and "they have
laid their swords under their heads"; in the grave, and shall rise with
the same revengeful spirit they ever had against the saints, see [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008.md); "but their iniquities shall be
upon their bones"; both them, and the punishment of them, [Eze
32:27](../../../bib/kjv/eze032.htm#027.md). The Jewish commentator last
mentioned interprets the whole verse of Balaam, who died at the age of
thirty three, and whose prosperity died with him, he leaving nothing to
his children; and so he interprets the following verses of the curse he
was forced to hide, which he would gladly have pronounced, and of the
riches he received from Balak falling into the hands of the Israelites.

\(p\) "ejus occultis", Montanus, Vatablus, Schmidt.

[Job 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 20:12</span></span>

Though wickedness be sweet in his mouth,.... Which may respect some
particular sin, and by the context it seems to be the sin of
covetousness, or of getting riches in an unlawful way, which is very
sweet and pleasing to wicked men, while they are in such pursuits that
succeed; and so Mr. Broughton renders it by "wrong"; though it may be
applied to sin in general, which is "wickedness", or an evil (q), being
contrary to the pure and holy nature, will, and law of God; and it is
evil in its effects on men, it having deprived them of the image and
glory of God, and exposed them to his wrath, to the curses of his law,
and to eternal deaths. Now this is "sweet" to an unregenerate man, who
minds and savours the things of the flesh, whose taste is not changed,
but is as it was from his birth, and who calls sweet bitter, and bitter
sweet; such a man has the same delight in sin as a man has in his food,
drinks up iniquity like water, and commits sin with greediness; for it
is natural to him, he is conceived, born, and brought up in it; besides,
some sins are what are more particularly called constitution sins, which
some are peculiarly addicted to, and in which they take a peculiar
delight and pleasure; these are like the right hand or right eye, and
they cannot be persuaded, at any rate, to part with them:

though he hide it under his tongue; not for the sake of concealing it,
nor by denying, dissembling, or excusing it, but for the sake of
enjoying more pleasure in it; as a gluttonous man, when he has got a
sweet morsel in his mouth, do not let it go down his throat immediately,
but rolls it under his tongue, that he may have all the pleasure of it
he can; so a wicked man devises sin in his heart, keeps it on his mind,
revolves it in his thoughts, and his meditation on it is sweet; and he
is so far from hiding it from others, that he openly declares it, freely
tells of it, and takes pleasure in so doing: "fools make a mock at sin";
it is their diversion and recreation.

\(q\) "malum", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, &c.

[Job 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 20:13</span></span>

Though he spare it,.... Not that he feeds sparingly on it, for he eats
of it freely and plentifully, with great eagerness and greediness; it
designs the gratefulness of it to him; he does not spit it out as
loathsome, having tasted of it, but retains it as sweet and pleasant; he
spares it as Saul did Agag, and as a man spares his only son; sin being
a child, a brat of a wicked man, and therefore it is dear unto him:

and forsake it not: as he never will, until he is fully convinced of the
evil of it, and it becomes exceeding sinful to him, and so loathsome and
disagreeable; and he is restrained from it by the grace of God, and
enabled by it to desert it, for such an one only finds mercy, [Pro
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013.md);

but keep it still within his mouth; like an epicure, that will not
suffer his food quickly to go down his throat into his stomach, that he
may have the greater pleasure in tasting, palating, and relishing it; as
Philoxenus, who wished his throat as long as a crane's, that he might be
the longer in tasting the sweetness of what he ate and drank; so the
wicked man keeps sin within his mouth, not by restraining his mouth from
speaking evil, rather by a non-confession of it, but chiefly by
continuing and persisting in it, that he might have all the pleasure and
satisfaction he has promised himself in it.

[Job 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 20:14</span></span>

Yet his meat in his bowels is turned,.... Or "his bread" (r), to which
sin is compared, being what the sinner lives in, and lives upon; what he
strengthens himself in and with, and by which he is nourished unto the
day of slaughter, and by means of which he grows and proceeds to more
ungodliness, though in the issue he comes into starving and famishing
circumstances; for this is bread of deceit, and proves to be ashes and
gravel stones; it promises pleasure, profit, liberty, and impunity, but
is all the reverse; as meat turns in a man's stomach when it does not
digest in him, or rather his stomach turns against that, and instead of
its being pleasant and agreeable to him, it distresses him and makes him
uneasy; sin being compared to meat in the bowels, denotes the finishing
of in after it has been conceived in the mind, and completed in the act:

it is the gall of asps within him; which is bitter, though not poison;
which yet Pliny (s) suggests, but it seems (t) it is not fact. Sin is an
evil and bitter thing, and produces bitter sorrow, and makes bitter work
for repentance in good men, [Jer 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019.md);
and fills with distress inexpressible and intolerable in wicked men, as
in Cain and Judas in this world, and with black despair, weeping, and
gnashing of teeth, and dreadful horrors of conscience, in the world to
come, to all eternity; the effect of it is eternal death, the second
death, inevitable and everlasting ruin and destruction.

\(r\) "panis ejus", Pagninus, Montanus, Beza, Schmidt. (s) Nat. Hist. l.
11. c. 37. (t) Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 4. p. 711. Philosoph.
Transact. abridged, vol. 2. p. 819.

[Job 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 20:15</span></span>

He hath swallowed down riches,.... Not his own, but another's, which he
has spoiled him of and devoured, with as much eagerness, pleasure, and
delight, as a hungry man swallows down his food; having an excessive and
immoderate love of riches, and an insatiable desire after them, which
make him stop at nothing, though ever so illicit, to obtain them; and
when he has got them into his possession, thinks them as safe as the
food in his belly, and never once dreams of refunding them, which yet he
must do, as follows:

and he shall vomit them up again; that is, make restoration of them, not
freely, but forcedly, with great reluctance, much pain of mind, and
gripes of conscience:

God shall cast them out of his belly; he shall oblige him to cast them
up again, by working upon his heart, making his mind uneasy, loading his
conscience with guilt, so that he shall have no rest nor peace until he
has done it; though they are as meat in his belly within him, they shall
not remain with him; though they are in his house, in his coffers, or in
his barns, they shall be fetched out from thence.

[Job 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 20:16</span></span>

He shall suck the poison of asps,.... Or "the head of asps" (u); for
their poison lies in their heads, particularly in their "teeth" (w); or
rather is a liquor in the gums, yellow like oil (x); according to Pliny
(y), in copulation the male puts his head into the mouth of the female,
which she sucks and gnaws off through the sweetness of the pleasure,
then conceives her young, which eat out her belly; this is to be
understood not of the man's sin, then it would have been expressed
either in the past or present tense, as if that was sweet unto him in
the commission of it, sucked in like milk from the breast, or honey from
the honeycomb; such were his contrivances and artful methods, and the
success of them in getting riches, but in the issue proved like the
poison of asps, pernicious and deadly to him, which caused him to vomit
them up again; for poison excites vomiting: but of the punishment of his
sin; for putting men to death by the poison of asps was a punishment
inflicted by some people upon malefactors; and however, it is certain
death, and immediately and quickly dispatches, and without sense; so the
wages of sin is death, and there is no avoiding it, and it comes
insensibly on carnal men; they are not aware of it, and in no pain about
it, until in hell they lift up their eyes as the rich man did:

the viper's tongue shall slay him; though it is with its teeth it bites,
yet, when it is about to bite, it puts out its tongue, and to it its
poison is sometimes ascribed; though it is said (z) to be quite
harmless, and therefore not to be understood in a literal sense, but
figuratively of the tongue of a detractor, a calumniator and false
accuser, such an one as Doeg; but cannot be the sense here, since the
fall of the person here described would not be by any such means; but
the phrase, as before, denotes the certain and immediate death of such a
wicked man; for the bite of a viper was always reckoned incurable, and
issued in sudden death, see [Act 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#003.md).

\(u\) "caput aspidum", V. L. Montanus. (w) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 11. c.
37. Aelian. Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 4. (x) Philosoph. Transact. ut supra.
(abridged, vol. 2. p. 819.) (y) Ib. c. 62. (z) Scheuchzer, ut supra,
(Physic. Sacr. vol. 4.) p. 712.

[Job 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 20:17</span></span>

He shall not see the rivers,.... Of water, or meet with any to assuage
his thirst, which poison excites, and so makes a man wish for water, and
desire large quantities; but this shall not be granted the wicked man;
this might be illustrated in the case of the rich man in hell, who
desired a drop of cold water to cool his tongue, but could not have it,
[Luk 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024.md); though rather plenty of
good things is here intended, see [Isa
48:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#018.md); as also the following
expressions:

the floods, the brooks of honey and butter; or "cream"; which are
hyperbolical expressions, denoting the great profusion and abundance of
temporal blessings, which either the covetous rich man was ambitious of
obtaining, and hoped to enjoy, seeking and promising great things to
himself, which yet he should never attain unto; or else the sense is,
though he had enjoyed such plenty, and been in such great prosperity as
to have honey and butter, or all temporal good things, flowing about him
like rivers, and floods, and brooks; yet he should "see them no more",
so Broughton reads the words; and perhaps Zophar may have respect to the
abundance Job once possessed, but should no more, and which is by
himself expressed by such like metaphors, [Job
29:6](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#006.md); yea, even spiritual and eternal
good things may be designed, and the plenty of them, as they often are
in Scripture, by wine, and milk, and honey; such as the means of grace,
the word and ordinances, the blessings of grace dispensed and
communicated through them; spiritual peace and joy, called the rivers of
pleasure; the love of God, and the streams of it, which make glad his
people; yea, eternal glory and happiness, signified by new wine in the
kingdom of God, and by a river of water of life, and a tree of life by
it, see [Isa 55:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#001.md); which are what
carnal men and hypocrites shall never see or enjoy; and whereas Zophar
took Job to be such a man, he may have a principal view to him, and
object this to the beatific vision of God, and the enjoyment of eternal
happiness he promised himself, [Job
19:26](../../../bib/kjv/job019.htm#026.md). Bar Tzemach observes, that
these words are to be read by a transposition thus, "he shall not see
rivers of water, floods of honey, and brooks of butter".

[Job 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 20:18</span></span>

That which he laboured for shall he restore,.... This explains what was
before figuratively expressed by vomiting, [Job
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#015.md); and is to be interpreted either
of that which another laboured for; so the Targum paraphrases it,

"another's labour;''

and Mr. Broughton renders it, "he shall restore what man's pain get":
and then the sense is, that that which another got by his labour, coming
by some means or another into the hand of this rapacious, covetous,
wicked man, he shall be obliged to restore to him again; or the hire of
the labourer being detained in his hands, he shall be forced to give it
to him, as the Egyptians, by lending the Israelites their jewels of gold
and silver, restored to them the wages due to them for all their labour
among them for many years; or else this is to be understood of what the
wicked man himself had laboured for, who with much toil and labour, as
well as trick and artifice, had got the wealth of others into his hands;
but should be obliged to make restoration of it again, and along with
that also what he had laboured for, and had got even in an honest and
lawful way, the marathon of unrighteousness corrupting and marring his
whole substance:

and shall not swallow it down; or "not have time to devour it", as Mr.
Broughton; he shall be obliged so soon to restore it, that it shall be
as if he had never had it; he shall have no enjoyment of it, at least no
comfort, pleasure, and satisfaction in it:

according to his substance shall the restitution be; the law of Moses
required, in some cases, fourfold, in others fivefold, and sometimes
sevenfold was exacted; and if a man had not sufficient to pay, all his
substance was to go towards payment, and by this means what he lawfully
got went along with that which was obtained in an illicit way, as
before, see [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001.md);

and he shall not rejoice therein; not in the restitution he is forced to
make, it being greatly against his will; nor in his ill-gotten
substance, at least but for a little while, as in [Job
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#005.md); he shall neither enjoy it nor
have delight and pleasure in it, nor glory of it, as men are apt to do;
Mr. Broughton reads this in connection with the preceding clause thus,

"and never rejoice in the wealth for which he must make recompense.''

[Job 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 20:19</span></span>

Because he hath oppressed and hath forsaken the poor,.... Having
oppressed, crushed, and broken the poor to pieces, he leaves them so
without pity and compassion for them, and without giving them any
relief; he first by oppression makes them poor, or however poorer still,
and then leaves them in such circumstances; for this does not suppose
that he once was a favourer of them, and afforded them assistance in
their necessities, and afterwards forsook them; but rather, as Ben
Gersom gives the sense, he does not leave the poor until he has
oppressed and crushed them, and then he does; Mr. Broughton's reading of
the words agrees with the former sense, "he oppresseth and leaveth
poor":

because he hath violently taken away an house which he built not; an
house which did not belong to him, he had no property in or right unto,
which, as he had not bought, he had not built; and therefore could lay
no rightful claim unto it, and yet this he took in a violent manner from
the right owner of it, see [Mic 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic002.htm#002.md);
or "and", or "but shall not build it" (a), or "buildeth it not"; he took
it away with an intention to pull it down, and build a stately palace in
the room of it; but either his substance was taken from him, or he taken
away by death before he could finish it, and so either through neglect,
or want of opportunity, or of money, did not what he thought to have
done.

\(a\) "et non aedificabit eam", Pagninus, Montanus; "et non aedificat
eam", Cocceius, Schultens; "non autem", Beza; "sed non", Schmidt,
Michaelis.

[Job 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 20:20</span></span>

Surely he shall not feel quietness in his belly,.... Or happiness in his
children, so some in Bar Tzemach; rather shall have no satisfaction in
his substance; though his belly is filled with hid treasure, it shall
give him no contentment; he shall be a stranger to that divine art, but
ever have a restless craving after more, which is his sin; but rather
punishment is here meant, and the sense is, that he shall have no quiet
in his conscience, no peace of mind, because of his sin in getting
riches in an unlawful way:

he shall not save of that which he desired; of his desirable things, his
goods, his wealth, his riches, and even his children, all being gone,
and none saved; respect may be had particularly to Job's case, who was
stripped of everything, of all his substance and his children.

[Job 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 20:21</span></span>

There shall none of his meat be left,.... Not in his belly, all shall be
cast up; none of his substance left for himself or others; none of his
riches for his children or heirs, all being consumed: or this may
respect either the profuseness or niggardliness of his living, that he
should live in great luxury himself, but take no care of the poor; or
else keep so mean a table, that there would be nothing left for the
poor, not so much as a few crumbs to fall from it; but the first sense
seems best; though some render the words, "there shall be none left for
his meat" (b), or his substance; he shall leave no children, have no
heirs, all his family shall be cut off, see [Job
18:19](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#019.md);

therefore shall no man look for his goods; for there shall be none to
look for them; or rather there shall be none to look for, all being
gone: a man in good circumstances of life, his heirs expect to enjoy
much at his death, but when he is stripped of all, as Job was, his
relations and friends are in no expectation of having anything at his
death; and therefore do not think it worth their while to look out, or
make an inquiry whether there is anything for them or not, see [Job
20:28](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#028.md).

\(b\) "non erit superstes haeres qui ejus bonis fruetur"; so some in
Mercer. Drusius.

[Job 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 20:22</span></span>

In the fulness of his sufficiency he shall be in straits,.... For though
he may not only have a sufficient competency to live upon, but even a
fulness of temporal blessings, have as much as heart can wish, or more,
even good things, and plenty of them laid up for many years; yet amidst
it all shall be reduced to the utmost straits and difficulties, either
through fear of losing what he has, insomuch that his abundance will not
suffer him to sleep in the night, nor to enjoy an hour's pleasure in the
day; or being so narrow spirited, notwithstanding his fulness, that he
cannot allow himself to eat of the fruit of his labours, and rejoice
therein; or fearing, notwithstanding all his plenty, that he shall come
to want and poverty; or rather while he is in the most flourishing
circumstances, and in the height of his prosperity, he is suddenly, as
Nebuchadnezzar was, dispossessed of all, and reduced to the utmost
extremity, [Dan 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#031.md); the Targum is,

"when his measure is filled, he shall take vengeance on him:''

every hand of the wicked shall come upon him: or of the labourer, as the
Targum, the hire of whose labour he has detained, or has taken away from
him that which he laboured for; and so Broughton,

"the hand of the injured or grieved;''

such as he had been injurious to, and had grieved by his oppressions of
them; or rather every troublesome wicked man, the hand of every thief or
robber; respect seems to be had to the hand of the Sabeans and
Chaldeans, that had been on Job and his substance.

[Job 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 20:23</span></span>

When he is about to fill his belly,.... Either in a literal sense, when
he is about to take an ordinary meal to satisfy nature; or in a
figurative sense, when he is seeking to increase his worldly riches, and
his barns and coffers, and endeavouring to get satisfaction therein:

God shall cast the fury of his wrath upon him; or "send it out on him"
(c); out of the treasures of it, which are laid up with him, [Deu
32:34](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#034.md); into his conscience, and fill
him with a dreadful sense and apprehension of it, and that with great
force and violence, and cast it, and pour it on him like fire, or any
scalding liquor, which is very terrible and intolerable. This intends
the indignation of God against sin, and his just punishment of it,
according to the rigour of his justice; sometimes it is only a little
wrath and displeasure he shows, he does not stir up all his wrath; but
here it is threatened he will cast it, and pour it in great plenty, even
"the fury" of it, in the most awful and terrible manner:

and shall rain it upon him while he is eating; signifying, that the
wrath of God shall be revealed from heaven against him, from whence rain
comes; that it shall fall on him from above, unseen, suddenly, and at an
unawares, and come with a force and violence not to be resisted, and in
great abundance and profusion. The allusion seems to be to the raining
of fire and brimstone on Sodom and Gomorrah, the inhabitants of which
were indulging themselves in gratifying the flesh, when that judgment
came upon them, [Luk 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#028.md); and so it
was with the Israelites, when they sinned against God in the wilderness,
[Psa 78:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#030.md); perhaps Zophar may glance
at Job's children being slain while they were eating and drinking in
their elder brother's house, [Job
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#018.md). Some render it, "upon his food"
(d); his meat, a curse going along with it, while he is eating it, his
table becoming a snare unto him; or upon his wealth and riches, he is
endeavouring to fill his belly or satisfy himself with; and others,
"upon his flesh", as the Targum; or "into his flesh"; as Broughton, and
so many of the Jewish commentators (e) meaning his body, filling it with
diseases, so that there is no soundness in it, but is in pain, and
wasting, and consuming; and Job's case may be referred to, his body
being full of boils and ulcers.

\(c\) "mittet in eum", Pagninus, Montanus, Schmidt; so Mercerus,
Piscator. (d) "in cibum illius", Tigurine version. (e) Aben Ezra, Ben
Gersom, Bar Tzemach; "in carne ejus", Pagninus, Montanus; "super carnem
ejus", Beza; "in carnem ejus", Drusius, Mercer, Schmidt.

[Job 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 20:24</span></span>

He shall flee from the iron weapon,.... The sword, for fear of being
thrust through with it; the flaming sword of justice God sometimes
threatens to take, and whet, and make use of against ungodly men; the
sword of God, as Bar Tzemach observes, is hereby figuratively expressed;
fleeing from it, or an attempt to flee from it, shows guilt in the
conscience, danger, and a sense of it, and a fear of falling into it,
and yet there is no escaping the hand of God, or fleeing from his
presence:

and the bow of steel shall strike him through; that is, an arrow out of
a bow, made of steel or brass, of which bows were formerly made, and
reckoned the strongest and most forcible, see [Psa
18:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#034.md); signifying, that if he should
escape the dint of a weapon, a sword or spear used near at hand, yet, as
he fled, he would be reached by one that strikes at a distance, an arrow
shot from a bow; the sense is, that, if a wicked man escapes one
judgment, another will be sure to follow him, and overtake him and
destroy him, see [Isa 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#017.md).

[Job 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 20:25</span></span>

It is drawn, and cometh out of the body,.... That is, the arrow with
which a wicked man is stricken through; either it is drawn, and comes
out of the quiver, as Broughton; or rather is drawn out of the body of a
wicked man, being shot into it, and that in order that he may be cured
of his wound if possible, but to no purpose, since it follows:

yea, the glittering sword cometh out of his gall; being thrust into it,
which being pierced and poured out, is certain and immediate death, see
[Job 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#013.md). Some render it, yea, "the
glittering sword out of his gall, he shall go away", or "is gone" (f);
that is, he shall die, or is a dead man, there is no hope of him, when
the arrow has transfixed his body, and the sword has penetrated into his
gall, and divided that:

terrors are upon him; the terrors of death, the plain symptoms of it
being upon him; the terrors of an awful judgment, which follows after
it; the terrors of the dreadful sentence of condemnation that will then
be pronounced, "go, ye cursed", &c. and the terrors of hell and eternal
death, signified by utter darkness, unquenchable fire, and the never
ceasing torments of it. Some by them understand devils, those terrible
spirits which haunt wicked men in their dying moments, and are ready to
carry them to the lake which burns with fire and brimstone, where they
are to be companions with them for ever. The word is sometimes used of
gigantic persons, who are sometimes terrible to others; and since these
are mentioned along with weapons of war, Bar Tzemach interprets them of
men of strength and power, men of war or soldiers, whose fear falls on
others.

\(f\) "abibit e vivis"; so some in Michaelis; "abit", Schultens.

[Job 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 20:26</span></span>

All darkness shall be hid in his secret places,.... In such places of
secrecy, where he may promise himself safety, he shall find more
calamities of all sorts; or every kind of judgments shall find him out,
and come upon him, sometimes signified by darkness, see [Isa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022.md); or utter darkness, the blackness
of darkness; everlasting wrath, ruin, and destruction, are laid up and
reserved in God's secret places for him, and lie hid among his treasures
of vengeance, which he in due time will bring forth from thence, and
punish the guilty sinner with, [Jde
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#013.md); or all this shall be because of
secret sins, as Ben Gersom interprets it; and so Mr. Broughton renders
the words, "for his store"; that is, for the store of his sins, as he
explains it, which, however privately and secretly committed, shall be
brought into judgment; and there the hidden things of darkness will be
brought to light, and sentence pass upon men for them:

a fire not blown shall consume him; not blown by man, but by God
himself; which some understand of thunder and lightning, such as fell on
Job's sheep and servants, and consumed them, and which may be glanced
at; and others of some fiery distemper, a burning fever, hot ulcers,
carbuncles, &c. such as were at this time on Job's body; but the Targum,
better, of the fire of hell; and so many of the Jewish commentators (g),
as well as Christian; the Septuagint version renders it, "unquenchable
fire"; and so Mr. Broughton; and such the fire of hell is said to be,
[Mat 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012.md), &c. and which is a fire
kindled by the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, [Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033.md);

it shall go ill with him that is left in his tabernacle; not only it
shall go ill with the wicked man himself, but with those he leaves
behind him, that dwell in the house he formerly lived in, with his
posterity; God sometimes punishing the iniquities of the fathers upon
the children.

\(g\) Jarchi, Sephorno, and others.

[Job 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">job 20:27</span></span>

The heaven shall reveal his iniquity,.... Either God the Maker and
Possessor of heaven, who dwells there, and is sometimes so called, [Dan
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan004.htm#025.md); who sees and knows all things,
even those that are most secret, as well as more openly committed, and
will make all manifest, sooner or later; or else the angels of heaven,
the inhabitants of it, so the Targum; who in the last day will be
employed in gathering out of Christ's kingdom all that offend, and do
iniquity, [Mat 13:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#041.md); or the judgments
of God descending from heaven, or appear there, and are owing to it;
such as drowning the old world by opening the windows of heaven, [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011.md); the burning of Sodom and
Gomorrah by fire and brimstone from thence, [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024.md); and the destruction of persons
by thunder, [Sa2 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2022.htm#015.md), and lightning,
[Sa1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010.md), and the like; which
judgments falling upon men, show them to be guilty of crimes deserving
of the wrath of God, see [Rom 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#018.md);

and the earth shall rise up against him; when that becomes barren for
the sins of men, and nothing but things hurtful to man rise up out of
it; when it discloses the blood of murdered persons, and will at last
give up the wicked dead that are buried in it; the Targum is,

"the inhabitants of the earth;''

and may be interpreted of their enmity, opposition, and hostility.

[Job 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">job 20:28</span></span>

The increase of his house shall depart,.... Either his children or his
substance. Some interpret it, as Kimchi (h) observes, of the walls of
his house, because of what follows, "they shall flow away", &c. as if he
should say, the stones of his house shall fall down, and his habitation
shall be destroyed, according to [Mic
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006.md); where a dilapidation is expressed
by a flow, or pouring down of stones:

and his goods shall flow away in the day of his wrath; in the day of the
wrath of God upon him, which will come upon him like water split on the
ground, of no more use and service to him; the Targum interprets it of
oil and wine, which shall flow away and cease, and so Mr. Broughton
renders it, "fruits for his house"; all desirable and useful ones, see
[Rev 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#014.md).

\(h\) Sepher Shorash. rad.

[Job 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">job 20:29</span></span>

This is the portion of a wicked man from God,.... All before related,
and which is very different from the portion of a good man, which is God
himself, both here and hereafter; the wicked man has indeed his portion
from God, which he has assigned him, but his portion is not himself; nor
is it with him, nor with his people, but it is at most and best in this
life, and but a worldly one, and hereafter will be with devils and
damned spirits; and a dreadful portion it is to be banished from the
presence of God to all eternity, and take up an everlasting abode with
such company:

and the heritage appointed unto him by God; it is not only a portion
allotted to him, but an inheritance to abide continually with him; and
this by the irreversible decree and appointment of God, who has
foreordained ungodly men to condemnation, and made, appointed, and
reserved them to the day of wrath and destruction. Some choose to render
the clause, "and the inheritance of his word or words (i) is unto him by
God"; that is, punishment shall be inflicted upon him, and continue with
him as an inheritance, because of his words, his indecent words, hard
speeches and blasphemies uttered by him; referring, as it is thought, to
the words which had dropped from the lips of Job.

\(i\) "haereditas eloquii ejus", Pagninus, Montanus; "verborum ejus", V.
L. "impie dictorum ejus", Codurcus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 21](job021.md)

</div>
