<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job002)  [Next](job004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 3

In this chapter we have an account of Job's cursing the day of his
birth, and the night of his conception; [Job
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001); first the day, to which he wishes
the most extreme darkness, [Job 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#004);
then the night, to which he wishes the same and that it might be
destitute of all joy, and be cursed by others as well as by himself,
[Job 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#006); The reasons follow, because
it did not prevent his coming into the world, and because he died not on
it, [Job 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#010); which would, as he
judged, have been an happiness to him; and this he illustrates by the
still and quiet state of the dead, the company they are with, and their
freedom from all trouble, oppression, and bondage, [Job
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#013); but however, since it was
otherwise with him, he desires his life might not be prolonged, and
expostulates about the continuance of it, [Job
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020); and this by reason of his
present troubles, which were many and great, and came upon him as he
feared they would, and which had made him uneasy in his prosperity, [Job
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#024).

[Job 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 3:1</span></span>

After this opened Job his mouth,.... order to speak, and began to speak
of his troubles and afflictions, and the sense he had of them; for
though, this phrase may sometimes signify to speak aloud, clearly and
distinctly, and with great freedom and boldness, yet here it seems to
design no more than beginning to speak, or breaking silence after it had
been long kept: be spake after his first trial and blessed the name of
the Lord, and upon his second, and reproved his wife for her foolish
speaking; but upon the visit of his three friends, and during the space
of seven days, a profound silence was kept by him and them; and when he
perceived that they chose not to speak to him, and perhaps his distemper
also decreased, and his pain somewhat abated, he broke out into the
following expressions:

and cursed his day: he did not curse his God, as Satan said he would,
and his wife advised him to: nor did he curse his fellow creatures, or
his friends, as wicked men in passion are apt to do, nor did he curse
himself, as profane persons often do, when any evil befalls them; but he
cursed his day; not the day on which his troubles came upon him, for
there were more than one, and they were still continued, but the day of
his birth, as appears from [Job 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003);
and so the Syriac and Arabic versions add here, "in which he was born";
and what is meant by cursing it may be learnt from his own words in the
following verses, the substance of which is, that he wished either it
had never been, or he had never been born; but since that was
impossible, that it might be forgotten, and never observed or had in
esteem, but be buried oblivion and obscurity, and be branded with a
black mark, as an unhappy day, for ever: the word (s) signifies, he made
light of it, and spoke slightly and contemptibly of it; he disesteemed
it, yea, detested it, and could not bear to think of it, and desired
that it might be disrespected by God and men; so that there is no need
of such questions, whether it is in the power of man to curse? and
whether it is lawful to curse the creature? and whether a day is capable
of a curse? The frame of mind in which Job was when he uttered these
words is differently represented; some of the Jewish writers will have
it that he denied the providence of God, and thought that all things
depended upon the stars, or planets which rule on the day a man is born,
and therefore cursed his stars; whereas nothing is more evident than
that Job ascribes all that befell him to the purpose and providence of
God, [Job 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#014); some say he was in
the utmost despair, and had no hope of eternal life and salvation, but
the contrary to this is clear from [Job
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015); and many think he had lost all
patience, for which he was so famous; but if he had, he would not have
been so highly spoken of as he is in [Jam
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#011); it is true indeed there may be a
mixture of weakness with respect to the exercise of that grace at this
time, and which may appear in some after expressions of his; yet were it
not for these and the like, as we could not have such an idea of his
sorrows and afflictions, and of that quick sense and perception he had
of them, so neither of his exceeding great patience in enduring them as
he did; and, besides, what impatience he was guilty of was not only
graciously forgiven, but he through the grace of God was enabled to
conquer; and patience had its perfect work in him, and he persevered
therein to the end; though after all he is not to be excused of weakness
and infirmity, since he is blamed not only by Elihu, but by the Lord
himself; yea, Job himself owned his sin and folly, and repented of it,
[Job 40:4](../../../bib/kjv/job040.htm#004).

\(s\) "Opponitur verbum" "verbo" "significat se pronunciasse diem
inglorium", Codurcus.

[Job 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 3:2</span></span>

And Job spake, and said. Or "answered and said" (t), though not a word
was spoken to him by his friends; he answered to his own calamity, and
to their silence, as Schmidt observes; and this word is sometimes used
when nothing goes before, to which the answer is, as many Jewish writers
observe, as in [Exo 32:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo032.htm#027); Jarchi
interprets it, "he cried", and so some others (u) render it: from
henceforwards to [Job 42:6](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#006), this book
is written in a poetical style, in Hebrew metre as is thought, which at
present is pretty much unknown, even to the Jews themselves; some have
been of opinion, that the following discourses between Job and his
friends were not originally delivered in metre, but were put into this
form by the penman or writer of the book; but of this we cannot be
certain; in the Targum in the king of Spain's Bible it is, "and Job sung
and said".

\(t\) "et respondit", Pagninus, Montanus, Schmidt, Schultens, Michaelis.
(u) "Clamavitquo", Mercerus; "nam proloquens", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator.

[Job 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 3:3</span></span>

Let the day perish wherein I was born,.... Here begins Job's form of
cursing his day, and which explains what is meant by it; and it may be
understood either of the identical day of his birth, and then the sense
is, that he wished that had never been, or, in other words, that he had
never been born; and though these were impossible, and Job knew it, and
therefore such wishes may seem to be in vain, yet Job had a design
herein, which was to show the greatness of his afflictions, and the
sense he had of them: or else of his birthday, as it returned year after
year; and then his meaning is, let it not be kept and observed with any
solemnity, with feasting and other expressions of joy, as the birthdays
of great personages especially were, and his own very probably had been,
since his children's were, [Job 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#004);
but now he desires it might not be so for the future, but be entirely
disregarded; he would have it perish out of his own memory, and out of
the memory of others, and even be struck out of the calendar, and not be
reckoned with the days of the month and year, [Job
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#006); both may be intended, both the
very day on which he was born, and the yearly return of it:

and the night in which it was said, there is a man child conceived; that
is, let that night perish also; he wishes it had not been, or he had not
been conceived, or for the future be never mentioned, but eternally
forgotten: Job goes back to his conception, as being the spring of his
sorrows; for this he knew as well as David, that he was shapen in
iniquity, and conceived in sin, see [Job
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/job014.htm#004); but rather, since the particular
night or time of conception is not ordinarily, easily, and exactly known
by women themselves, and much less by men; and more especially it could
not be told what sex it was, whether male or female that was conceived,
and the tidings of it could not be brought by any; it seems better with
Aben Ezra to render the word (w), "there is a man child brought forth",
which used to be an occasion of joy, [Joh
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021); and so the word is used to bear
or bring forth, [Ch1 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#017); see [Jer
20:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#015); and, according to him, it was a
doubt whether Job was born in the day or in the night; but be it which
it will, if he was born in the day, he desires it might perish; and if
in the night, he wishes the same to that; though the words may be
rendered in a beautiful and elegant manner nearer the original, "and the
night which said, a man child is conceived" (x); representing, by a
prosopopoeia, the night as a person conscious of the conception, as an
eyewitness of it, and exulting at it, as Schultens observes.

\(w\) "in lucem editus est vir", Mercerus; "creatus, progenitus",
Drusius, so the Targum; "conceptus et natus est vir, vel mas",
Michaelis; so Ben Melech. (x) "et nox quae dixit", Mercerus, Gussetius,
Schultens.

[Job 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 3:4</span></span>

Let that day be darkness,.... Not only dark, but darkness itself,
extremely dark; and which is to be understood not figuratively of the
darkness of affliction and calamity; this Job would not wish for, either
for himself, who had enough of that, or for others; but literally of
gross natural darkness, that was horrible and dreadful, as some (x)
render it: this was the reverse of what God said at the creation, "let
there be light", [Gen 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#003), and there
was, and he called it day; but Job wishes his day might be darkness, as
the night; either that it had been always dark, and never become day, or
in its return be remarkably dark and gloomy:

let not God regard it, from above; that is, either God who is above, and
on high, the High and Holy One, the Most High God, and who is higher
than the highest, and so this is a descriptive character of him; or else
this respects the place where he is, the highest heaven, where is his
throne, and from whence he looks and takes notice of the sons of men,
and of all things done below: and this wish must be understood
consistent with his omniscience, who sees and knows all persons and
things, even what are done in the dark, and in the darkest days; for the
darkness and the light are alike to him; and as consistent with his
providence, which is continually exercised about persons and things on
earth without any intermission, even on every day in the year; and was
it to cease one day, hour, or moment, all would be dissolved, and be
thrown into the utmost confusion and disorder: but Job means the smiles
of his providence, which he wishes might be restrained on this day; that
he would not cause his sun in the heavens to shine out upon it, nor send
down gentle and refreshing showers of rain on it; in which sense he is
said to care for and regard the land of Canaan, [Deu
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#011); where the same word is used as
here; or the sense is, let it be so expunged from the days of the year,
the when it is sought for, and if even it should be by God himself, let
it not be found; or let him not "seek" (y) after it, to do any good upon
it:

neither let the light shine upon it; the light of the sun, or the
morning light, as the Targum, much less the light at noonday; even not
the diurnal light, as Schmidt interprets it, in any part of the day:
light is God's creature, and very delightful and desirable; the best
things, and the most comfortable enjoyments, whether temporal,
spiritual, or eternal, are expressed by it; and, on the other hand, a
state of darkness is the most uncomfortable, and therefore the worst and
most dismal things and states are signified by it.

\(x\) "horrens", Caligo, Schultens. (y) "ne requirat", Montanus, &c.

[Job 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 3:5</span></span>

Let darkness and the shadow of death stain it,.... Let there be such
darkness on it as on persons when dying, or in the state of the dead;
hence the sorest afflictions, and the state of man in unregeneracy, are
compared unto it, [Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004); let there
be nothing but foul weather, dirt, and darkness in it, which may make it
very uncomfortable and undesirable; some render the word, "let darkness
and the shadow of death redeem it" (z), challenge and claim it as their
own, and let light have no share or property in it:

let a cloud dwell upon it; as on Mount Sinai when the law was given; a
thick dark cloud, even an assemblage of clouds, so thick and close
together, that they seem but one cloud which cover the whole heavens,
and obscure them, and hinder the light of the sun from shining on the
earth; and this is wished to abide not for an hour or two, but to
continue all the day:

let the blackness of the day terrify it; let it be frightful to itself;
or rather, let the blackness be such, or the darkness of it such gross
darkness, like that as was felt by the Egyptians; that the inhabitants
of the earth may be terrified with it, as Moses and the Israelites were
at Mount Sinai, at the blackness, tempest, thunders, and lightnings,
there seen and heard: as some understand this of black vapours exhaled
by the sun, with which the heavens might be filled, so others of sultry
weather and scorching heat, which is intolerable: others render the
words, "let them terrify it as the bitternesses of the day" (a); either
with bitter cursings on it, or through bitter calamities in it; or, "as
those who have a bitter (b) day", as in the margin of our Bibles, and in
others.

\(z\) "vindicassent", Junius & Tremellius; "vendicent", Cocceius;
"vindicent", Schultens. (a) "tanquam amaritudines dici", Schmidt,
Michaelis; "velut amarulenta diei", Schultens; so the Targum. (b) "Velut
amari diei", Mercerus; "tanquam amari diei", Montanus.

[Job 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 3:6</span></span>

As for that night,.... The night of conception; Job imprecated evils on
the day he was born, now on the night he was conceived in, the returns
of it:

let darkness seize upon it; let it not only he deprived of the light of
the moon and stars, but let an horrible darkness seize upon it, that it
may be an uncommon and a terrible one:

let it not be joined unto the days of the year; the solar year, and make
one of them; or, "let it not be one among them" (c), let it come into no
account, and when it is sought for, let it not appear, but be found
wanting; "or let it not joy" or "rejoice among the days of the year"
(d), as Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and others interpret it, or be a joyful one,
or anything joyful done or enjoyed in it:

let it not come into the number of the months; meaning not the
intercalated months, as Sephorno, nor the feasts of the new moon, as
others, but let it not serve to make up a month, which consists of so
many days and nights, according to the course of the moon; the sense
both of this and the former clause is, let it be struck out of the
calendar.

\(c\) "non sit una inter dies", Pagninus; "ne adunatur in diebus",
Montanus. (d) "Ne fuisset gavisa", Junius & Tremellius; "ne gaudeat",
Vatablus, Beza, Mercerus, Piscator, Drusius, Broughton, Cocceius,
Schmidt, Schultens, Michaelis.

[Job 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 3:7</span></span>

Lo, let that night be solitary,.... Let there be no company for
journeys, or doing any business; no meetings of friends, neighbours, or
relations on it, for refreshment, pleasure, and recreation, after the
business of the day is over, as is frequently done; let there be no
associations of this kind, or any other: in the night it was usual to
have feasts on various accounts, and especially on account of marriage;
but now let there be none, let there be as profound a silence as if all
creatures, men and beasts, were dead, and removed from off the face of
the earth, and nothing to be heard and seen on it: or, "let it be
barren" or "desolate" (e), so R. Simeon bar Tzemach interprets it, and
refers to [Isa 49:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#021); that is, let no
children be born in it, and so no occasion for any joy on that account,
as follows; let it be as barren as a flint (f):

let no joyful voice come therein; which some even carry to the nocturnal
singing of saints in private or in public assemblies, and to the songs
of angels, those morning stars in heaven; but it seems rather to design
natural or civil joy, or singing on civil accounts; as on account of
marriage, and particularly on account of the birth of a child, and
especially his own birth, and even any expressions of joy on any
account; and that there might not be so much as the crowing of a cock
heard, as the Targum has it.

\(e\) "orba", Syr. "desolata", Ar. "vasta", Schmidt. (f) "Sterilis",
Schultens; "effoetus", apud Arab. in ib. See Hottinger. Smegma
Orientale, l. 1. c. 7. p. 136.

[Job 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 3:8</span></span>

Let them curse it that curse the day,.... Their own day, either their
birthday, or any day on which evil befalls them; and now such as are
used to this, Job would have them, while they were cursing their own
day, to throw some curses upon his; or that curse the daylight in
general, as adulterers and murderers, who are said to rebel against the
light, see [Job 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#013); and as some
Ethiopians, who lived near Arabia, and so known to Job, who supposed
there was no God, and used to curse the sun when it rose and set, as
various writers relate (g), called by others (h) Atlantes; or it may
design such persons who were hired at funerals, to mourn for the dead,
and who, in their doleful ditties and dirges, used to curse the day on
which the person was born whom they lamented; or it may be rather the
day on which he died; hence it follows:

who are ready to raise up their mourning; who were expert at the
business, and who could raise up a howl, as the Irish now do, or make a
lamentation for the dead when they pleased; such were the mourning women
in [Jer 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#017); and those that were
skilful of lamentation, [Amo 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/amo005.htm#016);
some render the words, "who are ready to raise up Leviathan" (i), and
interpret it either of the whale, which, when raised up by the
fishermen, they are in danger of their vessels being overturned, and
their lives lost, and then they curse the day that ever they entered
into such service, and exposed themselves to such danger; or of fish in
general, and of fishermen cursing and swearing when they are
unsuccessful: some understand this of astrologers, magicians, and
enchanters, raising spirits, and particularly the devil, who they think
is meant by Leviathan; but it seems best with a little alteration from
Gussetius, and Schultens after him, to render the words thus,"let the
cursers of the day fix a name upon it; let those that are ready "to
anything, call it" the raiser up of Leviathan;''that is, let such who
either of themselves are used to curse days, or are employed by others
to do it, brand this night with some mark of infamy; let them ascribe
all dreadful calamities and dismal things unto it, as the source and
spring of them; which may be signified by Leviathan, that being a
creature most formidable and terrible, of which an account is given in
the latter part of this book; but many Jewish writers (k) render it
"mourning", as we do.

\(g\) Diodor. Sic. l. 3. p. 148. Strabo, Geograph. l. 17. P. 565. (h)
Herodot. Melpomene, sive, l. 4. c. 184. Mela de Situ Orbis, l. 1. c. 8.
Solin. Polyhistor, c. 44. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 8. (i)
"Leviathanem", Schmidt, Michaelis. Mr. Broughton renders the words, "who
hunt Leviathan." (k) Vid. Aben Ezram & Gersom in loc. R. Sol. Urbin.
Ohel Moed, fol. 1. 1. Aruch in voce So the word is used, T. Hieros. Moed
Katon, fol. 80. 4.

[Job 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 3:9</span></span>

Let the stars of the twilight thereof be dark,.... Either of the morning
or evening twilight; both may be meant, rather the latter, because of
the following clause; the sense is, let not these appear to adorn the
heavens, and to relieve the darkness of the night, and make it more
pleasant and delightful, as well as to be useful to travellers and
sailors:

let it look for light, but have none; that is, either for the light of
the moon and stars, to shine in the night till daybreak, or for the
light of the sun at the time when it arises; but let it have neither;
let the whole time, from sun setting to sunrising, from one twilight to
another, be one continued gross and horrible darkness; here, by a strong
and beautiful figure, looking is ascribed to the night:

neither let it see the dawning of the day; or, "let it not see the
eyelids of the morning" (l), or what we call "peep of day"; here, in
very elegant language, the dawn of morning light is expressed, which is
like the opening of an eye and its lids, quick and vibrating, when light
is let in and perceived; or this may be interpreted of the sun, the eye
of the morning and of light, and of its rays, which, when first darted,
are like the opening of the eyelids.

\(l\) "palpebras aurorae", Montanus, Mercerus, &c.

[Job 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 3:10</span></span>

Because it shut not up the doors of my mother's womb,.... Or "of my
belly" (m), or "womb"; which Aben Ezra interprets of the navel, by which
the infant receives its food and nourishment before it is born, and
which, if closed, he must have died in embryo; but rather it is to be
understood of his mother's womb, called his, because he was conceived
and bore in it, and was brought forth from it; and the sense is, that he
complains of the night, either that it did not close his mother's womb,
and hinder the conception of him, as Gersom, Sephorno, Bar Tzemach, and
others, and is the usual sense of the phrase of closing the womb, and
which is commonly ascribed to God, [Gen
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#017) [Sa1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#005); which Job here attributes to the
night, purposely avoiding to make mention of the name of God, that he
might not seem to complain of him, or directly point at him; or else the
blame laid on that night is, that it did not so shut up the doors of his
mother's womb, that he might not have come out from thence into the
world, wishing that had been his grave, and his mother always big with
him, as Jarchi, and which sense is favoured by [Jer
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#017); a wish cruel to his mother, as
well as unnatural to himself:

nor hid sorrow from mine eyes; which it would have done, had it done
that which is complained of it did not; had it he could not have
perceived it experimentally, endured the sorrows and afflictions he did
from the Chaldeans and Sabeans, from Satan, his wife, and friends; and
had never known the trouble of loss of substance, children, and health,
and felt those pains of body and anguish of mind he did; these are the
reasons of his cursing the day of his birth, and the night of his
conception.

\(m\) "ventris mei", Mercerus, Piscator, Schmidt, Schuitens, Michaelis;
"uteri mei", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Cocceius.

[Job 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 3:11</span></span>

Why died I not from the womb?.... That is, as soon as he came out of it;
or rather, as soon as he was in it, or from the time that he was in it;
or however, while he was in it, that so he might not have come alive out
of it; which sense seems best to agree both with what goes before and
follows after; for since his conception in the womb was not hindered, he
wishes he had died in it; and so some versions render it to this sense
(n):

why did I not give up the ghost when I came out of the belly? since he
died not in the womb, which was desirable to him, he wishes that the
moment he came out of it he had expired, and is displeased because it
was not so, see [Jer 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#017); thus what
is the special favour of Providence, to be taken out of the womb alive,
and preserved, he wishes not to have enjoyed, see [Psa
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009).

\(n\) , Sept. "in vulva", V. L. "aut, in utero", Beza, Mercerus,
Cocceius, Junius, Michaelis; so R. Abraham Peritzol, and Simeon Bar
Tzemach.

[Job 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 3:12</span></span>

Why did the knees prevent me?.... Not of the mother, as Jarchi, but of
the midwife, who received him into her lap, and nourished and cherished
him, washed him with water, salted, and swaddled him; or it may be of
his father, with whom it was usual to take the child on his knees as
soon as born, see [Gen 50:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen050.htm#023); which
custom obtained among the Greeks and Romans (o); hence the goddess
Levana (p) had her name, causing the father in this way to own his
child; his concern is, that he did not fall to the ground as he came out
of his mother's womb, and with that fall die; and that he was prevented
from falling by the officious knees of the midwife; that he was not
suffered to fall, and be left there, without having any of the usual
things done to him for the comfort and preservation of life, which was
sometimes the case, [Eze 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#004),

or why the breasts that I should suck? since a miscarrying womb was not
given, and death did not seize him immediately upon birth, but all
proper care was taken to prevent it, he asks, why was there milk in the
breasts of his mother or nurse to suckle and nourish him? why were there
not dry breasts, such as would afford no milk, that so he might have
been starved? thus he wishes the kindest things in nature and Providence
had been withheld from him.

\(o\) Homer. Iliad. 9. Vid. Barthii Animadv. ad Claudian. in Nupt.
Honor. ver. 341. (p) Kipping. Antiqu. Roman. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 10.

[Job 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 3:13</span></span>

For now should I have lain still, and been quiet,.... Signifying, that
if the above had been his case, if he had died as soon as born, or
quickly after, then he would have been laid in the grave, where he would
have lain as still as on a bed; for such is the grave to dead bodies as
a bed is to those that lie down and sleep upon it; a place of ease and
quiet, where there is freedom from all care and thought, from all
trouble, anxiety, and distress; nay, more so than on a bed, where there
is often tossing to and fro, and great disquietude, but none to the body
in the grave, that is still and silent, where there is no uneasiness nor
disturbance, see [Job 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/job017.htm#013),

I should have slept; soundly and quietly, which persons do not always
upon their beds; sometimes they cannot sleep at all, and when they do,
they are frequently distressed with uneasy thoughts, frightful dreams,
and terrifying visions, [Job 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#013); but
death is a sound sleep until the resurrection morn, which Job had
knowledge of, and faith in, and so considered the state of the dead in
this light; death is often in Scripture expressed by sleeping, [Dan
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#002); which refers not to the soul,
which in a separate state is active and vigorous, and always employed;
but to the body, which, as in sleep, so in death, is deprived of the
senses, and the exercise of them; on which account there is a great
likeness between sleep and death, and out of which a man awakes brisk
and cheerful, as the saints will at the time of their resurrection,
which will be like an awaking out of sleep:

then had I been at rest; from all toil and labour, from all diseases and
pains of body, from all troubles of whatsoever kind, and particularly
from those he now laboured under; see Gill on [Job
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017).

[Job 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 3:14</span></span>

With the kings and counsellors of the earth,.... From whom he might
descend, he being a person of great distinction and figure; and so, had
he died, he would have been buried in the sepulchres of his ancestors,
and have lain in great pomp and state: or rather this he says, to
observe that death spares none, that neither the power of kings, who
have long hands, nor the wisdom of counsellors, who have long heads, can
secure them from death; and that after death they are upon a level with
others; and even he suggests, that children that die as soon as born,
and have made no figure in the world, are equal to them:

which built desolate places for themselves; either that rebuilt houses
and cities that had lain in ruins, or built such in desolate places,
where there had been none before, or formed colonies in places before
uninhabited; and all this to get a name, and to perpetuate it to
posterity: or rather sepulchral monuments are meant, such as the lofty
pyramids of the Egyptians, and superb mausoleums of others; which, if
not built in desolate places, yet are so themselves, being only the
habitations of the dead, and so they are called the desolations of old,
[Eze 26:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze026.htm#020); and this is the sense of
many interpreters (q); if any man desires, says Vansleb (r), a prospect
and description of such ancient burying places, let him think on a
boundless plain, even, and covered with sand, where neither trees, nor
grass, nor houses, nor any such thing, is to be seen.

\(q\) Pineda, Bolducius, Patrick, Caryll, Schultens, and others. (r)
Relation of a Voyage to Egypt, p. 91.

[Job 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 3:15</span></span>

Or with princes that had gold,.... A large abundance of it while they
lived, but now, being dead, were no longer in the possession of it, but
on a level with those that had none; nor could their gold, while they
had it, preserve them from death, and now, being dead, it was no longer
theirs, nor of any use unto them; these princes, by this description of
them, seem to be such who had not the dominion over any particular place
or country, but their riches lay in gold and silver, as follows:

who filled their houses with silver; had an abundance of it, either in
their coffers, which they hoarded up, or in the furniture of their
houses, which were much of it of silver; they had large quantities of
silver plate, as well as of money; but these were of no profit in the
hour of death, nor could they carry them with them; but in the grave,
where they were, those were equal to them, of whom it might have been
said, silver and gold they had none.

[Job 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 3:16</span></span>

Or as an hidden untimely birth,.... Or "hid, as one born out of time",
as Mr. Broughton reads it; the Septuagint use the same word as the
apostle does, when he says the like of himself, [Co1
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#008); the word has the signification
of "falling" (s), and designs an abortive, which is like to fruit that
falls from the tree before it is ripe; and this may be said to be
"hidden", either in the belly, as the Targum, or however from the sight
of man, it being not come to any proper shape, and much less perfection;
now Job suggests, that if he had not lain with kings, counsellors, and
princes, yet at least he should have been as an abortion, and that would
have been as well to him: then

I had not been; or should have been nothing, not reckoned anything;
should not have been numbered among beings, but accounted as a
nonentity, and should have had no subsistence or standing in the world
at all:

as infants which never saw light; and if not like an untimely birth,
which is not come to any perfection, yet should have been like infants,
which, though their mothers have gone their full time with them, and
they have all their limbs in perfection and proportion, yet are dead, or
stillborn, their eyes have never been opened to see any light; meaning
not the light of the law, as the Targum, but the light of the sun, or
the light of the world, see [Ecc 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#003);
infants used to be buried in the wells or caves of the mummies (t).

\(s\) "sicut abortivus qui ex utero excidit, aut in terram cadit",
Michaelis. (t) Vansleb, ut supra, (Relation of a Voyage to Egypt,) p.
90.

[Job 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">job 3:17</span></span>

There the wicked cease from troubling,.... At death, and in the grave;
such who have been like the troubled sea, that cannot rest, have always
been either devising or doing mischief while living, in the grave can do
neither; there is no work nor device there; such who are never easy, and
cannot sleep unless they do mischief, when dead have no power to do any,
and are quite still and inactive; such who have been troublers of good
men, as profane persons by their ungodly lives, false teachers by their
pernicious doctrines and blasphemies, cruel persecutors by their hard
speeches, bitter calumnies and reproaches, and severe usage; those, when
they die themselves, cease from giving further trouble, or when the
righteous die, they can disturb them no more; yea, a good man at death
is not only no more troubled by wicked men, but no more by his own
wicked heart, nor any more by that wicked one Satan; there and then all
these cease from giving him any further molestation:

and there the weary be at rest; wicked men, either who here tire and
weary themselves with committing sin, to which they are slaves and
drudges, and especially with persecuting and troubling the saints, shall
rest front such acts of sin and wickedness, of which they will be no
more capable; or else good men, who are weary of sin, and long to be rid
of it, to whom it is a burden, and under which they groan, and are weary
of the troubles and afflictions they meet with in the world; and what
with one thing and another are weary of their lives, and desire to
depart and be with Christ; these at death and in the grave are at rest,
their bodies from toil and labour, and from all painful disorder, and
pressing afflictions, and from all the oppressions and vexations of
wicked and ungodly men; their souls rest in the arms of Jesus, from sin
and all consciousness of it, from the temptations of Satan, from all
doubts and fears, and every spiritual enemy, by whom they can be no more
annoyed: some render the words, "there rest the labours of strength"
(u): such toils are over that break the strength of men; or "the labours
of violence" (w), which are imposed upon them through violence, by cruel
and imperious men; but at death and in the grave will cease and be no
more, even labour of all sorts; see [Rev
14:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#013).

\(u\) "labores roboris", Michaelis. (w) "Labores violentiae", Schmidt.

[Job 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">job 3:18</span></span>

There the prisoners rest together,.... "Are at ease", as Mr. Broughton
renders the words; such who while they lived were in prison for debt, or
were condemned to the galleys, to lead a miserable life; or such who
suffered bonds and imprisonment for the sake of religion, at death their
chains are knocked off, and they are as much at liberty, and enjoy as
much ease, as the dead that never were prisoners; and not only rest
together with those who were their fellow prisoners, but with those who
never were in prison, yea, with those who cast them into it; for there
the prisoners and those that imprisoned them are upon a level, enjoying
equal ease and liberty:

they hear not the voice of the oppressor; or "exactor" (x); neither of
their creditors that demanded their debt of them, and threatened them
with a prison, or that detained them in it; nor of the jail keeper that
gave them hard words as well as stripes; nor of cruel taskmasters, who
kept them to hard service in prison, and threatened them severely if
they did not perform it, like the taskmasters in Egypt, [Exo
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#011); but, in the grave, the
blustering, terrifying, voice of such, is not heard.

\(x\) "exactoris", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
&c.

[Job 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">job 3:19</span></span>

The small and great are there,.... Both as to age, and with respect to
bulk and strength of body, and also to estate and dignity; children and
men, or those of low and high stature, or in a mean or more exalted
state of life, as to riches and honour, these all come to the grave
without any difference, and lie there without any distinction (y)
"little and great are there all one"; as Mr. Broughton renders the
words, see [Rev 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#012),

and the servant is free from his master; death dissolves all relations
among men, and takes away the power that one has legally over another,
as the husband over the wife, who at death is loosed from the law and
power of her husband, [Rom 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#002); and so
parents over their children, and masters over their servants; there the
master and the servant are together, without any superiority of the one
to the other: the consideration of all the above things made death and
the state of the dead in the grave appear to Job much more preferable
than life in his present circumstances; and therefore, since it had not
seized on him sooner, and as soon as he before had wished it had, he
desires it might not be long before it came upon him, as in [Job
3:20](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020).

\(y\) "Grandia cum parvis Orcus metit". Horat. Ep. l. 2. ep. 2. ver.
178. "----Mista senum ac juvenum densantur funera". Horat. Carmin. l. 1.
Ode. 28.

[Job 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">job 3:20</span></span>

Wherefore is light given to him that is in misery,.... That labours
under various calamities and afflictions, as Job did, being stripped of
his substance, deprived of his children, and now in great pain of body
and distress of mind; who, since he died not so soon as he wished he
had, expostulates why his life is protracted; for that is what he means
by light, as appears from the following clause, even the light of the
living, or the light of the world; which though sweet and pleasant to
behold to a man in health, yet not to one in pain of body and anguish of
mind, as he was, who chose rather to be in the dark and silent grave;
this he represents as a gift, as indeed life is, and the gift of God:
the words may be rendered, "wherefore does he give light?" (y) that is,
God, as some (z) supply it, who is undoubtedly meant, though not
mentioned, through reverence of him, and that he might not seem to
quarrel with him; the principle of life is from him, and the continuance
and protraction of it, and all the means and mercies by which it is
supported; and Job asks the reasons, which he seems to be at a loss for,
why it should be continued to a person in such uncomfortable
circumstances as he was in; though these, with respect to a good man as
he was, are plain and obvious: such are continued in the world under
afflictions, both for their own good, and for the glory of God, that
their graces may be tried, their sins purged away or prevented, and they
made more partakers of divine holiness; and be weaned from this world,
and fitted for another, and not be condemned with the world of the
ungodly:

and life unto the bitter in soul; whose lives are embittered to them by
afflictions, comparable to the waters of Marah, and to wormwood and
gall, which occasion bitterness of spirit in them, and bitter complaints
from them; see [Job 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#026).

\(y\) "quare dat", Cocceius, Schmidt, Schultens, Michaelis. (z) So
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. vid. Schultens in loc.

[Job 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">job 3:21</span></span>

Which long for death, but it cometh not,.... Who earnestly desire,
wistly look out, wish for, and expect it, and with open mouth gape for
it, as a hungry man for his food, or as the fish for the bait, or the
fishermen for the fish, as some (a) observe the word may signify; but it
comes not to their wish and expectation, or so soon as they would have
it; the reason is, because the fixed time for it is not come, otherwise
it will certainly come at God's appointed time, and often in an hour not
thought of; death is not desirable in itself, being a dissolution of
nature, or as it is the sanction of the law, or the wages of sin, or a
penal evil; and though it is and may be lawfully desired by good men,
that they may be free from sin, and be in a better capacity to serve the
Lord, and that they may be for ever with him; yet such desires should be
expressed with submission to the divine will, and the appointed time
should be patiently waited for, and should not be desired merely to be
rid of present afflictions and troubles, which was the case of Job, and
of those he here describes; see [Rev
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#006),

and dig for it more than for hid treasures; which are naturally hid in
the earth; as gold and silver ore, with other metals and precious
stones; or which are of choice concealed there from the plunder of
others; the former seems rather to be meant, and in digging for which
great pains, diligence, and industry, are used, see [Pro
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#004); and is expressive of the very
great importunity and strong desire of men in distressed circumstances
after death, seeking diligently and pressing importunately for it; the
sin of suicide not being known, or very rare, in that early time, or
however was shunned and abhorred even by those that were most weary of
their lives: some render it, "who dig for it out off hid treasures" (b);
out of the bowels of the earth, and the lowest parts of it, could they
but find it there: but the Targum, Jarchi, and others, understand it
comparatively, as we do.

\(a\) So Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. vid. Schultens in loc. (b) "e
thesauris", Cocceius; "ex imis terrae latebris", Mercerus: "ex locis
absconditis", Schmidt.

[Job 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">job 3:22</span></span>

Which rejoice exceedingly,.... Or, "which joy till they do skip again",
as Mr. Broughton renders it, and to the same purport others (d); are so
elated as to skip and dance for joy:

and are glad when they can find the grave; which is to be understood
either of those who dig in the earth for hid treasure, such as is laid
there by men; when they strike and hit upon a grave where they expect to
find a booty; it being usual in former times to put much riches into the
sepulchres of great personages, as Sanctius on the place observes; so
Hyrcanus, opening the sepulchre of David, found in it three thousand
talents of silver, as Josephus (e) relates: or rather this is said of
the miserable and bitter in soul, who long for death, and seek after it;
who, when they perceive any symptoms of its near approach, are
exceedingly pleased, and rejoice at it, as when they observe the decays
of nature, or any disorder and disease upon them which threaten with
death; for this cannot be meant of the dead carrying to the grave, who
are insensible of it, and of their being put into it.

\(d\) "qu laetantur ad choream usque", Schultens, "quasi ad tripudium",
Michaelis. (e) Antiqu. l. 13. c. 8. sect. 4. Ed. Hudson.

[Job 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">job 3:23</span></span>

Why is light given to a man whose way is hid,.... Some of the Jewish
writers connect this with [Job 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#022),
thus; "who rejoice and are glad when they find a grave for a man", &c.
but it should be observed that such are said to rejoice at finding a
grave, not for others, but for themselves; the words stand in better
connection with [Job 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#020), from whence
the supplement is taken in our version and others; and so it is a
continuation or repetition of the expostulation why light and life, or
the light of the living, should be given to persons as before described,
and here more largely; and Job himself is principally designed, as is
generally thought, whose way, according to him, was hid from the Lord,
neglected and not cared for by him but overlooked and slighted, and no
regard had to the injuries done him, as the church also complains, [Isa
40:27](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#027); or front whom the way of the
Lord was hid; his way in the present afflictive dispensations of
Providence, the causes and reasons of which he could not understand; not
being conscious of any notorious sin committed, indulged, and continued
in, that should bring these troubles on him: or the good and right way
was hid from him in which he should walk; he was at a loss to know which
was that way, since by his afflictions he was ready to conclude that the
way he had been walking in was not the right, and all his religion was
in vain; and according to this sense he laboured under the same
temptation as Asaph did, [Psa 73:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#013);
or his way of escape out of his present troubles was unknown to him; he
saw no way open for him, but shut up on every side: or there was no way
for others to come to him, at least they cared not for it; he who had
used to have a large levee, some to have his counsel and advice, and to
be instructed by him, others to ask relief of him, and many of the
highest rank and figure to visit, caress, and compliment him; but now
all had forsaken him, his brethren and acquaintance, and his kinsfolk
and familiar friends kept at a distance from him, as if they knew not
the way to him:

and whom God hath hedged in? not with the hedge of his power,
providence, and protection, as before; but with thorns and afflictions,
and in such manner as he could not get out, or extricate himself; all
avenues and ways of escape being blocked up, see [Lam
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#007); though, after all, the words may
be considered as a concession, and as descriptive of a man the reverse
of himself, and be supplied thus; "indeed light may be given to a man",
a mighty man, as the word (e) signifies, a man strong, hale, and robust;
"whose way is hid", or "covered" (f); who is hid in the secret of God's
presence, and in the pavilion of his power; who dwells in his secret
place, and under the shadow of the Almighty, [Psa
31:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#020); who is under the shelter of his
providence, preserved from diseases of body, and protected from the
plunder and depredations of enemies, and enjoys great affluence and
prosperity, as his three friends about him did, and whom he may point
at: "and whom God hath hedged in"; as he had formerly set a hedge about
him in his providence, though now he had plucked it up; see [Job
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#010).

\(e\) "emphatice ponitur saepe, ut notetur praepollentia", Coccei. Lexic
in rad (f) "tecta", Cocceius; "velo septa est", Schultens.

[Job 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">job 3:24</span></span>

For my sighing cometh before I eat,.... Or, "before my bread", or "food"
(g); before he sat down to eat, or had tasted of his food, there were
nothing but sighing and sobbing, so that he had no appetite for his
food, and could take no delight in it; and, while he was eating, his
tears mingled with it, so that these were his meat and his drink
continually, and he was fed with the bread and water of affliction; and
therefore what were light and life to such a person, who could not have
the pleasure of one comfortable meal?

and my roarings are poured out like the waters; he not only wept
privately and in secret, and cried more publicly both to God and in the
presence of men, but such was the force and weight of his affliction,
that he even roared out, and that like a lion; and his afflictions,
which were the cause of these roarings, are compared to waters and the
pouring of them out; for the noise these waterspouts made, and for the
great abundance of them, and for their quick and frequent returns, and
long continuance, one wave and billow rolling upon another.

\(g\) "ante cibum meum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "ante panem
meum", Cocceius, Schmidt, Michaelis.

[Job 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">job 3:25</span></span>

For the thing which I greatly feared is come upon me,.... Some refer
this to his fears about his children, lest they should sin and offend
God, and bring down his judgments on them, and now what he feared was
come to pass, [Job 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#005); others take in
all his sorrows and troubles; which, through the changeableness of the
world, and the uncertainty of all things in it, and the various
providences of God, he feared would come upon him at one time or
another; and this he mentions to justify his expostulation, why light
and life should be continued to such a man, who, by reason of his fear
and anxiety of mind, never had any pleasure in his greatest prosperity,
destruction from the Almighty being a terror to him; [Job
31:23](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#023); but I think it is not
reasonable to suppose that a man of Job's faith in God, and trust in
him, should indulge such fears to such a degree; nor indeed that he
could ever entertain such a thought in him, nor even surmise that such
shocking calamities and distresses should come upon him as did: but this
is to be understood not of his former life, in prosperity, but of the
beginning of his afflictions; when he heard of the loss of one part of
his substance, he was immediately possessed with a fear of losing
another; and when he heard of that, he feared the loss of a third, and
even of all; then of his children, and next of his health:

and that which I was afraid of is come unto me: which designs the same,
in other words, or a new affliction; and particularly the ill opinion
his friends had of him; he feared that through these uncommon
afflictions he should be reckoned an ungodly man, an hypocrite; and as
he feared, so it was; this he perceived by the silence of his friends,
they not speaking one word of comfort to him; and by their looks at him,
and the whole of their behaviour to him.

[Job 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">job 3:26</span></span>

I was not in safety,.... This cannot refer to the time of his
prosperity; for he certainly then was in safety, God having set an hedge
about him, so that none of his enemies, nor even Satan himself, could
come at him to hurt him:

neither had I rest, neither was I quiet; which also was not true of him
before his afflictions, for he did then enjoy great peace, rest, and
quietness; he lay in his nest at ease, and in great tranquillity; and
thought and said he should die in such a state, see [Job
29:18](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#018), &c. nor is the sense of these
expressions, that he did not take up his rest and satisfaction in
outward things, and put his trust and confidence in his riches, and yet
trouble came upon him; but this relates to the time of the beginning of
his troubles and afflictions, from which time he was not in safety, nor
had any rest and peace; there was no intermission of his sorrows; but as
soon as one affliction was over, another came:

yet trouble came; still one after another, there was no end of them; or,
as Mr. Broughton renders it, "and now cometh a vexation"; a fresh one, a
suspicion of hypocrisy; and upon this turns the whole controversy,
managed and carried on between him and his friends in the following part
of this book.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 4](job004)

</div>
