<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Job Index](job)  
  [Previous](job034)  [Next](job036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Job Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#001)

[Job](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">job 35:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOB 35

Is this chapter Elihu goes on to charge Job with other unbecoming
speeches, which he undertakes to refute; as that he had represented his
cause more just than God's, and religion and righteousness as things
unprofitable to men, only to God; to which Elihu takes upon him to make
answer, [Job 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#001); and that the cries
of the oppressed were not heard by the Lord, so as to give occasion to
songs of praise and thankfulness, to which he replies, [Job
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#009); and that Job had expressed
diffidence and despair of ever seeing and enjoying the favour of God,
which he endeavours to remove, [Job
35:14](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#014).

[Job 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">job 35:10</span></span>

But none saith, where is God my Maker?.... Or "Makers" (y), as in [Psa
149:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#002); for there are more concerned in
the formation of man, [Gen 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#026); even
the Father, Son, and Spirit, who are the one God that has made all men,
[Mal 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#010). Now not one of the
oppressed ones that cry by reason of their oppression, or very few of
them, inquire after God, seek unto him for help and deliverance from
their oppressions, or desire to enjoy him and his gracious presence
under their afflictions and distresses; and that is one reason why they
are not heard: they do not so much as consider him as the author of
their beings, and be thankful to him for them; nor as the preserver of
them in their beings; nor as their kind benefactor, who gives them all
that they enjoy, and who is the disposer of all their affairs in
providence: and if they are new creatures, or are remade, they are his
workmanship; and therefore should upon all accounts seek him and submit
to his will, and patiently bear all their afflictions, waiting his time
to deliver them out of them: but there are few or none that regard him
in this light, or make an inquiry after him, even though he has not only
made them, but is he

who giveth songs in the night; which respects not the praises of the
angels in the night, as the Targum; nor the shining of the moon and
stars in the night, which cause praise and thankfulness; nor the singing
of birds in the night, as of the nightingale; senses some give into: but
matter and cause of rejoicing in the night, either taken literally, as
the mercies of the day, which, when reflected upon when men come to lie
down on their beds at night, and commune with their hearts there, afford
them songs of praise, see [Psa 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#008).
Or the mercies of the night, as sweet refreshing sleep, and preservation
in safety from all dangers by fire, thieves, &c. all which are of God;
and, when duly considered, will direct to encompass him with songs of
deliverance, see [Psa 137:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#002). Or,
figuratively, the night sometimes signifying a time of calamity,
affliction, and distress, either on temporal or spiritual accounts; and
when men seek to him in such a night with their whole hearts, and he is
pleased to visit them in a gracious manner, and favour them with his
presence and the discoveries of his love, this occasions songs of praise
to him, [Isa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009). But when men are
unconcerned about and not thankful for the mercies of the day and of the
night, though these administer songs unto them, it is no wonder that,
when they cry through oppression, they are not heard.

\(y\) "factores mei"; Drusius, Mercerus, Piscator, Cocceius, Michaelis,
Schultens; so Broughton.

[Job 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">job 35:11</span></span>

Who teacheth us more than the beasts of the earth?.... Who are taught
and know much, especially some of them; but not so much as man, see [Isa
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#003);

and maketh us wiser than the fowls of heaven? who are wise to provide
food and nests for themselves and their young; and such as are birds of
passage, as the turtledove, the crane, the stork, and the swallow, to
know the time of their coming and returning, see [Jer
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#007). But then neither the beasts not;
the fowls, though they are endowed with much knowledge and sagacity,
according to their natures, yet not with reason and understanding, as
men are, so as to make reflections on things they see and hear, and
reason and discourse about them; nor are they capable of being taught
and attaining to knowledge and wisdom as men are, by the works of God,
of creation, and providence; and by the word of God, the Scriptures of
truth, which are able to make men wise unto salvation; and by the Spirit
of God, who teaches all things of a spiritual nature. God not only
endows men with reason, but with sentiments of religion, which brutes
are incapable of: he gives to men wisdom in the hidden part; he puts in
them his fear, which is the beginning of wisdom; he makes them wise to
know God in Christ, and to know his Son Jesus Christ, whom to know is
life eternal; and he gives them knowledge of a future state, and hope of
immortality and eternal life. Wherefore it becomes them to bear
afflictions and oppressions with a fortitude of mind, and patiently
submit to the will of God, and wait his time for deliverance, having
called upon him in faith, and left their case with him; but if they only
cry, as the brutes do under their burdens, it need not seem strange they
are not heard and answered; since God has given them more wisdom and
knowledge than they, and therefore should behave after another manner;
though sometimes they act a part inferior to them, [Jde
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#010).

[Job 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">job 35:12</span></span>

There they cry,.... As brutes do, and as in, [Job
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#009); by reason of their oppressions,
but not under a due sense of the hand of God upon them, nor of his being
their only helper, and saviour, and deliverer;

but none giveth answer; to them, either God or men, and they lie
groaning and howling under their oppression;

because of the pride of evil men; this is either to be connected with
"they cry", and then the sense is, that they cry by reason of the
oppressions of wicked men, who, through the pride of their hearts, and
to show their superior power and authority, persecute and distress them,
[Psa 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#002). And it is because of this
they cry out, being distressed by them, and not through any sense of sin
they have committed, as the reason of God's suffering them to be thus
oppressed: or "with none give answer"; God gives them no answer to their
cry, because pride is not withdrawn from them, which is one end he has
in afflicting men; because they are not humbled under the mighty hand of
God, and are not brought to a sense of sin and humiliation for it, and
acknowledgment of it. And another reason follows:

[Job 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">job 35:13</span></span>

Surely God will not hear vanity,.... Or "a lie" (z), than which nothing
is more an abomination to him; if men come to him with a lie in their
mouths, they cannot expect to be heard by him; he is only nigh to those
who call upon him in truth: or that which is "rash" (a); which is rashly
uttered, and in a passionate wrathful manner, savouring of a revengeful
spirit, too often the case of those that cry under oppression; see [Ecc
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#002); or vain and empty prayers, a
speech of vanity, as Aben Ezra; which as to the matter of them are about
vain and empty things; only for outward mercies, worldly goods; and not
for spiritual mercies, or such things as are according to the will of
God; but what are pleasing to the flesh, and sought for to consume on
the lusts of it, and therefore such prayers are not heard, [Psa
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#006); and as to the manner of them,
they are not put up in the name of Christ, nor under the influence of
the spirit of Christ, nor in the exercise of any grace, nor with
reverence of God, nor with sincerity of soul, not in faith, nor with
fervency: or "vanity" is put for vain men, as sin for sinners; such as
are proud men, and are vainly puffed up in their fleshly mind. God hears
humble penitent sinners, who find mercy with him; and humble saints, to
whom he gives more grace; but not proud Pharisees, or men not humbled by
afflictions; see [Luk 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011); nor light
and empty persons, who are without God and Christ, destitute of the
spirit, devoid of all grace, and full of all unrighteousness; unstable
ones, who are vanity itself, and lighter than vanity, tossed to and fro
like a wave of the sea, and double minded, [Jam
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#006); nor men of vain conversations,
that walk in the vanity of their minds, whose words are vain, and
especially such as take the name of God in vain; and all whose actions
are vain, or such that live a vain and sinful course of life; God hears
not sinners, [Joh 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031);

neither will the Almighty regard it; vanity, vain prayers and vain
persons; he regards the prayer of the destitute, the lowly, and the
humble, but not the prayer of such as before described; he cannot "look"
at, it (b), nor at them: he looks to the poor and contrite, and desires
to see their countenance and hear their voice in prayer; but he is of
purer eyes thou to look on vain persons and their vain prayers; and a
greater contempt cannot be shown to petitioners and their petitions than
when those to whom they apply will not so much as look at them, but turn
both a deaf ear to them, and their eyes away from them.

\(z\) "falsitatem", Beza; "mendacium", Pagninus, Montanus. (a) "Quod
temerarium est", Cocceius. (b) "non intuatur illud", Pagninus, Montanus;
"non videt illud", Cocceius; so Michaelis and Schultens.

[Job 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">job 35:14</span></span>

Although thou sayest thou shall not see him,.... Which is another
expression of Job's taken notice of by Elihu, and to which he makes
answer; he seems to refer to [Job
23:3](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#003). God is indeed invisible in his
nature and essence, but is to be seen in his works of creation and
providence; which Job was acquainted with, and in which he had seen
somewhat of the glory of God, and of his divine perfections in them. See
[Job 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#004). And he is to be seen in
Christ by an eye of faith, and Job had trusted in him as his salvation;
and he will be seen with the beatific vision in heaven as he is, in a
more glorious and perfect manner, which Job had a full persuasion of,
[Job 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/job013.htm#015); and therefore is not to be
understood in either of those senses, but of his not seeing him on a
throne of judgment, hearing and trying his cause, judging and acquitting
him; this he had often desired, but despaired of ever seeing it; see
[Job 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#004); to which Elihu replies;

yet judgment is before him; all things are naked and open to him, and
stand clear before him; he has perfect knowledge of what is right and
wrong; no cause is unknown to him, and needs not to be searched into by
him; nor can he nor will he ever pass a wrong judgment: he is just and
true, righteous in all his ways and works, the Judge of the whole earth,
who will do right, and will plead and judge the cause of every good man
sooner or later; if not now, there is a judgment to come with him, when
all must appear before his judgment seat, and he will render unto every
man according to his works;

therefore trust thou in him, or "wait for him" (c); wait for his coming
to judgment: wait till that time comes when everything will be brought
to light, and every good man shall have praise of God. Or, as we render
it, "trust in him"; God alone is the object of trust and confidence, and
happy is the man that trusts in him; he is to be trusted in for all
things, both temporal, spiritual, and eternal; and particularly for this
of doing justice to his people; if not now, yet hereafter, he will
render tribulation to them that trouble them; he will right all their
wrongs and avenge their injuries, and remove the rebuke that is upon
them, and confess them before men and angels, and declare them
righteous, and receive them into his kingdom and glory: and be is to be
trusted in at all times, in times of adversity as well as prosperity;
and even when he is not to be seen, and the dispensations of his
providence are dark and intricate, see [Isa
50:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#010); The word used signifies such a
trust, hope, and waiting, as of a woman in travail, who bears her pains
patiently, holding and trusting for a safe deliverance of a child, to
the joy of her and her family.

\(c\) "et expectabis eum", Montanus; "expecta eum", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Mercerus; so Michaelis, Schultens.

[Job 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">job 35:15</span></span>

But now, because it is not so,.... Because there was not such trust,
hope, patience, and quiet expectation in Job that God would appear for
him, and do him, justice openly and publicly; for though he had hope and
confidence of an interest in his living Redeemer and Saviour, and of
eternal life and happiness through him; yet not of his bringing his
judgment to the light, and of his beholding his righteousness, as he
ought to have had, see [Psa 37:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#005);

he hath visited in his anger; corrected and chastised in fatherly anger
and displeasure, though not in wrath and vengeance, and in a way of
punishment in strict justice; but consistent with his invariable love
and free favour in Christ; being displeased at his want of faith and
patience, failing in the exercise of which is oftentimes resented by the
Lord, see [Num 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012);

yet he knoweth it not in great extremity: so stupid was Job, that though
he was in the utmost extremity of affliction, in his body, family, and
substance, yet was not sensible it was his duty to trust in God, and
patiently wait for him; he knew that the hand of God was upon him, and
that he had visited him in anger, and that his arrows stuck fast in him,
and his hand pressed him sore; but was insensible of the cause of the
continuance of it, his unbelief, impatience, and non-submission to the
will of God. The word for "extremity" signifies "abundance" (d), and may
be applied to an abundance and plenty of good things; and therefore some
understand it of Job's prosperity, and take the sense to be, that God
took no notice of this; it did not hinder him from visiting him, but he
destroyed it all: though Mr. Broughton, on the other hand, interprets it
of the great plenty of sorrows and distresses Job was attended with, the
true cause of which he did not advert to: some (e) think the whole
refers to the merciful dealings of God with Job, and read the first
clause,

"know now his anger hath visited but a little or noticing;''

the affliction is but a light one comparatively speaking, scarce any
thing at all in comparison of what sin deserves, being abundantly less
than that:

"neither hath he made great inquisition, or inquired out the multitude''

of sins; not strictly and severely marking them, and dealing with and
for them according to their deserts; see [Ezr
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#013); with which compare [Co2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#017); and therefore Job had no reason
to complain of God, or of any hard usage from him.

\(d\) "in copia", Montanus; "ad auctum valde", Cocceius;
"prosperitatem", De Dieu; so Patrick. (e) Tigurine version, Mercerus,
Piscator; so Ben Gersom.

[Job 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">job 35:16</span></span>

Therefore doth Job open his mouth in vain,.... In uttering such
unbecoming expressions, observed, and refuted, in his loud complaints of
God, and of his dealings with him, and in defence of himself;

he multiplieth words without knowledge; both against God and in answer
to others; being in a great measure ignorant of the nature and number of
his sins, and of his afflictions; and of the end of God in them, and of
the right he had to lay them upon him; us well as of his duty patiently
to bear them, and trust in God, and wait his own time for deliverance
out of them; and or the truth of this he was afterwards convinced, and
acknowledged it, [Job 42:3](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#003).

[Job 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">job 35:1</span></span>

Elihu spake moreover, and said. Elihu very probably paused awhile, and
waited to observe whether any of the company would rise up, and either
contradict and refute what he had said, or declare their assent unto it
and approbation of it; or rather to see whether Job would make any reply
or not; but perceiving no inclination in him to it, he proceeded to take
notice of some other undue expressions of Job, and refute them; one of
which is observed in [Job 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#002), and
the proof of it given in [Job 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#003).

[Job 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">job 35:2</span></span>

Thinkest thou this to be right,.... Elihu appeals to Job himself, to his
conscience and reason; who as a natural man, guided by the light of
nature and reason only, and judging according to the dictates of a
natural conscience, and especially as a good man, one that feared God,
and had so much knowledge of him and his perfections, as his speeches
showed, could never upon reflection think it right what he had said
concerning God and his justice, as follows:

that thou saidst, my righteousness is more than God's? A strange
expression this indeed! but what is to be understood not of his personal
righteousness; Job in his senses could never say that this was more or
greater than God's, or to be above it and preferred to it in any sense;
nor even of righteousness imputed. Old Testament saints had the
righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and were justified by it; and
so Job, who had knowledge of and faith in Christ as his living Redeemer,
and the Lord his righteousness: but then though this is the
righteousness of God, wrought out by one that is God as well as man, and
approved and accepted of by God, and imputed by him to his people, which
is revealed in the Gospel, and is unto all, and upon all them that
believe, and they are made the righteousness of God in Christ; yet this
cannot be more than the righteousness of God: besides it is not the
essential righteousness of Christ as God, as Osiander dreamed, by which
men are justified, but his obedience, active and passive, as Mediator,
otherwise they would be deified who are justified by it; and if even so
absurd a notion as this could obtain, it would not be more of man than
the righteousness of God: much less can this be interpreted of Job's
inherent righteousness, or the new man which is created in righteousness
and true holiness; since all the holiness and righteousness that is in
man is from God, and at present imperfect, and therefore cannot be more
or greater than his; and still less can this be meant of Job's external
righteousness, which, how great soever, was not perfect and without sin;
whereas God is just and without iniquity. But there is not a just man
that does good and sins not. This therefore must be understood of the
righteousness of his cause; and to say that this was more than God's was
what he ought not to have said, and more than became him to say: for
though a good man may defend himself against the calumnies of his
enemies, by asserting his own righteousness, innocence, and integrity,
and may desire the Lord to plead his cause against them, and judge him
according to his righteousness and the integrity of his heart; but to
attempt to make it out, that his cause is more righteous than the
Lord's, is doing an ill thing. Now though Job had not expressed this in
so many words, yet he had said that from whence this might by
consequence be deduced; he had given great occasion for such an
inference to be drawn from his speeches; for since he had spoken so
largely of his innocence and integrity, and holy life, and of the hard
usage nevertheless he had met with from God; and had represented his own
case, as if he had behaved so well as to deserve better treatment at the
hand of God than to be afflicted in the manner he was; that he had wrong
done him, and complained of it, and could not be heard; his judgment was
taken from him by the Lord; which was in effect to say, that his cause
was better than the Lord's, and would bear a stricter examination than
his; which to say was, exceeding bad and unbecoming; see [Job
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/job016.htm#017).

[Job 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">job 35:3</span></span>

For thou saidst, what advantage will it be unto thee?.... Meaning that
his righteousness, his holy life and conversation, were of no avail to
him: he received no more benefit by being righteous than if he was
wicked, since God destroyed one as well as another; and since his
righteousness did not secure him from afflictions and calamities, it was
of no advantage to him; he had not said so in so many words, but it is
inferred from what he had said, [Job
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#022). Man's own righteousness is of no
advantage to him as to justification before God, and acceptance with
him, nor in the business of salvation, or with respect to heaven and
happiness, so as to give a right and title to it; bat is of great
advantage in other respects; is for self-defence against the imputations
and calumnies of wicked men; it makes a man honourable and respectable
among men, when to live a vicious course of life is scandalous and
reproachful; it gives pleasure and satisfaction to the mind, the
testimony of a good conscience is matter of rejoicing; and such a man is
free from the racks and tortures of an evil conscience others are
distressed with; besides, good works are an evidence of the truth and
genuineness of faith to others, and ornament the doctrines of the Gospel
and a profession of them: and though a righteous man may be afflicted as
others, yet in a different manner, in love and not in wrath, and always
for his good;

and, what profit shall one have, if I be cleansed from my sin? The
words, "if I be cleansed", are a supplement, and seem necessary; so Mr.
Broughton supplies. Sin is of a defiling nature, yet man may be cleansed
from it, not by anything he can do, but only by the grace of. God and
blood of Christ; and from such a cleansing profit arises. This fits a
man for the service and worship of God, and for communion with him;
gives him peace of mind, and makes him meet for heaven. This Job had not
expressly said, and not at all in this sense, but it seems to be
inferred from [Job 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#029); where he is
speaking of outward purity of life, and yet was plunged into the ditch
of afflictions. Some render the words to this sense, as if there was no
profit "by expiation of atonement for sin" (u); the same word signifying
both sin and atonement for it: there is none but by the blood and
sacrifice of Christ, and much profit arises from that; pardon of sin
proceeds upon it, and this furnishes out much solid peace, joy, and
comfort, [Rom 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#010). Others, what
profit by punishment for sin (w), unless to God? so sin is sometimes put
for punishment; or through leaving sin and repenting of it (x). Now
though these are not the causes of the pardon of sin, yet it is given
and applied to such who do repent of it, confess and forsake it, [Pro
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#013). Or by being "without sin" (y):
no man is without sin; but a man may be without any gross and enormous
crime he is chargeable with, or without living a vicious course of life;
and this is profitable, as has been before observed. Jarchi's paraphrase
is,

"what shall I profit more by my righteousness than by my sin?''

which sense is followed by others: I may as well be wicked as righteous;
I am not the better for it, since I am afflicted in the manner I am: my
righteousness is of no profit to me; if to any, it is to God. To this
Elihu returns an answer in the following verses.

\(u\) "de expiatione mea", Mercerus, &c. "in expiando peccatum",
Grotius; "pro piaculo venit", Cocceius; so Simeon Bar Tzemach in loc.
(w) "Supplicio meo", Junius & Tremellius; "mucta pro illo aut poena",
Cocceius; "ex poena peccati mei", Drusius; so Ben Gersom. (x) "Subaudi
relicto", so Mercerus, Drusius; "remisso et per poenitentiam diluto",
Munster. (y) "Absque peccato", i.e. "ita vivendo ut non perccom"; so
some in Michaelis.

[Job 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">job 35:4</span></span>

I will answer thee, and thy companions with thee. Meaning not his three
friends, as the Septuagint version expresses it; for they were not on
the side of Job, and of the same sentiment with him, but rather on the
side of Elihu; especially Eliphaz, who expresses much the same sentiment
he does, [Job 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/job022.htm#002); but all that were
of the same mind with Job, whether present or absent, or in whatsoever
part of the world; the answer he should return to him would serve for
them all, and sufficiently confute such a bad notion of God, let it be
embraced by whomsoever.

[Job 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">job 35:5</span></span>

Look unto the heavens, and see,.... The firmament of heaven, in which
are the sun and moon and stars:

and behold the clouds which are higher than thou; the clouds of the air
or sky, which are lower than the starry heavens, yet these were higher
than Job, and much more the starry heavens: but because the word has the
signification of "thinness", which does not so well agree with the
clouds, which are thick substances, condensed air; some take it to be
meant of the supreme region of the heavens, which is pure and thin; so
Sephorno: and Job is directed to look to these, not as stargazers do,
such as are given to judicial astrology, to judge of the fates of men
and kingdoms; but rather thereby to be led to the contemplation of God
the author of them, and the glorious perfections of his being they
display; and chiefly to observe the height of them, that they were out
of his reach, and he could neither help them nor hurt them; that he
could neither increase nor diminish the light of the celestial bodies,
which he could only behold; nor either advance or hinder their course,
nor in the least add to or abate their influence and efficacy; and if he
could neither be beneficial nor harmful to them, how was it possible
that he could be of any advantage or detriment to God, by any actions of
his, good or bad, who is higher and out of sight? This is the answer
Elihu in general returned, he more particularly replies as follows.

[Job 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">job 35:6</span></span>

If thou sinnest, what dost thou against him?.... Sin is expressly said
to be against God, [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004); it is
contrary to his nature, as any opposites can be to each other: it is
against his law, a breach and violation of it; and so against his
supreme legislative power and authority, and a contempt of it; it is
what he is angry with and is provoked by, being what he hates and
abhors, and is abominable in his sight. But then he cannot be supposed
to be so affected with it to be ruffled and discomposed, or his peace be
disturbed, and his happiness in the least broke in upon; for affections
are only attributed to him after the manner of men; much less is he so
affected hereby as to be hurt or in danger of being destroyed, nor even
of being dethroned: men can no more reach him by any hostile action of
theirs, such as sin is, than they can reach the sun and stop its course,
lessen its light or pluck it from its orbit. Or, "what canst thou work
for him?" as Mr. Broughton; by way of atonement or satisfaction for sin?
Nothing at all; see [Job 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/job007.htm#020); but the
other sense is best;

or if thy transgressions be multiplied, what dost thou unto him? As he
is not hurt by a slight single sin, a failing or infirmity, an error or
mistake, common to men, as the preceding word may signify; so not by
greater sins, presumptuous ones, gross enormities, rebellions against
God, overt acts of treason against the Almighty, and these multiplied
and heaped up even unto heaven; for though by these the name of God is
profaned and blasphemed, and he is dishonoured and despised, and his
manifestative glory is eclipsed, or he has not the honour given him that
is due unto him; yet his essential glory is untarnished, unsullied, and
unhurt, no more than the sun by an eclipse; he is the same without any
variableness or shadow of turning, as well as is over all blessed for
ever. And, indeed, his manifestative glory in many instances receives a
lustre, through his power, wisdom, and goodness, overruling the sins of
men for the display of it; as the fall of the first Adam made way for
the sending of Christ the Saviour, in which God has shown forth the
exceeding riches of his grace; and as his mercy and grace are displayed
in the pardon of sin, and his power and justice in the punishment of sin
and sinners; and his patience and longsuffering in bearing with them.

[Job 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">job 35:7</span></span>

If thou be righteous, what givest thou him?.... All righteousness is of
God that any creatures have. What the angels in heaven have, or Adam had
in a state of innocence; or what believers in Christ have in and from
him; his righteousness imputed to them is of God; the grace of
righteousness, or holiness, imparted to them and implanted in them, is
from him; and it is under the influence of his Spirit, and by his grace
and strength, they do works of righteousness externally; and therefore
can give nothing to him of their own, nor does he need any, being God
all sufficient; even the goodness of his Son does not extend to him, but
to the saints, [Psa 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#002); much less
any goodness of theirs: their best works of righteousness are due to
him, and not gifts; and though they may contribute to his manifestative
glory, both in them that do them and in others that see them, they can
add nothing to the essential glory of God;

or what receiveth he of thine hand? He can receive nothing but what he
has given, or what he has a prior right to and is his due, and so cannot
be laid under any obligation to man by what he does; nor can man merit
anything at his hand, not even the least temporal mercy, and much less
spiritual ones and everlasting life: and what notice God is pleased to
take of the good works of men, in away of reward, is not of debt, but of
grace, and entirely owing to his goodness; and does not arise from any
intrinsic worth in them, or from any advantage to him by them.

[Job 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">job 35:8</span></span>

Thy wickedness may hurt a man as thou art,.... But not God: a man may
hurt himself by his wickedness; his body, by bringing various diseases
upon it, through debauchery and intemperance; his family and estate, by
wasting it; his soul, for every sin is a wrong and injury to a man's
soul, and exposes it to ruin and destruction: and sin does even a good
man harm, since it breaks in upon his peace, and hinders his communion
with God; and the wickedness of men may harm others like themselves,
frail, mortal, sinful creatures, and easily led aside by ill examples;
as well as there are many sins which do injury to the persons, families,
and estates of others, as murder, adultery, theft, &c. and since sin is
harmful to others, God resents it, and punishes for it, though, strictly
speaking, it cannot harm him in the sense before given;

and thy righteousness may profit the son of man; may profit a man
himself (, [Job 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#003)), and others, but
neither for justification before God; but godliness is profitable to a
man's self, both for this life and that to come, and good works are
profitable to other men; for what reasons they are to be performed and
maintained, see [Ti1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008). Some are of
real and direct profit to men, as acts of beneficence to them, and all
as being examples to them; but then no works of righteousness can be
profitable to God, they adding nothing to him; which is what Elihu
undertook to answer to.

[Job 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/job035.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">job 35:9</span></span>

By reason of the multitude of oppressions, they make the oppressed to
cry,.... Which is either an illustration by an instance of what is
before said, that wickedness hurts men, as particularly oppression does,
which makes then cry; or this refers to something new, to another
complaint of Job, or an undue expression of his. Elihu undertakes to
answer; that men cry unto God, as he himself had, but are not heard and
answered; the place or places referred to may be [Job
24:12](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#012). To which Elihu replies, by
granting that men oppressed cry because of their oppression, and are not
heard; for which reasons may be given, as in the following verses. The
poor are often oppressed by the rich, whose wealth gives them power, and
that they abuse; and the weak and feeble by the mighty; and their
oppressions are many, there is a multitude of them: men in power and
authority have various ways of oppressing others, who like the
Israelites cry by reason of them, and are made to cry by their
oppressors;

they cry out by reason of the arm of the mighty; which falls with
weight, and lies heavy upon them, and crushes them; meaning the power
they have, and which they abuse to the injury of them; nor are they able
to help themselves or deliver themselves out of their hands, they being
mighty, if not in body, yet through wealth; and by means of that
authority over them which gives it them: now on account of the pressure
upon them, they cry, not to God, but to men: and if they cry to God, it
is in a murmuring and complaining way, through impatience under their
burden, through envy at the riches and power of others, in a passionate
manner, in a revengeful spirit, calling and seeking for vengeance on
their oppressors; not in an humble penitent manner, acknowledging their
sins, and owning their unworthiness to be heard and regarded, and
submitting all to the will of God: for which reasons they are not heard,
their cries and, prayers being reckoned no other than howlings, [Hos
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#014).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Job Chapter 36](job036)

</div>
