<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joel Index](joe.md)  
  [Previous](joe001)  [Next](joe003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joel Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md)

[Joel](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">joe 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOEL 2

In this chapter a further account is given of the judgment of the
locusts and caterpillars, or of those who are designed by them, [Joe
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md); the people of the Jews are called
to repentance, humiliation, and fasting, urged from the grace and
goodness of God, his jealousy and pity for his people, and the answer of
prayer that might he expected from him upon this, even to the removal of
the calamity, [Joe 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012.md); a prophecy of
good things, both temporal and spiritual, in the times of the Messiah,
is delivered out as matter and occasion of great joy, [Joe
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#021.md); and another concerning the
effusion of the Spirit, which was fulfilled an the day of Pentecost,
[Joe 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md); and the chapter is
concluded with the judgments and desolations that should come upon the
land of Judea after this, for their rejection of Christ, though the
remnant according to the election of grace should be delivered and saved
from the general destruction, [Joe
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#030.md).

[Joel 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joe 2:1</span></span>

Blow ye the trumpet in Zion, and sound an alarm in my holy mountain,....
This is spoken to the priests, whose business it was to blow the
trumpets for calling solemn assemblies to meet in Zion, the temple built
there, called from thence the holy mountain of God. Here the trumpet is
ordered to be blown with a broken quivering voice, a tarantantara, to
give notice of approaching danger by the locusts, or those enemies
signified by them, and to prepare for it, and return to God by
repentance;

let all the inhabitants of the land tremble; at the judgments of God
coming upon them, and the alarm of them:

for the day of the Lord cometh, for it is nigh at hand; the time fixed
by him to punish a wicked people, and to pour out his wrath and
vengeance on them; the day of his visitation, not in love, but in anger.

[Joel 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joe 2:2</span></span>

A day of darkness and of gloominess, a day of clouds and of thick
darkness,.... Alluding to the gloomy and thick darkness caused by the
locusts, which sometimes come in prodigious numbers, like thick clouds,
and darken the air; so the land of Egypt was darkened by them, [Exo
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#015.md); historians and travellers
relate, as Bochart (f) has shown, that these creatures will fly like a
cloud, and darken the heavens at noonday, cover the sun, and hinder the
rays of it from touching the earth; though all these phrases may be
expressive of great afflictions and calamities, which are often in
Scripture signified by darkness, as prosperity is by light; see [Isa
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#022.md);

as the morning spread upon the mountains; as the morning light, when it
first appears, diffuses itself in a moment throughout the earth, and is
first seen on the tops of the mountains (g); so these locusts, and this
calamity threatened, should suddenly and at once come, and be spread
over the whole land; and which could no more be resisted than the
morning light. The Vulgate Latin version renders it, in connection with
the next clause, "as the morning spread upon the mountains, a people
much and mighty"; but the accents will not admit of it; though it may
seem a little improper that the same thing should be as a dark day, and:
the morning light; wherefore Cocceius understands the whole of the day
of Christ, which was light to many nations, and darkness to the wicked
Jews:

a great people and a strong; numerous and mighty, many in number, mighty
in strength; so the locusts are represented as a nation and people for
might and multitude, [Joe 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#006.md); an
emblem of the Chaldeans and Babylonians, who were a large and powerful
people:

there hath not been ever the like, neither shall any more after it,

even to the years of many generations; that is, in the land of Judea;
otherwise there might have been the like before in other places, as in
Egypt, and since in other countries. Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Kimchi,
account for it thus; that it was never known, before or since, that four
kinds of locusts came together; as for the plague of Egypt, there was
but one sort of them, they say; but it is best to understand it of the
like not having been in the same country: and such a numerous and
powerful army as that of the Chaldeans had not been in Judea, and made
such havoc and desolation as that did; nor would any hereafter, for many
generations, even until the Romans came and took away their place and
nation.

\(f\) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 4. c. 5. p. 479. (g) "Postera vix summos
spargebat lumine montes Orta dies----", Virgil. Aeneid. 12.

[Joel 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joe 2:3</span></span>

A fire devoureth before them, and behind them aflame burneth,.... This
is not to be understood of the heat of the sun, or of the great drought
that went before and continued after the locusts; but of them
themselves, which were like a consuming fire; wherever they came, they
devoured all green grass, herbs, and leaves of trees, as fire does
stubble; they sucked out the juice and moisture of everything they came
at, and what they left behind shrivelled up and withered away, as if it
had been scorched with a flame of fire: and so the Assyrians and
Chaldeans, they were an emblem of, destroyed all they met with, by fire
and sword; cut up the corn and herbage for forage; and what they could
not dispense with they set fire to, and left it burning. Sanctius thinks
this refers to fire, which the Chaldeans worshipped as God, and carried
before their armies as a sacred and military sign; but this seems not
likely:

the land is as the garden of Eden before them; abounding with fields and
vineyards, set with fruitful trees, planted with all manner of pleasant
plants, and all kind of corn growing upon it, and even resembling a
paradise:

and behind them a desolate wilderness; all green grass eaten up, the
corn of the field devoured, the vines and olives destroyed, the leaves
and fruit of them quite gone, and the trees themselves barked; so that
there was just the same difference between this country before the
calamities described came upon it, and what it was after, as between the
garden of Eden, or a paradise, and the most desolate wilderness; such
ravages were made by the locusts, and by those they resembled:

yea, and nothing shall escape them; no herb: plant, or tree, could
escape the locusts; nor any city, town, or village, nor scarce any
particular person, could escape the Chaldean army; but was either killed
with the sword, or carried captive, or brought into subjection. The
Targum interprets it of no deliverance to the ungodly.

[Joel 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joe 2:4</span></span>

The appearance of them is as the appearance of horses,.... in their
running, as Jarchi and Kimchi interpret it; they came with, as much
swiftness and eagerness, with as much fierceness and courage, as horses
rush into the battle. Bochart (h) has shown, from various writers, that
the head of a locust is in shape like that of a horse; and Theodoret on
the text observes, that whoever thoroughly examines the head of a locust
will easily perceive that it is very like the head of a horse; see [Rev
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#007.md). The Chaldeans are often
represented as strong and mighty, fierce and furious, and riding on
horses exceeding swift, [Jer 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013.md);

and as horsemen, so shall they run; with great agility and swiftness.
The particle "as" is observed by some, against those interpreters that
apply this wholly to the enemies of the Jews, and not the locusts; and
it seems indeed best to favour them; but Theodoret observes, that the
"as" here may be taken, not as a note of similitude, but as used for the
increase and vehemency of the expression.

\(h\) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 4. c. 5. p. 474, 475.

[Joel 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joe 2:5</span></span>

Like the noise of chariots on the tops of that mountains shall they
leap,.... The motion of the locusts is leaping from place to place; for
which the locusts have legs peculiarly made, their hindermost being the
longest; wherefore Pliny (i) observes, that insects which have their
hindermost legs long leap locusts; to which agrees the Scripture
description of them: "which have legs above their feet, to leap withal
upon the earth; even those of them ye may eat; the locust after his
kind", [Lev 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#021.md); which words, as Dr.
Shaw (k), observes, may bear this construction: "which have knees upon"
or "above their hinder legs, to leap withal upon the earth"; and he
observes, that the "locust", has the two hindermost of its legs or feet
much stronger, larger, and longer, than any of the foremost; in them the
knee, or the articulation of the leg and thigh, is distinguished by a
remarkable bending or curvature, whereby it is able, whenever prepared
to jump, to spring and raise itself with great force and activity; and
this fitly resembles the jumping of chariots on mountains and hills,
which are uneven, and usually have stones lie scattered about, which,
with the chains and irons about chariots, cause a great rattling; and
the noise of locusts is compared to the noise of these, which is
represented as very great; some say it is to be heard six miles off, as
Remigius on the place; and Pliny says (l), they make such a noise with
their wings when they fly, that they are thought to be other winged
fowls; see [Rev 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#009.md). Chariots were
made use of in war, and the Chaldeans are said to have chariots which
should come like a whirlwind, [Jer
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer004.htm#013.md);

like the noise of a flame of fire that devoureth the stubble; as they
are before compared to fire, and a flame of fire that devoured all
things as easily as the fire devours stubble, so here to the crackling
noise of it; see [Ecc 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#006.md);

as a strong people set in battle array: that is, as the noise of a
mighty army prepared for battle, just going to make the onset, when they
lift up their voices aloud, and give a terrible shout; for this clause,
as the other two, refer to the noise made by the locusts in their march;
an emblem of the terribleness of the Chaldeans in theirs, who were heard
before they were seen.

\(i\) Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 48. (k) Travels, p. 420. Ed. 2. (l) Nat.
Hist. l. 11. c. 29.

[Joel 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joe 2:6</span></span>

Before their face the people shall be much pained,.... Or, "at their
presence"; at the sight of them they shall be in pain, as a woman in
travail; into such distress an army of locusts would throw them, since
they might justly fear all the fruits of the earth would be devoured by
them, and they should have nothing left to live upon; and a like
consternation and pain the army of the Assyrians or Chaldeans upon sight
filled them with, as they expected nothing but ruin and destruction from
them:

all faces shall gather blackness; like that of a pot, as the word (m)
signifies; or such as appears in persons dying, or in fits and swoons;
and this here, through fear and hunger; see [Nah
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/nah002.htm#010.md).

\(m\) "fuliginem", Montanus; "luridum ollae colorem", Tigurine version,
Tarnovius; "ollam pro nigore ollae", Drusius.

[Joel 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joe 2:7</span></span>

They shall run like mighty men,.... Like men of war, in a hostile way,
as soldiers run upon their enemy with undaunted courage and bravery.
Bochart from Pisidas describes the locusts' manner of fighting, who
says, they strike not standing, but running:

they shall climb the wall like men of war; scale the walls of cities as
besiegers do; walls and bulwarks cannot keep them out; all places are
accessible to them, walled cities, towns, yea, even houses, [Exo
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#006.md);

and they shall march everyone on his ways; in his proper path, following
one another, and keeping just distance:

and they shall not break their ranks; or "pervert their ways", as the
word signifies in the Arabic language, as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben
Melech, observe; that is, decline not from their paths, as the
Septuagint version; proceed in an orderly way, keep rank and file; so
they are said to go forth in bands, [Pro
30:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#027.md); and to encamp, [Nah
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#017.md). Jerom on the text relates what
he saw with his own eyes:

"this we lately saw (says he) in this province (Palestine); for when
swarms of locusts came, and filled the air between heaven and earth,
they flew in such order, by the disposition and command of God, that
they kept their place like chequered squares in a pavement fixed by the
hands of artificers; so as not to decline a point, nor even I may say a
nail's breadth;''

they keep as exact order as if military discipline was known and
observed by them. Some render it, "they shall not ask their way" (n);
being unconcerned about it, moving on in a direct line securely.

\(n\) "non interrogabunt isti ab illo de semitis suis", some in
Vatablus, and others in Kimchi and Abendana.

[Joel 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joe 2:8</span></span>

Neither shall one thrust another,.... Press upon another, thrust him out
of his place, or push him forward, or any ways straiten and distress
him, or in the least hinder him in his progress:

they shall walk everyone in his path; or "highway" (o); everyone should
have his path, and keep in it, and it should be as roomy to him as if he
had a highway to walk in by himself, and in which he could not err:

and when they shall fall upon the sword; on which they would pitch
without any fear or dread of it:

they shall not be wounded: or "cut to pieces" (p) by it; it not being
easy for the sword to pierce and cut them, through the smoothness and
smallness of their bodies; see [Rev
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#009.md); and besides, their numbers being
so great, the loss of a few by the use of a sword, or a dart, or any
such flying projectile, as the word (q) signifies, would be of little
consequence, and avail very little to the utter rout, or cutting of them
in pieces. Kimchi observes that the word signifies haters of gain; and
to this sense Jarchi explains it; and so the Targum,

"they go to the place whither they are sent, they slay, and receive not
mammon;''

they are not, as other enemies, to be appeased by money, as Kimchi
interprets it. The Targum is, they are not to be bribed, as soldiers
sometimes may be, and so depart; see [Isa
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#017.md); and to this sense are other
versions (r).

\(o\) "per aggerem suum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "via elevata",
Drusius; "via strata sua", Cocceius. (p) "verbum significat discidit",
Amos ix. 1. Tarnovius, so Ben Melech. (q) "per missile", Cocceius; so
Bochartus, Castalio, Drusius, Burkius; "super missile", Montanus. (r)
"Non avari erunt", Montanus; "nec lucro inhiant", Tigurine version; "non
studebunt avaritiae", so some in Vatablus.

[Joel 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joe 2:9</span></span>

They shall run to and fro in the city,.... Leap about from place to
place, as locusts do; see [Isa 33:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#004.md);
and as the Chaldeans did when they became masters of the city of
Jerusalem; they ran about from place to place to seize upon their spoil
and plunder:

they shall run upon the wall; which before they climbed, now they shall
run upon, and go from tower to tower, as the Chaldeans did, and broke
clown the walls and fortifications:

they shall climb up upon the houses, and enter in at the windows, like a
thief; so the locusts entered into the houses of the Egyptians, [Exo
10:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#006); and Pliny says (s.md), they will
eat through everything, and even the doors of houses. Theodoret on the
place observes, that not only this may be done by enemies, what is here
said,

"but even we have often seen it done by locusts; for not only flying,
but even creeping up the walls, they enter into houses at the windows.''

\(s\) Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 29.

[Joel 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joe 2:10</span></span>

The earth shall quake before them,.... The inhabitants of it, because of
the desolating judgments they bring with them, and those enemies that
are signified by them:

the heavens shall tremble; being obscured by them:

the sun and moon shall be dark; the locusts sometimes come in such large
numbers as to intercept the rays of the sun. Pliny (t) says they
sometimes darken it; and though some thought they did not fly in the
night, because of the cold; this he observes is owing to their
ignorance, not considering that they pass over wide seas to distant
countries; and this will account for it how the moon also may be
darkened by them, and the stars, as follows:

and the stars shall withdraw their shining; though all this may be
understood in a figurative sense of the great consternation that all
sorts of persons should be in at such calamities coming upon the land,
either by locusts, or by enemies; as the king, queen, nobles, and the
common people of the land, signified by sun, moon, and stars, heaven and
earth.

\(t\) Ibid. (Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 29.)

[Joel 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joe 2:11</span></span>

And the Lord shall utter his voice before his army,.... Either the army
of the locusts, whom Pliny (u) calls "pestis deorum", "the plague of the
gods"; and the Arabians frequently style them the army of God. It is a
tradition of theirs that locusts fell into the hands of Mahomet, with
this inscription on their backs and wings,

"we are the army of the most high God;''

and because they were, for that reason Mahomet made a law that none
should kill them; See Gill on [Rev
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#003.md). These creatures are certainly at
his beck and command; he can "command the locust to devour the land",
[Ch2 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#013.md); which may be meant by his
uttering his voice here; though Jarchi and Kimchi interpret it of the
Lord's giving notice of this judgment by his prophets before it fame: or
this may design the army of the Assyrians or Chaldeans, of which the
locusts were all emblem, and which were of the Lord's mustering
together, and was at his command; and who is here represented as a
General at the head of his army, making a speech to them to animate and
encourage them to the battle, and to give them the word of command when
to begin the onset:

for his camp is very great; or numerous, as both the locusts and
Chaldeans were:

for he is strong that executeth his word; or "strong is it"; namely, the
camp and army of the locusts; which, though feeble in themselves,
separately considered; yet being in such large bodies, and the Lord at
the head of them, and strengthened by him, were able to fulfil his word;
which he can make the least and meanest of his creatures do: or the
Assyrian or Chaldean army, which was both numerous and mighty: which the
Targum may refer unto, paraphrasing the words,

"for strong are the executors of his word:''

for the day of the Lord is great and very terrible, and who can abide
it? the day appointed by the Lord to take vengeance on the Jews for sin;
and this, being the day of his wrath, is very dreadful and intolerable;
so any season may be called, in which God remarkably pours down his
wrath on men of their sins; see [Rev
6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#017.md). Such was the time of Jerusalem's
destruction, both by the Chaldeans and Romans.

\(u\) Ibid. (Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 29.)

[Joel 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joe 2:12</span></span>

Therefore also now, saith the Lord,.... Before this terrible and
intolerable day, which is near at hand, comes; before these judgments
and calamities threatened take place, though just at hand; serious
repentance is never too late, now is the accepted time; see [Luk
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042.md);

turn ye even to me with all your heart; against whom they had sinned,
and who had prepared his army against them, and was at the head of it,
just ready to give the orders, and play his artillery upon them; and yet
suggests, that even now, that if they turned to the Lord by true
repentance, not, feignedly and hypocritically, but cordially and
sincerely, with true hearts, and with their whole hearts, he was ready
to receive and forgive them. The Targum is,

"turn ye to my worship with all your heart:''

and with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning; external signs of
inward grief and sorrow, testifying their hearty return to the Lord;
which, though, without the heart, signify nothing, yet should be shown
where hearty repentance is, for the honour and glory of God.

[Joel 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joe 2:13</span></span>

And rend your heart, and not your garments,.... Which latter used to be
done in times of distress, either private or public, and as a token of
grief and sorrow, [Gen 37:34](../../../bib/kjv/gen037.htm#034.md); nor was
it criminal or unlawful, the apostles themselves used it, [Act
14:14](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#014.md); nor is it absolutely forbidden
here, only comparatively, that they should rend their hearts rather than
their garments; or not their garments only, but their hearts also; in
like sense as the words in [Hos 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006.md);
are to be taken as rending garments was only an external token of sorrow
and might be done hypocritically. Where no true repentance was, the Lord
calls for that, rather than the other; and that they would show
contrition of heart and brokenness of spirit under a sense of sin, and
in the view of pardoning grace and mercy; which is here held forth, to
influence godly sorrow and evangelical repentance; the acts of which,
flowing from faith in Christ are much more acceptable to the Lord than
any outward expressions of grief; see [Psa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#017.md). The Targum is,

"remove the wickedness of your heart but not with the rending of your
meats;''

the rending of the garment goes to the heart some say to the navel (w):

and turn unto the Lord your God; consider him not as an absolute God,
and as an angry one, wrathful and inexorable; but as your covenant God
and Father as your God in Christ, ready to receive backsliding sinners
and prodigal sons; yea all sinners sensible of sin that flee to him for
mercy through Christ:

for be is gracious and merciful; he is the God of all grace, and has
laid up a fulness of it in Christ; and he gives it freely to them that
ask it of him without upbraiding them with their sins; he is rich and
plenteous in mercy, and ready to forgive; be delights in showing mercy,
and in them that hope in it; and this is no small encouragement to turn
to the Lord, and seek mercy of him: and, besides, he is

slow to anger; he is not hasty to stir it up, and show it; he bears with
much longsuffering the vessels of wrath; and his longsuffering to his
own people issues in their salvation: he waits to be gracious to them;
and, though he may seem to be angry, he does not stir up all his wrath
their sins deserve nor does he retain anger for ever:

and of great kindness; both in a providential way, and in a way of
special grace through Christ; whom he has provided as a Saviour, and
sent him into the world as such, and saves sinners by obedience
sufferings, and death: these characters of God are taken out of [Exo
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md); and are admirably adapted to
engage and encourage sensible souls to turn to the Lord by acts of faith
in him, and repentance towards him; see [Isa
55:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#007.md); and it is added,

and repenteth him of the evil; which the sins of men deserve; and he has
threatened on account of them; not that he ever changes the counsels of
his will, but alters the course of his providence, and the manner of his
conduct towards men, according to his unalterable repentance otherwise
does not properly belong to God, [Num
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#019.md); but is ascribed to him after
the manner of men; and is used to express his compassion men; how ready
he is to receive and forgive returning sinners and not execute the
threatened and deserved evil and to bestow all needful good; see [Jon
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010.md). The Targum is,

"and he recalls his word from bringing on the evil.''

\(w\) T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 26. 2.

[Joel 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joe 2:14</span></span>

Who knoweth if he will return and repent,.... Which some understand of
man, and of his returning and repentance; either thus whosoever he be
that knows the ways of repentance, he will return, and God will repent
of this evil: which sense is mentioned by Kimchi and Ben Melech: or he
that knoweth that iniquity is on him will return and repent; so Jarchi,
with which agrees the Targum,

"he that knows that sins are in him will return from them, and he shall
obtain mercy; and whoever repents, his sins shall be forgiven him;''

but rather they are to be understood of God, as some in Kimchi, and
paraphrase it, who knows? perhaps God may return; and this is the sense
of Aben Ezra, and seems to be most correct; and to be interpreted,
either as carrying some doubt in it; not as if it was questionable
whether God will give pardon to repenting sinners, but whether he will
at once remove the present affliction and chastisement; which may be
thus expressed to check the presumption and awaken the security of the
people, and rouse them from their sluggishness and stupidity: or rather
as expressive of hope that God would return and change the dispensation
of his providence, and repent of the evil he had threatened, or brought
upon them; which might be justly grounded upon the character before
given of him, and that from the revelation of himself, and the
proclamation of his own perfections; see [Jon
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#009.md);

and leave a blessing behind him; meaning not behind God himself, as if
he was departed, or about to depart, for which there was no great
concern, provided he left a temporal blessing with them; but behind the
army of the locust, after that had made all the devastation it did: or
rather "cause to leave"; stop the locust in its progress, and not suffer
it to make a total desolation, but cause it to leave some of the fruits
of the earth behind it. So Aben Ezra gives the sense of the words,

"perhaps God will return, and cause the locust to leave a blessing;''

and to the same purpose Jarchi, of which they make a meat offering and a
drink offering, as follows:

even a meat offering and a drink offering to the Lord your God; at least
leave so much of the wheat, that a meat offering might be made of it;
and so many of the vines, as that so much wine might be produced by them
as would furnish out a drink offering to be offered to the Lord,
agreeably to the laws given about these; for which the greatest concern
is expressed, this being cut off and withheld from the house of the
Lord, by reason of the present scarcity, [Joe
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#009.md); which shows a truly pious and
religious mind, having more at heart the worship of God than themselves
and families.

[Joel 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joe 2:15</span></span>

Blow the trumpet in Zion,.... For the calling of the people together to
religious duties, which was one use of the silver trumpets made for and
blows by the priests, [Num 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002.md);

sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly; See Gill on [Joe
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014.md).

[Joel 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joe 2:16</span></span>

Gather the people,.... The common people, all the inhabitants of the
land, [Joe 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#014.md); summon them to meet
together in the temple, in order to humble themselves before God for
their sins, and implore his mercy, and seek his face to remove his
judgments, or avert them:

sanctify the congregation; see that they are sanctified and prepared for
a fast, as the law directs in such cases; that they may be clean and
free from all ceremonial impurities; that their bodies and clothes be
washed, and that they abstain from their wives, and from all lawful
pleasures, as well as sinful ones:

assemble the elders; both in age and authority; that they, by their
presence and example, might influence others to attend such a service:

gather the children and those that suck the breast; who were involved in
the common calamity and distress, were obliged to fasting and whose
cries might affect parents, and engage them the more to humiliation and
repentance for their sins, which brought such, miseries, not only upon
themselves, but upon their tender infants; and they might think their
cries would move the pity and compassion of God; all which is suggested
in the note of Kimchi:

let the bridegroom go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her
closet; where they are adorning themselves and preparing for an
interview with each other; or where they are enjoying each other's
embraces and the pleasures of the matrimonial state. The sense is, let
them put off their nuptial robes, and deny themselves their lawful
pleasures, and betake themselves to fasting mourning, and prayer; see
[Co1 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#005.md). This refers to a custom
among the Jews at the time of espousals when the bridegroom and bride
were introduced into the nuptial chamber, where the marriage was
completed; and, according to the Jewish writes it was not finished
before: the blessing of the bridegroom and bride did not complete the
marriage but the bringing of them into the chamber did; and then they
were said to he married, though as yet they had not cohabited and then,
and not before a man might enjoy his wife (x): and the marriage chamber
was nothing else but a linen cloth or garment spread upon four poles
over the head of the bridegroom and bride; this they called (y); the
word is here rendered a "closet" and the same with the "chamber"; and
their leaving and coming out of this signifies their abstaining from the
lawful enjoyment of each other, which now they had a right unto.

\(x\) Maimon. Hilchot Ishot, c. 10. sect. 2, 4. Schulchan Aruch, par. 2.
Eben Hezer, c. 55. sect. 2, 3. (y) R. Elias Levita, Tishbi in p. 119.

[Joel 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joe 2:17</span></span>

Let the priests, the ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch and
the altar,.... Not the altar of incense which stood in the holy place;
but the altar of burnt offering, where the priests used to stand and do
service; but now having nothing to do of that kind, they are called upon
to weep and pray between that and the porch of the temple; where they
might be seen and heard by the people in the outward court which the
porch led into: this is thought by some to be the same situation with
that between the temple and the altar, [Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035.md);

and let them say, spare thy people, O Lord; they are directed to plead,
not in a way of justice, but mercy; that though it might be just with
God to destroy these people, who were called by his name; yet it is
entreated that he would not, but in mercy spare them, and not cut them
off in his sore displeasure, which the present judgment threatened them
with: there seems to be an argument for mercy suggested, in the relation
these people stood in to God, they are "thy people", whom thou hast
chosen, and who are called by thy name; though this was also an
aggravation of their sin; and the same may be observed in what follows:

and give not thine heritage to reproach: the people whom he had chosen
for his inheritance, and the land of Canaan he had given to them for an
inheritance; both which would be given to reproach if such a famine
should ensue that they must be obliged to go into other countries for
food:

that the Heathen should rule over them; as they would, should they be
forced to leave their own country, and settle in theirs for the sake of
food: or "to be a proverb", or "byword, among the Heathen", as Jarchi.
This clause Jerom thinks opens the mystery, and explains who are meant
by the mighty nation under the name of locusts, the enemies of the Jews;
though this does not necessarily follow, take the words in either sense,
as explained: it seems indeed very likely, that though the locusts may
be understood literally, yet may be considered as an emblem of the
Assyrian or Chaldean army, as we have all along observed; and, as the
same ancient writer observes, when we read of the locusts, we should
think of the Chaldeans, in which thought we may be confirmed by this
clause:

wherefore should they say among the people, where is their God? they
boast of as their Creator and Benefactor, their Protector and Defender,
that gave them a land flowing with milk and honey, and abounding with
all blessings? what is become of that? and where is he now? which the
Gentiles would say in a reproaching blaspheming way, should they be
reduced to famine by the locusts, or fall into the hands of their
enemies; than which kind of reproach and blasphemy there is nothing more
cutting to religious minds: see [Psa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#010.md); and this, as well as the former
is used as an argument with God for mercy. The Targum is,

"where are they that are redeemed by the Word of your God?''

[Joel 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joe 2:18</span></span>

Then will the Lord be jealous for his land,.... Or "zealous" for it; for
the honour of it, and the good of its inhabitants, and for the glory of
his own name, it being the chief place in the world for his worship and
service; and his indignation will be moved against those who have
brought desolation on it:

and pity his people; as a father his children, who had suffered much,
and had been reduced to great distress by the locusts, or by their
enemies: this the prophet foretells would be done upon their repentance,
fasting, prayers, and tears; or, as some think, this is a narrative of
what had been done, and the prophet was a witness of; that the people
meeting together with their princess and priests, and humbling
themselves before the Lord, and crying to him, he expressed a zeal and
compassion for them, and delivered them out of their troubles; for
though their humiliation is not expressed, it may be understood and
supposed, as doubtless, it was fact.

[Joel 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joe 2:19</span></span>

Yea, the Lord will answer and say unto his people,.... By his prophets,
as Kimchi: or, "the Lord answered and said" (a); while they were praying
and weeping, or as soon as they cried unto him; or, however, praying to
him, they might assure themselves that he heard them, and would answer
them both by words and deeds:

behold, I will send you corn, and wine, and oil; that is, cause the
earth to bring forth corn, as wheat and barley, and the vines and olive
trees to bring forth grapes and olives, from which wine and oil might be
made: this is, according to some interpreters, to be understood of an
abundance of spiritual blessings:

and ye shall be satisfied therewith; or, "with it"; with each and every
of the above things, corn, wine, and oil; they should not only have
them, but have enough of them, even to satiety:

and I will no more make you a reproach among the Heathen; for want of
food, and as if forsaken of God. The Targum is,

"and I will not give you any more the reproaches of famine among the
people;''

see [Joe 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#017.md).

\(a\) "et respondit", Piscator, Drusius, Burkius.

[Joel 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joe 2:20</span></span>

But I will remove far off from you the northern army,.... The army of
the locusts, which came from the northern corner, as Aben Ezra and
Kimchi; and is the first sense Jarchi makes mention of; though he says
their Rabbins (b) interpret it of the evil imagination hid in the heart
of men; and the two seas, later mentioned, of the two temples, first and
second, destroyed by it; so, Kimchi says, they explain this verse of the
days of the Messiah, and observes, the same sense they give; but Jarchi
mentions another, according to which a people coming from the north are
designed, even the kings of Assyria; and with this agrees the Targum,
which paraphrases it,

"and the people which come from the north I will remove far off from
you;''

and indeed locusts do not usually come from the north, but from the
south, or from the east; it was an east wind that brought the locusts
into Egypt, [Exo 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013.md); though the
word "northern" may be used of the locusts in the emblem, because the
Assyrians or Chaldeans came from the north to Judea:

and will drive him into a land barren and desolate: where there are no
green grass, herbs, plants, and trees, to live upon, and so must starve
and die:

with his face towards the east sea; the front of this northern army was
towards the east sea, into which it was drove and fell; that is, the sea
of Chinnereth, or Gennesareth, the same with the lake of Tiberias, often
mentioned in the New Testament; or the Salt sea, the same with the lake
Asphaltites, or Dead sea, which was where Sodom and Gomorrah formerly
stood, as is usually said; and both these were to the east of the land
of Israel, as Kimchi and Ben Melech observe; and so either of them might
be called the "eastern sea":

and his hinder part towards the utmost sea; the rear of this army was
towards the utmost sea, or hinder sea, as it is called in [Zac
14:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#008.md); the western sea, as Kimchi and
Ben Melech interpret it, the same with the Mediterranean sea, which lay
to the west of the land of Israel; so the Egyptian locusts were cast
into the Red sea, [Exo 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#019.md); and
Pliny (c) observes, that they are sometimes taken away with a wind, and
fall into seas and lakes, and adds, perhaps this comes by chance; but
what is here related came not by chance, but by the will and providence
of God:

and his stink shall come up, and his ill savour shall come up: that is,
the stink and ill savour of the locusts shall come, up out of the seas
and lakes into which they fell, and where they died and putrefied; or,
being cast up from thence upon the shares, gave a most noisome stench;
so Jerom on the place says,

"in our times we have seen swarms of locusts cover the land of Judea,
which upon the wind rising have been driven into the first and last
seas; that is, into the Dead and Mediterranean seas; and when the shores
of both seas have been filled with heaps of dead locusts, which the
waters have thrown up, their rottenness and stench have been so very
noxious as to corrupt the air, and produce a pestilence among men and
beasts;''

or this may be understood of the fall and ruin of the enemies of the
Jews, signified by these locusts; and some apply it to Sennacherib's
army smote by the angel, when there fell in one night a hundred and
fourscore and five thousand of them in the land of Israel, and lay
unburied, [Kg2 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#035.md); Theodoret
interprets the seas of armies; the first sea of the army of the
Babylonians, by which Nineveh the royal seat of the Assyrians was
destroyed; and the other sea of the army of the Persians, who, under
Cyrus, took Babylon, the metropolis of the Chaldean empire:

because he hath done great things; evil things, as the Targum; either
the locust, which had done much mischief to the fruits of the earth; or
the enemy, signified by it, who had behaved proudly, and done much hurt
to the inhabitants of Judea: or, "though he hath done great things" (d),
as some render it, yet all this shall come to him. Some interpret it of
God, "for he (God) hath done", or "will do, great things" (e); in the
removing of the locusts, or in the destruction of those enemies they
represented, as is expressly said of him in [Joe
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#021.md).

\(b\) Vid. T. Bab. Succah, fol. 52. 1. (c) Nat. Hist. l. 11. c. 29. (d)
"quamvis magna gesserit", Gataker. (e) "Quia magnifica Jehovah agit",
Junius & Tremellius; "aget", Piscator, Liveleus, Castalio.

[Joel 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joe 2:21</span></span>

Fear not, O land,.... O land of Israel, as the Targum, and the
inhabitants of it; neither of the locusts, who had so terrified them,
and had done so much mischief, and threatened more; nor of their
enemies, the Assyrians or Chaldeans, and their powerful armies, or any
other; but, on the contrary,

be glad, and rejoice; at the removal of the locusts, and at the
destruction of their enemies:

for the Lord will do great things; good things, in opposition to the
evil things done by the locusts, as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech
observe; or by the destroying army of the king of Assyria, by delivering
the Jews out of the Babylonish captivity; and in the times of the
Maccabees, and especially in the times of Christ, which are quickly
prophesied of in this chapter; and which prophecies some interpreters
begin here, it not being unusual for the prophets to pass directly from
things temporal to things spiritual, and especially to the great
deliverance and salvation by Christ, and also by temporal blessings to
design spiritual ones.

[Joel 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joe 2:22</span></span>

Be not afraid, ye beasts of the field,.... Which before groaned, and
were perplexed for want of pasture, and cried because of the drought,
[Joe 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#018.md); perhaps the Gentiles may be
here designed, in the mystic and spiritual sense, in distinction from
the Jews, the children of Zion, in [Joe
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023.md);

for the pastures of the wilderness do spring; grass in abundance springs
up in them, and covers them, so that there was plenty of food for the
beasts of the field:

for the tree beareth her fruit; brings forth and bears fruit suitable to
it, agreeable to its nature:

the fig tree and the vine do yield their strength; send forth their
branches, put forth their buds, their leaves and fruit. This and the
preceding clause cannot be understood as a reason why the beasts of the
field should not be afraid, for they relate not to them, but to men; and
may serve to confirm the mystic sense of the words, as they may refer to
the great fruitfulness produced in the wilderness of the Gentile world,
through the preaching of the Gospel in the times of the Messiah; which
are more clearly pointed at in [Joe
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023.md); and which were introduced with
great outward peace and plenty; and the Jews (f) by the tree bearing her
fruit, in the preceding clause, understand barren trees bearing fruit.

\(f\) T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 112. 2.

[Joel 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joe 2:23</span></span>

Be glad then, ye children of Zion,.... The people of the Jews, and
especially the spiritual and believing part of them; such as were born
again, that were born of Zion, and born in Zion, and brought up by her,
and in her; the children of that Zion or Jerusalem that is the mother of
us all; and who were looking for the Messiah, and to whom it would be
good news and glad tidings to hear of his coming, [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md);

and rejoice in the Lord your God; not in any creature or creature
enjoyment, but in the Lord. The Targum is,

"in the Word of the Lord your God;''

in Christ the essential Word; see [Phi
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#003.md); though rather Jehovah the Father,
the giver and sender of Christ, is here meant, because of what follows;
and who is to be rejoiced in by his people, not as an absolute God, but
as in Christ, and as their covenant God and Father in him; who has
chosen them for himself, and is their portion and inheritance; which are
reasons sufficient why they should rejoice in him, and others follow:

for he hath given you the former rain moderately; or rather, "for he
hath given you the teacher of righteousness" (g); to which agrees the
Targum,

"for he hath returned to you your teacher in righteousness;''

and so Jarchi paraphrases the words, and interprets them of the prophets
in general,

"your prophets that teach you to return unto me, that I may justify
you;''

and R. Japhet says that signifies a prophet that should teach them in
the way of righteousness; not Isaiah, as Grotius; but the King Messiah
as Abarbinel interprets it; who is the teacher sent from God, and given
by him, as his presence with him, and the miracles done by him,
sufficiently prove, [Joh 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002.md); for
which he was abundantly qualified, being the omniscient God, and the Son
of God that lay in the bosom of his Father; is the Wisdom of God, as
Mediator; had the Spirit of wisdom on him, and the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge hid in him; and who is able to make his teachings
effectual, and to qualify others for such work. This office he performed
personally on earth, both in a doctrinal way, and by way of example; and
now executes it by his Spirit, and by his ministers: and a "teacher of
righteousness" he may be truly said to be; since he not only taught the
Gospel, the word of righteousness in general; but in particular directed
men to seek in the first place the righteousness of God, which is no
other than his own; and pronounced those happy that hungered after it:
he declared he came to fulfil all righteousness, even the law for
righteousness; and taught men to believe in him for it, and to live
righteously and godly. Aben Ezra observes, that the phrase is the same
with "the sun of righteousness", [Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002.md); which is said of Christ the
author of righteousness, who is our righteousness made so by imputation,
the Lord our righteousness: or, as here, "a teacher unto, or for
righteousness" (h), all which is matter of joy and gladness; see [Isa
61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010.md);

and he will cause to come down for you the rain, the former rain, and
the latter rain in the first month; alluding to the two seasons of the
year in which rain was given to the Jews; the former rain fell in
Marchesvan, which answers to our September and, October, part of each,
at their seedtime; and the latter in Nisan, the first month of their
ecclesiastical year, and answers to part of March and April, and fell
some time before their harvest; and these former and latter rains now
fall about the same time. So Dr. Shaw (i) observes, that

"the first rains in these countries (Syria, Phoenicia, and the Holy
Land) usually fall about the beginning of November; the latter sometimes
in the middle, sometimes toward the end, of April:''

and elsewhere he says (k),

"in Barbary the first rains fall some years in September, in others a
month later; the latter rains usually fall in the middle of April:''

and the same traveller relates (l), that

"upon the coast (of Egypt) from Alexandria, all along to Damiata and
Tineh, they have their former and latter rains as in Barbary and the
Holy Land.''

This rain spiritually designs the doctrine of the Gospel, which is
sometimes compared to rain, [Deu 32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002.md);
because as rain it comes from God, descends from heaven, is a divine
gift, both as to the ministry and experience of it; it tarries not for
man, neither for his desires nor deserts; falls according to divine
direction, sometimes here, and sometimes there; is a great blessing, and
brings many with it, revives, refreshes, and makes fruitful. Jerom
interprets these two rains of the first receiving of doctrine, and of a
more perfect knowledge of it; as also of the two Testaments, the Old and
New: but it may be better interpreted of the preaching of the Gospel by
John the Baptist, and by Christ; or by Christ, and then by his apostles;
or of the first and second ministration of apostles, first to the Jews,
then to the Gentiles; or of the coming of Christ in the flesh, for the
same word is used here as in the former clause, and of his spiritual
coming in the latter day, both which are compared to rain, [Hos
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003.md).

\(g\) "doctorem justitiae", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Munster. (h)
"Doctorem ad justitiam", Tigurine version, Mercerus, Castalio, Drusius,
Cocceius, Burkius. (i) Travels, tom. 2. par. 2. c. 1. p. 335. Ed. 2. (k)
Ib. tom. 1. part 3. sect. 2. p. 137. (l) Ib. tom. 2. part 2. c. 2. sect.
3. p. 377.

[Joel 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joe 2:24</span></span>

And the floors shall be full of wheat,.... The churches of Christ, which
will now be in Judea, and in the Gentile world, which are his "floors",
[Mat 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012.md); and which will be set up
everywhere through the preaching of the Gospel, the descent of the
former and latter rain; these will be full of precious souls gathered
in, compared to wheat, and of the choice and excellent, doctrines of the
Gospel, and of all spiritual provisions, [Mat
13:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#030.md);

and the fats shall overflow with wine and oil; with the wine of Gospel
doctrine, and the oil of true grace; there shall be a flow, an overflow,
a redundancy of these, both in the ministers of the word and private
Christians, in whom the grace of God shall abound and superabound; see
[Rom 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020.md).

[Joel 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joe 2:25</span></span>

And I will restore to you the years that the locust hath eaten,.... Or
"I will recompense to you the years" (m); give you fruitful ones, as a
full compensation for those in which the locust ate up the fruits of the
earth for some years running:

the canker worm, and the caterpillar, and the palmer worm; of which see
[Joe 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#004.md);

my great army which I sent among you; as in [Joe
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011.md); the Targum of the whole is,

"and I will recompense unto you good years, in the room of the years in
which the people, nations, and tongues, the governors and kingdoms of
vengeance, spoiled you, my great army which I sent among you;''

and Kimchi observes, that the sense of the Targumist is, that this verse
is a prophecy of the days of the Messiah; as no doubt it is, in which
the Lord has done for his people, as Moses prayed he would, "make them
glad according to the days wherein he afflicted them, and the years
wherein they had seen evil", [Psa
90:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#015.md); the times of the Messiah, in
which so many good things come to the people of God, are a sufficient
recompence for what they endured in times past. Of the Mahometan notion
of locusts being the army of God; see Gill on [Joe
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#011.md).

\(m\) "et rependam vobis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Vatablus,
Tarnovius; "compensabo", Grotius, Cocceius.

[Joel 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joe 2:26</span></span>

And ye shall eat in plenty,.... Or, "in eating eat" (n); most surely
eat, and in great abundance; which Hebraism not only denotes the
certainty of a thing, but the increase and abundance of it; see [Gen
22:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#017.md); there is plenty of spiritual
provisions held forth under the Gospel dispensation: much in God, in his
goodness, grace, and love, truth and faithfulness; in his covenant, the
blessings and promises of it: much in Christ, who is compared to many
things eatable; is called the Lamb of God, the fatted calf, the hidden
manna, the tree of life, and the bread of God; everything in him, and
that belongs to him, is food for faith; his flesh is meat indeed, his
blood is drink indeed; the fulness of grace in him; the righteousness
wrought out by him; the salvation he is the author of; upon all which
the believer lives by faith: much in the Gospel, and the doctrines of
it, compared to honey for sweetness of taste; to milk for its nourishing
nature, easiness of digestion, and the suitableness of it for babes; and
to strong meat fit for men: and there is groat plenty also in the
ordinances of the Gospel, particularly in the Lord's supper, the feast
of fat things, where saints are invited to eat and drink abundantly;
which eating is not a bare attendance on outward ordinances, or a
superficial taste of the things in them, but a feeding upon them by
faith, receiving and digesting them;

and be satisfied; eat to satiety; eat and be full, so as to be entirely
contented, and desire no other sort of food; thus saints, as Naphtali,
are satisfied with the favour and love of God, having a delightful
sensation of it, and a full persuasion of interest in it; with Christ as
the bread of life, so as not to hunger after other; with his
righteousness, as not to seek any other; and with his salvation, being
so suitable to them; and with the goodness and fatness of the Lord's
house, his word and ordinances;

and praise the name of the Lord your God, that hath dealt wondrously
with you; acknowledge him to be the giver of all this spiritual food,
and that they are unworthy of it; ascribe it entirely to the grace of
God, who has done wonders for them; in wonderfully setting them apart
for himself in eternal election; in making such a well ordered covenant
with them in Christ; in sending him to be their Saviour and Redeemer; in
calling them out of darkness into marvellous light; in bestowing such
love upon them, as to call them and make them his children, and also
heirs of him and eternal glory; see [Psa
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026.md);

and my people shall never be ashamed; because they shall always have
food to eat; shall never be disappointed, when they rightly apply for it
in proper places and times; and not be like the troops of Tema, and
companies of Sheba, [Job 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/job006.htm#019.md); they
shall not be ashamed of their faith and hope, and expectation of good
things promised them; nor of the word and ordinances, and the profession
they have made of Christ in this world; nor shall they be ashamed at his
coming; but shall be placed at his right hand, and received into his
kingdom, and shall be led by him to fountains of living water, and be
satisfied with pleasures for evermore.

\(n\) "comedetis comedendo", Pagninus, Montanus; "ceras", Vatablus,
Piscator, Tarnovius.

[Joel 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joe 2:27</span></span>

And ye shall know that I am in the midst of Israel,.... The presence of
God among his people shall be so manifest, the tokens of it so clear,
that it shall be easily known, by the impressions of his love upon them;
the teachings of his Spirit in them; the usefulness of the word and
ordinances to them; the spiritual and heavenly frame of soul they shall
be favoured with, and the savouriness of their conversation; this is the
blessing Christ has promised to Gospel ministers and churches, [Mat
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md);

and that I am the Lord your God, and none else; that he is their
covenant God and Father, and acknowledge none else:

and my people shall never be ashamed; which is repeated for the
certainty of it; see [Joe 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#026.md).

[Joel 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joe 2:28</span></span>

And it shall come to pass afterward,.... After the teacher of
righteousness has been sent, and a plentiful rain of the Gospel has been
let down in the land of Judea, in the ministry of John the Baptist,
Christ and his apostles, and such a comfortable enjoyment of the
blessings of grace in it, and the knowledge of God by it; and after the
wonderful work of redemption wrought by Christ. R. Jeshua in Aben Ezra
and Jarchi both say this prophecy refers to time to come; and Kimchi
observes, that the phrase is the same with "in the last days"; and so
the Apostle Peter quotes it, [Act
2:17](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#017.md); a phrase, as the above writer
observes, which always signifies the days of the Messiah, to which he
applies these words; and so do other Jewish writers, both ancient and
modern (o); and there is no doubt with us Christians that they belong to
the times of Christ and his apostles, since they are by an inspired
writer said to be fulfilled in those times, [Act
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#016.md); here some begin a new chapter;

that I will pour out my Spirit upon all flesh; not on such whose hearts
are made tender as flesh, according to [Eze
36:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#026.md); as Jarchi; for the Spirit must
be given first to make the heart such; nor only upon men in the land of
Israel, a place fit to prophesy in, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi; but upon
all men, as this phrase frequently signifies; see [Isa
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#005.md); that is, all sorts of men, Jews
and Gentiles, men of all nations; and such there were on the day of
Pentecost, when the Spirit was poured down upon the apostles, and the
grace of the Spirit was given to many of all nations; though that was
only the beginning of the fulfilment of this prophecy, which quickly had
a further accomplishment in the Gentile world; and denotes the abundance
of the gifts of the Spirit, both extraordinary and ordinary, and of his
grace, and the blessings of it, bestowed on them;

and your sons and your daughters shall prophesy; as Agabus, Barnabas,
Simeon, &c. and the four daughters of Philip the evangelist, [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028.md);

your old men shall dream dreams, your young men shall see visions; as
Ananias, Peter, Paul, John, and others, some in their elder, some in
their younger years, [Act 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#010.md); though
prophecy, dreams, and visions, being the usual ways of conveying
knowledge, here signify that the knowledge of men in Gospel times should
be equal to, yea, exceed, whatever was communicated to men in the
highest degree in former times: John the Baptist was greater than any of
the prophets, and yet the least in the kingdom of heaven was greater
than he, [Luk 7:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#028.md).

\(o\) Zohar in Numb. fol. 99. 2. Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 15. fol. 219. 2.
Debarim Rabba, sect. 6. fol. 242. 2. Abarbinel, Mashmia Jeshua, fol. 9.
3. R. Isaac, Chizzuk Emunah, par. 1. p. 51.

[Joel 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joe 2:29</span></span>

And also upon the servants and upon the handmaids in those days will I
pour my Spirit. Men servants and maidservants should partake of the
gifts and grace of the Spirit in great, abundance; and many of them were
effectually called by grace, through the ministry of the word; and some
servants became ministers of it; all which appears from [Co1
7:21](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#021.md); for that is not true what the
Jews (p) say, the Shechinah or divine Majesty does not rest but upon a
wise man, and one mighty and rich; or prophecy, as Maimonides (q) has
it.

\(p\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 92. 1. (q) Moreh Nevochim, par. 2. c. 32.

[Joel 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joe 2:30</span></span>

And I will show wonders in the heavens and in the earth,.... This, and
what follow, refer to the prodigies seen in the air, and done in the
earth, a little before the destruction of Jerusalem (r); when in the air
were seen comets and blazing stars, particularly one in the form of a
sword, hanging over Jerusalem, and appearances of armies engaged in
battle; and, on the earth, a flame was seen in the temple, and a voice
heard in it, saying, let us go hence; the doors of it opened of
themselves; an idiot went about, crying woe to the people, woe to the
city, &c.

blood, and fire, and pillars of smoke; "blood" may design the great
slaughter of then by the Roman army in the land of Judea, and by murders
committed among themselves in the city of Jerusalem, which were very
horrible, and of great numbers; "fire", the burning of towns and cities;
though Kimchi interprets it of lightnings in the heavens; and "pillars
of smoke", rising up in straightness and height like palm trees, as the
word (s) signifies, vast quantities of it arising from cities and towns
burnt. Gussetius (t) interprets this of the burning of the martyrs in
the first ages of Christianity, and of their spiritual affections, which
ascended upwards to God, and were grateful to him; see [Sol
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006.md).

\(r\) Vid. Joseph. De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 5. sect. 3. (s) "palmas fumi",
Piscator, Cocceius. (t) Ebr. Comment. p. 947.

[Joel 2:31](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joe 2:31</span></span>

The sun shall be turned into darkness, and the moon into blood,.... Not
by eclipses, as Aben Ezra; but by the clouds of smoke arising from the
burning of towns and cities, which would be so great as to obscure the
sun, and through which the moon would look like blood: or all, this may
be understood in a figurative sense of the change that should be made in
the ecclesiastic and civil state of the Jewish nation, signified by the
"heavens" and "earth"; and particularly that their king or kingdom
should be in a low, mean, and distressed condition, designed by the sun;
and the change of their priesthood is signified by the "moon": so
Vitringa on [Isa 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023.md); interprets the
"sun" here of King Agrippa, the last king of the Jews in obscurity; and
the "moon" of Ananias junior, the high priest, slain by the zealots:

before the great and the terrible day of the Lord come; not the fall of
Gog and Magog, as Kimchi; not the day of the last judgment, but of the
destruction of Jerusalem; not by the Chaldeans, but by the Romans; their
last destruction, which was very great and terrible indeed, and in which
there was a manifest appearance of the hand and power of God; see [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001). Maimonides (u.md) interprets it of
the destruction of Sennacherib near Jerusalem; but if that sense is not
acceptable, he proposes that of the destruction of Gog and Magog, in the
times of the Messiah.

\(u\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 2. c. 19. p. 271.

[Joel 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joe 2:32</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that whosoever shall call on the name of the
Lord shall be delivered,.... Or "saved", as in [Act
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#021.md); from those miseries and
calamities before described, from the impending ruin and destruction of
the city; and so it was, that those that believed in Christ, that were
in the city, had an intimation of it beforehand, and removed from thence
to a place called Pella (w), and so escaped being involved in the common
calamity: though this also may be understood of a spiritual deliverance
and salvation by Christ, from sin, Satan, and the world, and from the
second death, and wrath to come, and out of the hands of every enemy;
which such share in who call on the name of the Lord, pray to him for
grace and mercy, life and salvation, through Christ; that have a
spiritual knowledge of God in Christ, real and sincere desires after
him, and trust and confidence in him, which this phrase supposes; and
which also includes the whole worship of God, internal and external,
performed in a spiritual and evangelical manner; see [Rom
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013.md);

for in Mount Zion and in Jerusalem shall be deliverance, as the Lord
hath said; either by this prophet, or some others before him; see [Psa
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007.md); this cannot be understood
literally of Mount Zion and Jerusalem, unless it be of deliverance out
of it; not in it, for Jerusalem was the seat of blood, confusion, and
distress; but mystically of the church of Christ, often called Zion and
Jerusalem, [Heb 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022.md); hither the
deliverer came, here he is, and to be seen; from hence the word of the
Lord came, the Gospel of salvation, which proclaims deliverance to the
captives; here it is to be heard, met with, and found, [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003.md);

and in the remnant whom the Lord shall call; not merely externally, by
the outward ministry of the word; but internally, according to his
purpose, and by his grace, powerfully and effectually, to the special
blessings of grace here, and eternal glory hereafter: these are the
remnant according to the election of grace; the little flock to whom God
gives the kingdom; the few that enter in at the strait gate; the little
city, and few men in it, delivered by the poor wise man; these share in
the deliverance of Zion, and shall be certainly and completely saved,
with an everlasting salvation. This may respect not only the remnant, or
a small number of the Jews that believed in Christ, upon his first
coming, and the preaching of the Gospel by his apostles, but the call
and conversion of them in the latter day; which sense connects the words
better with the following chapter.

\(w\) Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 5. p. 75.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joel Chapter 3](joe003.md)

</div>
