<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[John Index](joh)  
  [Previous](joh017)  [Next](joh019) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001)

[John 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 18:1</span></span>

When Jesus had spoken these words,.... Referring either to his
discourses in [Joh 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#001), in which he
acquaints his disciples with his approaching death; comforts them under
the sorrowful apprehension of his departure from them; gives them many
excellent promises for their relief, and very wholesome advice how to
conduct themselves; lets them know what should befall them, and that
things, however distressing for the present, would have a joyful issue:
or else to his prayer in the preceding chapter, in which he had been
very importunate with his Father, both for himself and his disciples; or
to both of these, which is highly probable:

he went forth with his disciples over the brook Cedron; the same with
"Kidron" in [Sa2 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#023); and elsewhere:
it had its name, not from cedars, for not cedars but olives chiefly grew
upon the mount, which was near it; and besides the name is not Greek,
but Hebrew, though the Arabic version renders it, "the brook" , "of
Cedar": it had its name either from the darkness of the valley in which
it ran, being between high mountains, and having gardens in it, and set
with trees; or from the blackness of the water through the soil that ran
into it, being a kind of a common sewer, into which the Jews cast
everything that was unclean and defiling; see [Ch2
29:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#016). Particularly there was a canal
which led from the altar in the temple to it, by which the blood and
soil of the sacrifices were carried into it (m). This brook was but
about three feet over from bank to bank, and in the summer time was
quite dry, and might be walked over dry shod; and is therefore by
Josephus sometimes called the brook of Kidron (n), and sometimes the
valley of Kidron (o): in this valley were corn fields; for hither the
sanhedrim sent their messengers to reap the sheaf of the firstfruits,
which always was to be brought from a place near to Jerusalem (p); and
it is very likely that willows grew by the brook, from whence they might
fetch their willow branches at the feast of tabernacles; for the Jews
say (q), there is a place below Jerusalem called Motza, (in the Gemara
it is said to be Klamia or Colonia,) whither they went down and gathered
willow branches; it seems to be the valley of Kidron, which lay on the
east of Jerusalem, between that and the Mount of Olives (r); it had
fields and gardens adjoining to it; see [Kg2
23:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#004). So we read of a garden here,
into which Christ immediately went, when he passed over this brook. The
blood, the filth and soil of it, which so discoloured the water, as to
give it the name of the Black Brook, used to be sold to the gardeners to
dung their gardens with (s). It was an emblem of this world, and the
darkness and filthiness of it, and of the exercises and troubles of the
people of God in it, which lie in the way to the heavenly paradise and
Mount of Zion, through which Christ himself went, drinking "of the brook
in the way", [Psa 110:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#007); and through
which also all his disciples and followers enter into the kingdom of
heaven: it may also be a figure of the dark valley of the shadow of
death, through which Christ and all his members pass to the heavenly
glory. And I see not why this black and unclean brook may not be a
representation of the pollutions and defilements of sin; which being
laid on Christ when he passed over it, made him so heavy and sore amazed
in the human nature, as to desire the cup might pass from him. Once more
let it be observed, that it was the brook David passed over when he fled
from his son Absalom; in this David was a type of Christ, as in other
things: Absalom represented the people of the Jews, who rejected the
Messiah, and rebelled against him; Ahithophel, Judas, who betrayed him;
and the people that went with David over it, the disciples of our Lord;
only there was this difference; there was a father fleeing from a son,
here a son going to meet his father's wrath; David and his people wept
when they went over this brook, but so did not Christ and his disciples;
the sorrowful scene to them both began afterwards in the garden. This
black brook and dark valley, and it being very late at night when it was
passed over, all add to that dark dispensation, that hour of darkness,
which now came upon our Lord; yet he went forth over it of his own
accord, willingly and cheerfully; not being forced or compelled by any;
and his disciples with him, not to be partners of his sufferings, but to
be witnesses of them, and to receive some knowledge and instruction from
what they should see and hear:

where was a garden into which he entered; and his disciples: there were
no orchards nor gardens within the city of Jerusalem, but rose gardens,
which were from the times of the prophets (t); all others were without;
and this was a very proper place for gardens, where so much dung was
near at hand. Whether this garden belonged to one of Christ's friends,
is not certain; but since he often resorted hither, no doubt it was with
the leave, and by the consent of the proprietor of it. However, so it
was, that as the first Adam's disobedience was committed in a garden,
the second. Adam's obedience to death for sin, began here; and as the
sentence of death, on account of sin, was passed in a garden, it began
to be executed in one.

\(m\) Misn. Middot, c. 3. sect. 2. Meila, c. 3. sect. 3. & Bartenora in
ib. Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Zebachim, c. 8. 7. & Temura, c. 7.
sect. 6. (n) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 1. sect. 5. (o) Ib. l. 9. c. 7. sect. 3. &
de Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 4. sect. 2. & c. 6. sect. 1. (p) Misna Menachot,
c. 10. sect. 2, 3. (q) Misna Succa, c. 4. sect. 5. (r) Jerom de locis
Hebraicis, fol. 92. C. (s) Misn. Yoma, c. 5. sect 6. Maimon. Meila, c.
2. sect. 11. (t) T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 82. 2. Abot. R. Nathan, c. 35.
Maimon. Beth Habbechira, c. 7. sect. 14. Moses Kotsensis Mitzvot Torn
praecept. Aff. 164.

[John 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 18:2</span></span>

And Judas also which betrayed him, knew the place,.... This character is
given of Judas, to distinguish him from another disciple of the same
name; and though as yet he had not betrayed him, yet it was determined
he should, and Christ knew it, and he was now about to do it: and it is
observed, that Judas was as well acquainted with the place of Christ's
resort, and knew the garden he frequently retired to, as the rest of the
disciples; to show that Christ did not go there to hide and secure
himself from him, but to meet him, and that he might have an opportunity
of finding him with the greater case:

for Jesus often times resorted thither with his disciples; when at
Jerusalem at any of the feasts, and at this festival; partly for
refreshment and rest after he had been preaching in the temple, and
partly for prayer, and also for private conversation with his disciples.

[John 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 18:3</span></span>

Judas then having received a band of men,.... From the captain of this
band, who in [Joh 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#012); is called a
"Chiliarch", that is, a commander of a thousand men, one might conclude
there were so many in this band; but it seems, that such an officer
might have two bands under his command; and if this was, the case, there
were at least five hundred men in this company; a large number indeed,
to take an unarmed person; and yet, as if this was not sufficient, it is
added,

and officers from the chief priests and Pharisees; servants that belong
to each of these, and who seem to be a considerable number also; for
these are said to be "a great multitude"; [Mat
26:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#047); nay, not only so, but the chief
priests, captains of the temple, and elders of the people, were
themselves among them, [Luk 22:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#052); to
see that the men did their work, and did not return without him; as
these officers, when sent by them once before, did:

cometh thither with lanterns, and torches, and weapons: which is no
other than the Greek word here used for a lantern, the Jews tell us (u),
was an earthen vessel, in which a candle was put and covered, that the
wind might not put it out, and it had holes in the sides of it, through
which light was let out; their or "lamp", here rendered "torch", they
say (w), was also an earthen vessel in the form of a reed, at the top of
which was a proper receptacle, in which they burnt old rags dipped in
oil: now though it was full moon, being the time of the passover, they
brought these along with them to discover him by the light of, and find
him out with them, if he should hide himself among the trees, or in any
of the more shady places in the garden; and they took warlike
instruments, as swords, spears, and staves, as if they had a thief or a
murderer to apprehend, or a little army of men to encounter with;
whereas there were only Christ, and his eleven disciples; and these in
no condition, nor had any design, to defend themselves in an hostile
manner.

\(u\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Celim, c. 2. sect. 4. (w) Ib. in
sect. 8.

[John 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 18:4</span></span>

Jesus therefore knowing all things,.... As being the omniscient God, so
his knowledge reaches to all persons and things, without any limitation,
and restriction; though here it has a regard to all the things,

that should come upon him; even all the sufferings he should endure,
which were all determined by God; agreed to by him, in the covenant of
grace; predicted in the Old Testament, and foretold by himself: he knew
all the circumstances that would attend his sufferings, as that he
should be betrayed by Judas; be forsaken by the rest of his disciples;
that the Jews would give him gall and vinegar in his thirst; and the
soldiers part his garments among them: he knew the time of his
sufferings; and that it was now at hand; and that Judas and his company
were not far off: and therefore, went forth out of the garden, or at
least from that part of it where he was, and his disciples with him:
this was done to show his willingness to suffer; he

went forth of his own accord; he did not hide himself in the garden, as
the first Adam did: he did not stay till those that sought his life came
up to him: he went forth, not to make his escape from them, but to meet
them, and make himself known unto them;

and said unto them; whom seek ye? this question was put, not out of
ignorance; for he knew full well who they were seeking after: nor with a
design to deceive them, and make his escape; but to show that he was not
afraid of them, and that they could not have known him, nor have taken
him, had he not made himself known; and offered himself to them; and
which makes it appear, that he was willingly apprehended by them, and
voluntarily suffered.

[John 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 18:5</span></span>

They answered him, Jesus of Nazareth,.... Their answer is not, "thee";
for they knew him not, their eyes were holden, or struck with dimness,
or blindness, as the men of Sodom were; or they that answered might be
such, who never personally knew him: nor do they say "Christ", for they
rejected and denied him as the Messiah; nor do they call him that
deceiver, or seditious person, as they sometimes did, being willing to
cover their malicious views and intentions; but Jesus of Nazareth, a
name by which he was commonly known, being taken from his education and
conversation in that place; though this was sometimes given him in a
contemptuous way:

Jesus saith unto them, I am he; or "I am", respecting his name Jehovah,
averring himself to be the Christ, and owning himself under the name
they were pleased to call him by; which shows how willing he was to be
taken by them, and may teach us not to be ashamed of him, or of any
nickname we may bear for his sake:

and Judas also which betrayed him stood with them; this circumstance is
recorded to show, that Judas at first did not know him any more than the
rest; so that he might easily have passed them if he had pleased; and
that Judas did not stand with them as an idle spectator; he came with
them to betray him, and was looking out for him; though when he spake he
knew him not: it also expresses the different company Judas was in; a
little while ago, he was at supper with Christ, and the other disciples,
and now he is at the head of a band of soldiers, and others, to betray
him; and also his continuance in his iniquity and wicked resolutions and
agreement; as yet he had no remorse of conscience, or sense of his sin:
and it seems to be mentioned also with this view, to inform us, that he
fell to the ground with the rest; which is related in [Joh
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006). The Jew (x) asserts, that there
is a disagreement between the Evangelist John and the rest of the
evangelists in this account: he observes, that when Judas came with his
armed men to take Jesus, Jesus went out to meet them, and asked them,
saying, whom Seek ye? they say Jesus of Nazareth; to whom he replies, I
am he; and then Judas, that betrayed him, stood with them: but Matthew,
in his Gospel, [Mat 26:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#047), and Mark,
[Mar 14:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#043); and Luke, [Luk
22:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#047); relate, that Judas gave a sign
to the soldiers, when they came to take Jesus, saying, him whom I shall
kiss, lay hold on, and they did so. But here is no contradiction, John
does not deny that Judas gave a sign to the soldiers; though he omits
it, it being so particularly observed by the other evangelists, and only
relates what is not taken notice of by them, and which no ways
contradicts what they have asserted: the force of the objection seems to
lie here; that, according to the other evangelists, Judas, as soon as he
came into the garden, made up to Christ, and gave the signal by which he
might be known, whereas he is here said to stand with the soldiers and
officers; and that seeing such a signal was given, he must be, and was
known by it, whereas he is here represented as if he was not known by
them until he had made himself known to them; and that as soon as Judas
had given the sign, they immediately seized him, whereas, according to
this account, they did not, until some words had passed between Christ
and them, and they first fell to the ground. In answer to which it may
be said, that admitting that Judas did make up to Christ as soon as he
entered the garden, and gave the signal to the soldiers, he might upon
that immediately retire, and place himself among the multitude; either
to give further directions and instructions to them, or that they might
defend him from Jesus, should there be any occasion for it: and though
it should be allowed that the signal was given by Judas before this, it
might not be discerned by the soldiers, either not being near enough to
observe it; or, as some think, being stricken with blindness, for a
time, as the Sodomites were; or even supposing it was seen, and they
knew by it which was Jesus, it is still a fuller proof of the courage
and intrepidity of Christ to go forth, and present himself to them, and
put the questions he did, and confirm unto them the truth of it, that he
was Jesus whom they sought: to which may be added, that it does not
appear that Christ was immediately seized by the soldiers, upon the
signal given them by Judas, without some intervening words and actions;
for though the signal and the seizure lie very near together in the
accounts of Matthew and Mark; yet Luke relates many things between them,
as the question of the disciples, whether they should smite with the
sword; Peter's cutting off the ear of the high priest's servant;
Christ's rebuking him, and touching the servant's ear, and healing it;
and some discourse which passed between him, and the chief priests,
captains, and elders. All which agree with the account the Evangelist
John here gives.

\(x\) R. Isaac Chizzuk Emuna, par. 2. c. 56. p. 445, 446.

[John 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 18:6</span></span>

As soon then as he had said unto them I am he,.... Immediately upon his
speaking these words, which were delivered with so much majesty and
authority, and were attended with such a divine power:

they went backward, and fell to the ground; they were confounded,
surprised, and intimidated, and seemed as if they would have chose
rather to have fled from him, than to have apprehended him; and as they
retired and went backward, they fainted away, as it were, either at the
majesty of his looks, or at the power of his words, or both, so that
they became like ad men, falling to the ground. Sometimes the majesty of
a man's person, or his fame for some remarkable things done by him, or
the innocence and uprightness of his cause, have had such an influence
upon his enemies, that they have not been able to execute upon him what
they intended. It is reported of Caius Maxius that being reduced to the
utmost misery, and shut up in a private house at Minturnae, (a town in
Italy,) an executioner was sent to kill him; and though he was an old
man, and unarmed, and in the most miserable condition, yet the
executioner having drawn his sword, could not attempt to use it; but, as
the historian (y) says, being struck with blindness at the glory of the
man, ran away astonished and trembling. Now, besides the above things,
in their highest perfection, there was in our Lord something more than
human; he was God as well as man, and he displayed his divine majesty,
glory, and power. This was done, not to make his escape from them; but
to give proof of his deity, and a specimen of his power at the great
day; and to let them know, that if he had not thought fit to have
surrendered himself voluntarily to them, though he was an unarmed
person, they, with all their men and arms, could never have laid hold on
him; and to show them, that he could as easily have struck them dead, as
to cause them to fall to the ground: and sometimes striking a person
dead immediately, is expressed by this phrase of striking to the ground;
and is ascribed to God, who does it by the ministry of angels: says R.
Simeon ben Shetach (z), to some persons at variance,

"let the master of thoughts come, (i.e. the blessed God,) and take
vengeance on you; immediately Gabriel came, , "and smote them to the
ground"; and they died immediately.''

The like is elsewhere said (a),

"if thou transgresseth thy father's command, immediately comes Gabriel,
and "smites to the ground".''

\(y\) Valerius Maxim. l. 2. c. 5. (z) F. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 19. 2. (a)
Shemot Rabba, sect. 1. fol. 91. 2.

[John 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 18:7</span></span>

Then asked he them again, whom seek ye?.... This supposes them to be
risen up again and on their feet; no hurt being done to them; for Christ
always did good, and not hurt, to the bodies of men; he never disabled
any, or took away life, or limb: he only did this to show his power, and
not to do them any real damage; and the same divine person that struck
them down, suffered them to rise, and gave them power and strength to
get up; which showed his great clemency and goodness: but they, on the
contrary, persisted in their wicked intentions, and were still seeking
after him; a plain proof of that judicial hardness of heart, under which
they were; and that even miracles wrought will not bring hardened
sinners to repentance without powerful and efficacious grace. When
Christ, as fearless of them, and to show that this action he had no
design to make his escape them, though he could easily have done it, and
that he was willing to be apprehended by them, puts the question a
second time, and asks them who they were seeking for. Something like
this Josephus (b) reports concerning Elisha the prophet, though not
repeated as here, nor attended with the like effect: he relates that
Elisha having requested of God that he would smite his enemies with
blindness, and that being granted he went into the midst of them, and
asked them, , "whom do ye come to seek?" they say Elisha the prophet: he
promised them to deliver him to them, if they would follow him into the
city, where he was; and so they being blinded by God, both in their
sight and in their mind, followed the prophet.

They said Jesus of Nazareth; having recovered their spirits, and being
hardened in desperate malice and wickedness, impudently make this reply
to him; nor would they, notwithstanding this instance of his power, own
him to be the Messiah; but still contemptuously style him Jesus of
Nazareth.

\(b\) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 4. sect. 3.

[John 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 18:8</span></span>

Jesus answered, I have told you that I am he,.... This he said,
upbraiding them with their stupidity; signifying he was ready to deliver
himself up into their hands; and which he did with intrepidity and
calmness, only on this condition, with this proviso for his disciples;

if therefore ye seek me, let these go their way: Christ was about to
suffer for them, and therefore it was not just that they should suffer
too; nor was it proper that they should suffer with him, lest their
sufferings should be thought to be a part of the price of redemption.
Besides, their suffering time was not come, and they had other work to
do: this shows the love of Christ to his disciples, and his care of
them, and also his power, and that he could have saved himself as well
as them. Moreover, these words may be considered as an emblem and pledge
of the acquittance and discharge of God's elect, through the suretyship
engagements, and performances of Christ, who drew near to God on their
account, substituted himself in their room, and undertook for them in
the council and covenant of peace, and laid himself under obligation to
pay their debts, to satisfy for their sins, to bring in an everlasting
righteousness, to keep and preserve them in this world, and to make them
happy in another. Accordingly, in the fulness of time he was made under
the law, and stood in their place and stead, and was taken, suffered,
died, and rose again. Now, as there was a discharge and acquittance of
them from eternity, a non-imputation of sin to them, and a secret
letting of them go upon the suretyship engagements of Christ, and in
virtue thereof, a passing by, and over, the sins of the Old Testament
saints so there was an open acquittance and discharge of them all upon
the apprehension, sufferings, death, and resurrection of Christ;
complete deliverance from wrath and condemnation being obtained, and a
full title to eternal glory made. Moreover, these words may be
considered not only and merely as spoken to the Jews, but as addressed
to the law and justice of God; or however, as having some respect to
them, while directed to the others; for justice finding the sins of all
the elect upon Christ, on whom the Father had laid them, and Christ had
took them upon himself, was seeking for, and about to demand
satisfaction of him for them; and he being under the law, and coming
into the world to fulfil it, in the room and stead of his people, was
about to bear the curse of it; wherefore seeing this was the case, he
insists upon it, that they who were convicted of the law as
transgressors, and held under it as condemned criminals and malefactors,
and who were liable, as considered in themselves, to be seized upon by
the justice of God, and to have the sentence of condemnation and death
executed upon them, might be discharged and let go; and accordingly,
upon the satisfaction made by Christ, this is the case: Christ's people
are no longer under the law, as a ministration of condemnation and
death, nor liable to suffer the vindictive wrath of God; they are become
free from the curses of a righteous law, and are let go by divine
justice, and will never suffer the strokes of it, neither in this world
nor in that to come; there is no demand to be made upon them, either by
the law or justice of God; there is no wrath or punishment will be
inflicted on them, either here or hereafter; and they may, and shall go
their way into everlasting life, when time shall be no more with them,
neither law nor justice having anything to say to the contrary.

[John 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 18:9</span></span>

That the saying might be fulfilled which he spake,.... [Joh
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012);

of them which thou gavest me have I lost none; which though it has a
peculiar respect to the apostles, is true of all the elect of God; who
are given to Christ, and shall none of them be lost, neither their souls
nor bodies; for Christ's charge of them reaches to both: both were given
to him, both are redeemed by him, and both shall be saved in him with an
everlasting salvation: he saves their souls from an eternal death, and
will raise their bodies from a corporeal one; wherefore that his care of
his disciples, with respect to their bodies as well as souls, with
respect to their temporal lives as well as eternal happiness, might be
seen; he made this agreement with the Jews that came to take him, or
rather laid this injunction on them, to dismiss them; and which it is
very remarkable they did; they laid hands on none of them, even though
Peter drew his sword and struck off the ear of one of them: and which is
a very considerable instance of the power which Christ had over the
spirits of these men, to restrain them; and so a proof of his proper
deity, as well as of the care of Christ for the preservation of his
apostles, whilst he was here on earth; for to that time only the words
cited have a respect; in which Christ speaks of his keeping them whilst
he was with them, and uses this as an argument with his Father to keep
them, now he was removing from them: wherefore their losing their lives
afterwards for his sake, as they all did excepting the Apostle John, is
no contradiction to this expression of his; and besides, they were
preserved by the power of God so long, until they had done the work
which was appointed them to do, and for which they were given him, and
chosen by him to be his apostles, and for which they were better
furnished after his resurrection and ascension; for had they been,
apprehended by the Jews at this time, in all probability, according to
an human view of things, such was their weakness, they would have fallen
most foully and shamefully, as the instance of Peter, the strongest of
them, shows; and therefore to prevent such a temptation and to preserve
them, our Lord took this method to deliver them out of the hands of the
Jews; the saving clause, "but the son of perdition", is here left out,
because Judas, who is designed by that character, was now openly
declared to be what he was; he was no longer among the disciples; he was
separated from them, and had betrayed his master, and was not of the
number of those Christ insisted upon might be let go.

[John 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 18:10</span></span>

Then Simon Peter having a sword,.... Girt about him, which he either
wore in common, or particularly at the feast, as the Galilaeans are said
to do, to preserve them from thieves and wild beasts by the way; or was
one of the two the disciples had with them in the garden; or what Peter
purposely furnished himself with to defend his master, taking a hint
from what was said by him, [Luk 22:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#036);

drew it; before Christ could give an answer to the question put by his
disciples, whether they should smite or not, [Luk
22:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#049); being encouraged thereunto by
what Christ said, [Luk 22:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#038); or by
what he had just done in, striking the man to the ground; and being
provoked by that servant's going to lay hold on Christ, and who it is
probable was more forward and busy than any of the rest; for it appears
from the other evangelists, that Peter did this, though he is not
mentioned by name by any of the rest, just as they were seizing and
apprehending Christ:

and smote the high priest's servant, and cut off his right ear; he
doubtless struck at his head, and intended to have cleaved him down, but
missed his aim, and took off his ear: the person is particularly
described, that he was a servant, and the servant of the high priest,
and he is mentioned also by name;

and the servant's name was Malchus; that if the truth of this relation
was called in question, it might easily be looked into and examined,
when it would appear that it was perfectly right. All the evangelists
give an account of this action of Peter's, but none of them mention his
name but this evangelist; perhaps the reason might be, that Peter was
alive when the other evangelists wrote, and therefore it was not safe to
say who it was that did it, lest he who was the minister of the
circumcision, and dwelt among the Jews, should be persecuted for it, or
their minds should be prejudiced against him on that account; but John
writing his Gospel many years after his death, the reason for the
concealment of his name no longer subsisted: nor indeed is the name of
the high priest's servant mentioned by any other of the evangelists:
John had, or however he writes, a more exact and particular account of
this matter. This was a name frequent with the Syrians, Phoenicians, and
Hebrews. Jerom (c) wrote the life of one Malchus, a monk or Eremite, who
was by nation a Syrian; and Porphyry, that great enemy of Christianity,
who was by birth a Tyrian, his original name was Malchus, as was his
father's; and "which", in the Syrian, and his country dialect, as he
himself (d) and others (e) say, signifies a "king". Josephus (f) speaks
of one Cleodemus, whose name was Malchus, that wrote a history of the
Hebrews. And some Jewish Rabbins were of this name; hence we read of ,
"R. Maluc" (g), and of , "R. Malcio" (h); the name is the same with
Malluch, [Neh 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#004).

\(c\) Tom. I. fol. 87. (d) Porphyr. vita in Plotin. c. 17. (e) Eunapius
in vita Porphyr. p. 16. (f) Antiqu. l. 1. c. 15. (g) T. Hieros. Succa,
fol. 53. 3. & Bab. Bathra, fol. 16. 1. (h) T. Bab. Nidda, fol. 52. 1.

[John 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 18:11</span></span>

Then said Jesus unto Peter,.... By way of rebuke, and to prevent his
repeating the blow, and that further mischief might not ensue; for such
a bold imprudent action risked the lives of all the disciples, who, in
all probability, would have fallen a sacrifice to the fury and
resentment of these men, had not Christ interposed in this prudent
manner; who, also, Luke says, touched the servant's ear and healed him,
[Luk 22:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#051), which no doubt tended
greatly to conciliate their minds, and make them easy:

put up thy sword into the sheath: Peter was not a proper person to bear
the sword, and use it; it was a very daring attack, and a dangerous one,
and was very unnecessary; since Christ could have defended himself, had
he thought fit, without Peter's drawing his sword; and besides, for a
word speaking, he could have had of his Father more than twelve legions
of angels; and it was also contrary to the nature of his kingdom, which
was not of this world, nor to be supported and defended in any such
manner; and was, moreover, as much as in Peter lay, an hinderance of his
sufferings, and of the execution of his Father's will and decree;
wherefore he adds,

the cup which my Father hath given me: by the cup is meant, the wrath of
God, and punishment due to sin, endured by Christ in his sufferings, and
is said to be given him by his Father; because he called him to these
sufferings, they were appointed and determined by him; yea, he was even
ordered, and commanded by his Father, to drink of this cup; justice
mixed it up, and put it into his hands; and he took it as coming from
his Father, who delighted in seeing him drink it up, as the stately of
his people; and a dreadful one it was, a cup of trembling and
astonishment, of curse, and not of blessing, of wrath and fury: the
allusion seems to be to the master of the family, who appointed, and
gave to everyone their cup:

shall I not drink it? which expresses his, willingness to do it, his
eager desire after it, his delight in it, and displeasure at Peter's
attempt to hinder him; he being now perfectly reconciled in his human
nature to drink it, though it was so bitter a potion: he found it was
impossible, considering the decree of God, his own agreement, and the
salvation of his people, that it should be otherwise; and besides, it
was his Father's will and pleasure, he considered it as coming from him;
and therefore cheerfully accepted it, and was, resolved to drink it up,
and that nothing should hinder him. The Persic version reads it, "I will
not give it to another to drink"; Peter, by this rash action, seeming as
if he would have the cup out of Christ's hands, and have drank it
himself; which, as it could not be, nor would Christ suffer it, so if he
had, it would have been of no advantage to the salvation of his people.

[John 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 18:12</span></span>

Which Judas received, and which came along with him, [Joh
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#003). When Jesus had rebuked Peter,
and healed the servant's ear, and showed such a willingness to surrender
himself to them;

they took Jesus and bound him. This they did, partly for safety and
security, he having several times escaped from them; and partly for
contempt, and by way of reproach, using him as they would do the vilest
of malefactors: and this was submitted to by Christ, that his people
might be loosed from the cords of sin, be delivered from the captivity
of Satan, and be freed from the bondage of the law; hereby the types of
him were fulfilled, as the binding of Isaac, when his father was going
to offer him up, and the binding of the sacrifice with cords to the
horns of the altar: who that has read the ceremonies of the sheaf of the
firstfruits, but must call them to mind, upon reading this account of
the apprehension and binding of Christ, and leading him to the high
priest? This sheaf was fetched from places the nearest to Jerusalem,
particularly from the fields of Kidron: the manner was this (i):

"the messengers of the sanhedrim went out (from Jerusalem) on the
evening of the feast day (the sixteenth of Nisan, and over the brook
Kidron to the adjacent fields), and bound the standing corn in bundles,
that it might be the easier reaped; and all the neighbouring cities
gathered together there, that it might be reaped in great pomp; and when
it was dark, one (of the reapers) says to them, is the sun set? they
say, yes; and again, is the sun set? they say, yes: with this sickle
(shall I reap?) they say, yes; again, with this sickle (shall I reap?)
they say, yes; in this basket (shall I put it?) they say, yes; again, in
this basket (shall I put it?) they say, yes; if on the sabbath day he
says to them, is this sabbath day? they say, yes; again, is this sabbath
day? they say, yes; (it was sabbath day this year;) Shall I reap? they
say to him reap, shall I reap? they say to him reap; three times upon
everything; then they reap it, and put it into the baskets, and, bring
it to the court, where they dry it at the fire.''

Whoever reads this, will easily observe a likeness: the messengers of
the great sanhedrim go to the fields of Kidron, in the evening, with
their sickles and baskets; bind the standing corn; questions and answers
pass between them and the people before they reap; and when they have
done, they bring the sheaf in their basket to the court, to be dried at
the fire. So the officers of the high priest, with others, pass over the
brook Kidron, with lanterns, torches, and weapons; in the night go into
a garden; there apprehend Jesus; questions and answers pass between them
there; then they lay hold on him, bind him, and bring him to the high,
priest.

\(i\) Misn. Menachot, c. 10. sect. 2, 3, 4.

[John 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 18:13</span></span>

And led him away to Annas first,.... Who is elsewhere mentioned with
Caiaphas as an high priest also, [Luk
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002). He was the "sagan" of the high
priest; he and Caiaphas seem to have had the high priesthood
alternately; and either now, because his house lay first in the way, or
rather, because he was a man of age, learning, and experience, as these
men usually were, that they might supply the deficiencies of the high
priests, who were sometimes very weak and unlearned men (k); therefore
they first lead him to him, to have his advice how to proceed, and to
take him along with them to his son-in-law, where the great council was
convened, and that he might use his interest and authority, in taking
proper measures, in order to put Jesus to death; and especially they led
him to him, for the reason here assigned;

for he was father-in-law to Caiaphas; so that he was, it is very
probable, the older man: and being related to him, had an interest in
him; and to whom such a sight was equally pleasing as to the high priest
himself, or any of the council:

which was the high priest that same year; for the high priesthood was
not for life, but was often changed, being bought and sold for money;
See Gill on [Luk 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002); so that this
clause is very properly added, though Caiaphas held it longer, or, at
least, had it more years than one; for Caiaphas was high priest when
John began to preach, [Luk 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#002); but he
now succeeded Simeon ben Camhith, who was priest the year before; as was
Eleazar the son of Ananus, the year before that; and before him Ishmael
ben Phabi, who were all three successively put into the priesthood by
Valerius Gratus, the Roman governor; as was also Caiaphas this year, and
whose name was Joseph.

\(k\) Misn. Yoma, c. 1. sect. 3, 6.

[John 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 18:14</span></span>

Now Caiaphas was he which gave council to the Jews,.... The chief
priests and Pharisees, who met in council about Jesus, [Joh
11:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#047), the counsel he gave was,

that it was expedient that one man should die for the people; and which
advice was given out of ill will and malice to Christ, and to prevent,
as he thought, the people of the Jews being destroyed by the Romans;
though the words have a very good sense which he did not understand. The
people Christ was to die for, was not all the, people of the world, nor
only the people of the Jews, nor all of them; but all the elect of God,
whom God has chosen for his special and peculiar people, and has given
to Christ as such: these Christ were to die for, and did, not merely as
a martyr, to confirm his doctrine to them, or as an example to teach
them meekness, patience, and courage, but in the room and stead of them,
as a surety for them; and it was expedient that he should, in such
sense, die for them, because of his suretyship engagements, that he
might make satisfaction to the law and justice of God, and procure the
salvation of his people, and send forth the Spirit to make application
of it to them.

[John 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 18:15</span></span>

And Simon Peter followed Jesus,.... It is certain, he first fled with
the rest, and forsook him, as they all did, notwithstanding his
resolution to abide by him; however, he was very desirous to know what
would become of Jesus, and what would be the issue of things; with this
view he followed him, and not to deny him; though that was the
consequence. Other evangelists say he followed him afar off, at a
distance, [Mat 26:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#058); which showed
some fear; and yet to follow him at all discovered love and zeal. To
follow Christ is a property of his sheep, and is highly commendable,
especially to follow him in sufferings; a greater character a person
cannot well have, than to be a follower of Jesus, in the exercise of
grace, in the discharge of duty, and in bearing the cross; and yet it
does not appear that Peter did well in following Christ now; for Christ
had cautioned him of his over confidence, had hinted to him that he
should deny him, and had dismissed him, and took his leave of him, and
the rest, on whose discharge he insisted, when he was apprehended, [Joh
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#008);

And so did another disciple, and that disciple was known unto the high
priest. This is thought to be the Apostle John, because he frequently
speaks of himself, without mentioning his name; and these two, Peter and
John, were generally together; and certain it is, that John was present
at the cross at the time of Christ's crucifixion; and who is supposed to
be known to the high priest, by carrying fish to his house, and selling
it to him; so Nonnus says, he was known from his fishing trade: but it
is not probable that he was known, or could be known by the high priest,
so as to have any intimacy with him; nor is it likely that he, being a
Galilaean, would venture in; he was discoverable by his speech, and
would have been in equal danger with Peter; rather it was some one of
the disciples of Christ, who had not openly professed him; one of the
chief rulers that believed in him, but, for fear of the Pharisees, had
not confessed him; it may be Nicodemus, or Joseph of Arimathea, or the
man at whose house Christ had eaten the passover. In the Syriac version
he is called one of the other disciples; not of the twelve, but others.
However, through his knowledge of the high priest, he

went in with Jesus into the palace of the high priest; not Annas, but
Caiaphas; for Christ was now brought from Annas's house to Caiaphas's,
where the Scribes and elders were assembled together.

[John 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 18:16</span></span>

But Peter stood at the door without,.... It being difficult to get in;
and perhaps he might be fearful too of going in, lest he should be
known; however, he waited, if he could hear or see anything, and for a
proper opportunity of entrance: it would have been well if he had took
the hint of providence, access not being easy, and have gone his way;
for he was now at the door of temptation: it would have been best for
him, if he had kept without; and indeed at a greater distance; but his
curiosity had led him thus far, and he hoped for an opportunity of
getting nearer, which offered in the following manner:

then went out that other disciple, which was known unto the high priest;
seeing Peter through the window, by the light of the moon, for it was
full moon; and knowing him, who he was, concluded he had a mind to come
in, and hear and see what he could, steps out,

and spake unto her that kept the door; which might be thought more
properly the business of menservants; but these being employed in
apprehending and guarding Jesus, the maid, servants might be obliged to
take this post. The Ethiopic version, in the next verse, calls her the
doorkeeper's daughter; her father might be the porter, and he being
busy, she supplied his place. Though there is no need of these
conjectures, since it was usual with other nations, and it might be with
the Jews, for women to be doorkeepers, as Pignorius (l) has shown out of
Plautus, Petronius, Pausanias, and others. However, the other disciple,
who was a man of figure and authority, and was known by the servants of
the family, ordered her to open the door, and let Peter in; who
accordingly did:

and brought in Peter; into the hall, where Jesus was, under the
examination of the high priest.

\(l\) De Servis, p. 454, 455.

[John 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 18:17</span></span>

Then saith the damsel that kept the door unto Peter,.... She being
relieved, either by her father, if porter, or by a fellow servant, had
the opportunity of coming into the hall, where Peter was, and was
curious to observe him, who he should be, that that person of note
should order him to be admitted, when an affair of so much privacy and
importance was transacting; and either by Peter's language, or the
trouble that appeared in his countenance, or fancying: she had seen him
in the temple, or in some part of the city in company With Jesus,
addresses him after this manner:

art not thou also one of this man's disciples? She speaks of Christ in
the vulgar dialect of the Jews, calling him "this man"; not only
esteeming him a mere man, but a worthless man; and knowing he had
disciples, challenges him as one of them; when he, all in flight and
surprise, not expecting such a question to be put to him, without any
further thought, rashly and suddenly

he saith I am not: he never denied that Christ was God or the Son of
God, or that he was come in the flesh, or that he was the Messiah and
Saviour of sinners; but either that he did not know what the maid said,
or the person she spoke of; or, as here, that he was one of his
disciples; which was a very great untruth: and many are the aggravations
of his fall; which came to pass as soon as ever he was entered almost;
and that by the means of a maid, a servant maid, a very inferior one;
and at first perhaps they were alone; and the question put to him might
not be in a virulent way, nor proceed from malice, but commiseration of
him; and yet he had not resolution enough to own himself a disciple of
Jesus; which he might have done, and in all likelihood might have gone
safe off directly: but he that had so much confidence as to say, though
all men deny thee, yet will not I; and had so much courage, as, in the
face of a band of soldiers, to draw his sword, and smite one of the high
priest's servants, but a few hours before, has not spirit enough in him
to own his master before a servant maid!

[John 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 18:18</span></span>

And the servants and officers stood there,.... In a certain part of the
hall, the middle of it; the Vulgate Latin reads, "by the coals": it
follows,

who had made a fire of coals, for it was cold; though it was the
passover, and harvest near. Dr. Lightfoot has observed from our
countryman Biddulph, who was at Jerusalem at this time of the year, that
though in the daytime it was as hot as with us at Midsummer, yet such
very great dews fell as made it very cold, especially in the night; and
from one of the Jewish canons (m), that the year was not intercalated,
(which when done was chiefly on account of the passover,) neither for
snow nor frost; which, as he justly remarks, supposes there might be
frost and snow at the time of the passover. The same is observed in the
Talmud (n), where the gloss upon it is,

"that they might not desist, on that account, from coming to the
passover.''

The sense is, that whereas sometimes snow fell about the time of the
passover; which might be thought to be an hinderance to some from coming
to it; this never was a reason that came into consideration with the
sanhedrim, or prevailed upon them to intercalate a month, that so the
passover might not fall at a time of year when there was usually snow.
The passover was always in the spring of the year, when nights are
commonly cold, as they are generally observed to be at the vernal
equinox: this night might be remarkably cold; which seems to be
suggested by the Persic version, which reads, "for it was cold that
night"; and the Ethiopic version, "for the cold of that night was
great"; and adds what is neither in the text, nor true, "for the country
was cold". The Arabic version, as it should seem, very wrongly renders
it, "for it was winter"; since the passover was never kept in the winter
season, but always in the spring, in the month Nisan: the winter season,
with the Jews, were half the month of Chisleu, all Tebeth, and half
Shebet (o); though this is to be observed in favour of that version,
that the Jews distinguish their winter into two parts; the one they call
which, as the gloss says, is the strength of winter, the coldest part of
it, and which lasts the time before mentioned; and the other they call
which is the end of winter, and when the cold is not so strong; and half
Nisan is taken into this; for they say that half Shebat, all Adar, and
half Nisan, are reckoned to this part of winter: so that, according to
this account, the fourteenth of Nisan, which was the day on which the
passover was killed; or at least the fifteenth, which was now begun, was
the last day of winter, and so just secures the credit of the above
version.

And they warmed themselves, and Peter stood with them, and warmed
himself: he was cold both inwardly and outwardly; and being so, he gets
into bad company; and it may be with a view that he might not be
suspected, but be taken for one of their own sort, as one who had the
same ill opinion of Jesus they had; and by the light of the fire he is
again discovered and challenged, which makes way for a second denial.

\(m\) Maimon. Hilch. Kiddush Chodesh, c. 4. sect. 6. (n) T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 11. 1. (o) T. Bab. Bava Metzia, fol. 106. 2.

[John 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 18:19</span></span>

The high priest then asked Jesus,.... Being now brought from Annas to
Caiaphas, who was the high priest and mouth of the sanhedrim, and to
whom it appertained to hear and try a cause relating to doctrine. And
what he did was by putting questions to him, instead of opening the
charge against him, and calling for witnesses to support it. The person
he interrogated was a greater high priest than himself; was that prophet
Moses spoke of, to whom the Jews were to hearken, and no other than the
Son of God, and King of Israel; who, when at twelve years of age, asked
the doctors questions, and answered theirs, to their great astonishment.
He first inquires

of his disciples, not so much who they were, and what they were, and how
many they were, and where they were now, as for what purpose he gathered
them together; whether it was not with some seditious views to overturn
the present government, and set up himself as a temporal prince; and
this he did, that he might be able to send him, with a charge against
him, to the Roman governor: he did not ask for his disciples to come and
speak on his behalf, if they had anything to say for him, which, by
their canons (p), was allowed and encouraged:

"if any of the disciples (of the person accused) says, I have a crime to
lay to his charge, they silence him; but if one of the disciples says, I
have something to say in his favour, they bring him up, and place him
between them; nor does he go down from thence all the day; and if there
is anything in what he says, , "they hearken to him".''

The Jews indeed pretend (q) that after Jesus was found guilty, a herald
went before him forty days declaring his crime, and signifying, that if
anyone knew anything worthy in him, to come and declare it; but none
were found: but this is all lies and falsehood, to cover their
wickedness; no disciple of his was allowed to speak for him. The high
priest next asked Jesus

of his doctrine; not for the sake of information and instruction, nor to
see whether it was according to the Scriptures; but if it was a new
doctrine, and his own, and whether it tended to idolatry or blasphemy,
and whether it was factious and seditious, that so they might have
wherewith to accuse him; for though they had got his person, they were
at a loss for an accusation; and yet this self-same man that put these
questions, and was fishing for something against him, had before given
counsel to put him to death, right or wrong: all this was doing, and
these questions were put to Jesus, whilst Peter was denying him.

\(p\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 40. 1. Maimon. Hilch. Sanhedrin, c. 10.
sect. 8. (q) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 43. 1.

[John 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 18:20</span></span>

Jesus answered him,.... Not to the first of these questions, concerning
his disciples; not because they had all now forsaken him, and one was
denying him; nor because he would not betray them; nor because he would
suffer alone; but because if his doctrine was good; it could not be
blameworthy to have disciples, and to teach them: and the charge of
sedition, blasphemy, and idolatry, they wanted to fasten on him, would
sufficiently appear to be groundless by the doctrine he preached; and as
to that he answers not directly what he taught, but declares the manner
in which he delivered it, and which was such, that they that heard him
could not be strangers to it.

I spake openly to the world; with all plainness, freedom, and boldness,
without any reserve or ambiguity; and that not to a few persons only, to
his own particular disciples, but to all the people of the Jews, who
crowded in great numbers to hear him; insomuch that it was said by his
enemies, that the world was gone after him.

I ever taught in the synagogue; the Arabic, "the synagogues"; the places
of public worship in all parts of the nation, where the Jews met to
pray, and read, and hear the word:

and in the temple; at Jerusalem, whenever he was in that city;

whither the Jews always resort; for prayer, and to offer sacrifice, and
particularly at the three grand festivals of the year, the passover,
Pentecost, and feast of tabernacles, when all the males from all parts
appeared before the Lord. Accordingly, the Alexandrian copy, and some
others, read, "whither all the Jews resort"; and so read the Vulgate
Latin, Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions.

And in secret have I said nothing; not but that our Lord taught in other
places than what are here mentioned, as on mountains, in deserts, by the
sea shore, and in private houses, yet generally to great multitudes; and
though he sometimes conversed alone, and in secret with his disciples,
yet what he taught them was either an explanation of what he had said in
public, or was perfectly agreeable to it.

[John 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 18:21</span></span>

Why askest thou me?.... He seems surprised at the high priest's conduct,
that he should put such questions to him, who stood bound before him;
was brought there as a criminal, and was the defendant, and not obliged
to accuse himself; nor could it be thought, that whatever evidence or
testimony he should give, would have much weight with the persons before
whom he stood.

Ask them which heard me, what I said unto them; he appeals to his
hearers, many of whom were then present; and these his enemies, even his
worst enemies, so clear was his case, so free was his doctrine from
sedition and blasphemy, so innocent was he in the whole of his
deportment and conduct, that he even submits to have his case issued and
determined by what his hearers should say of him; and these not his
friends, but his enemies; see [Isa
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#008);

behold, they, or these,

know what I have said; pointing at some persons present, perhaps the
very officers who had been sent to take him before, but returned without
him, declaring that never man spake like him.

[John 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 18:22</span></span>

And when he had thus spoken,.... What was so right and reasonable, in so
becoming a manner, without heat or passion:

one of the officers which stood by; it may be one of those who had been
sent to him and had been a hearer of him, whom Jesus might look
wistfully at, or point unto, when he said the above words, at which he
might be provoked: and therefore

stroke Jesus with the palm of his hand; or gave him a rap with a rod, or
smote him with a staff, as some think, is the sense of the phrase;
though the Syriac, agreeably to our version, reads it, he smote him, ,
"upon his cheek"; gave him, what we commonly call, a slap on the face;
and which is always esteemed a very great affront, and was a piece of
rudeness and insolence to the last degree in this man:

saying, answerest thou the high priest so? This he said, as well as gave
the blow, either out of flattery to the high priest, or to clear himself
from being a favourer of Christ; which, by what had been said, he might
think would be suspected: some have thought this was Malchus, whose ear
Christ had healed; if so, he was guilty of great ingratitude.

[John 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 18:23</span></span>

Jesus answered him,.... For the high priest took no notice of him, nor
any of the sanhedrim, though the action was so insolent and indecent,
both as to the manner in which it was done, and the person, an officer,
by whom it was done; and considering the circumstances of it, in the
palace of the high priest, in his presence, and before so grand a
council, and whilst a cause was trying; and it was a barbarous, as well
as an impious action, considering the person to whom it was done.
Wherefore Jesus replies to him, without making use of his divine power
as the Son of God, or discovering any warmth of spirit, and heat of
passion, as a man, mildly and rationally argues with him;

if I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil: meaning, either if he
had, to his knowledge, delivered any wicked doctrine in the course of
his ministry, or had at that time said any evil thing of the high
priest, or any other person, he desires that he would make it to appear,
and give proper proof and evidence of it:

but if well, why smitest thou me? If he had said nothing contrary to
truth, reason, and good manners, then he ought not to be used and
treated in such an injurious way. And moreover, the officer ought to
have been corrected by the Council, and have been made to pay the two
hundred "zuzim", or pence, the line for such an affront, according to
the Jewish canon, or more, according to the dignity of the person abused
(r).

\(r\) Misn. Bava Kama, c. 8. sect. 6.

[John 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 18:24</span></span>

Now Annas had sent him bound,.... As he found him, when the captain,
band, and officers brought him to him; who having pleased himself with
so agreeable a sight, and had asked him some few questions, and perhaps
insulted him, sent him away in this manner,

unto Caiaphas the high priest: his son-in-law, as the more proper person
to be examined before; and especially as the grand council was sitting
at his house. This was done before Peter's first denial of Christ;
which, it is plain, was in the palace of the high priest, and not in
Annas's house; though there seems no reason on this account to place
these words at the end of the 13th verse, as they are by some, since
they manifestly refer to time past, and do not at all obscure or hinder
the true order of the history, as standing here.

[John 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 18:25</span></span>

And Simon Peter stood and warmed himself,.... This is repeated from [Joh
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#018) to connect the history, and
carry on the thread of the account of Peter's denial of Christ, which is
interrupted by inserting the examination of Christ before the high
priest, which was made at the same time. Peter stood among, and
continued with the servants and officers of the high priest, warming
himself by a fire they had made, it being a cold night; and this proved
of bad consequence to him. The company and conversation of wicked men
should be abstained from; no good is got thereby; continuance among such
is very dangerous; men are too often more concerned for their bodies
than their souls; Satan baits his temptations for the fleshly and
sensitive part; and that which is thought to be for good, is the
occasion of hurt.

They said therefore unto him; the servants and officers, among whom he
stood warming himself, having observed what the maid had said to him:

art thou not also one of his disciples? suspecting that he was, though
he had denied it, and therefore press him to give a direct answer: they
might observe his countenance to fall, when the maid put the question to
him; there might be something in his dress, and especially in his
speech, which increased the suspicion:

but he denied it, and said, I am not; a second time. This denial of his
being a disciple of Christ, as before, did not arise from a sense of his
unworthiness to be one; nor from diffidence and distrust of a right to
such a character; but from the fear of men; and being ashamed of Christ,
he denies that which was his great mercy, privilege, and glory.

[John 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 18:26</span></span>

One of the servants of the high priest,.... Hearing him so stiffly deny
that he was a disciple of Jesus, when he had great reason to believe he
was:

being his kinsman, whose ear Peter cut off; a near relation of Malchus,
to whom Peter had done this injury; and who was present at the same
time, and no doubt took particular notice of him; and the more, because
of what he had done to his kinsman:

saith unto him, did not I see thee in the garden with him? as if he
should have said, I saw thee with my own eyes along with Jesus, this
very night in the garden, beyond Kidron, where he was apprehended, how
canst thou deny it? and wilt thou stand in it so confidently, that thou
art not one of his disciples?

[John 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 18:27</span></span>

Peter then denied again,.... A third time, as the Ethiopic version
renders it; and that, according to other evangelists, with cursing and
swearing; for now he was more affrighted than before, lest should he be
taken up, and it be proved upon him, that he was the person that cut off
Malchus's ear, he should be sentenced to a fine, or it may be some
capital punishment. The fine for plucking a man's ears, and which some
understand of plucking them off, was four hundred "zuzim" (s), or,
pence; which, as they answer to Roman pence, amount to twelve pounds ten
shillings; a sum of money Peter perhaps could not have raised, without
great difficulty: and therefore, that it might be believed he was not a
disciple of Christ, so not the man; he swears in a profane manner, and
imprecates the judgments of God upon him:

and immediately the cock crew; the second time; which was a signal by
which he might call to remembrance, what Christ had said to him; that
before the cock crowed twice, he should deny him thrice, [Mar
14:72](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#072). It was now early in the
morning, about three o'clock, or somewhat after.

\(s\) Misn. Bava Kama, c. 8, sect. 6. Vid. L'Empereur in ib.

[John 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 18:28</span></span>

Then led they Jesus from Caiaphas,.... When Peter had denied him, one of
the officers had smote him, the high priest had examined him, and they
thought they had enough, out of his own mouth, to condemn him; they, the
chief priests, elders, Scribes, and the whole multitude, led him bound
as he was, from Caiaphas's house,

unto the hall of judgment; or the "praetorium"; the place where the
Roman governor, who was now Pontius Pilate, used to hear and try causes
in; the Romans now having matters and causes relating to life and death,
in their hands:

and it was early; the morning indeed was come; but it was as soon as it
was day; they had been all night in taking and examining Jesus, and
consulting what to do with him; and as soon as they could expect the
governor to be up, they hurry him away to him, eagerly thirsting after
his blood, and fearing lest he should be rescued out of their hands:

and they themselves went not into the judgment hall, lest they should be
defiled; that is, the Jews, only the band of Roman soldiers went in; the
reason of this was, because it was the house of a Gentile, and with
them, , "the dwelling houses of Gentiles", or idolaters, "are unclean"
(t); yea, if they were the houses of Israelites, and Gentiles were
admitted to dwell in them, they were defiled, and all that were in them;
for so they say (u),

"if the collectors for the government enter into a house to dwell in,
all in the house are defiled.''

They did not think it lawful to rent out a house in Judea to an Heathen
(w), or to assist in building a Basilica for them; which they explain to
be a palace, in which judges sit to judge men (x): hence the reason of
their caution, and which they were the more observant of,

that they might eat the passover; pure and undefiled; not the passover
lamb, for that they had eaten the night before; but the "Chagigah", or
feast on the fifteenth day of the month. Many Christian writers, both
ancient and modern, have concluded from hence, that Christ did not keep
his last passover, at the same time the Jews did; and many things are
said to illustrate this matter, and justify our Lord in it: some observe
the distinction of a sacrificial, and commemorative passover; the
sacrificial passover is that, in which the lamb was slain, and was fixed
to a certain time and place, and there was no altering it; the
commemorative passover is that, in which no lamb is slain and eaten,
only a commemoration made of the deliverance of the people of Israel out
of Egypt; such as is now kept by the Jews, being out of their own land,
where sacrifice with them is not lawful; and this it is supposed our
Lord kept, and not the former: but it does not appear that there was
such a commemorative passover kept by the Jews, in our Lord's time, and
whilst the temple stood: and supposing there was such an one allowed,
and appointed for those that were at a distance from Jerusalem, and
could not come up thither, (which was not the case of Christ and his
disciples,) it is reasonable to conclude, that it was to be kept, and
was kept at the time the sacrificial passover was, in the room of which
it was substituted, as it is by the Jews to this day; so that this will
by no means clear the matter, nor solve the difficulty; besides it is
very manifest, that the passover our Lord kept was sacrificial; and such
an one the disciples proposed to get ready for him, and did, of which he
and they are said to eat: "and the first day of unleavened bread, when
they KILLED the passover, his disciples said to him, where wilt thou
that we go and prepare, that thou mayest EAT the passover?" [Mar
14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012) and again, "then came the day of
unleavened bread, when the passover MUST be KILLED", [Luk
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#007). "They made ready the passover",
[Luk 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#013) "and he sat down, and the
twelve apostles with him", [Luk 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#014)
"and he said unto them, with desire I have desired to eat this
passover", [Luk 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#015). Others suggest,
that this difference of observing the passover by Christ and the Jews
arose from fixing the beginning of the month, and so accordingly the
feasts in it, by the or appearance of the moon; and that our Lord went
according to the true appearance of it, and the Jews according to a
false account: but of this, as a fact, there is no proof; besides,
though the feasts were regulated and fixed according to the appearance
of the moon, yet this was not left to the arbitrary will, pleasure, and
judgment of particular persons, to determine as they should think
proper; but the sanhedrim, or chief council of the nation sat, at a
proper time, to hear and examine witnesses about the appearance of the
moon; and accordingly determined, and none might fix but them (y); and
as this was doubtless the case at this time, it is not very reasonable
to think, that Christ would differ from them: besides, it was either a
clear case, or a doubtful one; if the former, then there would be no
room nor reason to keep another day; and if it was the latter, then two
days were observed, that they might be sure they were right (z); but
then both were kept by all the Jews: and that the time of this passover
was well known, is clear from various circumstances; such and such facts
were done, so many days before it; six days before it, Jesus came to
Bethany, [Joh 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#001) and two days before
it, he was in the same place, [Mat
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#002) and says to his disciples, "ye
know that after two days is the feast of the passover", &c. Others
taking it for granted, that Christ kept the passover a day before the
usual and precise time, defend it, by observing the despotic and
legislative power of Christ, who had a right to dispense with the time
of this feast, and could at his pleasure anticipate it, because the
betraying of him and his death were so near at hand: that he had such a
power will not be disputed; but that he should use it in this way, does
not seem necessary, on account of his death, seeing none but the living
were obliged to it; nor so consistent with his wisdom, since hereby the
mouths of his enemies would be opened against him, for acting not
agreeably to the law of God: moreover, when it is considered that the
passover, according to the Jews, was always kept "in its set time" (a),
and was not put off on the account of the sabbath, or anything else, to
another day; and that though when it was put off for particular persons,
on account of uncleanness, to another month, yet still it was to be kept
on the fourteenth day at even, in that month, [Num
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#010) it will not easily be received
that Christ observed it a day before the time: besides, the passover
lamb was not killed in a private house, but in the temple, in the court
of it, and that always on the fourteenth of Nisan, after noon: so says
Maimonides (b),

"it is an affirmative command to slay the passover on the fourteenth of
the month Nisan, after the middle of the day. The passover is not slain
but in the court, as the rest of the holy things; even in the time that
altars were lawful, they did not offer the passover on a private altar;
and whoever offers the passover on a private altar, is to be beaten; as
it is said, "thou mayest not sacrifice the passover within any of thy
gates, which the Lord thy God giveth thee", [Deu
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#005).''

And seeing therefore a passover lamb was not to be killed at home, but
in the court of the priests, in the temple, it does not seem probable,
that a single lamb should be suffered to be killed there, for Christ and
his disciples, on a day not observed by the Jews, contrary to the sense
of the sanhedrim, and of the whole nation: add to this, that the sacred
text is express for it, that it was at the exact time of this feast,
when it was come according to general computation, that the disciples
moved to Christ to prepare the passover for him, and did, and they with
him kept it: the account Matthew gives is very full; "now the first day
of the feast of unleavened bread"; that is, when that was come in its
proper time and course, "the disciples came to Jesus"; saying unto him,
where wilt "thou that we prepare for thee to eat the passover?" He bids
them go to the city to such a man, and say, "I will keep the passover at
thy house with my disciples, and the disciples did as Jesus had
appointed, and they made ready the passover; now when the even was
come", the time of eating the passover, according to the law of God, "he
sat down with the twelve, and as they did eat", &c. [Mat
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#017) and Mark is still more
particular, who says, "and the first day of unleavened bread, when they
killed the passover"; that is, when the Jews killed the passover, on the
very day the lamb was slain, and eaten by them; and then follows much
the same account as before, [Mar 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar014.htm#012)
and Luke yet more clearly expresses it, "then came the day of unleavened
bread, when the passover must be killed"; according to the law of God,
and the common usage of the people of the Jews; yea, he not only
observes, that Christ kept the usual day, but the very hour, the precise
time of eating it; for he says, "and when the hour was come, he sat
down, and the twelve apostles with him", [Luk
22:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk022.htm#007). Nor is there anything in this
text, that is an objection to Christ and the Jews keeping the passover
at the same time; since by the passover here is meant, the "Chagigah",
or feast kept on the fifteenth day of the month, as it is sometimes
called: in [Deu 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#002) it is said, "thou
shalt therefore sacrifice the passover unto the Lord thy God, of the
flock and the herd": now the passover of the herd, can never mean the
passover lamb, but the passover "Chagigah"; and so the Jewish
commentators explain it; "of the herd", says Jarchi, thou shalt
sacrifice for the "Chagigah"; and says Aben Ezra, for the peace
offerings; so Josiah the king is said to give for the passovers three
thousand bullocks, and the priests three hundred oxen, and the Levites
five hundred oxen, [Ch2 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2035.htm#007) which
Jarchi interprets of the peace offerings of the "Chagigah", there called
passovers; and so in 1 Esdres 1:7-9 mention is made of three thousand
calves, besides lambs, that Josias gave for the passover; and three
hundred by some other persons, and seven hundred by others: the passage
in Deuteronomy, is explained of the "Chagigah", in both Talmuds (c), and
in other writings (d); so besides the passover lamb, we read of
sacrifices slain, , "in the name of" the passover, or on account of it
(e); and particularly of the calf and the young bullock, slain for the
sake of the passover (f): and now this is the passover which these men
were to eat that day, and therefore were careful not to defile
themselves, that so they might not be unfit for it; otherwise had it
been the passover lamb in the evening, they might have washed themselves
in the evening, according to the rules of , or "the daily washing", and
been clean enough to have eat it: besides, it may be observed, that all
the seven days were called the passover; and he that ate the unleavened
bread, is said by eating that, to eat the passover; and thus they invite
their guests daily to eat the bread, saying (g),

"everyone that is hungry, let him come and eat all that he needs, "and
keep the passover".''

It is easy to observe the consciences of these men, who were always wont
to strain at a gnat and swallow a camel; they scruple going into the
judgment hall, which belonged to an Heathen governor, and where was a
large number of Heathen soldiers; but they could go along with these
into the garden to apprehend Christ, and spend a whole night in
consulting to shed innocent blood: no wonder that God should be weary of
their sacrifices and ceremonious performances, when, trusting to these,
they had no regard to moral precepts: however, this may be teaching to
us, in what manner we should keep the feast, and eat of the true
passover, Christ; not with malice and wickedness, as these Jews ate
theirs, but with sincerity and truth: besides, a sanhedrim, when they
had condemned anyone to death, were forbidden to eat anything all that
day (h); and so whilst scrupling one thing, they broke through another.

\(t\) Misn. Oholot, c. 18. sect. 7. (u) Maimon. Mishcab & Mosheb, c. 12.
sect. 12. (w) Misn. Avoda Zara, c. 1. sect. 8. (x) Jarchi & Bartenora in
ib. sect. 7. (y) Maimon. Kiddush Hachodesh, c. 2. sect. 7, 8. (z) Ib. c.
5. sect. 6, 7, 8. (a) Maimon. in Misn. Pesachim, c. 7. sect. 4. &
Bartenora in ib. c. 5. sect. 4. (b) Hilchot Korban Pesacb. c. 1. sect.
1, 3. (c) T. Hieros. Pesacb. fol. 33. 1. T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 70. 2.
(d) Maimon. Korban Pesach. c. 10. sect. 12. Moses Kotsensis Mitzvot
Tora, pr. neg. 349. (e) Misn. Pesachim, c. 6. sect. 5. (f) T. Bab.
Menachot, fol. 3. 1. (g) Haggadah Shel Pesach. p. 4. Ed. Rittangel. (h)
T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 63. 1. Maimon. Hilch. Sanhedrin, c. 13. sect. 4.

[John 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 18:29</span></span>

Pilate then went out unto them,.... Either into the street, or rather
into the place called the pavement, and in Hebrew Gabbatha; see [Joh
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#013) the place where the Jewish
sanhedrim used to sit; wherefore in complaisance to them, since they
would not come into his court of judicature, he condescends to go into
one of theirs, which showed great civility and humanity in him:

and said, what accusation bring ye against this man? meaning, what
offence had he committed? what crime had they to charge him with? what
did they accuse him of? and what proof had they to support their charge?
His view was, to have the matter stated, the cause opened, and evidence
given; that the accused being face to face with the accusers, might
answer for himself; and he, as a judge, be capable of judging between
them: all which were very commendable in him, and agreeably to the Roman
laws; and have an appearance of equity, justice, and impartiality.

[John 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 18:30</span></span>

They answered and said unto him,.... Offended at the question put to
them, and filled with indignation that they should be so interrogated,
with an air of haughtiness and insolence reply to him:

if he were not a malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto
thee; insinuating, that he was guilty of some very wicked action; not
merely of a breach of some of their laws peculiar to them; for then they
would have tried and judged him according to them, and not have brought
him before him; but they suggest, that he was guilty of some crimes
recognizable by Caesar's court; and which they did not care to mention
expressly, lest they should not succeed, not having it may be as yet,
their witnesses ready; and hoped he would have took their own word for
it, without any further proof, they being men of such rank and dignity,
and of so much knowledge, learning, and religion; and therefore took it
ill of him, that he should ask such persons as they were, so famous for
their prudence, integrity, and sanctity, such a question: however, they
own themselves to be the betrayers and deliverers up of our Lord, which
Christ had before foretold, and which Stephen afterwards charged them
with.

[John 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 18:31</span></span>

Then said Pilate unto them,.... Either ironically, knowing that they did
not, or it was not in their power, to judge in capital causes; or
seriously, and with some indignation, abhorring such a method of
procedure they would have had him gone into, to condemn a man without
knowing his crime, and having evidence of it:

take ye him, and judge him according to your law; this he said, as
choosing to understand them in no other sense, than that he had broken
some peculiar law of theirs, though they had otherwise suggested; and as
giving them liberty to take him away to one of their courts, and proceed
against him as their law directed, and inflict some lesser punishment on
him than death, such as scourging, &c. which they still had a power to
do, and did make use of:

the Jews therefore said unto him, it is not lawful for us to put any man
to death; thereby insinuating, that he was guilty of a crime, which
deserved death, and which they could not inflict; not that they were of
such tender consciences, that they could not put him to death, or that
they had no law to punish him with death, provided he was guilty; but
because judgments in capital cases had ceased among them; nor did they
try causes relating to life and death, the date of which they often make
to be forty years before the destruction of the temple (i); and which
was much about, or a little before the time these words were spoken: not
that this power was taken away wholly from them by the Romans; though
since their subjection to the empire, they had not that full and free
exercise of it as before; but through the great increase of iniquity,
particularly murder, which caused such frequent executions, that they
were weary of them (k); and through the negligence and indolence of the
Jewish sanhedrim, and their removal from the room Gazith, where they
only judged capital causes (l): as for the stoning of Stephen, and the
putting of some to death against whom Saul gave his voice, these were
the outrages of the zealots, and were not according to a formal process
in any court of judicature. Two executions are mentioned in their
Talmud; the one is of a priest's daughter that was burnt for a harlot
(m), and the other of the stoning of Ben Stada in Lydda (n); the one,
according to them, seems to be before, the other after the destruction
of the temple; but these dates are not certain, nor to be depended upon:
for since the destruction of their city and temple, and their being
carried captive into other lands, it is certain that the power of life
and death has been wholly taken from them; by which it appears, that the
sceptre is removed from Judah, and a lawgiver from between his feet; and
this they own almost in the same words as here expressed; for they say
(o) of a certain man worthy of death,

"why dost thou scourge him? he replies, because he lay with a beast;
they say to him, hast thou any witnesses? he answers, yes; Elijah came
in the form of a man, and witnessed; they say, if it be so, he deserves
to die; to which he answers, "from the day we have been carried captive
out of our land, , we have no power to put to death".''

But at this time, their power was not entirely gone; but the true reason
of their saying these words is, that they might wholly give up Christ to
the Roman power, and throw off the reproach of his death from
themselves; and particularly they were desirous he should die the
reproachful and painful death of the cross, which was a Roman
punishment: had they took him and judged him according to their law,
which must have been as a false prophet, or for blasphemy or idolatry,
the death they must have condemned him to, would have been stoning; but
it was crucifixion they were set upon; and therefore deliver him up as a
traitor, and a seditious person, in order thereunto.

\(i\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 15. 1. Sanhedrin, fol. 41. 1. T. Hieros.
Sanhedrin, fol. 18. 1. & 24. 2. Juchasin, fol. 51. 1. Moses Kotsensis
pr. affirm. 99. (k) T. Bab. Avoda Zara fol. 8. 2. Juchasin, fol. 21. 1.
(l) Gloss. in T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 8, 2. (m) T. Hieros. Sanhedrin,
fol. 24. 2. (n) Ib. fol. 25. 4. (o) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 58. 1.

[John 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 18:32</span></span>

That the saying of Jesus might be fulfilled,.... That he should be
delivered by the Jews to the Gentiles, to crucify him; and that he
should be lifted up from the earth, and as the serpent upon the pole:

which he spake, signifying what death he should die; [Mat
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019) and which was brought about this
way, by the providence of God conducting this whole affair; and was
cheerfully submitted to by Christ, in great love to his people, to
redeem them from the curse of the law, being hereby made a curse for
them.

[John 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 18:33</span></span>

Then Pilate entered into the judgment hall again,.... Where he went at
first, but the Jews refusing to come in thither to him, he came out to
them; and now they speaking out more plainly, that he was guilty of a
crime deserving of death; as that he set up himself as a king, in
opposition to Caesar, and taught the people not to pay tribute to him;
he goes into the "praetorium" again, and called Jesus; beckoned, or sent
for him; or ordered him to come in thither to him, that he might alone,
and the more freely, converse with him; which Jesus did, paying no
regard to the superstitious observances of the Jews:

and said unto him, art thou the king of the Jews? This he might say,
from a rumour that was generally spread, that there was such a person to
come, and was born; and by many it was thought, that Jesus was he; and
particularly from the charge of the Jews against him, which though not
here expressed, is elsewhere; see [Luk
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#002). Wherefore Pilate was the more
solicitous about the matter, on account of Caesar, and lest he should be
charged with dilatoriness and negligence in this affair: some read these
words not by way of question, but affirmation, "thou art the king of the
Jews"; which method he might make use of, the more easily to get it out
of him, whether he was or not: and to this reading, Christ's answer in
the next verse seems best to agree.

[John 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 18:34</span></span>

Jesus answered him, sayest thou this thing of thyself,.... That he was
the king of the Jews: Christ's meaning is, whether he asserted this from
the sentiments of his own mind; or moved the question from anything he
himself had observed, which might give him just ground to suspect that
he had, or intended to set up himself as the king of that nation:

or did others tell it thee of me? Whether the Jews had not intimated
some such thing to him, out of malice and ill will? not but that Christ
full well knew where the truth of this lay; but he was desirous of
convincing Pilate of his weakness, if he so judged of himself, and of
his imprudence and hastiness, if he took up this from others; and also
to expose the baseness and wickedness of the Jews, to charge him with
this, when they themselves would have made him a temporal king, and he
refused; and when he had not only paid tribute himself to Caesar, but
had exhorted them to do the like.

[John 18:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 18:35</span></span>

Pilate answered, am I a Jew?.... This he said, in a sort of derision and
contempt; who was not a Jew, neither by birth, nor by religion, and so
had never imbibed any notions of their King Messiah, nor read anything
about him; and knew nothing of his distinguishing characters and
properties, by which he was described, and might be known; and therefore
it remained, that what he had said, though not expressed, was not of
himself, of his own knowledge or observation, but arose from some
intimations and suggestions the Jews had given him:

thine own nation and the chief priests have delivered thee unto me; that
is, the men of his nation, his countrymen the Jews, who best understood
their own laws and books of prophecy; and what expectations they had
formed from thence, concerning their king, and his kingdom; and the
principal of the priesthood, who were accounted men of the greatest
learning, piety, and integrity, they had brought him bound before him;
they had entered a charge against him, and had delivered him up into his
hands, as an enemy to Caesar, and a traitor to his government:

what hast thou done? as an occasion of such treatment, and as the
foundation of such a charge; surely there must be something in it, or
men of such character would never impeach a man altogether innocent, and
one of their own country too!

[John 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 18:36</span></span>

Jesus answered, my kingdom is not of this world,.... By saying which, he
tacitly owns he was a king: as such he was set up, and anointed by his
Father from everlasting; was prophesied of in the Old Testament;
declared by the angel, both when he brought the news of his conception,
and of his birth; was owned by many, who knew him to be so in the days
of his flesh; and since his resurrection, ascension, and session at
God's right hand, more manifestly appears to be one: he also hereby
declares, that he had a kingdom; by which he means, not his natural and
universal kingdom, as God, and the Creator and Governor of all things;
but his mediatorial kingdom, administered both in the days of his flesh,
and after his resurrection; which includes the whole Gospel
dispensation, Christ's visible church state on earth, and the whole
election of grace; it takes in that which will be at the close of time,
in the latter day, which will be more spiritual, and in which Christ
will reign before his ancients gloriously; and also the kingdom of God,
or of heaven, even the ultimate glory: the whole of which is not of this
world; the subjects of Christ's kingdom are not of the world, they are
chosen and called out of it; the kingdom itself does not appear in
worldly pomp and splendour, nor is it supported by worldly force, nor
administered by worldly laws; nor does it so much regard the outward, as
the inward estates of men; it promises no worldly emoluments, or
temporal rewards. Christ does not say it is not "in" this world, but it
is not of it; and therefore will not fail, when this world does, and the
kingdoms thereof. Every thing that is carnal, sensual, and worldly, must
be removed from our conceptions of Christ's kingdom, here or hereafter:
and to this agrees what some Jewish writers say of the Messiah, and his
affairs;

"the Messiah (they say (o)) is separated from the world, because he is
absolutely intellectual; but the world is corporeal; how then should the
Messiah be in this world, when the world is corporeal, and , "the
business of the Messiah is divine, and not corporeal?"''

And since this was the case, Caesar, or any civil government, had no
reason to be uneasy on account of his being a king, and having a
kingdom; since his kingdom and interests did not in the least break in
upon, or injure any others: and that this was the nature of his kingdom,
he proves by the following reason;

if my kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight that I
should not be delivered to the Jews: if Christ's kingdom had been a
worldly one, set up on worldly views, and governed with worldly policy,
and was to answer some worldly ends, Christ would have had servants
enough among the Jews, who would have declared for him, and took up arms
in his favour against the Romans; his own disciples would not have
suffered him to have been betrayed into the hands of the Jews by Judas;
nor would he have hindered them from attempting his rescue, as he did
Peter; nor would they suffer him now to be delivered by Pilate into
their hands, to put him to death; since they had such a Prince at the
head of them, who, was he to make use of his power, was able to drive
all the Roman forces before them out of the nation, and oblige a general
submission among the Jews, to the sceptre of his kingdom:

but now is my kingdom not from hence; it does not rise out of, nor
proceed upon, nor is it supported by worldly principles, wherefore none
of the above methods are made use of.

\(o\) R. Juda Bezaleel Nizeach Israel, fol. 48.

[John 18:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 18:37</span></span>

Pilate therefore said unto him,.... Upon this free and full declaration
of Christ, concerning his kingly office, and the nature of his kingdom:

art thou a king then? or thou art a king then: for, from his having a
kingdom, it might be very justly inferred that he was a king:

Jesus answered, thou sayest that I am a king; and which was very rightly
said; and Christ by these words owns and confesses, that he was one:
adding,

to this end was I born, and for this cause came I into the world, that I
should bear witness unto the truth. The end of Christ's being born,
which was of a virgin, in a very miraculous manner, and of his coming
into the world, which was by the assumption of human nature, among many
other things, was to bear testimony to truth in general; to the whole
Gospel, the word of truth, and every branch of it, which he brought with
him, constantly preached in life, and confirmed by his death; and
particularly to this truth, that he was a King, and had a kingdom in a
spiritual sense:

everyone that is of the truth; that is of God, belongs to the sheep of
Christ, knows the truth as it is in Jesus, and is on the side of truth,
and stands by it:

heareth my voice; the voice of his Gospel; and that not only externally,
but internally; so as to approve of it, rejoice at it, and distinguish
it; and the voice of his commands, so as cheerfully to obey them from a
principle of love to him.

[John 18:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 18:38</span></span>

Pilate saith unto him, what is truth?.... That is, in general, or that
which Christ then particularly spoke of: many things might be observed
in answer to this question, as that there is the truth and faithfulness
of God in his word and promises; the truth of grace in the hearts of his
people; Jesus Christ himself is truth, he is true God, and true man; the
truth of all covenant transactions, of all types, promises, and
prophecies; whatever he said and taught was truth, and the truth of all
doctrine comes from him. The Gospel is truth in general; it comes from
the God of truth; lies in the Scriptures of truth; Christ, who is truth
itself, is the substance of it; the Spirit of truth has an hand in it,
leads into it, and makes it effectual; the whole of it is true, and
every particular doctrine of it; as the manifestation of the Son of God
in human nature, his coming into the world to save the chief of sinners,
justification by his righteousness, pardon by his blood, atonement by
his sacrifice, the resurrection of the dead, &c. The same question is
put in the Talmud (p), , "what is truth?" and it is answered, that he is
the living God, and the King of the World: we do not find that our Lord
gave any answer to this question, which might be put in a scornful,
jeering way; nor did Pilate wait for one; for

when he had said this, he went out again unto the Jews: as soon as he
had put the question about truth, having no great inclination to hear
what Christ would say to it; nor did he put it for information sake, or
as having any opinion of Christ, and that he was able to answer it; he
directly goes out of the judgment hall, taking Jesus along with him, and
addresses the Jews after this manner:

and saith unto them, I find in him no fault at all; and indeed how
should he? there was no sin in his nature, nor guile in his lips, nor
any iniquity in his life; the devil himself could find none in him. This
confession is both to the shame of Pilate and the Jews; to the reproach
of Pilate, that after this he should condemn him; and of the Jews, that
after such a fair and full declaration from the judge, they should
insist upon his crucifixion; it shows, however, that he died not for any
sin of his own, but for the sins of others.

\(p\) T. Hieros. Sanhedrin, fol. 18. 1.

[John 18:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 18:39</span></span>

But ye have a custom,.... Not a law, either of God or man's, but a
custom; and which was not originally observed at the feast of the
passover, and perhaps was not of any long standing; but what the Roman
governors, by the order of Caesar, or of their own pleasure, had
introduced to ingratiate themselves into the affections of the people;
and being repeated once and again, was now looked for:

that I should release unto you one at the passover; which was at this
time; and more than one it seems it was not customary, to release:

will ye therefore that I release unto you the King of the Jews? who they
had said called himself so, and was so accounted by others, and which
Pilate says, in a sneering, sarcastic way; though he was heartily
willing to release him, and was in hopes they would have agreed to it,
since nothing could be proved against him; however, he proposes it to
them, and leaves it to their option.

[John 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 18:40</span></span>

Then cried they all again,.... For it seems that Pilate had made this
proposal once before, and that this was the second time, though not
mentioned; yet some copies, and the Syriac, Arabic, Persic, and Ethiopic
versions, leave out the word "again": they all, priests and people, in a
very clamorous manner, cried out as one man, with one united voice, all
at once;

saying, not this man, but Barabbas; now Barabbas was a robber; who was
an emblem of God's elect in a state of nature, released and set free
when Christ was condemned. These, as he, many of them at least, are
notorious sinners, the chief of sinners, robbers and murderers; who have
robbed God of his glory, and destroyed themselves; are prisoners,
concluded in sin and unbelief, and shut up in the law, and in a pit,
wherein is no water, in their natural state; and were, as this man,
worthy of death, and by nature children of wrath; and yet children of
God by adopting grace, as his name Bar Abba signifies, "the son of the
father": these, though such criminals, and so deserving of punishment,
were let go free, when Christ was taken, condemned, and died; and which
was according to the wise and secret counsel of Jehovah, and is a large
discovery of divine grace; and what lays those who are released under
the greatest obligations to live to him, who suffered for them, in their
room and stead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 19](joh019)

</div>
