<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[John Index](joh.md)  
  [Previous](joh000)  [Next](joh002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [John Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

[John 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">joh 1:1</span></span>

In the beginning was the word,.... That this is said not of the written
word, but of the essential word of God, the Lord Jesus Christ, is clear,
from all that is said from hence, to [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md) as that this word was in the
beginning, was with God, and is God; from the creation of all things
being ascribed to him, and his being said to be the life and light of
men; from his coming into the world, and usage in it; from his bestowing
the privilege of adoption on believers; and from his incarnation; and
also there is a particular application of all this to Christ, [Joh
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md). And likewise from what this
evangelist elsewhere says of him, when he calls him the word of life,
and places him between the Father and the Holy Ghost; and speaks of the
record of the word of God, and the testimony of Jesus, as the same
thing; and represents him as a warrior and conqueror, [Jo1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001.md). Moreover this appears to be
spoken of Christ, from what other inspired writers have said of him,
under the same character; as the Evangelist Luke, [Luk
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#002.md), the Apostle Paul, [Act
20:32](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#032.md) and the Apostle Peter, [Pe2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005.md). And who is called the word, not
as man; for as man he was not in the beginning with God, but became so
in the fulness of time; nor is the man God; besides, as such, he is a
creature, and not the Creator, nor is he the life and light of men;
moreover, he was the word, before he was man, and therefore not as such:
nor can any part of the human nature be so called; not the flesh, for
the word was made flesh; nor his human soul, for self-subsistence,
deity, eternity, and the creation of all things, can never be ascribed
to that; but he is the word as the Son of God, as is evident from what
is here attributed to him, and from the word being said to be so, as in
[Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md) and from those places, where
the word is explained by the Son, compare [Jo1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#005.md). And is so called from his nature,
being begotten of the Father; for as the word, whether silent or
expressed, is the birth of the mind, the image of it, equal to it, and
distinct from it; so Christ is the only begotten of the Father, the
express image of his person, in all things equal to him, and a distinct
person from him: and he may be so called, from some action, or actions,
said of him, or ascribed to him; as that he spoke for, and on the behalf
of the elect of God, in the eternal council and covenant of grace and
peace; and spoke all things out of nothing, in creation; for with regard
to those words so often mentioned in the history of the creation, and
God said, may Jehovah the Son be called the word; also he was spoken of
as the promised Messiah, throughout the whole Old Testament
dispensation; and is the interpreter of his Father's mind, as he was in
Eden's garden, as well as in the days of his flesh; and now speaks in
heaven for the saints. The phrase, , "the word of the Lord", so
frequently used by the Targumists, is well known: and it is to be
observed, that the same things which John here says of the word, they
say likewise, as will be observed on the several clauses; from whence it
is more likely, that John should take this phrase, since the paraphrases
of Onkelos and Jonathan ben Uzziel were written before his time, than
that he should borrow it from the writings of Plato, or his followers,
as some have thought; with whose philosophy, Ebion and Cerinthus are
said to be acquainted; wherefore John, the more easily to gain upon
them, uses this phrase, when that of the Son of God would have been
disagreeable to them: that there is some likeness between the Evangelist
John and Plato in their sentiments concerning the word, will not be
denied. Amelius (f), a Platonic philosopher, who lived after the times
of John, manifestly refers to these words of his, in agreement with his
master's doctrine: his words are these,

"and this was truly "Logos", or the word, by whom always existing, the
things that are made, were made, as also Heraclitus thought; and who,
likewise that Barbarian (meaning the Evangelist John) reckons was in the
order and dignity of the beginning, constituted with God, and was God,
by whom all things are entirely made; in whom, whatsoever is made,
lives, and has life, and being; and who entered into bodies, and was
clothed with flesh, and appeared a man; so notwithstanding, that he
showed forth the majesty of his nature; and after his dissolution, he
was again deified, and was God, as he was before he descended into a
body, flesh and man.

In which words it is easy to observe plain traces of what the evangelist
says in the first four verses, and in the fourteenth verse of this
chapter; yet it is much more probable, that Plato had his notion of the
Logos, or word, out of the writings of the Old Testament, than that John
should take this phrase, or what he says concerning the word, from him;
since it is a matter of fact not disputed, that Plato went into Egypt to
get knowledge: not only Clemens Alexandrinus a Christian writer says,
that he was a philosopher of the Hebrews (g), and understood prophecy
(h), and stirred up the fire of the Hebrew philosophy (i); but it is
affirmed by Heathen writers, that he went into Egypt to learn of the
priests (k), and to understand the rites of the prophets (l); and
Aristobulus, a Jew, affirms (m), he studied their law; and Numenius, a
Pythagoric philosopher (n), charges him with stealing what he wrote,
concerning God and the world, out of the books of Moses; and used to say
to him, what is Plato, but Moses "Atticising?" or Moses speaking Greek:
and Eusebius (o), an ancient Christian writer, points at the very
places, from whence Plato took his hints: wherefore it is more probable,
that the evangelist received this phrase of the word, as a divine
person, from the Targums, where there is such frequent mention made of
it; or however, there is a very great agreement between what he and
these ancient writings of the Jews say of the word, as will be hereafter
shown. Moreover, the phrase is frequently used in like manner, in the
writings of Philo the Jew; from whence it is manifest, that the name was
well known to the Jews, and may be the reason of the evangelist's using
it. This word, he says, was in the beginning; by which is meant, not the
Father of Christ; for he is never called the beginning, but the Son
only; and was he, he must be such a beginning as is without one; nor can
he be said to be so, with respect to the Son or Spirit, who are as
eternal as himself; only with respect to the creatures, of whom he is
the author and efficient cause: Christ is indeed in the Father, and the
Father in him, but this cannot be meant here; nor is the beginning of
the Gospel of Christ, by the preaching of John the Baptist, intended
here: John's ministry was an evangelical one, and the Gospel was more
clearly preached by him, and after him, by Christ and his apostles, than
before; but it did not then begin; it was preached before by the angel
to the shepherds, at the birth of Christ; and before that, by the
prophets under the former dispensation, as by Isaiah, and others; it was
preached before unto Abraham, and to our first parents, in the garden of
Eden: nor did Christ begin to be, when John began to preach; for John's
preaching and baptism were for the manifestation of him: yea, Christ
existed as man, before John began to preach; and though he was born
after him as man, yet as the Word and Son of God, he existed before John
was born; he was in being in the times of the prophets, which were
before John; and in the times of Moses, and before Abraham, and in the
days of Noah: but by the beginning is here meant, the beginning of the
world, or the creation of all things; and which is expressive of the
eternity of Christ, he was in the beginning, as the Maker of all
creatures, and therefore must be before them all: and it is to be
observed, that it is said of him, that in the beginning he was; not
made, as the heavens and earth, and the things in them were; nor was he
merely in the purpose and predestination of God, but really existed as a
divine person, as he did from all eternity; as appears from his being
set up in office from everlasting; from all the elect being chosen in
him, and given to him before the foundation of the world; from the
covenant of grace, which is from eternity, being made with him; and from
the blessings and promises of grace, being as early put into his hands;
and from his nature as God, and his relation to his Father: so Philo the
Jew often calls the Logos, or word, the eternal word, the most ancient
word, and more ancient than any thing that is made (p). The eternity of
the Messiah is acknowledged by the ancient Jews: [Mic
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002.md) is a full proof of it; which by
them (q) is thus paraphrased,

"out of thee, before me, shall come forth the Messiah, that he may
exercise dominion over Israel; whose name is said from eternity, from
the days of old.

Jarchi upon it only mentions [Psa
72:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#017.md) which is rendered by the Targum
on the place, before the sun his name was prepared; it may be
translated, "before the sun his name was Yinnon"; that is, the Son,
namely the Son of God; and Aben Ezra interprets it, , "he shall be
called the son"; and to this agrees what the Talmudisis say (r), that
the name of the Messiah was before the world was created; in proof of
which they produce the same passage,

And the word was with God; not with men or angels; for he was before
either of these; but with God, not essentially, but personally
considered; with God his Father: not in the Socinian sense, that he was
only known to him, and to no other before the ministry of John the
Baptist; for he was known and spoken of by the angel Gabriel before; and
was known to Mary and to Joseph; and to Zacharias and Elisabeth; to the
shepherds, and to the wise men; to Simeon and Anna, who saw him in the
temple; and to the prophets and patriarchs in all ages, from the
beginning of the world: but this phrase denotes the existence of the
word with the Father, his relation and nearness to him, his equality
with him, and particularly the distinction of his person from him, as
well as his eternal being with him; for he was always with him, and is,
and ever will be; he was with him in the council and covenant of grace,
and in the creation of the universe, and is with him in the providential
government of the world; he was with him as the word and Son of God in
heaven, whilst he as man, was here on earth; and he is now with him, and
ever will be: and as John here speaks of the word, as a distinct person
from God the Father, so do the Targums, or Chaldee paraphrases; [Psa
110:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#001.md) "the Lord said to my Lord", is
rendered, "the Lord said to his word"; where he is manifestly
distinguished from Jehovah, that speaks to him; and in [Hos
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#007.md) the Lord promises to "have mercy
on the house of Judah", and "save them by the Lord their God". The
Targum is, "I will redeem them by the word of the Lord their God"; where
the word of the Lord, who is spoken of as a Redeemer and Saviour, is
distinguished from the Lord, who promises to save by him. This
distinction of Jehovah and his word, may be observed in multitudes of
places, in the Chaldee paraphrases, and in the writings of Philo the
Jew; and this phrase, of "the word" being "with God", is in the Targums
expressed by, , "the word from before the Lord", or "which is before the
Lord": being always in his presence, and the angel of it; so Onkelos
paraphrases [Gen 31:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#022.md) "and the word
from before the Lord, came to Laban", &c. and [Exo
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#019.md) thus, "and let not the word from
before the Lord speak with us, lest we die"; for so it is read in the
King of Spain's Bible; and wisdom, which is the same with the word of
God, is said to be by him, or with him, in [Pro
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001.md) agreeably to which John here
speaks. John makes use of the word God, rather than Father, because the
word is commonly called the word of God, and because of what follows,

and the word was God; not made a God, as he is said here after to be
made flesh; nor constituted or appointed a God, or a God by office; but
truly and properly God, in the highest sense of the word, as appears
from the names by which he is called; as Jehovah, God, our, your, their,
and my God, God with us, the mighty God, God over all, the great God,
the living God, the true God, and eternal life; and from his
perfections, and the whole fulness of the Godhead that dwells in him, as
independence, eternity, immutability, omnipresence, omniscience, and
omnipotence; and from his works of creation and providence, his
miracles, the work of redemption, his forgiving sins, the resurrection
of himself and others from the dead, and the administration of the last
judgment; and from the worship given him, as prayer to him, faith in
him, and the performance of baptism in his name: nor is it any objection
to the proper deity of Christ, that the article is here wanting; since
when the word is applied to the Father, it is not always used, and even
in this chapter, [Joh 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006.md) and which
shows, that the word "God", is not the subject, but the predicate of
this proposition, as we render it: so the Jews often use the word of the
Lord for Jehovah, and call him God. Thus the words in [Gen
28:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#020.md) are paraphrased by Onkelos,

"if "the word of the Lord" will be my help, and will keep me, &c. then
"the word of the Lord" shall be, , "my God":

again, [Lev 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#012.md) is paraphrased, by
the Targum ascribed to Jonathan Ben Uzziel, thus,

"I will cause the glory of my Shekinah to dwell among you, and my word
shall "be your God", the Redeemer;

once more, [Deu 26:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#017.md) is rendered by
the Jerusalem Targum after this manner,

"ye have made "the word of the Lord" king over you this day, that he may
be your God:

and this is frequent with Philo the Jew, who says, the name of God is
his word, and calls him, my Lord, the divine word; and affirms, that the
most ancient word is God (s),

\(f\) Apud Euseb. Prepar. Evangel. l. 11. c. 19. (g) Stromat. l. 1. p.
274. (h) Ib. p. 303. (i) Ib. Paedagog. l. 2. c. 1. p. 150. (k) Valer.
Maxim. l. 8. c. 7. (l) Apuleius de dogmate Platonis, l. 1. in principio.
(m) Apud. Euseb. Prepar. Evangel. l. 13. c. 12. (n) Hesych. Miles. de
Philosophis. p. 50. (o) Prepar. Evangel. l. 11. c. 9. (p) De Leg. Alleg.
l. 2. p. 93. de Plant. Noe, p. 217. de Migrat. Abraham, p. 389. de
Profugis, p. 466. quis. rer. divin. Haeres. p. 509. (q) Targum Jon. in
loc. (r) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 54. 1. & Nedarim, fol. 39. 2. Pirke
Eliezer, c. 3. (s) De Allegor. l. 2. p. 99, 101. & de Somniis, p. 599.

[John 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">joh 1:2</span></span>

The same was in the beginning with God. This is a repetition of what is
before said, and is made to show the importance of the truths before
delivered; namely, the eternity of Christ, his distinct personality, and
proper deity; and that the phrase, in the beginning, is to be joined to
each of the above sentences; and so proves, not only his eternal
existence, but his eternal existence with the Father, and also his
eternal deity; and is also made to carry on the thread of the discourse,
concerning the word, and not God the Father; and to express, not only
his co-existence in nature, but his co-operation in the works of
creation next mentioned.

[John 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">joh 1:3</span></span>

All things were made by him,.... Which is a proof at once of all that is
said before; as that he was in the beginning; and that he was with God
the Father in the beginning; and that he was God; otherwise all things
could not have been made by him, had either of these been untrue: which
is to be understood, not of the new creation; for this would be a
restraining "all" things to a "few" persons only; nor is it any where
said, that all things are new made, but made; and it is false, that all
were converted, that have been converted, by the ministry of Christ, as
man: all men are not renewed, regenerated, nor reformed; and the greater
part of those that were renewed, were renewed before Christ existed, as
man; and therefore could not be renewed by him, as such: though indeed,
could this sense be established, it would not answer the end for which
it is coined; namely, to destroy the proof of Christ's deity, and of his
existence before his incarnation; for in all ages, from the beginning of
the world, some have been renewed; and the new creation is a work of
God, and of almighty power, equally with the old; for who can create
spiritual light, infuse a principle of spiritual life, take away the
heart of stone, and give an heart of flesh, or produce faith, but God?
Regeneration is denied to be of man, and is always ascribed to God; nor
would Christ's being the author of the new creation, be any
contradiction to his being the author of the old creation, which is
intended here: by "all things", are meant the heaven, and all its
created inhabitants, the airy, starry, and third heavens, and the earth,
and all therein, the sea, and every thing that is in that; and the word,
or Son of God, is the efficient cause of all these, not a bare
instrument of the formation of them; for the preposition by does not
always denote an instrument, but sometimes an efficient, as in [Co1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#009.md) and so here, though not to the
exclusion of the Father, and of the Spirit:

and without him was not any thing made that was made: in which may be
observed the conjunct operation of the word, or Son, with the Father,
and Spirit, in creation; and the extent of his concern in it to every
thing that is made; for without him there was not one single thing in
the whole compass of the creation made; and the limitation of it to
things that are made; and so excludes the uncreated being, Father, Son,
and Spirit; and sin also, which is not a principle made by God, and
which has no efficient, but a deficient cause. So the Jews ascribe the
creation of all things to the word. The Targumists attribute the
creation of man, in particular, to the word of God: it is said in [Gen
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md). "God created man in his own
image": the Jerusalem Targum of it is,

"and the word of the Lord created man in his likeness.

And [Gen 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022.md) "and the Lord God said,
behold the man is become as one of us", the same Targum paraphrases
thus,

"and the word of the Lord God said, behold the man whom I have created,
is the only one in the world.

Also in the same writings, the creation of all things in general is
ascribed to the word: the passage in [Deu
33:27](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#027.md) "the eternal God is thy refuge,
and underneath are the everlasting arms", is paraphrased by Onkelos,

"the eternal God is an habitation, by whose word the world was made.

In [Isa 48:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#013.md) it is said, "mine hand
also hath laid the foundation of the earth". The Targum of Jonathan ben
Uzziah on it is,

"yea, by my word I have founded the earth:

which agrees with what is said in [Heb
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#003.md), and the same says Philo the Jew,
who not only calls him the archetype, and exemplar of the world, but the
power that made it: he often ascribes the creation of the heavens, and
the earth unto him, and likewise the creation of man after whose image,
he says, he was made (t). The Ethiopic version adds, at the end of this
verse, "and also that which is made is for himself",

\(t\) De Mundi Opificio, p. 4, 5, 31, 32. De Alleg. l. 1. p. 44. De
Sacrificiis Abel & Cain, p. 131. De Profugis, p. 464. & de Monarch. p.
823.

[John 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">joh 1:4</span></span>

In him was life,.... The Persic version reads in the plural number,
"lives". There was life in the word with respect to himself; a divine
life, the same with the life of the Father and of the Spirit; and is in
him, not by gift, nor by derivation or communication; but originally,
and independently, and from all eternity: indeed he lived before his
incarnation as Mediator, and Redeemer. Job knew him in his time, as his
living Redeemer; but this regards him as the word and living God, and
distinguishes him from the written word, and shows that he is not a mere
idea in the divine mind, but a truly divine person: and there was life
in Christ the word, with respect to others; the fountain of natural life
is in him, he is the efficient cause, and preserver of it; whether
vegetative, animal, or rational; and proves him to be truly God, and
that he existed before his incarnation; since creatures, who have
received such a life from him, did: and spiritual life was also in him;
all his elect are dead in trespasses and sins, and cannot quicken
themselves. Christ has procured life for them, and gives it to them, and
implants it in them; a life of sanctification is from him; and a life of
justification is upon him, and of faith is by him; all the comforts of a
spiritual life, and all things appertaining to it, are from him, and he
maintains, and preserves it. Eternal life is in him, and with him; not
the purpose of it only, nor the promise of it barely, but the gift of it
itself; which was granted in consequence of his asking it, and which he
had by way of stipulation; and hence has a right and power to bestow it:
now, this being in him proves him to be the true God, and shows us where
life is to be had, and the safety and security of it:

and the life was the light of men; the life which was in, and by the
word, was, with respect to men, a life of light, or a life attended with
light: by which is meant, not a mere visive faculty, receptive of the
sun's light, but rational knowledge and understanding; for when Christ,
the word, breathed into man the breath of life, and he became a living
soul, he filled him with rational light and knowledge. Adam had a
knowledge of God; of his being, and perfections; of the persons in the
Trinity; of his relation to God, dependence on him, and obligation to
him; of his mind and will; and knew what it was to have communion with
him. He knew much of himself, and of all the creatures; this knowledge
was natural and perfect in its kind, but loseable; and different from
that which saints now have of God, through Christ, the Mediator; and
since this natural light was from Christ, the word, as a Creator, he
must be the eternal God. The Socinians are not willing to allow this
sense, but say that Christ is the light of men, by preaching the
heavenly doctrine, and by the example of his holy life; but hereby he
did not enlighten every man that cometh into the world; the greatest
part of men, before the preaching, and example of Christ, sat in
darkness; and the greatest part of the Jews remained in darkness,
notwithstanding his preaching, and example; and the patriarchs that were
enlightened under the former dispensation, were not enlightened this
way: it will be owned, that all spiritual and supernatural light, which
any of the sons of men have had, since the fall, was from Christ, from
whom they had their spiritual life; even all spiritual light in
conversion, and all after degrees of light; through him they enjoyed the
light of God's countenance, and had the light of joy and gladness here,
and of glory hereafter.

[John 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">joh 1:5</span></span>

And the light shineth in darkness,.... Which, through sin, came upon the
minds of men; who are naturally in the dark about the nature and
perfections of God; about sin, and the consequences of it; about Christ,
and salvation by him; about the Spirit of God, and his work upon the
soul; and about the Scriptures of truth, and the doctrines of the
Gospel. Man was created a knowing creature, but, not content with his
knowledge, sins, and is banished from the presence of God, the fountain
of light; which brought a darkness on him, and his posterity, and which
is increased in them by personal iniquity, and in which Satan, the god
of this world, has an hand; and sometimes they are left to judicial
blindness, and which issues in worse darkness, if grace prevents not:
now amidst this darkness there were some remains of the light of nature:
with respect to the being of God, which shines in the works of creation
and providence and to the worship of God, though very dimly; and to the
knowledge of moral good and evil:

and the darkness comprehended it not; or "perceived it not"; as the
Syriac version renders it. By the light of nature, and the remains of
it, men could not come to any clear and distinct knowledge of the above
things; and much less to any knowledge of the true way of salvation:
unless, rather by the light should be meant, the light of the Messiah,
or of the Gospel shining in the figures, types, and shadows of the law,
and in the prophecies and promises of the Old Testament: and yet, such
was the darkness upon the minds of men, that they could not very
distinctly apprehend it, and much less fully comprehend it, so that
there was need of a fresh and fuller revelation; an account of which
follows;

[John 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">joh 1:6</span></span>

There was a man sent from God,.... John the Baptist: he was not the
Logos, or word; nor was he an angel, but a man; yet an extraordinary
one, in his conception of a barren woman, and in being born when both
parents were stricken in years; and whilst he was in the womb, he leaped
for joy at the salutation of Mary; and as soon as born was filled with
the Holy Ghost; and when he was grown up, and appeared in public, it was
in an uncommon manner: his dress and his diet were both out of the
common way; and his temper and spirit were that of Elias the prophet;
and as for his work and office, it was very peculiar; he was the
forerunner of Christ, and the first administrator of the new ordinance
of baptism, and the greatest of all the prophets: this person had his
mission from God, both to preach and baptize:

whose name was John; the name given him by the angel before his
conception, and by his mother Elisabeth, after her neighbours and
cousins had given him another; and which was confirmed by his father
Zacharias, when deaf and dumb: it signifies grace, or gracious; and a
gracious man he was; he was very acceptable to his parents; a man that
had the grace of God in him, and great gifts of grace bestowed on him;
he was a preacher of the doctrines of grace; and his ministry was very
grateful to many.

[John 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">joh 1:7</span></span>

The same came for a witness,.... The end of his being sent, and the
design of his coming were,

to bear witness of the light: by which is meant, not the light of
nature, or reason; nor the light of the Gospel: but Christ himself, the
author of light, natural, spiritual, and eternal. This was one of the
names of the Messiah with the Jews; of whom they say (u), , "light is
his name"; as it is said in [Dan 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#022.md)
and the light dwelleth with him; on which they have (w) elsewhere this
gloss, this is the King Messiah; and so they interpret [Psa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003) of him (x.md). Philo the Jew often
speaks of the Logos, or word, as light, and calls him the intelligible
light; the universal light, the most perfect light; represents him as
full of divine light; and says, he is called the sun (y). Now John came
to bear a testimony to him, as he did; of which an account is given in
this chapter, very largely, and elsewhere; as that he testified of his
existence before his incarnation; of his being with the Father, and in
his bosom: of his deity and divine sonship; of his being the Messiah; of
the fulness of grace that was in him; of his incarnation and
satisfaction; of his descent from heaven; and of his relation to his
church, as in [Joh 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md) the end of
which witness was,

that all men through him might believe; that is, that the Jews, to whom
he preached, might, through his testimony, believe that Jesus was the
light, and true Messiah; for these words are to be taken in a limited
sense, and not to be extended, to every individual of mankind; since
millions were dead before John began his testimony, and multitudes then
in being, and since, whom it never reached: nor can it design more than
the Jews, to whom alone he bore witness of Christ; and the faith which
he taught, and required by his testimony, was an assent unto him as the
Messiah; though the preaching of the Gospel is a means of true spiritual
faith in Christ; and doubtless it was so to many, as preached by John:
it points out the object of faith, and encourages souls to believe in
Christ; and hence, Gospel ministers are instruments by whom ethers
believe; and faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God; and
then is it, considerable end of the Gospel ministry answered,

\(u\) Echa Rabbati, fol. 50. 2. (w) Bereshit Rabba, fol. 1. 3. (x)
Jarchi in ib. (y) De Maudi Opificio, p. 6. De Allegor. l. 2. p. 80. & de
Somniis, p. 576, 578.

[John 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">joh 1:8</span></span>

He was not that light,.... He was a light; he was the forerunner of the
sun of righteousness, the "phosphorus" of the Gospel day; he had great
light in him; he knew that the Messiah was ready to come, and declared
it; and upon his baptism he knew him personally, and signified him to
others: he had great light into the person and work of Christ; and into
the way of salvation by him, and remission of sins through him; into the
doctrines of faith in Christ, and of evangelical repentance towards God;
and into the abolition of the legal Mosaic and Jewish dispensation; and
was an instrument of giving light to others; yea, he was a burning and
shining light, in whose light the Jews rejoiced, at least for a season:
but then he was not that light, the word and wisdom of God; that
uncreated light that dwelt with him from all eternity; nor that which
was the light of men, from the creation; nor that light, which was of
old promised to the saints and patriarchs of the Old Testament, and
shone in the ordinances and predictions of that state; nor that fountain
and giver of light, of every sort, to men; not that light in which is no
darkness, and always shines; not that true light, or sun of
righteousness, the Messiah, or that lightens every man that comes into
the world:

but was sent to bear witness of that light; which is repeated, to
distinguish him from that light; to show what he was sent for, and that
he acted according to his mission; and to express the honourableness to
his work.

[John 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">joh 1:9</span></span>

That was the true light,.... Christ is that light, that famous and
excellent light, the fountain of all light to all creatures; that gave
light to the dark earth at first, and spoke light out of darkness; that
light of all men in the earth, and of all the angels in heaven, and of
all the saints below, and of all the glorified ones above: he is the
true light, in distinction from typical lights; the "Urim" of the former
dispensation; the candlestick, with the lamps of it; the pillar of fire
which directed the Israelites by night in the wilderness; and from all
the typical light there was in the institutions and sacrifices of the
law; and in opposition to the law itself, which the Jews (z) magnify,
and cry up as the light, saying, there is no light but the law; and in
opposition to all false lights, as priests, diviners, and soothsayers
among the Gentiles, Scribes, and Pharisees, and the learned Rabbins
among the Jews, so much boasted of as the lights of the world; and to
all false Christs and prophets that have risen, or shall rise, in the
world,

Which lighteth every man that cometh into the world: the sense is,
either that every man that is enlightened in a spiritual manner, is
enlightened by him, which is true of Christ, as the Son of God, existing
from the beginning; but not in the Socinian sense, as if they were
enlightened by his human ministry and example; for the Old Testament
saints were not enlightened by his preaching; and many were enlightened
by the ministry of John the Baptist; and multitudes afterwards, through
the ministry of the apostles; and very few, comparatively, were
enlightened under the ministry of Christ; and none we read of, in this
sense, enlightened by him, when, and as soon as they came into, the
world: or, the meaning is, that he is that light which lighteth all
sorts of men; which is true in, a spiritual sense: some connect the
phrase, "that cometh into the world", not with "every man", but with the
"true light"; and the Arabic version so reads, and joins it to the
following verse; but this reading is not so natural and the order of the
words requires the common reading; nor is the difficulty removed hereby;
for still it is every man that is enlightened: it is best therefore to
understand these words of the light of nature, and reason, which Christ,
as the word, and Creator and light of men, gives to every man that is
born into the world; and which serves to detect the Quakers' notion of
the light within, which every man has, and is no other than the light of
a natural conscience; and shows how much men, even natural men, are
obliged to Christ, and how great a person he is, and how deserving of
praise, honour, and glory. The phrase, "every man that cometh into the
world", is Jewish, and often to be met with in Rabbinical writings, and
signifies all men that are born into the world; the instances are almost
innumerable; take one or two: on those words in [Job
25:3](../../../bib/kjv/job025.htm#003.md) on whom doth not his light arise?
it is asked (a), who is he that cometh,

, "of all that come into the world"; and says, the sun hath not
lightened me by day, nor hath the moon lightened me by night! thou
enlightenest those above, and those below, and "all that come into the
world".

Again, God is introduced thus speaking (b):

"I am the God, , "of all that come into the world"; and I have not
united my name, but to the people of Israel.

Once more (c),

"Moses, our master, from the mouth of power, (i.e. God; see [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064)..md) commanded to oblige, , "all
that come into the world", to receive the commandments which were
commanded the sons of Noah.

\(z\) T. Bava Bathra, fol. 4. 1. (a) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 31. fol. 171.
4. (b) Midrash Ruth, c. l. v. 1. fol. 27. 3. (c) Maimon. Hilch. Melakim.
c. 8. sect. 10. Vid. Misn. Roshhashana, c. l. sect. 2. T. Hieros.
Sanhedrin, fol. 25. 4. & 26. 3. Sepher Bahir apud Zohar in Gen. fol. 30.
3. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 21. 2. & 22. 3. & 24. 3. & 27. 2. Caphter, fol.
56. 1. Jarchi in Exod. 15. 2.

[John 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">joh 1:10</span></span>

He was in the world,.... This is to be understood, not of his
incarnation; for the word was denotes past existence in the world, even
all the time past from the creation of the world; and the world intends
the world in general, as opposed to Judea, and the people of the Jews in
the next verse; besides, the incarnation of the word is spoken of in
[Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md) as a new and distinct thing
from this: but of his being in the world, when first made, and since, by
his essence, by which he fills the whole world; and by his power,
upholding and preserving it; and by his providence, ordering and
managing all the affairs of it, and influencing and governing all things
in it: he was in it as the light and life of it, giving natural life and
light to creatures in it, and filling it, and them, with various
blessings of goodness; and he was in the promise and type before, as
well as after the Jews were distinguished from other nations, as his
peculiar people; and he was frequently visible in the world, in an human
form, before his incarnation, as in Eden's garden to our first parents,
to Abraham, Jacob, Manoah, and his wife, and others,

And the world was made by him: so Philo the Jew often ascribes the
making of the world to the Logos, or word, as before observed on [Joh
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#003.md) and this regards the whole
universe, and all created beings in it, and therefore cannot design the
new creation: besides, if all men in the world were anew created by
Christ, they would know him; for a considerable branch of the new
creation lies in knowledge; whereas, in the very next clause, it is
asserted, that the world knew him not; and they would also love him, and
obey him, which the generality of the world do not; they would appear to
be in him, and so not be condemned by him, as multitudes will. To
understand this of the old creation, best suits the context, and proves
the deity of Christ, and his pre-existence, as the word, and Son of God,
to his incarnation,

And the world knew him not; that is, the inhabitants of the world knew
him not as their Creator: nor did they acknowledge the mercies they
received from him; nor did they worship, serve, and obey him, or love
and fear him; nor did they, the greater part of them, know him as the
Messiah, Mediator, Saviour, and Redeemer. There was, at first, a general
knowledge of Christ throughout the world among all the sons of Adam,
after the first promise of him, and which, for a while, continued; but
this, in process of time, being neglected and slighted, it was forgot,
and utterly lost, as to the greater part of mankind; for the Gentiles,
for many hundreds of years, as they knew not the true God, so they were
without Christ, without any notion of the Messiah; and this their
ignorance, as it was first their sin, became their punishment.

[John 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">joh 1:11</span></span>

He came unto his own,.... Not all the world, who are his own by right of
creation; for these, his own, are opposed to the world, and
distinguished from them; and his coming to them designs some particular
favour, which is not vouchsafed to all: nor yet are the elect of God
intended; though they are Christ's own, in a very special sense; they
are his by his own choice, by his Father's gift, by his own purchase,
and through the conquest of his grace, and are the objects of his
special love; and for their sake he came in the flesh, and to them he
comes in a spiritual way, and to them will he appear a second time at
the last day unto salvation: but they cannot be meant, because when he
comes to them they receive him; whereas these did not, as the next
clause affirms: but by his own are meant the whole body of the Jewish
nation; so called, because they were chosen by the Lord above all
people; had distinguishing favours bestowed upon them, as the adoption,
the covenants, the promises, the giving of the law, and the service of
God; and had the Shekinah, and the symbol of the divine presence in a
remarkable manner among them; and the promise of the Messiah was in a
particular manner made to them; and indeed, he was to be born of them,
so that they were his kindred, his people, and his own nation: and this
his coming to them is to be understood not of his incarnation; though
when he came in the flesh, as he came of them, so he came to them,
particularly being sent to the lost sheep of the house of Israel, and
was rejected by them as the Messiah; yet his incarnation is afterwards
spoken of in [Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md) as a new and
distinct thing from this; and to understand it of some coming of his
before his incarnation, best suits with the context, and the design of
the evangelist. Now Christ, the word, came to the Jews before his
incarnation, not only in types, personal and real, and in promises and
prophecies, and in the word and ordinances, but in person; as to Moses
in the bush, and gave orders to deliver the children of Israel out of
Egypt: he came and redeemed them himself with a mighty hand, and a
outstretched arm; in his love and pity he led them through the Red Sea
as on dry ground; and through the wilderness in a pillar of cloud by
day, and a pillar of fire by night; and he appeared to them at Mount
Sinai, who gave unto them the lively oracles of God:

and his own received him not; they did not believe in him, nor obey his
voice; they rebelled against him, and tempted him often, particularly at
Massah and Meribah; they provoked trim to anger, and vexed, and grieved
his holy Spirit, as they afterwards slighted and despised his Gospel by
the prophets. Of this nonreception of the word by the Jews, and their
punishment for it, the Targumist on [Hos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/hos009.htm#017.md) thus speaks:

"my God will remove them far away, because, , "they receive not his
word"; and they shall wander among the people.

And so they treated this same "Logos", or word of God, when he was made
flesh, and dwelt among them. Somewhat remarkable is the following
discourse of some Jews among themselves (e):

"when the word of God comes, who is his messenger, we shall honour him.
Says R. Saul, did not the prophets come, and we slew them, and shed
their blood? (compare this with [Mat
23:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#030)..md) how therefore now, , "shall we
receive his word?" or wherefore shall we believe? Says R. Samuel, the
Levite, to him, because he will heal them, and deliver them from their
destructions; and because of these signs we shall believe him, and
honour him.

But they did not,

\(e\) Ben Arama in Gen. xlvii. 4. apud Galatin. de Arcan. Cathol. Ver.
l. 3. c. 5,

[John 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">joh 1:12</span></span>

But as many as received him,.... This is explained, in the latter part
of the text, by believing in his name; for faith is a receiving him as
the word, and Son of God, as the Messiah, Saviour, and Redeemer; a
receiving grace out of his fulness, and every blessing from him, as a
justifying righteousness, pardon of sin, and an inheritance among them
that are sanctified; for though the generality rejected him, there were
some few that received him:

to them gave he power to become the sons of God; as such were very early
called, in distinction from the children of men, or of the world; see
[Gen 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002.md). To be the sons of God is a
very special favour, a great blessing, and high honour: saints indeed
are not in so high a sense the sons of God as Christ is; nor in so low a
sense as angels and men in common are; nor in such sense as civil
magistrates; nor merely by profession of religion; much less by natural
descent; but by adopting grace: and in this, Christ, the word, has a
concern, as all the three divine persons have. The Father predestinated
men to the adoption of children, secures this blessing for them in the
covenant of his grace, and puts them among the children, and assigns
them a goodly heritage: the Spirit, and who is therefore called the
spirit of adoption, discovers and applies this blessing to them, and
witnesses to their spirits that they are the children of God: and
Christ, the word, or Son of God, not only espoused their persons, and in
time assumed their nature, and by the redemption of them opened a way
for their reception of the adoption of children; but actually bestows
upon them the "power", as it is here called, of becoming the sons of
God: by which is meant, not a power of free will to make themselves the
sons of God, if they will make use of it; but it signifies the honour
and dignity conferred on such persons: so Nonnus calls it, "the heavenly
honour"; as indeed, what can be a greater? It is more honourable than to
be a son or daughter of the greatest potentate on earth: and it is
expressive of its being a privilege; for so it is an undeserved and
distinguishing one, and is attended with many other privileges; for such
are of God's household and family, and are provided for by him; have
liberty of access unto him; are Christ's free men, and are heirs to an
incorruptible inheritance. This is a privilege that excels all others,
even justification and remission of sins; and is an everlasting one: and
it also intends the open right which believers have unto this privilege,
and their claim of it: hence it follows,

even to them that believe in his name; that is, in himself, in Christ,
the word: the phrase is explanative of the former part of the verse, and
is a descriptive and manifestative character of the sons of God; for
though the elect of God, by virtue of electing grace, and the covenant
of grace, are the children of God before faith; and were so considered
in the gift of them to Christ, and when he came into the world to gather
them together, and save them; and so, antecedent to the Spirit of God,
being sent down into their hearts, to make this known to them; yet no
man can know his adoption, nor enjoy the comfort of it, or claim his
interest in it, until he believes.

[John 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">joh 1:13</span></span>

Which were born not of blood,.... Or bloods, in the plural number. The
birth, here spoken of, is regeneration, expressed by a being born again,
or from above; by a being quickened by the Spirit and grace of God; by
Christ being formed in men; and by a partaking of the divine nature; and
by being made new creatures, as all that believe in the name of Christ
are; and which is the evidence of their being the sons of God: and now
this is owing not to blood, or bloods; not to the blood of circumcision;
or of the passover, which the Jews had an high opinion of, and ascribe
life and salvation to, and to which notion this may be opposed: so their
commentators (f) on [Eze 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#006.md) where
the word "live" is twice used, observe on the first "live", by the blood
of the passover, on the second "live", by the blood of circumcision;
but, alas! these contribute nothing to the life of the new creature: nor
is regeneration owing to the blood of ancestors, to natural descent, as
from Abraham, which the Jews valued themselves upon; for sin, and not
grace, is conveyed by natural generation: all men are of one blood, and
that is tainted with sin, and therefore can never have any influence on
regeneration; no blood is to be valued, or any one upon it, but the
blood of Christ, which cleanses from all sin,

Nor of the will of the flesh; man's free will, which is carnal and
corrupt, is enmity to God, and impotent to every thing that is
spiritually good: regeneration is ascribed to another will and power,
even to the will and power of God, and denied of this:

nor of the will of man: of the best of men, as Abraham, David, and
others; who, though ever so willing and desirous, that their children,
relations, friends, and servants, should be born again, be partakers of
the grace of God, and live in his sight, yet cannot effect any thing of
this kind: all that they can do is to pray for them, give advice, and
bring them under the means of grace; but all is ineffectual without a
divine energy. So with the Jews, "a man", signifies a great man, in
opposition to "Adam", or "Enosh", which signify a mean, weak, frail man;
and our translators have observed this distinction, in [Isa
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#009) and the mean man (Adam.md) boweth
down, and the great man (Ish) "humbleth himself": on which Jarchi has
this note, "Adam boweth down", i.e. little men; "and a man humbleth
himself", i.e. princes, and mighty men, men of power: and so Kimchi on
[Psa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#002.md). "O ye sons of men",
observes, that the Psalmist calls them the sons of men, with respect to
the great men of Israel; for there were with Absalom the sons of great
men. Though sometimes the Jews say (g), Adam is greater than any of the
names of men, as Geber, Enosh, Ish. But now our evangelist observes, let
a man be ever so great, or good, or eminent, for gifts and grace, he
cannot communicate grace to another, or to whom he will; none are born
again of any such will:

but of God; of God, the Father of Christ, who begets to a lively hope;
and of the Son, who quickens whom he will; and of the grace of the
Spirit, to whom regeneration is generally ascribed,

\(f\) Jarchi & Kimchi in loc. Shemot Rabba, sect. 19. fol. 103. 2. &
104. 4. & Mattanot Cehuna in Vajikra Rabba, sect. 23. fol. 164. 2. Zohar
in Lev. fol. 39. 2. (g) Zohar in Lev. fol. 20. 2.

[John 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">joh 1:14</span></span>

And the word was made flesh,.... The same word, of whom so many things
are said in the preceding verses; and is no other than the Son of God,
or second person in the Trinity; for neither the Father, nor the Holy
Ghost, were made flesh, as is here said of the word, but the Son only:
and "flesh" here signifies, not a part of the body, nor the whole body
only, but the whole human nature, consisting of a true body, and a
reasonable soul; and is so called, to denote the frailty of it, being
encompassed with infirmities, though not sinful; and to show, that it
was a real human nature, and not a phantom, or appearance, that he
assumed: and when he is said to be "made" flesh, this was not done by
the change of one nature into another, the divine into the human, or the
word into a man; but by the assumption of the human nature, the word,
taking it into personal union with himself; whereby the natures are not
altered; Christ remained what he was, and became what he was not; nor
are they confounded, and blended together, and so make a third nature;
nor are they separated, and divided, so as to constitute two persons, a
divine person, and an human person; but are so united as to be but one
person; and this is such an union, as can never be dissolved, and is the
foundation of the virtue and efficacy of all Christ's works and actions,
as Mediator:

and dwelt among us; or "tabernacled among us"; in allusion to the
tabernacle, which was a type of Christ's human nature: the model of the
tabernacle was of God, and not of man; it was coarse without, but full
of holy things within; here God dwelt, granted his presence, and his
glory was seen; here the sacrifices were brought, offered, and accepted.
So the human nature of Christ was of God's pitching, and not man's; and
though it looked mean without, the fulness of the Godhead dwelt in it,
as well as a fulness of grace and truth; in the face of Christ the glory
of God is seen, and through him, even the vail of his flesh, saints have
access unto him, and enjoy his presence; and by him their spiritual
sacrifices become acceptable to God: or this is observed, in allusion to
the feast of tabernacles, when the Jews dwelt in booths, in remembrance
of their manner of living in the wilderness: the feast of tabernacles
was typical of Christ, and of his tabernacling in our nature. Solomon's
temple, which was also a type of Christ, was dedicated at the time of
that feast; and it seems probable, that our Lord was born at that time;
for as he suffered at the time of the passover, which had respect unto
him, and the pouring forth of the Spirit was on the very day of
Pentecost, which that prefigured; so it is highly probable, that Christ
was born at the time of the feast of tabernacles, which pointed out his
dwelling among us; and is therefore very pertinently hinted at, when
mention is here made of his incarnation. However, reference is
manifestly had to the Shekinah, and the glory of it, in the tabernacle
and temple; and almost the very word is here used. The Targumists
sometimes speak of the Shekinah of the word dwelling among the
Israelites: so Onkelos in [Num 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#020.md)
where the Israelites are threatened with flesh, until they loath it;
because, says the paraphrast,

"ye have loathed "the word of the Lord", whose Shekinah dwelleth among
you.

Jonathan ben Uzziel, on the same place, expresses it thus,

"because ye have loathed the word of the Lord, the glory of whose
Shekinah dwelleth among you.

And it follows here,

and we beheld his glory; the glory of his divine nature, which is
essential to him, and underived, is equal to the Father's glory, is
transcendent to all creatures, and is ineffable, and incomprehensible;
some breakings forth of which there were in his incarnate state, and
which were observed by the evangelist, and his companions; who, in
various instances, saw plainly, that Christ was possessed of divine
perfections, such as omniscience, and omnipotence; since he knew the
thoughts of the heart, and could do the things he did: his Father
declared him to be his beloved Son; and the miracles he wrought, and the
doctrines he taught, manifested forth his glory; and not only there were
some beams of his glory at his transfiguration, which were seen by the
apostles, among which the Evangelist John was one, and to which he may
have here a particular reference; but even at his apprehension, and
death, and especially at his resurrection from the dead. The Jews speak
of the glory of the Messiah to be seen in the world to come. They say
(h),

"If a man is worthy of the world to come, (i.e. the times of the
Messiah,) he shall "see the glory" of the King Messiah.

And of Moses, they say (i),

"there was (or will be) no generation like that in which he lived, until
the generation in which the King Messiah comes, which shall "behold the
glory" of the holy, blessed God, as he.

This our evangelist, and the other disciples of Christ have seen:

the glory, as of the only begotten of the Father; a glory becoming him,
suitable to him as such; the very real glory of the Son of God; for the
"as", here, is not a note of similitude, but of certainty, as in [Mat
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#005.md) and the word is here called, "the
only begotten of the Father"; which cannot be said of Christ, as man;
for as such, he was not "begotten" at all: nor on the account of his
resurrection from the dead; for so he could not be called the "only
begotten", since there are others that have been, and millions that will
be raised from the dead, besides him: nor by reason of adoption; for if
adopted, then not begotten; these two are inconsistent; besides, he
could not be called the only begotten, in this sense, because there are
many adopted sons, even all the elect of God: nor by virtue of his
office, as magistrates are called the sons of God; for then he would be
so only in a figurative and metaphorical sense, and not properly;
whereas he is called God's own Son, the Son of the same nature with him;
and, as here, the only begotten of the Father, begotten by him in the
same nature, in a way inconceivable and inexpressible by us:

full of grace and truth; that is, he dwelt among men, and appeared to
have a fulness of each of these: for this clause is not to be joined
with the glory of the only begotten, as if this was a branch of that;
but regards him as incarnate, and in his office, as Mediator; who, as
such, was full of "grace"; the Spirit, and the gifts of the Spirit; of
all the blessings of grace, of justifying, pardoning, adopting,
sanctifying, and persevering grace; of all the promises of grace; of all
light, life, strength, comfort, peace, and joy: and also of truth, of
all Gospel truths; and as he had the truth, the sum, and substance of
all the types and prophecies concerning him in him; and as he fulfilled
all his own engagements, and his Father's promises; and as possessed of
sincerity towards men, and faithfulness and integrity to God,

\(h\) Gloss. in T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 58. 1. (i) Zohar in Lev. fol. 9.
4.

[John 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">joh 1:15</span></span>

John bare witness of him,.... Which was his office and business, for
which purpose he was sent, [Joh 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006.md).

and cried; this agrees with his work and office, according to the
prophecy of him in [Isa 40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md) and with
the time of his ministry, the year of jubilee; and with the nature of
his ministry, which was clear, open, and public; and performed with
vigour, and in a powerful manner, with much assurance and certainty,
with boldness and intrepidity, and with great zeal and fervency, and in
an evangelical way; for it was such a cry as debased the creature, and
exalted Christ:

this was he, of whom I spake; when he first entered upon his ministry
and baptism, before he saw Christ, or baptized him; see [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md).

he that cometh after me; for Christ came into the world after John; he
was born six months after him; he came after him to be baptized by him,
and attended on his ministry; and came later into the public ministry
than he did,

is preferred before me; by God, the Father, in setting him up as
Mediator; constituting him the head of the church; causing a fulness of
grace to dwell in him; appointing him the Saviour of his people; and
ordaining him judge of quick and dead. And by the prophets, who spake
much of him, and sparingly of John; and of him as the Messiah and
Saviour, and of John only as his harbinger: and by John himself, who
represents him as coming from above, and as above all; and himself as of
the earth, earthly: and by all Gospel ministers, and every true
believer; and good reason there is for it:

for he was before me; which cannot be meant of honour and dignity; for
this is expressed before; and it would be proving one thing by the same:
nor of his birth, as man; for John in that sense was before him, being
born before him; besides, being born before another, is no proof of
superior worth; others were born before John, whom he yet excelled: but
of his eternal existence, as the word, and Son of God, who was before
John, or any of the prophets; before Abraham, and Noah, and Adam, or any
creature whatever: the Arabic and Persic versions read, "for he was more
ancient than me"; being from everlasting, from the beginning, or ever
the earth was.

[John 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">joh 1:16</span></span>

And of his fulness have all we received,.... These are the words not of
John the Baptist; but of the evangelist carrying on his account of
Christ, after he had inserted the testimony of the Baptist, in
connection with [Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014.md) where he is
said to be full of grace and truth; and which fulness is here intended;
for the fulness of the Godhead in trim is incommunicable; and the
fulness of his fitness, and ability for his office, as Mediator, was for
himself; but his fulness of grace and truth is dispensatory, and is in
him, on purpose to be communicated unto others: and "of it", the
evangelist says, "have all we received"; not all mankind, though they
all receive natural light and life from trim; nor merely all the
prophets of the Old Testament, though they had their gifts and grace
from him, who then was, as now, the head of the church; nor only all the
apostles of Christ, though these may be principally intended; but all
believers, who, though they have not all the same measure of grace, nor
the same gifts, yet all have received something: nor is there any reason
for discouragement, envy, or reproach. Faith is the hand which receives
Christ, and grace from him; and the act of receiving, being expressed in
the past tense, seems to regard first conversion, when faith is first
wrought, and along with it abundance of grace is received; for a
believer has nothing but what is given him, and what he has, is in a way
of receiving; so that there is no room for boasting, but great reason
for thankfulness, and much encouragement to apply to Christ for more
grace, which is the thing received, as follows:

and grace for grace: according to the different senses of the
preposition different interpretations are given of this passage; as that
signifies a substitution of a person, or thing, in the room of another,
the sense is thought to be, the Gospel, instead of the law; or the grace
of the present dispensation, instead of the grace of the former
dispensation; grace, different from the former grace, as Nonnus
expresses it. If it designs the original, and moving cause, the meaning
is, grace is for the sake of grace; for there is no other cause of
electing, justifying, pardoning, adopting, and regenerating grace, and
even eternal life, but the grace, or free favour of God; and the one is
the reason why the other is received: if it signifies the end, or final
cause, then it is explained in this way; the disciples received the
grace of apostleship, or gift, of grace, in order to preach the Gospel
of the grace of God, and for the implanting and increasing grace in men;
and grace also, in this life, is received, in order to the perfection of
grace, or glory, in the other: if it denotes the measure and proportion
of a thing, as one thing is answerable to another, then if may be
interpreted after this manner; the saints receive grace from the fulness
of Christ, according, or answerable to the grace that is in him; or
according to the measure of the gift of Christ, and in proportion to the
place, station, and office they bear in the church. Some think the
phrase only designs the freeness of grace, and the free and liberal
manner in which it is distributed, and received; along with which, I
also think, the abundance of it, at first conversion, with all after
supplies, is intended; and that grace for grace, is the same with grace
upon grace, heaps of grace; and that the phraseology is the same with
this Jewish one (k), , "goodness upon that goodness", an additional
goodness; so here, grace upon grace, an abundance of it, an addition to
it, and an increase of it: so (l), joy upon joy, is an abundance of joy,
a large measure of it; and "holiness upon holiness" (m), abundance of
it,

\(k\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 45. 1. (l) lb. in Lev. fol. 28. 1. & in Num.
fol. 69. 2. & 71. 2. (m) lb. fol. 40. 3. & in Num. fol. 61. 1.

[John 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">joh 1:17</span></span>

For the law was given by Moses,.... Both moral and ceremonial. The moral
law was given to Adam, in innocence, which having been broken, and
almost lost out of the minds, and memories of men, was given by Moses,
in a new edition of it in writing; and points out what is man's duty
both to God and men; discovers sin, accuses of it, convicts of it, and
condemns for it; nor could it give strength to perform its demands; nor
does it give the least hint of forgiveness; nor will it admit of
repentance: and hence is opposed to grace; though it was a benefit to
men, being in its own nature good and useful in its effects. The
ceremonial law pointed out the pollution of human nature, the guilt and
punishment of sin; was a type and shadow of deliverance by Christ, but
could not give the grace it shadowed, and therefore is opposed both to
grace and truth. Now both these were given by Moses to the people of the
Jews, not as the maker, but the minister of them: it was God who
appointed each of these laws, and ordained them in the hand of the
mediator Moses, who received them from him, by the disposition of
angels, and delivered them to the people of Israel; and a very high
office this was he was put into, and a very great honour was conferred
upon him; but Jesus Christ is a far greater person, and in an higher
office:

but grace and truth came by Jesus Christ: by grace and truth, is meant
the Gospel, in opposition to the law; which is called grace, because it
is a declaration of the love, and grace, of God to men; it ascribes
salvation, in all the parts of it, to the free grace and favour of God;
and is the means of implanting and increasing grace in the hearts of
men. And "truth", not only because it contains truth, and nothing but
truth, it coming from the God of truth; and the substance of it being
Christ, who is the truth; and being revealed, applied, and led into by
the Spirit of truth; but because it is the truth of the types, and the
substance of the shadows of the law: or these two may mean distinct
things; grace may design all the blessings of grace which are in Christ,
and come by him; and truth, the promises, and the fulfilment of them,
which are all yea, and amen, in Christ: and when these are said to be by
him, the meaning is, not that they are by him, as an instrument, but as
the author of them; for Christ is the author of the Gospel, and the
fulfiller of the promises, and the giver of all grace; which shows the
superior excellency of Christ to Moses, and to all men, and even to
angels also.

[John 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">joh 1:18</span></span>

No man hath seen God at any time,.... That is, God the Father, whose
voice was never heard, nor his shape seen by angels or men; for though
Jacob, Moses, the elders of Israel, Manoah, and his wife, are said to
see God, and Job expected to see him with his bodily eyes, and the
saints will see him as he is, in which will lie their great happiness;
yet all seems to be understood of the second person, who frequently
appeared to the Old Testament saints, in an human form, and will be seen
by the saints in heaven, in his real human nature; or of God in and by
him: for the essence of God is invisible, and not to be seen with the
eyes of the body; nor indeed with the eyes of the understanding, so as
to comprehend it; nor immediately, but through, and by certain means:
God is seen in the works of creation and providence, in the promises,
and in his ordinances; but above all, in Christ the brightness of his
glory, and the express image of his person: this may chiefly intend
here, man's not knowing any thing of God in a spiritual and saving way,
but in and by Christ; since it follows,

the only begotten Son; the word that was with God in the beginning. The
Jerusalem Targum on [Gen 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#022.md) says
almost the same of the word of the Lord, as here, where it introduces
him saying,

"the word of the Lord God said, lo, the man whom I created, the only one
in my world, even as I am, "the only one", (or, as the word is sometimes
rendered, "the only begotten",) in the highest heavens.

And to the same purpose the Targum of Jonathan, and also Jarchi, on the
same place. The Syriac version here renders it, "the only begotten, God
which is in the bosom of the Father"; clearly showing, that he is the
only begotten, as he is God: the phrase,

which is in the bosom of the Father, denotes unity of nature, and
essence, in the Father and Son; their distinct personality; strong love,
and affection between them; the Son's acquaintance with his Father's
secrets; his being at that time, as the Son of God, in the bosom of his
Father, when here on earth, as the son of man; and which qualified him
to make the declaration of him:

he hath declared him. The Persic and Ethiopic versions further add, "to
us"; he has clearly and fully declared his nature, perfections,
purposes, promises, counsels, covenant, word, and works; his thoughts
and schemes of grace; his love and favour to the sons of men; his mind
and will concerning the salvation of his people: he has made, and
delivered a fuller revelation of these things, than ever was yet; and to
which no other revelation in the present state of things will be added.
Somewhat like this the Jews (n) say of the Messiah,

"there is none that can declare the name of his Father, and that knows
him; but this is hid from the eyes of the multitude, until he comes,
"and he shall declare him".

He is come, and has declared him: so Philo speaks of the "Logos", or
word, as the interpreter of the mind of God, and a teacher of men (o),

\(n\) R. Moses Haddarsan in Psal. 85. 11. apud Galatin. de Arcan,
Cathol. ver. l. 8. c. 2. (o) De nominum mutat. p. 1047.

[John 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">joh 1:19</span></span>

And this is the record of John,.... The evangelist proceeds to give a
large, and full account of the testimony John the Baptist bore to
Christ, which he had hinted at before, and had signified was his work,
and office, and the end of his being sent,

When the Jews sent priests and Levites from Jerusalem, to ask him, who
art thou? The Jews that sent were the great sanhedrim that sat at
Jerusalem, whose business it was to inquire into, examine, and try
prophets, whether true or false (p); and John appearing as a prophet,
and being so esteemed by the people, they deputed messengers to him to
interrogate him, and know who he was. The persons sent were very likely
of their own body, since priests and Levites were in that council. For
it is said (q),

"they do not constitute, or appoint in the sanhedrim but priests,
Levites, and Israelites, who have their genealogies---and it is
commanded, that there should be in the great sanhedrim priests and
Levites, as it is said, [Deu 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#009.md) "and
thou shalt come unto the priests, the Levites", &c. and if they are not
to be found, though they are all Israelites, (not of the tribe of Levi,)
it is right.

Such a sanhedrim is a lawful one; but priests and Levites, if such could
be found, that had proper qualifications, were to be admitted in the
first place. A message from so august an assembly, at so great a
distance, (for Jordan was a day's journey distant from Jerusalem (r);
according to Josephus (s), it was 210 furlongs, or 26 miles and a
quarter,) and by the hands of persons of such character and figure, was
doing John a great deal of honour, and serves to make his testimony of
Christ the more public and remarkable; and it also shows what a noise
John's ministry and baptism made among the Jews, that it even reached
Jerusalem, and the great council of the nation; and likewise the
question put to him, which by John's answer seems to intimate as if it
was thought he was the Messiah, shows the opinion that was entertained
of him, and even the sanhedrim might not be without thoughts this way:
and the question they put by their messengers might not be, as some have
thought, to ensnare John, nor out of disrespect to Jesus, who, as yet,
was not made manifest; but might be in good earnest, having, from many
circumstances, reason to think there might be something in the people's
opinion of him; since, though the government was not wholly departed
from Judah, yet they could not but observe it was going away apace, an
Idumean having been upon the throne for some years, placed there by the
Roman senate; and now the government was divided among his sons by the
same order; Daniel's weeks they could not but see were just
accomplishing; and besides, from the uncommon appearance John made, the
austerity of his life; the doctrine of remission of sins he preached,
and the new ordinance of baptism he administered, they might be ready to
conclude he was the person,

\(p\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 1. sect. 5. (q) Maimon. Hilch. Sanhedrin, c.
2. sect. 1, 2. (r) Misna Maaser Sheni, c. 5. sect. 2. Juchasin, fol. 65.
2. Jarchi in Isa. xxiv. 16. (s) De Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 4.

[John 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">joh 1:20</span></span>

And he confessed, and denied not,.... He freely, and without any
reserve, declared, and in the plainest and strongest terms professed to
the messengers before all the people, that he was not the Messiah; nor
did he retract his confession, or draw in his words again, or drop any
thing that looked doubtful or suspicious,

but confessed, I am not the Christ: he stood to it, and insisted on it,
that he was not that illustrious person; nor had they any reason to
entertain such an opinion of him; nor would he have them do so; they
might assure themselves he was not Christ.

[John 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">joh 1:21</span></span>

And they asked him, what then? art thou Elias?.... Elijah, the prophet;
the Tishbite, as Nonnus in his paraphrase expresses it; who was
translated, soul and body, to heaven: the Jews had a notion that that
prophet would come in person a little before the coming of the Messiah;
See Gill on [Mat 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#010.md) wherefore these
messengers inquire, that since he had so fully satisfied them that he
was not the Messiah, that he would as ingenuously answer to this
question, if he was Elias, or not:

and he saith, I am not; that is, he was not Elijah the prophet that
lived in Ahab's time, and was called the Tishbite; for John's answer is
to the intention of their question, and their own meaning in it, and is
no contradiction to what Christ says of him, [Mat
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014.md) that he was the Elias that was
to come; for he was the person meant by him in [Mal
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005.md) though not in the sense the Jews
understood it; nor is it any contradiction to what the angel said to
Zacharias, [Luk 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#017.md) for he does not
say that John should come in the body, but in the power and spirit of
Elias; See Gill on [Mat 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#014.md).

Art thou that prophet? Jeremiah, whom some of the Jews (t) have thought
to be the prophet Moses spoke of, in [Deu
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015.md) and expected that he would
appear about the times of the Messiah; see [Mat
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#014.md) or any one of the ancient
prophets risen from the dead, which they also had a notion of, [Luk
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#008.md) or, as it may be rendered, "art
thou a prophet?" for prophecy had long ceased with them:

and he answered, no; he was not Jeremiah, nor any one of the old
prophets risen from the dead, nor a prophet in the sense they meant: he
was not like one of the prophets of the Old Testament; he was a prophet,
and more than a prophet, as Christ says, [Mat
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#009.md) yet not such a prophet as they
were; his prophesying lay not so much in predicting future events, as in
pointing out Christ, and preaching the doctrine of the remission of sins
by him,

\(t\) Baal Hatturim in Deut. xviii. 15. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 127. 4. &
143. 4. Siphre in Jarchi in Jer. i. 5.

[John 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">joh 1:22</span></span>

Then said they unto him, who art thou?.... Since, as yet, he had only
answered in negatives, who he was not, that he was not the Christ, nor
Elias, nor that prophet; they desire he would give them a positive
account who he was:

that we may give answer to them that sent us; that their labour might
not be in vain; that they might not come so far for nothing, without
knowing who he was; and that they might be capable of giving an account
of him to the sanhedrim:

what sayest thou of thyself? they insisted on it, that he would openly,
and honestly declare who he was, and what was his office and business;
that from his own mouth, and not from the opinion and conjectures of
others, they might represent him in a true light to those who had
deputed them on this errand.

[John 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">joh 1:23</span></span>

And he said, I am the voice of one crying in the wilderness,.... These
words are cited by the other evangelists, and applied to John the
Baptist; but then they are only to be considered as their citation, and
as an application of them to him by them: but here they are used by John
himself, who both expresses them, and interprets them of himself; and in
which he was undoubtedly under the infallible direction of the blessed
Spirit; and which confirms the sense of the evangelists, who apply the
words to him. The Jews give a different interpretation of the words;
though one of their celebrated commentators (u) owns, that the comforts
spoken of in the preceding verses are what will be in the days of the
King Messiah: one of them (w) interprets, "the voice", of the Holy
Ghost; and so far it may be true, as John was filled with the Holy
Ghost, and he spake by him in his ministry: and another (x), of the
resurrection of the dead, or the voice that will be heard then, which
will be the voice of the archangel: though another of (y) them better
explains it by, , "they are they that bring glad tidings", or good news;
such are Gospel preachers; only it should have been in the singular
number: for the text speaks but of one voice; of one person crying; and
of John the Baptist, who brought the good news, and glad tidings, that
the Messiah was coming, yea, that he was already come, and that the
kingdom of heaven was at hand. The Hebrew writers generally understand
the passage, of the return of the Jews from the Babylonish captivity,
and of removing all obstructions in their way to Jerusalem; to which
sense the Targum on the place inclines, which paraphrases it thus,

"the voice of him that crieth in the wilderness, prepare the way before
the people of the Lord, make in the plain, paths before the congregation
of our God:

but not the people of the Lord, but the Lord himself, and not the
congregation of God, but God himself is intended; whose ways were to be
prepared, and made plain, even the King Messiah; which was to be done,
and was done by his forerunner John the Baptist, who, with great
modesty, expresses himself in the language of this Scripture, as being a
prophecy of him: he was a "voice", but not a mere voice; nor was his
ministry a mere voice of words, as the law was, but it was the sweet
voice of the Gospel, proclaiming the coming of the Messiah; encouraging
men to believe in him; calling them to evangelical repentance, and
publishing remission of sins in the name of Christ, and pointing him out
as the Lamb of God, which takes away the sin of the world: this voice
was "crying"; it was not a still small voice, it was a very loud one;
John lifted up his voice like a trumpet; he delivered himself with great
zeal and fervency; and it was "in the wilderness" where this voice was
heard, in the wilderness of Judea, as in [Mat
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#001.md) where Jesus came preaching; the
Ethiopic version renders the words, "I am the voice of one that goes
about in the wilderness"; that is, in the several towns and villages
which were in the wilderness, to whom John went and preached the Gospel:
the Persic version reads, "I am the voice and cry which cometh out of
the wilderness"; referring to the place where he was before he entered
on his public ministry, and from whence he came; for he was in the
deserts till the day of his showing unto Israel, [Luk
1:80](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#080.md). The words this voice cried were,

make straight the way of the Lord; he called upon persons to reform
their ways, and walk in the way of the Lord, to repent of their sins,
believe in Christ, and submit to the ordinance of baptism: the Ethiopic
version reads, "the way of God"; and such was the person he came to
prepare the way for, even the Son of God, and who is truly and properly
God,

as said the prophet Esaias, in [Isa
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#003.md).

\(u\) Kimchi in Isa. xl. 1. (w) Jarchi in Isa xl. 3. (x) Zohar in Gen.
fol. 70. 4. (y) Aben Ezra in Isa. ib.

[John 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">joh 1:24</span></span>

And they which were sent were of the Pharisees. Who were the straitest
sect of religion among the Jews; were very zealous of the traditions of
the elders, and professed an expectation of the Messiah; and were famous
in the nation for their knowledge and learning, as well as for their
devotion and sanctity: and many of them were in the sanhedrim, as
appears from [Joh 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#001.md); see Gill on
[Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md).

[John 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">joh 1:25</span></span>

And they asked him, and said unto him,.... They put a question, by
saying to him,

why baptizest thou then, if thou be not that Christ, nor Elias, neither
that prophet? since he denied that he was the Messiah, or Elias that was
to come before the Messiah, according to the expectation of the Jews, or
that prophet, or a prophet, they demand by what authority he introduced
a new rite and ordinance among them, which they had never been used to;
for though there were divers washings or baptisms among them, enjoined
by the law of Moses in certain cases, and others which obtained by
tradition, as the immersion of themselves after they had been at market,
and of cups, pots, brazen vessels, and tables, yet nothing of this kind
that John administered: and as for the baptism of proselytes, it seems
to be of a later date than this, and had no manner of likeness to it.
The ordinance John administered was such, as they apprehended that no
one ought to practise, unless he was the Messiah, or his forerunner, or
some eminent prophet; they insist upon it therefore, that since he
denied he was either of these, that he would show his credentials, and
what commission he had from God to baptize; or they suggest he was
liable to be called to an account by their sanhedrim, and be condemned
as a false prophet, or an innovator in religious affairs. From hence it
appears, that the Jews expected that baptism would be administered in
the times of the Messiah, and his forerunner; but from whence they had
this notion, it is not easy to say, whether from [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001.md) as Grotius, or from [Eze
36:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze036.htm#025.md) as Lightfoot; nor do they speak
contemptibly of it, but rather consider it as a very solemn affair, to
be performed only by great personages: and this may teach modern ones to
think and speak more respectfully of this ordinance than they do, who
have given themselves great liberties, and have treated it with much
contempt and virulence; calling it by the names of uncleanness,
abomination, filthy water, and a devoting of persons to Satan (z):
likewise, it is clear from hence, that they expected that this ordinance
would be first administered by some person of very great note, either
some very famous prophet, as Elias, whom they looked for before the
coming of the Messiah, or else the Messiah himself, and not by a common
teacher, or any ordinary person; wherefore this rite, as performed by
John, could have no likeness with any thing that was in common use among
them: besides, it was expressly done in the name of the Messiah, [Act
19:5](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#005.md) therefore they conclude he, or
his forerunner, must be come; and that John must be one, or other of
them, otherwise, why did he administer it? and it is also evident from
hence, that no such practice had obtained before among them, or they
would not have been alarmed at it, as they were; nor would they have
troubled themselves to have sent after John, and inquire of him who he
was, that should practise in this manner,

\(z\) Vet. Nizzachon, p. 56, 62, 64, 70, 74, 77, 148, 191, 193.

[John 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">joh 1:26</span></span>

John answered them, saying, I baptize with water,.... Or in water, so
the Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental versions render it. The sense of
the answer is, that he indeed baptized persons in water, which was all
that he could do, or pretended to do; and he owned, that this was a new
rite, and that he was the administrator of a new ordinance; but he
suggests, as may be supplied from [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md) that there was one at hand, and
even now among them, that should baptize, and so it is read in one of
Stephens's copies here, in the Holy Ghost, and in fire; and it was by
his authority, by a commission he had received from him, that he
baptized in water; and that his speedy manifestation and appearance as
the Messiah, which would be confirmed by his power of baptizing in the
Holy Ghost, and by his ministry and miracles, would be a sufficient
vindication of his conduct, and support him in his administration of
water baptism:

but there standeth one among you; or "hath stood", as the Vulgate Latin
version renders it; referring, not to his being among them at twelve
years of age, but a few days ago when he came to John to be baptized,
and was baptized by him; for from [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md) it is plain he was not now, or
"today", as Nounus expresses it, standing in the midst of them. The
Ethiopic version renders it, there is one about to stand among you, as
he did the next day: though the meaning of the phrase may only be, that
he was then in being, and dwelt somewhere among them, and not that he
was personally present at that time:

whom ye know not; neither from whence he is, nor who he is, or what is
his work and office; neither the dignity of his person, nor the end of
his coming into the world, nor the nature of his business in it.

[John 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">joh 1:27</span></span>

He it is who coming after me,.... Both into the world, and into the
ministry of the word; for John was before Christ, in both these
respects, though greatly behind him in others, and therefore he adds,

is preferred before me: being not only of a more excellent nature, the
Son of God, and of an higher extract, the Lord from heaven; but in an
higher office, and having greater gifts, and the Spirit of God without
measure on him; and also being more followed by the people; for John
decreased, but he increased: or rather the words may be rendered, who
was before me; being the eternal Son of God, whose goings forth were of
old, from everlasting; who was set up from everlasting, from the
beginning, or ever the earth was; the firstborn, or first bringer forth
of every creature; and therefore must be before all things, which are
created by him; see Gill on [Joh 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md).

Whose shoes latchet I am not worthy to unloose; which was one of the
meanest services done by a servant to his master; see Gill on [Mat
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md).

[John 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">joh 1:28</span></span>

These things were done in Bethabara,.... That is, this testimony was
bore by John; and this discourse passed between him and the Pharisees,
at the place here mentioned; which was a passage over Jordan, where much
people walked to go on the other side,

beyond Jordan; and

where also John was baptizing; which brought a great concourse of people
together: so that this witness was bore in a very public manner, and
before a large number; and it is to this that Christ refers, in [Joh
1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033.md) for this was so well known, that
there was no hiding or denying it: the place where this conversation
passed, is in the Vulgate Latin, and all the eastern versions; and in
the Alexandrian copy, and many other copies, and so in Nonnus, called
Bethany; but as De Dieu observes, Bethany was not beyond Jordan, nor in
the wilderness of Judea, but near to Jerusalem, about two miles distant
from it; nor was it situated by waters convenient for baptizing, unless
they went to the brook Kidron, which indeed was not far from it; but it
is clear from the history, that John was not so near Jerusalem; nor did
that brook which might be forded over, continues the same learned
author, seem fit and proper enough, \`"mergendis baptizandorum
corporibus", for plunging the bodies of those that were to be baptized';
wherefore he rightly concludes, that either this reading is an error, or
there was another Bethany near Jordan: Bethabara signifies "the house of
passage", and is thought to be the place where the Israelites passed
over Jordan, to go into the land of Canaan, [Jos
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#016.md). And which, as it must be a very
convenient place for the administration of baptism by immersion, used by
John, so it was very significant of the use of this ordinance; which is,
as it were, the passage, or entrance, into the Gospel church state; for
persons ought first to be baptized, and then be admitted into a Gospel
church, according to the example of the primitive Christians, [Act
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#041.md) but whether there was a place of
this name, where the Israelites went over Jordan, is not certain; and if
there was, it does not seem so likely to be the place here designed,
since that was right over against Jericho; whereas this seems to be
rather further off, and over against Galilee: there were several
passages of Jordan, [Jdg 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#005.md). There
was a bridge over it, between the lake of Samochon and Gennesaret, now
called Jacob's bridge, where Jacob is supposed to have wrestled with the
angel, and to have met with his brother Esau; and there was another over
it at Chainmath, near Tiberias, and in other places: and it might be at
one of these passages, by which they went over into Galilee, that John
pitched upon to continue preaching and baptizing at; partly because of
the number of people that went over, to whom he had the opportunity of
preaching; and partly, for the sake of baptizing those who became proper
subjects of that ordinance through his ministry. Some have thought, that
this place is the same with Bethbarah, in [Jdg
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#024.md), which was either in the tribe of
Ephraim or of Manasseh, and not far from the parts where this place must
be, but was on this side Jordan; and so Beza says the words should be
rendered; and those who came to John at Jordan, are not said to pass
over that river: others are of opinion, that Bethabara is the same with
Betharabah, [Jos 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006.md), since this is
called Bethabara by the Septuagint, in [Jos
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#022.md). However, be it what place
soever, and wheresoever, it was no doubt very proper for John's purpose;
and therefore he chose it, and for a while continued at it: and here,
says Jerom (a).

"to this day many of the brethren, that is, of the number of believers,
desiring there to be born again, are baptized in the vital stream;

such veneration had they for the place where John first baptized: Origen
says (b), that in his time it was said, that Bethabara was showed by the
banks of Jordan, where they report John baptized,

\(a\) De Locis Hebraicis, fol. 89. L. (b) Comment in Joannemo, Tom. 8.
p. 131.

[John 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">joh 1:29</span></span>

The next day John seeth Jesus coming unto him,.... Not to be baptized,
for he had been baptized before by him. This seems to have been after
Christ had been forty days in the wilderness, from whence he now
returned, and came to attend on John's ministry; both to do honour to
him, and that he might be made manifest by him; and this was the day
after John had bore such a testimony concerning him, to the priests and
Levites; and which Christ the omniscient God, knew full well, and
therefore came at this season, when the minds of the people were
prepared by John's testimony, to expect and receive him: one part of the
work of Elias, which the Jews assign unto him, and the precise time of
his doing it, exactly agree with this account of John the Baptist; they
say (c), that his work is

â€œto bring to them (the Israelites) the good news of the coming of the
Redeemer; and this shall be, , "one day", before the coming of the,
Messiah; and this is that which is written, "behold I will send you
Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great and dreadful day of
the Lord". [Mal 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#005.md).

For John, the day before Christ Lord, came to him, had signified to the
priests and Levites, that the Messiah was already come; and now on the
day following, seeing him, pointed as with his finger to him,

and saith, behold the Lamb of God, which taketh away the sin of the
world: he calls him a "lamb", either with respect to any lamb in common,
for his harmlessness and innocence; for his meekness and humility; for
his patience; and for his usefulness, both for food and clothing, in a
spiritual sense; as well as for his being to be a sacrifice for the sins
of his people: or else with respect to the lambs that were offered in
sacrifice, under the legal dispensation; and that either to the passover
lamb, or rather to the lambs of the daily sacrifice, that were offered
morning and evening; since the account of them best agrees with what is
said of this Lamb of God, who was slain in type, in the morning of the
world, or from the foundation of the world; and actually in the evening
of the world, or in the end of it; and who has a continued virtue to
take away the sins of his people, from the beginning, to the end of the
world; and their sins, both of the day and night, or which are committed
every day: for as they are daily committed, there is need of the daily
application of the blood and sacrifice of Christ, to remove them; or of
continual looking unto him by faith, whose blood has a continual virtue,
to cleanse from all sin: the Jewish doctors say (d), that "the morning
daily sacrifice made atonement for the iniquities done in the night; and
the evening sacrifice made atonement for the iniquities that were by
day:

and in various things they were typical of Christ, as that they were
lambs of the first year, which may denote the weakness of the human
nature of Christ, which had all the sinless infirmities of it; they,
were also without spot, signifying the purity of Christ's human nature,
who was holy and harmless, a lamb without spot and blemish; these were
offered as a sacrifice, and for the children of Israel only, as Christ
has given himself an offering and a sacrifice to God, both in soul and
body, for the sins of the mystical Israel of God, the Israel whom God
has chosen for himself, whether Jews or Gentiles; for Christ is the
propitiation for the sins of both: and these were offered daily, morning
and evening; and though Christ was but once offered, otherwise he must
have often suffered; yet as he has by one offering put away sin for
ever, so there is a perpetual virtue in his sacrifice to take it away,
and there is a constant application of it for that purpose; to which may
be added, that these lambs were offered with fine flour, oil and wine,
for a sweet savour to the Lord; denoting the acceptableness of the
sacrifice of Christ to his Father, to whom it is for a sweet smelling
savour, [Eph 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002.md). And Christ is styled
the Lamb "of God", in allusion to the same, whom the Cabalistic Jews (e)
call the secret of the mystery, and , "the Lambs of God"; because God
has a special property in him; he is his own Son; and because he is of
his providing and appointing, as a sacrifice for sin, and is acceptable
to him as such; and to distinguish him from all other lambs; and to give
him the preference, since he does that which they could not do, "taketh
away the sin of the world": by the "sin of the world", is not meant the
sin, or sins of every individual person in the world; for some die in
their sins, and their sins go before hand to judgment, and they go into
everlasting punishment for them; which could not be, if Christ took them
away: rather, the sin which is common to the whole world, namely:
original sin; but then it must be observed, that this is not the only
sin Christ takes away; for he also takes away actual sins; and the
Arabic and Ethiopic versions read in the plural, "the sins of the
world"; and also that this he takes away, only with respect the elect;
wherefore they are the persons intended by the world, as in [Joh
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#033.md), whose sin, or sins, Christ takes
away: and a peculiar regard seems to be had to the elect among the
Gentiles, who are called the world, in distinction from the Jews, as in
[Joh 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#016.md), and the rather, since the
lambs of the daily sacrifice, to which the allusion is, were only
offered for the sins of the Jews: but John here signifies, that the Lamb
of God he pointed at, and which was the antitype of these lambs, not
only took away the sins of God's people among the Jews, but the sins of
such of them also as were among the Gentiles; and this seems to me to be
the true sense of the passage. The phrase "taking away sin", signifies a
taking it up, as Christ did; he took it voluntarily upon himself, and
became responsible to divine justice for it; and also a bearing and
carrying it, for taking it upon himself, he bore it in his own body on
the tree, and carried it away, as the scape goat did under the law; and
so likewise a taking it quite away: Christ has removed it as far as the
east is from the west, out of sight, so as never to be seen any more; he
has destroyed, abolished, and made an utter end of it: and this is
expressed in the present tense, "taketh away": to denote the continued
virtue of Christ's sacrifice to take away sin, and the constant efficacy
of his blood to cleanse from it, and the daily application of it to the
consciences of his people; and which is owing to the dignity of his
person, as the Son of God; and to his continual and powerful mediation
and intercession: this must be a great relief to minds afflicted with
the continual ebullitions of sin, which is taken away by the Lamb of
God, as fast as it rises; and who, for that purpose, are called to
"behold", and wonder at, the love and grace of Christ, in taking up,
bearing, and taking away sin; and to look to him by faith continually,
for everlasting salvation; and love him, and give him the honour of it,
and glorify him for it,

\(c\) R. Abraham ben David in Misn. Ediot, c. 8. sect. 7. (d) R.
Menachem, fol. 115. apud Ainsworth, in Exod. xxix. 39. (e) Raya Mehimna,
in Zohar in Lev. fol. 33. 2.

[John 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">joh 1:30</span></span>

This is he, of whom it is said,.... Either the day before, as in [Joh
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#027.md), or some time before that, [Joh
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md), when he first began to baptize,
even before Christ came to be baptized by him, and before he personally
knew him; see [Mat 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md).

After me cometh a man; not a mere man, but the man God's fellow: and
this is said, not because he was now a grown man, or to show the truth
of his human nature; but seems to be a common Hebraism, and is all one
as if it had been said, "after me cometh one", or a certain person: for
the sense of this phrase, and what follows; see Gill on [Joh
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#015.md).

[John 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">joh 1:31</span></span>

And I knew him not,.... "by sight", as Nonnus paraphrases it; personally
he had never seen him, nor had had any conversation and familiarity with
him; for though they were related to each other, yet lived at such a
distance, as not to know one another, or have a correspondence with each
other: John was in the deserts, until the day of his showing unto
Israel; and Christ dwelt with his parents at Nazareth, in a very mean
and obscure manner, till he came from thence to Jordan to John, to be
baptized by him; and which was the first interview they had: and this
was so ordered by providence, as also this is said by John, lest it
should be thought, that the testimony he bore to Jesus, and the high
commendation he gave of him, arose from the relation between them; or
from a confederacy and compact they had entered into:

but that he should be made manifest to Israel; who had been for many
years hid in Galilee, an obscure part of the world: and though he had
been known to Joseph and Mary, and to Zacharias and Elisabeth, and to
Simeon and Anna; yet he was not made manifest to the people of Israel in
common; nor did they know that the Messiah was come: but that he might
be known:

therefore am I come baptizing with water; or in water, as before: for by
administering this new ordinance, the people were naturally put upon
inquiry after the Messiah, whether come, and where he was, since such a
new rite was introduced; and besides, John, when he baptized any, he
exhorted them to believe on him, which should come after him, that is,
on Christ Jesus; and moreover, by Christ's coming to his baptism, he
came to have a personal knowledge of him himself, and so was capable of
pointing him out, and making him manifest to others, as he did.

[John 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">joh 1:32</span></span>

And John bare record,.... The same day that he said the above things,
and at the same time:

saying, I saw the Spirit; that is, of God, as is said in [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md) and which Nonnus here expresses;
and the Ethiopic version reads, "the Holy Ghost",

descending from heaven like a dove; at the time of his baptism; see Gill
on [Mat 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md).

And it abode upon him; for some time; so long as that John had a full
sight of it, and so was capable of giving a perfect account of it, and
bearing a certain and distinct testimony to it.

[John 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">joh 1:33</span></span>

And I knew him not,.... That is, before he came to be baptized by him;
when it was secretly suggested to him who he was, and the following
signal was given him, to confirm him in it:

but he that sent me to baptize with water; or "in water"; that is, God;
for John's mission was from God, as in [Joh
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#006.md), and his baptism from heaven; he
had a divine warrant and commission for what he did:

the same said unto me; either by an articulate voice, or by a divine
impulse on his mind, or by the revelation of the Spirit:

upon whom thou shalt see the Spirit descending and remaining on him, the
same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Ghost; that is, the Messiah;
See Gill on [Mat 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#011.md), [Mat
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#016.md).

[John 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">joh 1:34</span></span>

And I saw,.... The Spirit descending from heaven as a dove, and lighting
upon Jesus, and remaining some time on him; this he saw with his bodily
eyes:

and bore record; at the same time, before all the people that were with
him, when he baptized Jesus:

that this is the Son of God; the natural, essential, and eternal Son of
God; who being sent in the fulness of time, had assumed an human nature,
in which he became subject to all ordinances, and had the Spirit without
measure bestowed on him; and which was an evidence who he was, and of
what he came about.

[John 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">joh 1:35</span></span>

Again, the next day after,.... The third day from the priests and
Levites having been with John, to know who he was. The Syriac, Arabic,
and Persic versions, leave out the word "again":

stood, and two of his disciples; one of these was Andrew, Simon Peter's
brother, as appears from [Joh 1:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#040.md) and
very likely the other was the Evangelist John, the writer of this
Gospel, who always chooses to conceal himself. John the Baptist stood,
and these disciples by him, in some certain place near Jordan, where he
was preaching and baptizing.

[John 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">joh 1:36</span></span>

And looking upon Jesus as he walked,.... Either by them; or as he was
going from them to his lodgings; it being toward the close of the day,
when John had finished his work for that day, and the people were
departing home: John fixed his eyes intently on Christ, with great
pleasure and delight, and pointing at him,

he saith, behold the Lamb of God; as in [Joh
1:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#029.md), where it is added, "which taketh
away the sin of the world"; and which the Ethiopic version subjoins
here.

[John 1:37](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">joh 1:37</span></span>

And the two disciples heard him speak,.... The above words, and took
notice of them; faith in Christ came by hearing them; they reached their
hearts, and they found their affections, and the desires of their souls,
to be after Christ:

and they followed Jesus; left their master, and went after him, in order
to get some acquaintance with him, and receive some instructions from
him.

[John 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">joh 1:38</span></span>

Then Jesus turned, and saw them following,.... That is, "him", as the
Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental versions add: he saw by their walk,
and by their countenances, that they were following him; and which he
knew before he turned himself: he knew what John had said, and what an
effect it had upon these disciples, and what was working in their
hearts, and how desirous they were of coming up to him, and conversing
with him; and therefore he turned himself, that they might have an
opportunity of speaking to him; or rather, in order to speak to them
first, as he did:

and saith unto them, what seek ye? This he said, not as ignorant of
whom, and what they were seeking, and desirous; but to encourage them to
speak to him, which, through fear and bashfulness, they might be
backward to do; and therefore, he who will not break the bruised reed,
nor quench the smoking flax, but cherishes and encourages the first
motions of grace, begins first with them, and treats them in a free and
familiar manner; thereby to animate and engage them to use freedom with
him, and which end was answered:

they said unto him, Rabbi; a title which now began to be in much use
with the Jews, and which they gave to their celebrated doctors; and
these disciples of John, observing how magnificently their master spoke
of Jesus, in great reverence to him, addressed him under this character;
See Gill on [Mat 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#007.md),

which is to say, being interpreted, master. These are the words of the
evangelist, interpreting the word "Rabbi", and not of the disciples, and
are left out in the Syriac and Persic versions, who, for "Rabbi", read
"our master", or our "Rabbi"; being said by both the disciples, or by
one in the name of both, putting the following question:

where dwellest thou? signifying, that that was not a proper place, in
the public way, to enter into a conversation with him, and acquaint him
with what they were desirous of; but should be glad to know where he
lodged, that they might wait upon him there, either then, or on the
morrow, or at any convenient time.

[John 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">joh 1:39</span></span>

He saith unto them, come and see,.... He gave them an invitation, to go
along with him directly, and see with their own eyes, where he dwelt,
and there and then converse with him, and at any other time; to which
they had a hearty welcome:

they came and saw where he dwelt; they accepted of the invitation, and
went along with him immediately, and saw, and took notice of the place
where he had lodgings, that they might know it, and find it another
time; which Dr. Lightfoot conjectures was at Capernaum, which is very
probable; since that was his own city, where he paid tribute, where he
frequently resorted, and was on the banks of Jordan, near the lake of
Gennesaret; and these disciples were Galilaeans:

and abode with him that day; the remaining part of the day, which they
spent in delightful conversation with him; by which they knew that he
was the Messiah; at least they were better instructed in this matter,
and more confirmed in it. The Arabic version renders it, "they remained
with him that his own day"; and Dr. Lightfoot thinks the next day is
meant, and that it was the sabbath day, which they kept with him in
private devotion and conference:

for it was about the tenth hour; which, according to the Roman way of
reckoning, must be ten o'clock in the morning; so that there was a
considerable part of the day before them; but according to the Jewish
way of reckoning, who reckon twelve hours to a day, it must be four
o'clock in the afternoon, when there were but two hours to night: and
this being; about the time when the lamb of the daily sacrifice of the
evening was offered up, very seasonably did John point unto them, at
this time, Christ the Lamb of God, the antitype of that sacrifice; for
the daily evening sacrifice was slain at eight and a half, and was
offered at nine and a half (f), or between the ninth and tenth hours of
the day. The Ethiopic version renders it, "they remained with him that
day unto the tenth hour",

\(f\) Misn. Pesachim, c. 5. sect. 1.

[John 1:40](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">joh 1:40</span></span>

One of the two which heard John speak,.... The above things, concerning
Jesus being the Lamb of God:

and followed him; that is, Jesus, as the Syriac and Arabic versions
read; and the Persic version, Christ: and the Ethiopic version, "the
Lord Jesus"; for not John, but Jesus they followed:

was Andrew, Simon Peter's brother: see [Mat
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#018.md) the other, as before observed,
might be the writer of this Gospel.

[John 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">joh 1:41</span></span>

He first findeth his own brother Simon,.... Either before the other
disciple, or before he found any other person: after he and the other
disciple departed from Christ, being affected with the grace bestowed
upon him, and his heart warm with the conversation he had had with him,
and transported with joy at finding the Messiah, goes in all haste in
search of his relations, friends, and acquaintance, to communicate what
he had seen and heard, in order to bring them to the knowledge of the
same; for such is the nature of grace, it is very communicative, and
those that have it, are very desirous that all others should be
partakers of it: and the first person he lighted on was Simon, who was
afterwards called Peter, who was his own brother; not a brother-in-law,
but his own brother, by father and mother's side, and so dear unto him
by the ties of nature and blood:

and saith unto him; with all eagerness imaginable, and in a rapture of
joy:

we have found the Messias; I, and a fellow disciple have had the
Messiah, so often foretold by the prophets, and so long expected by our
fathers, pointed out to us; and we have followed him, and have had
conversation with him, and are well assured he is that illustrious
person:

which is, being interpreted, the Christ; which, as in [Joh
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038.md), are the words of the evangelist,
and not Andrew, and are therefore left out in the Syriac version; the
word Messiah needing no interpretation in that language, and which was
the language in which Andrew spoke. This name, Messiah, was well known
among the Jews, for that who was promised, and they expected as a
Saviour and Redeemer; though it is not very often mentioned in the books
of the Old Testament, chiefly in the following places, [Psa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002.md); but is very much used in the
Chaldee paraphrases: Elias Levita (g) says, he found it in more than
fifty verses; and Buxtorf (h) has added others to them, and the word
appears in "seventy one" places, which he takes notice of, and are
worthy of regard; for they show the sense of the ancient synagogue,
concerning the passages of the Old Testament, respecting the Messiah:
this Hebrew word is interpreted by the Greek word, "Christ"; and both
signify "anointed", and well agree with the person to whom they belong,
to which there is an allusion in [Sol
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003.md), "thy name is as ointment poured
forth": he is so called, because he was anointed from everlasting, to be
prophet, priest, and king; see [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006.md) [Pro
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#022.md), and he was anointed as man, with
the oil of gladness, with the graces of the Spirit, without measure,
[Psa 45:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#007.md). And it is from him the
saints receive the anointing, or grace in measure; and are from him
called Christians, and are really anointed ones; see [Jo1
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#027.md), hence it is a name precious to
the saints, and savoury to them. These words were delivered by Andrew,
in a very exulting strain, expressing great joy; as indeed what can be
greater joy to a sensible soul, than to find Christ? which in a
spiritual sense, is to have a clear sight of him by faith, to go unto
him, and lay hold on him, as the only Saviour and Redeemer: who is to be
found in the Scriptures of truth, which testify of him; in the promises
of grace, which are full of him and in the Gospel, of which he is the
sum and substance; and in the ordinances of it, where he shows himself;
for he is not to be found by the light of nature, or by carnal reason,
nor by the law of Moses, but by means of the Gospel, and the Spirit of
God attending that, as a spirit of wisdom and revelation, in the
knowledge of him: and happy are those souls that find Christ under his
direction; for they find life, spiritual and eternal, in him; a
justifying righteousness; free and full pardon of their sins; spiritual
food for their souls; and peace, comfort, joy, and rest, and eternal
glory: wherefore this must needs be matter of joy unto them, since such
a finding is a rich one, a pearl of great price, riches durable and
unsearchable; and which a man that has found, would not part with for
all the world; but parts with all he has for it; and is what can never
be lost again; and, particularly to two sorts of persons, finding Christ
must give a peculiar pleasure, and an inexpressible joy; to such as are
under a sense of sin and damnation, and to such who have been under
desertion. The phrase of "finding" a person, twice used in this text,
and hereafter in some following verses, is frequent in Talmudic and
Rabbinic writings; as

â€œhe went, , "and found him with Rab" (i).

\(g\) Prefat ad Methurgemen, & in voce (h) Lexicon Talmud p. 1268. (i)
T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 108. 1. Zohar in Lev. fol. 15. 3.

[John 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">joh 1:42</span></span>

And he brought him to Jesus,.... That is, Andrew brought his brother
Simon to Jesus; he persuaded him to go along with him, and showed him
where he was; which discovered great zeal for Christ, being desirous of,
gaining souls unto him; and great affection to his brother, being
heartily concerned that he might know Christ, as well as he; nor did he
choose that he should take up with the bare account that he gave of him,
but would have him go to him himself, that he might be personally
acquainted with him, and instructed by him: and this also shows the
readiness and willingness of Simon, to see and hear Christ himself, and
not sit down contented with the bare relation his brother gave: no doubt
he found his heart stirred up within him, and the desires of his soul
going after Christ; and therefore he at once rose up and went with
Andrew to him; and thus one person may be the means of bringing another
to Christ: and it may be observed, that Peter was not the first of the
apostles that was called by Christ, or first knew him; Andrew was before
him, and the means of bringing him into an acquaintance with him; had it
been the reverse, the Papists would have improved it in favour of Peter,
as the prince of the apostles: this clause is omitted in the Persic
version,

And when Jesus beheld him; as he was coming, or come to him: he had
beheld him before in the glass of his Father's purposes and decrees; he
had viewed him in his blood, and said unto him, live; and he now looked
upon him with a look of love, of complacency, and delight:

he said, thou art Simon, the son of Jona; thy name is Simon, and thy
father's name is Jona: he knew both their names, though he might have
never seen their faces, nor heard of them: this he said to give Simon a
testimony of his omniscience; and which, no doubt, must strike him at
once. Simon, or Simeon, was a common name among the Jews, being the name
of one of the twelve patriarchs; see Gill on [Mat
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#002.md); and so likewise was Jona, being
the name of a prophet of theirs; See Gill on [Mat
16:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#017.md); and inasmuch as the prophet
Jonah was of Gathhepher in Zebulun, which was in Galilee; see Gill on
[Joh 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052.md); this might be a common name
among the Galilaeans; so that there seems no reason why it should be
thought to be the same with John, as the Ethiopic version reads it, and
by way of interrogation, "art thou not Simon the son of John?"

Thou shall be called Cephas, which is, by interpretation, a stone; or
Peter as it should rather be rendered; and as it is in the Vulgate
Latin, and Ethiopic versions; and as "Cepha", or "Cephas", in the Syriac
and Chaldee languages signifies a stone, or rock (k), so does "Peter" in
Greek: hence, the Syriac version here gives no interpretation of the
word. Christ not only calls Simon by his present name, at first sight of
him, but tells him what his future name should be; and which imports,
not only that he should be a lively stone in the spiritual building, the
church, but should have a considerable hand in that work, and abide firm
and steadfast to Christ, and his interest, notwithstanding his fall; and
continue constant and immoveable until death, as he did. The Jews also,
in their writings, call him Simeon Kepha (l),

\(k\) Vid. Targum in Psal. xl. 3. & Prov. xvii. 8. T. Bab. Ceritot, fol.
6. 1. & Gloss. in ib. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 63. 2. (l) Toldos Jesu, p. 20,
21, 22, 23.

[John 1:43](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">joh 1:43</span></span>

The day following,.... Not the day after John had pointed out Christ, as
the Lamb of God, to two of his disciples; but the day after Simon had
been with him, being brought by Andrew:

Jesus would go forth into Galilee; from whence he came to Jordan, to
John, to be baptized by him; and which being done, and his temptations
in the wilderness over, it was his will, resolution, and determination,
to return to Galilee, the place of his education and conversation, till
this time; and therefore chose to begin his ministry, and miracles,
there, both to give honour to it, and to fulfil a prophecy in [Isa
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#001.md); and besides this, he had
doubtless another end in going thither: which was to call some other
disciples that dwelt there:

and findeth Philip; as he was going to Galilee, or rather when in it;
not by hap or chance; but knowing where he was, as the shepherd and
bishop of souls, looked him up and found him out, and called him by his
grace, and to be a disciple of his; See Gill on [Mat
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003.md),

and saith unto him, follow me; leave thy friends, thy calling, and
business, and become a disciple of mine: and such power went along with
these words, that he at once left all, and followed Christ; as the other
disciples, Peter, and Andrew, James, and John, and Matthew did, as is
recorded of them, though not of this; but the following history makes it
appear he did.

[John 1:44](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">joh 1:44</span></span>

Now Philip was of Bethsaida,.... A town on the lake of Gennesaret,
afterwards made a city by Philip the tetrarch, and called Julias, after
the name of Caesar's daughter (m): it was a fishing town, and had its
name from thence; and the disciples that were of it, were of this
business:

the city of Andrew and Peter; or "Simon", as read the Syriac and Persic
versions: three apostles were called out of this place, as mean, and
wicked, as it was; see [Mat 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021.md);
which was no small honour to it: it is a saying of the Jews (n), that

"a man's place (his native place) does not honour him, but a man honours
his place.''

This was the case here.

\(m\) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 18. c. 3. (n) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 21. 2.

[John 1:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">joh 1:45</span></span>

Philip findeth Nathanael,.... Who was of Cana of Galilee, [Joh
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#002.md) and where, it is very likely,
Philip found him; since we quickly read of Jesus, and his disciples
being there. This man is thought, by some, to be the same with
Bartholomew; and so he is called Bartholomew, in a Syriac dictionary
(o); and the rather, since he and Philip are always mentioned together
in the account of the apostles, [Mat
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#003.md). And certain it is, from the
above mentioned place, that Nathanael was among the apostles after our
Lord's resurrection; and it is highly probable was one of them? his name
might be Nathanael bar Tholmai, the son of Tholmai, Ptolomy, or
Tholomew. It is the same name with Nethaneel, and which is read
Nathanael, as here, in:

"And of the sons of Phaisur; Elionas, Massias Israel, and Nathanael, and
Ocidelus and Talsas.'' (1 Esdras 9:22)

and by the Septuagint on [Ch1 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#014.md)
[Neh 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#036.md); and signifies one given of
God; and is the same with Theodore in Greek, and Adeodatus in Latin; a
doctor of this name, R. Nathaniel, is mentioned in the Jewish writings
(p):

and saith unto him, we have found him of whom Moses, in the law, and the
prophets, did write. He does not say, that he, and Andrew, and Simon,
had found the Messiah; though he designs him by this circumlocution;
Nathanael being, as is generally thought, a person well versed in the
law, and the prophets, and so would at once know who Philip meant: for
Moses, in the law, or Pentateuch, in the five books written by him,
frequently speaks of the Messiah as the seed of the woman, that should
break the serpent's head; as the seed of Abraham, in whom all nations
should be blessed; and as the Shiloh to whom the gathering of the people
should be; and as the great prophet, like to himself, God would raise up
among the children of Israel, to whom they were to hearken: and as for
the prophets, they wrote of his birth of a virgin; of the place of his
birth, Bethlehem; of his sufferings, and the glory, that should follow;
of his resurrection from the dead, his ascension to heaven, and session
at the right hand of God; and of many things relating to his person, and
office, and work. And Philip having given this general account of him,
proceeds to name him particularly; and affirms him to be

Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph; that his name was Jesus, which
signifies a saviour; and answers to the promises, and prophecies, and
character of him in the Old Testament; that he was of Nazareth, a place
not above three hours walk from Cana, as Adrichomius says, where Philip
and Nathanael were: Nazareth was the place where Christ had lived almost
all his days hitherto, and therefore is said to be of it; though
Bethlehem was the place of his birth, which Philip might not as yet
know; as Capernaum afterwards was his city, or the more usual place of
his residence: and that he was the son of Joseph; this Philip says,
according to the common opinion of people, for he was supposed to be the
son of Joseph; he having married his mother Mary.

\(o\) Bar Bahlui apud Castell Lex. Polyglott. col. 2437. (p) Pirke
Eliezer, c. 48.

[John 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">joh 1:46</span></span>

And Nathanael said unto him,.... Taking notice of, and laying hold on
what Philip said, that he was of Nazareth, which at once stumbled, and
prejudiced him against Jesus being the Messiah; knowing very well that
Bethlehem was to be the place of his birth:

can there any good thing come out of Nazareth? The whole country of
Galilee was had in contempt with the Jews; but Nazareth was so mean a
place, that it seems it was even despised by its neighbours, by the
Galilaeans themselves; for Nathanael was a Galilean, that said these
words. It was so miserable a place that he could hardly think that any
sort of good thing, even any worldly good thing, could come from thence;
and it was so wicked, as appears from their murderous designs upon our
Lord, that he thought no good man could arise from hence; and still
less, any prophet, any person of great note; and still least of all,
that that good thing, or person, the Messiah, should spring from it: so
that his objection, and prejudice, proceeded not only upon the oracle in
[Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002.md), which points out Bethlehem
as the birthplace of the Messiah; but upon the wickedness, and meanness,
and obscurity of Nazareth,

Philip saith unto him, come and see; who though he might not be master
of this point, and knew not how to solve this difficulty, and remove
this prejudice from Nathanael's mind, yet persuades him to go with him
to Jesus; who, he doubted not, would give him full satisfaction in this,
and all other points; and then it would most clearly appear to him, as
it had done to him, that he was the true Messiah. The phrase, , "come,
see", is often used in the book of Zohar (q): so it is, and likewise, ,
"come and see", in the Talmudic writings (r),

\(q\) In Gen. fol. 13. 1. & 14. 3. & 16. 1, 2. & in Exod. fol. 83. 4. &
passim. (r) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 8. 1. & 23. 2. & 24. 1. Kiddushin,
fol. 20. 1. & 33. 1. & Sota, fol. 5. 1, 2. & passim.

[John 1:47](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">joh 1:47</span></span>

Jesus saw Nathanael coming to him,.... For notwithstanding his
prejudices, he was a man of so much uprightness and honesty, that he
thought Philip's request was very reasonable; and that it was but right,
and fair, that he should see, and hear, and judge, for himself, whether
the person Philip spoke of was the Messiah, or not; and therefore he
came along with him; and as he was coming, Jesus saw him, who knew all
that had passed between him and Philip:

and saith of him; to those that were standing by him, and in the hearing
of Nathanael,

behold an Israelite indeed! a son of Israel, as the Syriac and Persic
versions read; a true son of Jacob's; an honest, plain hearted man, like
him; one that was an Israelite at heart; inwardly so; not one after the
flesh only, but after the Spirit; see [Rom
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028.md); and which was a rare thing at
that time; and therefore a note of admiration is prefixed to it; for all
were not Israel, that were of Israel; and indeed but a very few then:
and so, , "a son of Israel", and , "a perfect Israelite", are (s) said
of such who have regard to the articles of the Jewish faith, though not
even of the seed of Israel: it is added,

in whom there is no guile; not that he was without sin; nor is this said
of him; nor was he in such sense without guile, as Christ himself was;
but guile was not a governing sin in him: the course of his life, and
conversation, was with great integrity, and uprightness, and without any
prevailing hypocrisy and deceit, either to God, or men. This Christ said
to show how much such a character is approved by him; and that he knew
the secrets of men's hearts, and the inward frames of their minds,

\(s\) Addareth Eliahu apud Trigland de Sect. Karaeorum, c. 10. p. 175,
176.

[John 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">joh 1:48</span></span>

Nathanael saith unto him, whence knowest thou me?.... This he said as
one surprised, that he, who was a stranger to him, should hit upon his
general character, and describe the internal state and frame of his
soul: this was more surprising to him, than if he had called him by his
name Nathanael, as he did Simon; or had said what was the place, of his
abode; Cana of Galilee; since this ordinarily was only to be observed,
and learned, from a long and familiar acquaintance and conversation: by
Nathanael's reply, it looks as if he had no doubt, or fears, about the
character Christ gave him; but rather, that he believed it, as every
good man must be conscious to himself of his own integrity; only it was
amazing to him, how he should know it:

Jesus answered and said unto him; in order to satisfy him, how he could
know this inward temper of his mind, and to give him some undeniable
proofs of his omniscience, which he himself must acknowledge, being such
as none but an all seeing eye could discover:

before that Philip called thee, when thou wast under the fig tree, I saw
thee; in which words Christ gives two instances of his omniscience; the
one is, that he knew Philip had called him; he was privy to all that
passed between them, though they were alone, and the conversation was
had in the most private manner. Christ knew what an account Philip had
given of him, and what objection Nathanael had made; and what an
invitation Philip had given him to go along with him to Christ, and
judge for himself; which is here meant by calling him, and with which he
complied: and the other is, that he saw him under the fig tree before
that: he was sitting under it, as men in those countries used to do; see
[Mic 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004.md), where he might be reading
the Scriptures, and meditating upon them; and if, as some observe, he
was reading, and thinking upon Jacob's dream, concerning the ladder
which reached from earth to heaven, and on which he saw the angels of
God ascending and descending, the words of Christ in [Joh
1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051.md) must strike him with fresh
surprise, and give him another convincing proof of his omniscience: or
he might be praying here in secret, and so acted a different part from
the generality, of religious men of that nation, who chose to pray in
synagogues, and corners of the streets, that they might be seen; and
likewise proved him to be what Christ had said of him, a true and rare
Israelite, without guile and hypocrisy, which were so visible and
prevailing among others. It was usual with the doctors to read, and
study in the law, under fig trees, and sometimes, though rarely, to pray
there. It is said (t),

"R. Jacob, and his companions, were "sitting", studying in the law, ,
"under a certain fig tree".

And the rule they give about praying, on, or under one, is thus (u):

"he that prays on the top of an olive tree, or on the top of a "fig
tree", or on any other trees, must come down, and "pray below".

It is said of Nathanael, in the Syriac dictionary (x); that his mother
laid him under a fig tree, when the infants were slain, i.e. at
Bethlehem; which, if it could be depended upon, must be to Nathanael a
surprising and undeniable proof of the deity of Christ, and of his being
the true Messiah; since, at that time, he was an infant of days himself,
and was the person Herod was seeking to destroy, as the Messiah, and
king of the Jews,

\(t\) T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 5. 3. Vid. Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 16.
4. (u) Ib col. 1. & T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 16. 1. (x) Bar Bahluli apud
Castell. Lexic. Polyglott. col. 8437.

[John 1:49](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">joh 1:49</span></span>

Nathanael answered and saith unto him,.... Being fully convinced of his
omniscience by these instances:

Rabbi; that is, master, as it is interpreted in [Joh
1:38](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#038.md), and is not here, because it is
there:

thou art the Son of God; not by creation, for this would be to say no
more of him, than may be said of every man; nor by adoption, for in that
sense Nathanael himself was a Son of God, and many others; nor on
account of his wonderful incarnation, which, it is very likely, at this
time Nathanael knew nothing of; nor by reason of his resurrection from
the dead, which, as yet, was not, and still less might be known by this
person; nor because of his office, as Mediator, for this is expressed in
the next clause; but by nature, as being of the same essence, and
possessed of the same perfections God is; and of which he was convinced
by the instances he gave of his omniscience; for it was from hence, and
no other consideration, that he concludes him to be the Son of God:
wherefore this phrase must be understood of him, not as Mediator, but as
a divine person; as the natural, essential, and eternal Son of God; and
who is truly and properly God: he adds,

thou art the King of Israel; having in view, no doubt, the passage in
[Psa 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006.md), where the characters of Son
of God, and King of Zion, meet in the same person: not King of Israel,
in a literal sense; though he was the son of David, and a descendant of
his in a right line, and was of the royal line, and had a legal right to
the throne of Israel; and Nathanael might have a view to this, being
tinctured with the common national prejudice, that the Messiah would be
a temporal prince: but his kingdom is not of this world; nor with
observation; but is spiritual; and he is a King over Israel in a
spiritual sense, even of saints, whether Jews or Gentiles: whom he
conquers by his power, and rules in their hearts by his Spirit, and
grace; and protects, and defends them from all their enemies.

[John 1:50](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">joh 1:50</span></span>

Jesus answered and said unto him,.... Not as reproving him for his
faith, as if he was too credulous, and too easily gave into the belief
of Christ, as the Son of God, and true Messiah, upon these single
expressions of his; but as approving of it, and surprised at it:

because I said unto thee, I saw thee under the fig tree, believest thou?
some read the words, not by way of interrogation, but as an assertion;
"thou believest", or "hast believed", as the Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and
Persic versions:

thou shall see greater things than these; meaning that he should have
larger discoveries of his person, nature, and perfections, and should
see things done by him, much more surprising than any thing he had seen
yet; referring to the miracles of raising the dead, casting out devils,
and healing all manner of diseases.

[John 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#051.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">joh 1:51</span></span>

And he saith unto him, verily, verily, I say unto you,.... Not only to
Nathanael, but to the rest of the disciples that were then with him; and
to show himself to be the "Amen", and faithful witness, as well as more
strongly to asseverate what he was about to say, he doubles the
expression:

hereafter you shall see heaven open; either in a literal sense, as it
had been at his baptism; or, in a mystical sense, that there should be a
clearer manifestation of heavenly truths made by his ministry; and that
the way into the holiest of all should be made more manifest; and a more
familiar intercourse he opened between God and his people; and also
between angels and saints:

and the angels of God ascending and descending upon the son of man; or
to the son of man, as the Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions render
it; meaning himself in human nature; the second Adam, and seed of the
woman; and is expressive both of the truth, and infirmity of that
nature. Reference may here be had to the ladder Jacob dreamed of, in
[Gen 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012.md), which was a representation
of Christ, in his person, as God-man; who, as God, was in heaven, whilst
he, as man, was on earth; and in his office, as Mediator between God and
man, making peace between them both; and in the ministration of angels
to him in person, and to his body the church. And it is observable, that
some of the Jewish writers (y) understand the ascent, and descent of the
angels, in [Gen 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#012.md), to be, not upon
the ladder, but upon Jacob; which makes the phrase there still more
agreeable to this; and so they render in [Gen
28:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#013.md), not "above it", but "above
him". Or the, sense is, that there would be immediately made such
clearer discoveries of his person, and grace by his ministry, and such
miracles would be wrought by him in confirmation of it, that it would
look as if heaven was open, and the angels of God were continually going
to and fro, and bringing fresh messages, and performing miraculous
operations; as if the whole host of them were constantly employed in
such services: and this the rather seems to be the sense, since the next
account we have, is, of the beginning of Christ's miracles to manifest
forth his glory in Cana of Galilee, where Nathanael lived; and since the
word, rendered "hereafter", signifies, "from henceforward"; or, as the
Persic version renders it, "from this hour"; though the word is left out
in the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions,

\(y\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 68. fol. 61. 2. & sect. 69. fol. 61. 3, 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: John Chapter 2](joh002.md)

</div>
