<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Jonah Index](jon.md)  
  [Previous](jon002)  [Next](jon004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Jonah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#001.md)

[Jonah](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jon 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JONAH 3

This chapter gives an account of the renewal of Jonah's message to
Nineveh, and of his faithful execution of it, [Jon
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#001.md); and of the fruit and effect of
it, the conversion of the Ninevites, their faith in God, repentance of
their sins, and reformation from them, [Jon
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005.md); and of God's approbation thereof,
by revoking the sentence he had pronounced upon them, [Jon
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010.md).

[Jonah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jon 3:1</span></span>

And the word of the Lord came unto Jonah the second time,.... Jonah
having been scourged by the Lord for his stubbornness and disobedience,
and being humbled under the mighty hand of God, is tried a second time,
whether he would go on the Lord's errand, and do his business; and his
commission is renewed, as it was necessary it should; for it would have
been unsafe and dangerous for him to have proceeded upon the former
without a fresh warrant; as the Israelites, when they refused entering
into the land of Canaan to possess it, upon the report of the spies, and
afterwards reflecting upon their sin, would go up without the word of
the Lord, and contrary to the advice of Moses, many of them perished in
the attempt, being cut off by the Amalekites, [Num
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#001.md); and this renewal of Jonah's
commission shows that he was still continued in his office as a prophet,
notwithstanding his failings; as the apostles were in theirs, though
they all forsook Christ, and Peter denied him, [Mat
26:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#056.md); and that the Lord had heard his
prayer, and graciously received him, and took away his iniquity from
him, employing him again in his service, being more fitted for it:

saying; as follows:

[Jonah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jon 3:2</span></span>

Arise, go unto Nineveh, that great city,.... So it is called; See Gill
on [Jon 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#002.md). The order runs in the
same words as before; and the same discouragements are presented to
Jonah, taken from the greatness of the city, the number of its
inhabitants, its being the metropolis of the Assyrian empire, and the
seat of the greatest monarch on earth, to try his faith; but these had
not the like effect as before; for he had now another spirit given him,
not of fear, but of a sound mind; he considered he was sent by a greater
King, and that more were they that were on his side than the inhabitants
of this place, who might possibly be against him:

and preach unto it the preaching that I bid thee; that he had bid him
before, declaring and exposing their wickedness, and telling them that
in a short time their city would be destroyed. Jonah must not be
gratified with any alteration in the message; but he must go with it as
it had before been given, or what he now bid, or should bid him; the
word of the Lord must be spoken just as it is delivered; nothing must be
added to it, or taken from it; the whole counsel of God must be
declared; prophets and ministers must preach, not as men bid them, but
as God bids them. The Targum is,

"prophesy against it the prophecy which I speak with thee.''

[Jonah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jon 3:3</span></span>

So Jonah arose, and went unto Nineveh, according to the word of the
Lord,.... He was no longer disobedient to the heavenly vision; being
taught by the rod, he acts according to the word; he is now made willing
to go on the Lord's errand, and do his business, under the influence of
his power and grace; he stands not consulting with the flesh, but
immediately arises and sets forward on his journey, as directed and
commanded, being rid of that timorous spirit, and those fears, he was
before possessed of; his afflictions had been greatly sanctified to him,
to restore his straying soul, and cause him to keep and observe the word
of the Lord; and his going to Nineveh, and preaching to a Heathen
people, after his deliverance out of the fish's belly, was a type of the
preaching of the Gospel to the Gentiles by the apostles, according to
the commission of Christ renewed unto them, after his resurrection from
the dead, [Act 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#023.md); and after many
failings of theirs;

now Nineveh was an exceeding great city: or "a city great to God" (m);
not dear to him, for it was full of wickedness; not great in his esteem,
with whom the whole earth is as nothing; but known by him to be what it
was; and the name of God is often used of things, to express the
superlative nature and greatness of them, as trees of God, mountains of
God, the flame of God, &c. [Psa 36:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#007.md);
it was a greater city than Babylon, of which See Gill on [Jon
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#002.md);

of three days' journey; in compass, being sixty miles, as Diodorus
Siculus (n) relates; and allowing twenty miles for a day's journey on
foot, as this was, and which is as much as a man can ordinarily do to
hold it, was just three days journey; and so Herodotus (o) reckons a
day's journey at an hundred fifty furlongs, which make about nineteen
miles; but, according to the Jewish writers, a middling day's journey is
ten "parsas" (p), and every "parsa" makes four miles, so that with them
it is forty miles: or else it was three days' journey in the length of
it, as Kimchi thinks, from end to end. This is observed to show the
greatness of the city, which was the greatest in the whole world, as
well as to lead on to the following account.

\(m\) "magna Deo", Montanus, Vatablus, Tigurine version, Mercerus,
Drusius, Cocceius. (n) Bibliothec. l. 2. p. 92. (o) Terpsichore, sive l.
5. c. 53. (p) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 94. 1.

[Jonah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jon 3:4</span></span>

And Jonah began to enter into the city a day's journey,.... As soon as
he came to it, he did not go into an inn, to refresh himself after his
wearisome journey; or spend his time in gazing upon the city, and to
observe its structure, and the curiosities of it; but immediately sets
about his work, and proclaims what he was bid to do; and before he could
finish one day's journey, he had no need to proceed any further, the
whole city was alarmed with his preaching, was terrified with it, and
brought to repentance by it:

and he cried; as he went along; he lifted up his voice like a trumpet,
that everyone might hear; he did not mutter it out, as if afraid to
deliver his message, but cried aloud in the hearing of all; and very
probably now and then made a stop in the streets, where there was a
concourse of people, or where more streets met, and there, as a herald,
proclaimed what he had to say:

and said, yet forty days, and Nineveh shall be overthrown; not by a
foreign army besieging and taking it, which was not probable to be done
in such a space of time, but by the immediate power of God; either by
fire from heaven, as he overthrow Sodom and Gomorrah, their works being
like theirs, as Kimchi and Ben Melech observe, or by an earthquake; that
is, within forty days, or at the end of forty days, as the Targum; not
exceeding such a space, which was granted for their repentance, which is
implied, though not expressed; and must be understood with this proviso,
except it repented, for otherwise why is any time fixed? and why have
they warning given them, or the prophet sent to them? and why were they
not destroyed at once, as Sodom and Gomorrah, without any notice?
doubtless, so it would have been, had not this been the case. The
Septuagint version very wrongly reads, "yet three days", &c. and as
wrongly does Josephus (q) make Jonah to say, that in a short time they
would lose the empire of Asia, when only the destruction of Nineveh is
threatened; though, indeed, that loss followed upon it.

\(q\) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 10. sect. 2.

[Jonah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jon 3:5</span></span>

So the people of Nineveh believed God,.... Or "in God" (r): in the word
of the Lord, as the Targum; they believed there was a God, and that he,
in whose name Jonah came, was the true God; they believed the word the
prophet spake was not the word of man, but, the word of God; faith came
by hearing the word, which is the spring of true repentance, and the
root of all good works. Kimchi and R. Jeshuah, in Aben Ezra, suppose
that the men of the ship, in which Jonah had been, were at Nineveh; and
these testified that they had cast him into the sea, and declared the
whole affair concerning him; and this served greatly to engage their
attention to him, and believe what he said: but this is not certain;
and, besides, their faith was the effect of the divine power that went
along with the preaching of Jonah, and not owing to the persuasion of
men;

and proclaimed a fast; not of themselves, but by the order of their
king, as follows; though Kimchi thinks this was before that:

and put on sackcloth, from the greatest of them even to the least of
them; both, with respect to rank and age, so universal were their
fasting and mourning; in token of which they stripped themselves of
their common and rich apparel, and clothed themselves with sackcloth; as
was usual in extraordinary cases of mourning, not only with the Jews,
but other nations.

(Jonah would be a quite a sight to behold. The digestive juices of the
fish would have turned his skin to a most unnatural colour and his hair
was most like all gone. Indeed, anyone looking like that would attract
your attention and give his message more credence, especially after he
told you what had happened to him. A God who creates storms, prepares
large fish to swallow a man and preserves him in the fish, would not
likely have too much trouble destroying your city. Editor)

\(r\) "in Deum", V. L.

[Jonah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jon 3:6</span></span>

For word came unto the king of Nineveh,.... Who was not Sardanapalus, a
very dissolute prince, and abandoned to his lusts; but rather Pul, the
same that came against Menahem king of Israel, [Kg2
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#019), as Bishop Usher (s.md) thinks; to
him news were brought that there was such a prophet come into the city,
and published such and such things, which met with credit among the
people; and that these, of all ranks and degrees, age and sex, were
afflicted with it, and thrown into the utmost concern about it; so very
swiftly did the ministry of Jonah spread in the city; and what he
delivered was so quickly carried from one to another, that in one day's
time it reached the palace, and the royal ear:

and he arose from his throne; where he sat in great majesty and
splendour, encircled by his nobles, receiving their caresses and
compliments; or, it may be, giving audience to foreign ambassadors, sent
to court his friendship and alliance; or hearing causes, and redressing
the grievances of his subjects; for he appears to be one that did not
indulge himself in hunting, and such like exercises, or in his lusts and
pleasures:

and he laid his robe from him; his royal apparel, his imperial robe, and
garments of his glory, as the Targum; or his glorious garments, with
which he was richly and most magnificently arrayed; he put off these,
and left his throne, in token of his concern at hearing such dismal
tidings as the overthrow of his capital city, and of his humiliation and
abasement:

and covered him with sackcloth; which was very rough and coarse, and
must be very disagreeable to a person so tender and delicate, and was
what the meanest of his subjects wore on this occasion:

and sat in ashes; or "in the" or "that ashes" (t); used in such times of
mourning, which were either strewed under him, or put upon his head; and
this, with the other, were done to afflict the body, and affect the mind
with a sense of sin, and the misery threatened for sin, and to shaw deep
humiliation for it.

\(s\) Annales Vet. Test. A. M. 3233. Vid. Rollin's Ancient History, vol.
2. p. 30. (t) "in cinere illo", Vatablus, Tarnovius.

[Jonah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jon 3:7</span></span>

And he caused it to be proclaimed and published through Nineveh,.... By
a herald or heralds, sent into the several parts of the city:

by the decree of the king and his nobles; with whom he consulted, and
whose advice he took; and who were equally concerned at this news, and
very probably were present when word was brought to the king concerning
it:

saying, let neither man nor beast, herd nor flock, taste anything; a
very strict and general fast this: abstinence from all food was
enjoined; not only men of every rank and age, but the cattle likewise,
horses and camels, they used either for their pleasure or business;
their oxen, cows, and calves, of their herd; their sheep, goats, lambs,
and kids, of their flocks:

let them not feed, nor drink water; no food were to be put into their
mangers or folds: nor were they to be suffered to graze in their
pastures, or to be allowed the least quantity of food or drink; this was
ordered, to make the mourning the greater; thus Virgil (u) describes the
mourning for the death of Caesar by the oxen not coming to the rivers to
drink, nor touching the grass of the field; and to afflict their minds
the more, and for their greater mortification, since these creatures
were for their use and pleasure, Fasting was used by the Heathens; as
well as the Jews, in some cases; particularly the Egyptians, as
Herodotus (w) observes, from whom the Assyrians might take it.

\(u\) "Non ulli pastos, illis egere diebus Frigida Daphni boves, ad
flumius, nulla neque amnem Libavit quadrupes, nec graminis attigit
herbam". Bucolic. Eclog. 5. l. 24, &c. (w) L. 2. c. 4. & l. 4. c. 186.

[Jonah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jon 3:8</span></span>

But let man and beast be covered with sackcloth,.... As the king was,
and the people also were; and this order enjoined the same to the
beasts, horses, and camels, whose rich trappings were to be taken off,
and sackcloth put upon them, for the greater solemnity, of the mourning;
as at this day, at the funerals of great persons, not only the horses
which draw the hearse and mourning, coaches are covered with black
velvet, to make the solemnity more awful: but others are led, clothed in
like manner:

and cry mightily unto God; which clause stands so closely connected with
the former, as if it respected beasts as well as men, who sometimes are
said to cry for food in times of drought and distress, [Joe
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#020.md); and who here might purposely be
kept from food and drink, that they might cry, and so the more affect
the minds of the Ninevites, in their humiliation and abasement; but men
are principally meant, at least who were to cry unto God intensely and
earnestly, with great ardour, fervency, and importunity; not only aloud,
and with a strong voice, but with their whole heart, as Kimchi and Ben
Melech interpret it; heartily, sincerely, and devoutly, for the averting
divine wrath, and the pardon of their sins, and the sparing of their
city:

yea, let them turn everyone from his evil way; as well knowing that
fasting and prayer would be of no avail, without leaving everyone their
sinful courses, and reforming their life and manners:

and from the violence that is in their hands: their rapine and
oppression, their thefts and robberies, and preying upon the substance
of others; which seem to be the reigning vices of this city, in doing
which many murders were committed also; see [Nah
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#001.md); the Jewish writers interpret this
of making restitution for rapine and violence, which is a genuine fruit
of repentance; see [Luk 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008.md). The
Septuagint version understands this, not as a direction from the king to
the men of Nineveh what they should do, but as a narrative of what they
did; and no doubt but they did these things, put on sackcloth, fast,
pray, and turn from their evil ways; yet they are the instructions of
the king unto them and the orders he gave them.

[Jonah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jon 3:9</span></span>

Who can tell,.... The Septuagint and Arabic versions prefix to this the
word "saying", and take them to be, not the words of the king, but of
the Ninevites; though very wrongly: or "who is he that knows"; which
some connect with the next word, "he will return": that is, that knows
the ways of repentance, he will return, as Kimchi and Ben Melech; or
that knows that he has sinned, as Aben Ezra: or that knows the
transgressions he is guilty of, will return, as Jarchi; and so the
Targum,

"whosoever knows that sins are in his hands, he will return, or let him
return, from them:''

but they are the words of the king, with respect to God, encouraging his
subjects to the above things, from the consideration of the probability,
or at least possibility, of God's being merciful to them:

if God will turn and repent, and turn away from his fierce wrath,

that we perish not? he speaks here not as nor as absolutely doubting,
but as between hope and fear: for, by the light of nature, it is not
certain that God will pardon men upon repentance; it is only probable or
possible he may; neither the light of nature nor the law of Moses
connect repentance and remission of sins, it is the Gospel does this;
and it is only by the Gospel revelation that any can be assured that God
will forgive, even penitent sinners; however, this Heathen prince
encourages his subjects not to despair of, but to hope for, the mercy of
God, though they could not be sure of it; and it may be observed, that
he does not put their hope of not perishing, or of salvation, upon their
fasting, praying, and reformation, but upon the will, mercy, and
goodness of God.

[Jonah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jon003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jon 3:10</span></span>

And God saw their words, that they turned from their evil way,.... Not
their outward works, in putting on sackcloth and ashes, and fasting; but
their inward works, their faith in him, and repentance towards him; and
which were attended with fruits and works meet for repentance, in that
they forsook their former course of life, and refrained from it; and
these he saw not barely with his eye of omniscience, as he sees all
persons and things, good and bad, but so as to like them, approve of
them, and accept them, in which sense the word is used, [Gen
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#004.md); and so the repentance of these
men is spoken of with commendation by Christ, and as what would rise up
in judgment, and condemn the men of that generation, [Mat
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041.md);

and God repented of the evil that he had said that he would do unto
them, and he did it not; this is spoken after the manner of men, as Aben
Ezra observes; and is to be understood, not of any such affection in God
as repentance; but of an effect done by him, which carries in it a show
of repentance, or resembles what is done by men when they repent; then
they change their course and conduct; so, the Lord, though he never
changes his will, nor repents of or revokes his decrees, or alters his
purposes; yet he sometimes wills a change, and makes an alteration in
the dispensations of his providence, according to his unchangeable will.
God, in this case, did not repent of his decrees concerning the
Ninevites, but of what he had said or threatened respecting the
overthrow of Nineveh, in case of their impenitence; it was his will that
they should be told of their sin and danger, and by this means be
brought to repentance, and the wrath threatened them be averted; so that
here was a change, not of his mind and will concerning them, but of his
outward dispensations towards them; see [Jer
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer018.htm#007.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Jonah Chapter 4](jon004.md)

</div>
