<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos017)  [Next](jos019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001.md)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 18:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOSHUA 18

This chapter informs us of the setting up of the tabernacle at Shiloh,
[Jos 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001.md); of the notice Joshua took,
that seven tribes had not received their inheritance, [Jos
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#002.md); of the instructions he gave them
to send three men out of each tribe, and describe the land not yet
disposed of, and bring the account to him, which was accordingly done,
[Jos 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#003.md); and then he cast lots for
them, and the first lot came up for Benjamin, [Jos
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010.md); the borders of whose lots are
described, [Jos 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#012.md); and the several
cities in it enumerated, [Jos 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021.md).

[Joshua 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 18:1</span></span>

And the whole congregation of the children of Israel assembled together
at Shiloh,.... The whole body of the people, men, women, and children,
as well as the camp, [Jos 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#009.md); at
least all that had not received their inheritances in the land. Hither
they came from Gilgal, where the camp and tabernacle had been ever since
their passage over Jordan; but now the land being in the main subdued,
that was too far off both for the camp and tabernacle, and therefore
they moved further into the land, and nearer Jerusalem, where in time
the tabernacle was to be placed. The place they assembled at, Shiloh,
was in the tribe of Ephraim, of which tribe Joshua was, and whose lot
and inheritance was now fixed, and it was not far from Jerusalem, about
two leagues. Jerom says (u) it was ten miles from, Neapolis or Shechem,
in the country of Acrabatena; and that there were scarce any ruins of it
to be seen in his day, only an altar demolished was shown (w). It seems
to have its name from the peaceable condition the land was now in, and
very likely was now given it on that account:

and set up the tabernacle of the congregation there; no doubt by the
appointment and direction of God, signified to Eleazar the high priest,
either by a voice, or by Urim and Thummim; and the removal of it seemed
necessary, partly that because several camps which surrounded it were
now broken up and settled in their cities, as Reuben, Judah, and
Ephraim; and partly that it might be near where Joshua, the governor of
Israel, resided, Ephraim being his tribe; and also since Gilgal, on the
borders of the land, was too far off for the people to resort to the
tabernacle, and therefore it was, proper it should be more in the heart
of the country: when this was done, cannot certainly be determined;
Kimchi says it was fourteen years after the Israelites came into the
land of Canaan; and so says (x) their chronology; but it is highly
probable it was before that time, and not longer than seven or eight
years at most; here the tabernacle continued, according to the Jewish
writers (y), three hundred sixty nine years, even unto the times of
Samuel, when for the sins of the sons of Eli it was removed. Eupolemus
(z), an Heathen writer, speaks of the holy temple being fixed at Shiloh
by Joshua:

and the land was subdued before them: the far greater part of it, and
all so as to have no disturbance from, or war with, the inhabitants.

\(u\) De loc. Heb. fol. 94. I. (w) Comment. in Soph. c. 1. fol. 94. I.
Epitaph. Paul. fol. 59. L. (x) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 11. p. 32. (y)
Maimon. in Misn. Zebachim, c. 14. sect. 6. Bartenora in ib. sect. 7.
Seder Olam Rabba, ut supra. (x)) (z) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9.
c. 30. p. 447.

[Joshua 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 18:2</span></span>

And there remained among the children of Israel seven tribes,.... Which
were those of Benjamin, Simeon, Zebulun, Issachar, Asher, Naphtali, and
Dan:

which had not yet received their inheritance; and for which the lots
were not cast.

[Joshua 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 18:3</span></span>

And Joshua said unto the children of Israel,.... To those of the seven
tribes:

how long are you slack to go to possess the land which the Lord God of
your fathers hath given you? not that they might have taken possession
of it of themselves, without having it assigned to them by lot; that
they did not do this, is not what is complained of, and they stand
reproved for; but that when two tribes and a half had received their
inheritance, these seemed indifferent to it, showed no inclination and
disposition towards it, and much less eagerness to have a settlement,
and did not apply to the court for it; which dilatoriness might arise
from the present affluence of all good things they enjoyed through the
spoils of the enemy; and partly through slothfulness, being tired of the
war, and perceiving that they must be involved in it again to dispossess
the Canaanites of some of the cities that would fall to their lot; and,
perhaps, their slackness might be the more increased, by observing the
dissatisfaction of the tribes with the lot they had received, and
therefore waited till things were adjusted to greater satisfaction.

[Joshua 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 18:4</span></span>

Give out from among you three men for each tribe,.... That is, for each
of the seven tribes, in all twenty one; though some think they were to
be taken out of all the nine tribes and a half, and were thirty six; and
so Josephus (a) seems to understand it; but then he makes but one out of
each tribe to be sent, and but ten in all, which is a great oversight in
that historian:

and I will send them; Joshua would not take upon him to name the
persons, but left it to their own choice for their greater satisfaction;
but when chosen and presented to him, he would give them a commission
and directions what to do:

and they shall rise; gird themselves, and prepare for their journey, and
set out:

and go through the land; of Canaan; not the whole of it, but that part
which as yet was not disposed of; though some think they were to go
through and describe the whole land; but I see no reason for that, for
what was described was to be divided into seven parts only, and what
belonged already to Judah and Joseph, seem plainly to be excepted in
[Jos 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#005.md),

and describe it according to the inheritance of them; take the
dimensions of it, and divide it into seven parts, according to the
number of the tribes that had not received their inheritance. Jarchi
thinks this description and division were not to be made equally, but
according to the largeness and smallness of the tribes; but this could
not be done by the measurers, since the inheritance of each depended on
the lot that was afterward to be cast, which by this means would have
been rendered needless:

and they shall come again to me; which seems to be not only a precept or
instruction to them, that when they had done their business, they should
come to Joshua and give him an account of it; but an assurance also of
their safety, that they should receive no disturbance nor hurt from the
remaining Canaanites, but should return safe and well.

\(a\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 21.

[Joshua 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 18:5</span></span>

And they shall divide it into seven parts,.... According to the number
of the seven tribes not yet settled; and this they were to describe and
divide was all the land subdued, or not subdued, only the following
excepted:

Judah shall abide in their coast on the south; on the south of the land
of Canaan, where their lot fell, so that needed not to be measured and
described; and this tribe was to retain what they were possessed of,
unless it should appear they had too much, and others wanted, and they
willing to part with some of it to their brethren, as they afterwards
did to the tribes of Simeon and Dan:

and the house of Joseph shall abide in their coast on the north; on the
north of the tribe of Judah; not of the land of Canaan, for some other
tribes lay more northerly.

[Joshua 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 18:6</span></span>

Ye shall therefore describe the land into seven parts,.... Or ye shall
describe the land, even the seven parts of it when divided; it seems as
if they were first to describe in general all the land not disposed of,
and then divide it into seven parts, and make a particular description
of each part, or form a plan, or draw a map of every part:

and bring the description hither to me; not by word of mouth, but as
written in a book, or marked out in a map, and laid before him, see [Jos
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#009.md),

that I may cast lots for you here before the Lord your God; in Shiloh,
at the door of the tabernacle, and so before the Lord who dwelt in it,
at whose disposal the lot was, and by which everyone of the seven tribes
would have their part and portion assigned them most fitting and
convenient for them, according to the will and counsel of God, in which
it became them to acquiesce.

[Joshua 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 18:7</span></span>

But the Levites have no part among you,.... And so needed not to send
any men out of their tribe to measure the land on their account, and is
a reason why the remaining part of the land was to be divided into seven
parts only:

for the priesthood of the Lord is his inheritance; not only the office,
but what appertained to it, all the perquisites of it, the tithes,
firstfruits, parts of the sacrifices, &c. see [Jos
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#014.md),

and Gad, and Reuben, and half the tribe of Manasseh, have received their
inheritance beyond Jordan on the east, which Moses the servant of the
Lord gave them; and so had no share in the division of the land of
Canaan, being sufficiently provided for.

[Joshua 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 18:8</span></span>

And the men arose, and went away,.... The seven tribes took the advice
of Joshua, chose three men out of each tribe, and presented them to him,
who gave them their commission and instruction to go and describe the
land of Canaan, not yet disposed of, and whether subdued, or not
subdued; upon which they prepared for their journey, and took it, after
he had given them the following charge:

and Joshua charged them that went to describe the land; before they
departed from him:

saying, go and walk through the land; and take particular notice, and an
exact survey of it, both of the quality and the quantity of it:

and describe it; its cities and towns, hills and dales, the goodness and
badness of the soil, and put it down in a book, or lay it out in a map,
that it may be discerned by the eye what number of cities, and what
space of ground it contains, and what parts are hilly and woody, and
what otherwise:

and come again to me; to make a report of it:

that I may cast lots for you before the Lord in Shiloh; that is, for the
several tribes which they belonged to, and by whom they were chosen for
this purpose.

[Joshua 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 18:9</span></span>

And the men went and passed through the land,.... Undisturbed by the
inhabitants that remained; the fear of the Israelites being still upon
them, and the providence of God restraining them, so that the men passed
through the whole country, and took a survey of it without any
molestation:

and described it by cities, into seven parts, in a book; or map, or
rather made seven maps of it, and set down the several cities in each
division, with the places adjacent, hills and vales, and marked out a
plain and exact chorography of the whole, by which it appears they must
be men well skilled in geometry. Josephus (b) says, that Joshua added to
them some that understood geometry; but doubtless the persons each tribe
chose and sent were such whom they knew were well versed in that art,
and so fit for the business; and which they had, no doubt, learned in
Egypt, this being one part of the wisdom and learning of the Egyptians;
who boasted of it as an invention of theirs, as Diodorus Siculus (c)
relates; and indeed they were obliged to study it, their country being
divided into several homes, and these into lesser districts, and which
also were subdivided, and according thereunto were the king's taxes
levied upon them; and what with the confusion frequently made by the
overflowings of the Nile, they were frequently obliged to measure their
land over again; and hence they became expert in this science, which is
commonly believed took its rise from them, and passed into Greece, as
Herodotus (d), and Strabo (e), and other authors relate; however, it is
certain from this instance in the time of Joshua, that geometry was not
the invention of Anaximander, about five hundred years before Christ, as
some have asserted (f):

and came again to Joshua to the host at Shiloh; where the camp, as well
as the people in common, and the tabernacle, were; they returned, as
Josephus (g) says, at the end of seven months; and to measure so much
land, and make such divisions of it, and give the plans and maps of each
division, must take up a considerable time.

\(b\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 21. (c) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 63. (d)
Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 109. (e) Geograph. l. 17. p. 541, 542. Vid.
Suidam in voce (f) Vid. Strabo. Geograph. l. 1. p. 5. Lar. l. 2. Vit.
Anaximan I. (g) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 21.)

[Joshua 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 18:10</span></span>

And Joshua cast lots for them in Shiloh before the Lord,.... For the
seven tribes, as he had for the two tribes and a half at Gilgal; of the
manner of casting lots; see Gill on [Num
26:55](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#055.md),

and there Joshua divided the land unto the children of Israel according
to their division: the land that was divided into seven parts, he
distributed to the seven tribes, as the lot came up for them, and then
divided these several parts according to the families and households in
each tribe.

[Joshua 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 18:11</span></span>

And the lot of the tribe of the children of Benjamin came up according
to their families,.... This was the first lot of the seven that came up;
it was but a small lot, and therefore called "little Benjamin", [Psa
68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027.md); but the land was very pleasant
and fruitful. Josephus (h) says, this lot was very strait, because of
the goodness of the soil, for it took in Jericho, and the city of
Jerusalem:

and the coast of their lot came forth between the children of Judah and
the children of Joseph; having Judah on the south, and Joseph on the
north; this was so ordered by the providence of God, that Benjamin
should lie close to Joseph, being own brothers, and the only children of
Rachel, Jacob's beloved wife; and that it should be next to Judah, with
whom it was to unite, both in religious and civil affairs, and both met
in and had a part of Jerusalem, the metropolis of Israel; and this lot
fell exactly according to the prediction of Moses, and the order of it,
who places Benjamin between Judah and Joseph, the tribe of Levi having
no share in the division of the land, [Deu
33:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#007.md).

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 22.

[Joshua 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 18:12</span></span>

And their border on the north side was from Jordan,.... Which was the
eastern boundary of the tribe, and hence proceeded from east to west,
and formed its northern border, which is described in like manner as the
lot of the children of Joseph, [Jos
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#001.md),

and the border went up to the side of Jericho on the north side; from
Jordan it went to the north of Jericho, and so took in that place, which
was within the tribe of Benjamin, [Jos
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021.md),

and went up through the mountains westward; the mountains that were on
the north of Jericho; for, as Strabo says (i), Jericho was surrounded
with mountains, see [Jos 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#016.md); through
these mountains the coast went on towards the western border of the
tribe:

and the goings out thereof were at the wilderness of Bethaven: a place
near Bethel and Ai, to which there was a wilderness adjoining, see [Jos
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002.md); here ended the northern border.

\(i\) Geograph. l. 16. p. 525.

[Joshua 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 18:13</span></span>

And the border went over from thence towards Luz,.... From Bethaven,
where the northern border ended, the western began, and went on to Luz:

to the side of Luz, which is Bethel, southward; that is, passed along,
leaving that city to the south, which formerly was called Luz, but now
Bethel, which though distinct places formerly, yet being very near,
might in process of time be joined; See Gill on [Jos
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#002.md),

and the border descended to Atarothadar, the same with Archiataroth; see
Gill on [Jos 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#002.md), and See Gill on
[Jos 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#005.md),

near the hill that lieth on the south side of the nether Bethhoron; so
called to distinguish it from Bethhoron the upper, situated on an hill
or mountain, [Jos 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#005.md); this was
rebuilt by Solomon, [Kg1 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#017.md).

[Joshua 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 18:14</span></span>

And the border was drawn thence,.... From Bethhoron:

and compassed the corner of the sea southward; it is hard to say what
sea is meant, or what by it. Fuller (k) conjectures, that as the Hebrews
call any confluence of water a sea, as we call such a "mere", the great
waters in Gibeon may be meant, [Jer
41:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#012.md); for it cannot mean the
Mediterranean sea, for Dan lay between Benjamin and that; and yet if a
sea is meant, no other can be; wherefore it is best to render it the
"west quarter", as it is in the latter part of this verse; and so the
same word is translated, [Jos 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#012.md);
the "west", and not the "sea", as it sometimes is; for the border of
Benjamin did not reach the sea any where; though Josephus (l) makes it
to extend to it, and says, that the length of it was from the river
Jordan to the sea:

the hill that lieth before Bethhoron southward; the hill that lay to the
south of nether Bethhoron, as in [Jos
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#013.md),

and the goings out thereof, the end of the western coast:

were at Kirjathbaal, which is Kirjathjearim, a city of the children of
Judah; of which see [Jos 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009.md),

this was the west quarter; as thus described.

\(k\) Pisgah Sight, B. 2. c. 12. p. 251. (l) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c.
1. sect. 22.)

[Joshua 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 18:15</span></span>

And the south quarter was from the end of Kirjathjearim,.... Where the
western quarter ended:

and the border went out on the west; not directly south, but somewhat
westerly. It is, in the original, "the sea", and should be rendered,
"from the sea", or "from the west" (m); and Jarchi confesses his
ignorance, and says, I know not what sea it is; and well he might, for
there was no sea here; but the Mediterranean sea, being to the west of
the land of Israel, it is often used for the west in the Hebrew
language, and so here:

and went out to the well of waters of Nephtoah; See Gill on [Jos
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009.md);

\(m\) "a mari", Masius; "ab occidente", Noldius, No. 1083. p. 239.

[Joshua 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 18:16</span></span>

And the border came down,.... In the description of the border of Judah,
hereabout, it is said to go up, [Jos
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#005.md); because there, as Jarchi
observes, the measure was from east to west, but here from west to east:

to the end of the mountain that lieth before the valley of the son of
Hinnom; this south border of Benjamin is the same with the north border
of Judah; and the same places are mentioned in the description of the
one as of the other, see [Jos 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008.md).
The mountain is Mount Moriah,

and which is in the valley of the giants on the north; on the north of
the valley of Rephaim:

and descended to the valley of Hinnom; the border from the end of Mount
Moriah to that valley:

to the side of Jebusi on the south; to the south side of Jerusalem,
having that city on the south:

and descended to Enrogel; of which See Gill on [Jos
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007.md).

[Joshua 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 18:17</span></span>

And was drawn from the north,.... Turning northward, and looking that
way from the west to the east:

and went forth to Enshemesh; or the fountain of the sun, see [Jos
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007.md),

and went forth toward Geliloth; called Gilgal, [Jos
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007.md),

which is over against the going up to Adummim; a place between Jerusalem
and Jericho, see [Jos 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#007.md),

and descended to the stone of Bohan the son of Reuben; see [Jos
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006.md).

[Joshua 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 18:18</span></span>

And passed along toward the side over against Arabah northward,.... The
same with Betharabah, [Jos 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006.md); and
so it is called here in the Greek version:

and went down unto Arabah; the same as before, and included it, for it
is mentioned among the cities of this tribe, [Jos
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#022.md).

[Joshua 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 18:19</span></span>

And the border passed along to the side of Bethhoglah northward,....
Inclining somewhat toward the north, but not leaving the city to the
north, for it is included in the lot of Benjamin, [Jos
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021.md); of which place see [Jos
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006.md),

and the outgoings of the border were at the north bay of the salt sea;
here ended the southern border of Benjamin, even at the bay or creek of
the salt sea, which looked northward, as the southern border of Judah
began at that bay of it, which looked southward, [Jos
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#002.md),

at the south end of Jordan; where it fell into the salt sea:

this was the south coast; as before described.

[Joshua 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 18:20</span></span>

And Jordan was the border of it on the east side,.... It had Jordan on
the east, Dan on the west, Judah on the south, and Joseph or Ephraim on
the north:

this was the inheritance of the children of Benjamin, by the coasts
thereof round about, according to their families; this is the general
description of the limits of this tribe, the particular cities in it
follow.

[Joshua 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 18:21</span></span>

Now the cities of the tribe of the children of Benjamin,

according to their families, were Jericho,.... Which though destroyed,
and not to be rebuilt as a city, was yet a place inhabited, and in
future times was rebuilt, and in great splendour, and continued to the
time of Christ; of which see [Jos 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos002.htm#001.md),

and Bethhoglah, where or near to which was the threshing floor of Atad,
at which lamentation was made for Jacob; see Gill on [Gen
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#010.md), and See Gill on [Jos
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006.md),

and the valley of Keziz; or Emekkeziz; so the Greek version calls it
Amecasis: it is highly probable it was in the valley or plain of
Jericho, and perhaps might have its name from the incision of the balsam
tree there; which, as Pliny (n) says, was cut with glass or a stone, or
with knives made of bone; if cut with iron, it kills it.

\(n\) Nat. Hist. l. 12. c. 25.

[Joshua 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 18:22</span></span>

And Betharabah,.... Of the first of these; see Gill on [Jos
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006.md),

and Zemaraim; one of the sons of Canaan was named Zemira, [Gen
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen010.htm#018.md); by whom this city Zemaraim
might be built, or however have its name given it, in memory of him;
there was a mountain of this name in the tribe of Ephraim, near to which
this city might be, [Ch2 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#004.md).

and Bethel; of the last of these; see Gill on [Jos
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002.md).

[Joshua 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 18:23</span></span>

And Avim, and Parah,.... Of the two first of these we read nowhere else:

and Ophrah is not the same with Ophrah in [Jdg
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011.md); that belonged to the tribe of
Manasseh, but rather that which was in the land of Shuah, [Sa1
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#017.md). Jerom calls this place Aphrah,
in the tribe of Benjamin, and says (o), in his time there was a village
called Effrem, five miles from Bethel to the east, which very probably
is the same with this.

\(o\) De loc. Heb. fol. 88. H.

[Joshua 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 18:24</span></span>

And Chepharhaammonai, and Ophni,.... Of the two first of these no
mention is made elsewhere:

and Gaba is the same with Gibeah, a well known place, because of the
foul fact committed there, which had like to have been the ruin of this
tribe, [Jdg 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#014.md); and for being the
native place of King Saul, hence called "Gibeah of Saul", [Sa1
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#004.md); it was about six or seven miles
from Jerusalem; see Gill on [Hos 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos005.htm#008.md);
twelve cities with their villages; which agrees with the account of
them.

[Joshua 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 18:25</span></span>

Gibeon,.... Gibeon is the place from whence the Gibeonites came, who
deceived Joshua, [Jos 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#003.md). Jerom says
(p), in his time there was a village shown of this name, four miles from
Bethel to the east, near Ramah, next mentioned:

and Ramah, which Jerom relates (q) was six miles from Aelia or Jerusalem
to the north, against Bethel. Rauwolff, a traveller in those parts, says
(r), that the town of Rama is situated on an ascent, in plain fields,
which extend themselves for two leagues to the hill of the city of
Jerusalem; these fields are very fruitful and well tilled, and sown with
corn, cotton, and Indian millet; the town is pretty large, but very
open, like unto a village, very pitifully built, where one may still see
here and there some signs of old buildings:

and Beeroth was a city that belonged to the Gibeonites, [Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017); and Jerom says (s.md), in his time
was shown the village, seven miles from Aelia or Jerusalem, as you go to
Neapolis or Shechem.

\(p\) De loc. Heb. fol. 92. A. (q) Ibid. fol. 94. B. (r) Travels, par.
3. c. 1. p. 215. Ed. Ray. (s) Vid. Reland. Palestin. Illustrat. tom. 2.
p. 618.

[Joshua 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 18:26</span></span>

And Mizpeh,.... Frequent mention is made of Mizpeh in Scripture;
according to Fuller (t), it was about eight miles from Gibeah; it was
near Ramathon, which Josephus says (u) was forty furlongs from
Jerusalem:

and Chephirah was one of the cities subject to Gibeon, [Jos
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos009.htm#017.md).

and Mozah; there was a place called Motza, near to Jerusalem, where they
used to go to get willows at the feast of tabernacles (w).

\(t\) Pisgah-Sight, B. 2. c. 12. p. 209. (u) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 12. sect.
3. (w) Misn. Succah, c. 4. sect. 5.

[Joshua 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 18:27</span></span>

And Rekem, and Irpeel, and Taralah. Of these cities there is no mention
made elsewhere.

[Joshua 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 18:28</span></span>

And Zelaheath,.... Zelah was the buryingplace of Saul and his family,
[Sa2 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#014.md).

Eleph is nowhere else mentioned; some join it with Zelah, and make one
city of it, but then the number of cities given could not be completed;
both Jarchi and Kimchi say they were two cities, as doubtless they were:

and Jebusi, which is Jerusalem; of Jerusalem being called Jebusi, see
[Jos 15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063.md); it belonged partly to the
tribe of Judah, and partly to the tribe of Benjamin; Mount Zion belonged
to Judah, and Moriah to Benjamin:

Gibeath was a distinct city both from Gaba and Gibeon; by its being
mentioned with Jerusalem, it should seem to be near it. Jerom (y) speaks
of Gabaatha in the tribe of Benjamin, twelve miles from Eleutheropolis,
where the grave of the Prophet Habakkuk was shown:

and Kirjath signifies a city, but what city is meant is not known:

fourteen cities with their villages; and just so many are mentioned by
name:

this is the inheritance of the children of Benjamin according to their
families; these cities, with others perhaps not mentioned, were allotted
to the tribe of Benjamin for their families to dwell in.

\(y\) De loc. Heb. fol. 92. C.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 19](jos019.md)

</div>
