<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos021)  [Next](jos023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 22:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOSHUA 22

The war with the Canaanites being ended, Joshua called to him the two
tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh, who came over
Jordan with him to assist in it, and commended them for their obedience
to Moses and to himself, and to God by them; and then dismissed them,
with some instructions to keep the ways and worship of God, and with his
blessing upon them, [Jos 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001); upon
which they returned to their country, and when they came to the borders
of it set up an altar by Jordan, [Jos
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#009); which, when the children of
Israel heard of, it gave them great offence, they fearing they were
going to make a revolt from the pure worship of God, and therefore sent
a deputation of princes to them, with the son of the high priest, to
inquire into the matter, and expostulate with them about it, who did,
[Jos 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011); and who received from them
a very satisfactory answer, [Jos
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#021); with which they returned and
reported to the children of Israel, and which gave them pleasure, [Jos
22:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#032).

[Joshua 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 22:1</span></span>

Then Joshua called the Reubenites, and the Gadites, and the half tribe
of Manasseh. The promise of God to Israel being fulfilled, the land of
Canaan being for the most part subdued, the war at an end, and rest had
on all sides from their enemies, and the land divided among the nine
tribes and an half, and they settled in the quiet possession of their
lots; Joshua sent for the two tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half
tribe of Manasseh, who had, at their own request, their portion allotted
them on the other side Jordan, and who came over that river with him to
assist their brethren in their wars with the Canaanites, and addressed
them in the following respectable manner.

[Joshua 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 22:2</span></span>

And said unto them, ye have kept all that Moses the servant of the Lord
commanded you,.... Which was, that they should leave their wives and
children, and flocks, and herds, behind them in the land of Gilead, and
pass over Jordan, with their brethren the children of Israel armed, and
fight with them, and for them, until the Canaanites were subdued, and
not return until their brethren were peaceably settled in the possession
of their inheritances; all which they had punctually observed, and
inviolably kept, as they agreed to, [Num
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001),

and have obeyed my voice in all that I commanded you; as the
generalissimo and commander in chief of the Israelitish forces; as what
rank and position to be in, what part to take in an engagement, what
attack to make, when and where, or on what expedition to go; wherever he
ordered them to go, they went; and upon whatsoever and wheresoever he
sent them, they readily and cheerfully obeyed, as they promised, [Jos
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#016); and approved themselves as good
soldiers under him; for all which he commends them, and gives them
military honour.

[Joshua 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 22:3</span></span>

Ye have not left your brethren these many days unto this day,.... For
the space of fourteen years, which is the commonly received notion of
the Jews (f); seven years according to them the land was subduing, and
seven more spent in dividing it, and then these tribes were sent for and
dismissed; all this time they stayed close by their brethren, and
assisted them in their wars, and never offered to return to their wives
and children, until they had an order from their general:

but have kept the charge of the commandment of the Lord your God; for
what both Moses and Joshua commanded them was from the mouth of the
Lord; so that, in obeying them, they obeyed him.

\(f\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 11. p. 32.

[Joshua 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 22:4</span></span>

And now the Lord your God hath given rest unto your brethren,

as he promised them,.... As in [Jos
21:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#044); see [Deu
12:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#009),

therefore now return ye, and get ye unto your tents; not their military
tents in the army, from which they now came to Joshua, but their houses,
as the Greek version, and their cities, as the Targum; they having been
so long used to tents in the wilderness, and during the wars in Canaan,
this was a familiar word for their dwellings:

and unto the land of your possession, which Moses the servant of the
Lord gave you, on the other side Jordan; before his death, on condition
of doing what they now had done; even the land of Gilead and Bashan,
beyond Jordan.

[Joshua 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 22:5</span></span>

But take diligent heed to do the commandment and the law,.... The ten
commandments, and all other laws, both ceremonial and civil:

which Moses the servant of the Lord charged you; in the name of the
Lord, to keep and observe:

to love the Lord your God; of which keeping the commands of God is an
evidence, and which is the true principle and motive of hearty, sincere,
and cheerful obedience to them:

and to walk in all his ways; which he has prescribed, all his ways of
worship, paths of duty, faith, truth, holiness, and righteousness:

and to keep his commandments; whether moral, ceremonial, or judicial:
whether of natural and moral obligation, or of positive institution:

and to cleave unto him; and not depart from his ways, worship, word, and
ordinances:

and to serve him with all your heart, and with all your soul: in the
most strict and affectionate manner. This advice Joshua thought proper
to give them, and inculcate into them, now they were about to leave
their brethren, and go on the other side Jordan; where they would be at
a distance from the tabernacle, altar, and service of God, and might be
under temptation to relinquish it, and set up another form of worship
elsewhere.

[Joshua 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 22:6</span></span>

So Joshua blessed them, and sent them away,.... Dismissed them from his
presence with a blessing, in order to go to their own country; this he
did by wishing them well, praying to God for a blessing on them, their
persons, and families, who had been so useful in assisting their
brethren to get possession of the land of Canaan. Some think this
blessing includes gifts and presents he bestowed on them:

and they went unto their tents; here the word means their military tents
in the camp of Israel, to which they returned, in order to take with
them their goods, their substance and riches, their part of the spoil of
the enemy, which of right belonged to them.

[Joshua 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 22:7</span></span>

Now to the one half of the tribe of Manasseh Moses had given possession
in Bashan,.... The kingdom of Og, see [Deu
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#013),

but unto the other half thereof gave Joshua among their brethren on this
side Jordan westward: of which an account is given, and the border of
their lot described, [Jos 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#001),

and when Joshua sent them also unto their tents, then he blessed them;
it seems as if this half tribe was separately dismissed and blessed,
they being more nearly related to Joshua, who was of the tribe of
Ephraim, and so had a more particular dismission and blessing; and he
took his leave of them in a different and affectionate manner. Kimchi
makes mention of a Derash, or Exposition of theirs, which says, that
after they had taken leave they stayed two days, and returned and took
leave a second time, and which he understands of them all, and not of
the half tribe only; but it is plainly the half tribe that is only
spoken of.

[Joshua 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 22:8</span></span>

And he spake unto them,.... To the half tribe of Manasseh only, though
some think also to the other ten tribes:

saying, return with much riches unto your tents; that is, return to
their own land, and habitations there, with whatsoever riches they had
got from the spoil of the enemy:

and with very much cattle; they had taken from them, and fell to their
share, and for which they had good pasturage in Gilead and Bashan, and
therefore very proper to take with them:

with silver and with gold, and with brass, and with iron; whether in
massive pieces, or wrought up into vessels, which they found in the
houses of the Canaanites when they plundered them:

and with very much raiment; some no doubt very rich and costly, such as
their kings, princes, nobles, and great personages among them wore:

divide the spoil of your enemies with your brethren; according to Jarchi
and Kimchi, this is spoken to the half tribe of Manasseh, to divide
their spoil with the tribes of Reuben and Gad; but it rather means the
dividing the above spoil, when they came to their own country with their
brethren they left behind; who as they were employed in guarding and
defending their cities, their wives and children, herds and flocks, in
their absence, they had a right to part of the spoil; and as in other
instances it appears to be a common case for those that stayed at home
to share in the spoil with them that went to war, see [Num
31:27](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#027); though the notion of Abarbinel
pleases me best, that by "their brethren" are meant the other half tribe
of Manasseh that remained in Canaan, and were settled there: when the
spoil of the Canaanites was divided among all the tribes, the whole
tribe of Manasseh had its share; and whereas now half of it were going
to their own country on the other side Jordan, it was but reasonable
they should have their part of the spoil to carry with them; and this
seems to be the true reason of their being separately addressed, and
dismissed and blessed.

[Joshua 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 22:9</span></span>

And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the half tribe
of Manasseh, returned,.... First to the camp to take their substance,
and then set forward to their own land:

and departed from the children of Israel; from the rest of them, for
otherwise they were children of Israel also:

out of Shiloh, which is in the land of Canaan; for here the camp of
Israel was, as well as the tabernacle:

to go unto the country of Gilead, to the land of their possession,

whereof they were possessed; Gilead is put for the whole country on the
other side Jordan, as the land of Jazer, and the kingdom of Bashan,
which the two tribes of Reuben and Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh,
were possessed of:

according to the word of the Lord by the hand of Moses; for when they
moved to have that country, Moses, it seems, consulted the Lord about
it, who declared it to be his will they should have it, on performing
what they promised, see [Num 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#001).

[Joshua 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 22:10</span></span>

And when they came unto the borders of Jordan, that are in the land of
Canaan,.... To the banks of it, or the sand heaps, some take the word to
signify, which were thrown up to restrain the waters from overflowing;
some by Geliloth understand a place so called; and Jerom (g) says it was
near Jordan in the tribe of Benjamin: but rather the word signifies the
meanders, windings, and turnings, of the river (h); and such circuits
and compasses it fetched near Jericho, as the same writer (i) observes,
where we may suppose these tribes went over, and at a place where the
river jetted out into the land of Canaan:

the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, built there an altar by
Jordan; or "then"; that is, when they had passed over the river into
their own country, for which Josephus is express (k); and certain it is,
that the altar was built not on the Canaan side of Jordan, but on the
opposite side, as is clear from [Jos
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011), and indeed they had no right to
build on any other ground than their own; and they pitched upon a spot
where the river jetted out into the land of Canaan, as most proper to
erect it on, to be a witness, that though separated from the rest of the
Israelites by the river Jordan, yet were a part of them, and had a right
to join them in the service of God, and bring their sacrifices to the
altar of God in the tabernacle, as more fully appears in some after
verses:

a great altar to see to; built up very high, so that it might be seen at
a great distance.

\(g\) De loc. Heb. fol. 92. C. (h) Vid. Gusset. Ebr. Comment. p. 170,
573. Reland. Palestin. Illustrat. tom. 1. l. 1. c. 43. p. 274, 279. (i)
Ut supra, (De loc. Heb. fol. 92.) G. (k) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 26.

[Joshua 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 22:11</span></span>

And the children of Israel heard say,.... Those that dwelt in the land
of Canaan, for otherwise, as before observed, the two tribes and a half
on the other side Jordan were Israelites also; and this is a further
proof that the altar was built on their side, or those in the land of
Canaan would have known of the building of it, and have seen them at it,
and not come at the knowledge of it by hearsay only, as it seems they
did, it being reported to them by some who had been in those parts, and
had seen the structure:

behold, the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the half
tribe of Manasseh, have built an altar over against the land of Canaan;
which clearly shows it was on the other side Jordan, though Noldius, who
places it in the land of Canaan, renders the words, "in the
neighbourhood of" it (l); which will not much help him, since it might
be in the neighbourhood of it, and yet not in it:

in the borders of Jordan; on the banks of it, or in one of the meanders
and windings of it, at a place where it ran out and fetched a compass in
the land of Canaan:

at the passage of the children of Israel; where they passed over when
they first came into Canaan, and where those tribes also passed over at
their return; supposed to be the Bethabara beyond Jordan, where John was
baptizing, [Joh 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028).

\(l\) "in vicinia", Noldius, No. 369. p. 80.

[Joshua 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 22:12</span></span>

And when the children of Israel heard of it,.... Of the building the
altar in the above place, namely, the nine tribes and a half settled in
the land of Canaan:

the whole congregation of the children of Israel gathered themselves
together at Shiloh; where the tabernacle and altar of the Lord were,
whose cause they undertook to avenge, being injured as they imagined by
the altar the other tribes had built, and where they could consult the
Lord by Urim and Thummim, if needful; hither they repaired from the
several places around, where their tribes were settled; not the whole
body of the people, but their heads and representatives:

to go up to war against them; to consult about it, and to prepare for
it, which they were obliged to do by the law of God, as in the case of a
city, so of a tribe drawn aside to idolatry; and which they imagined was
the case of these tribes, or at least what they had done had a tendency
to apostasy from the true worship of God, which they were zealous to
defend at the hazard of their lives, and though it should issue in an
extirpation of one or more of their tribes; see [Deu
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012).

[Joshua 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 22:13</span></span>

And the children of Israel,.... In the land of Canaan:

sent unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the
half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead; they were possessed of,
and had now returned unto and dwelt in; hither they sent an embassy to
them, to inquire into the truth of what they had heard, and the reason
of it, before they went to war with them, or proclaimed it, or took any
further steps towards it; and which they were obliged to do by the above
law, when there was any suspicion of idolatry, and any good ground and
reason for it, [Deu 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#014); and at the
head of this deputation was

Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest; a man zealous for the Lord of
hosts, and his glory, of which there is an instance in [Num
25:7](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#007); and so a fit person to be
employed in this affair, who would be faithful, bold, and zealous, as
well as capable of giving advice and counsel to both parties, if
needful.

[Joshua 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 22:14</span></span>

And with him ten princes, of each chief house a prince,

throughout all the tribes of Israel,.... The nine tribes and a half, so
that the half tribe of Manasseh sent a prince, as well as the whole
tribes:

and each one was an head of the house of their fathers among the
thousands of Israel; that is, among the rulers of the thousands of
Israel; and so the Greek version calls them Chiliarchs, rulers of
thousands; for the people were divided into tens, fifties, hundreds, and
thousands, over whom there were distinct rulers, [Exo
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#025). Now these were among the chief
of them, of the highest rank and authority; they were the chief princes,
heads of several tribes; a very honourable deputation this! the son of
the high priest, and ten princes, the heads of the tribes; these were
chosen and sent, partly in honour to their brethren beyond Jordan, and
partly that they might carry the greater authority with them, and
prevail upon them to hearken to them.

[Joshua 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 22:15</span></span>

And they came unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad,
and to the half tribe of Manasseh, unto the land of Gilead,.... The
deputation came thither; they either sent for the chiefs among the two
tribes and a half, to meet them at some place, or they, having a notion
of their coming, assembled together to receive them, and hear what they
had to say to them:

and they spake with them, saying; as follows; very probably Phinehas was
the mouth of the whole, for there could be but one speaker.

[Joshua 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 22:16</span></span>

Thus saith the whole congregation of the Lord,.... By whom they were
sent, and whom they represented; and they do not call them the
congregation of Israel, but of the Lord, because it was not on a civil
but religious account they were come, and not to plead their own cause,
but the cause of God; and not so much to show a concern for their own
honour and interest as for the glory of God:

what trespass is this that ye have committed against the God of Israel;
they took it for granted that they had committed a sin, and that so
great, they were not able to express the greatness of it in all its
aggravated circumstances, and plainly suggest it was idolatry; which was
too premature, when as yet they had not inquired into it; but their zeal
for God, and his honour, hurried them into this hasty step:

to turn away this day from following the Lord; they intimate, that they
had begun a revolt from the worship of God, which is aggravated by their
falling into it so soon, having received so many favours from God, and
had so lately seen such wonderful appearances of his power and goodness,
and had just had such excellent instructions, exhortations, and cautions
given them by Joshua, when he dismissed them:

in that ye have built you an altar; which they supposed was to offer
sacrifices upon; whereas there was to be but one altar, and that in the
place which the Lord should choose to put his name in, and which he had
now chosen, where all sacrifices were to be brought and offered up; see
[Exo 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#024),

that ye might rebel this day against the Lord? against the commandment
of the Lord expressed in the places referred to, which they charge with
rebellion against himself, a very high and heavy charge indeed! but they
should first have inquired whether they were guilty of the trespass, or
with what view they had built the altar, whether for sacrifice, or for
some other use; but they took it for granted it was for sacrifice.

[Joshua 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 22:17</span></span>

Is the iniquity of Peor too little for us,.... The worshipping of that
idol, when in the plains of Moab; the history of which, see in [Num
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#002), was that so small a sin, that
another must be added to it, or a greater committed? since building an
altar seemed designed not for a single action of idolatrous worship, but
for the continuance of it, whereas the sin of Peor was only committed at
one time, and not continued in:

from which we are not cleansed until this day; not cleared from the
shame and disgrace of it, or the guilt of it expiated or removed; but it
might be expected, as in the case of the golden calf, that God would
still at times punish for it, when provoked by new crimes; or the sense
is, that there were those among them that were infected with the same
contagion, and whose inclinations were to commit the same, or like sin
of idolatry:

although there was a plague in congregation of the Lord; of which twenty
four thousand died, [Num 25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009).

[Joshua 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 22:18</span></span>

But that you must turn away this day from following the Lord?.... From
the worship of the Lord, as the Targum, and so on [Jos
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016); not content with the former
transgression, but must add this revolt unto it, and at a time which
sadly aggravates it:

and it will be, that seeing ye rebel to, day against the Lord; against
the Word of the Lord, as the Targum, and so on [Jos
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#016),

that tomorrow he will be wroth with the whole congregation of Israel;
or, in a little time, if a stop is not put to this revolt, the whole
body of the people will suffer for it: here they express a concern for
the whole nation of Israel, as well as for the glory of God; for
sometimes the whole congregation has been charged with the sins of
individuals, and punished for it, as a case after mentioned shows; see
[Jos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#001).

[Joshua 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 22:19</span></span>

Notwithstanding, if the land of your possession be unclean,.... That is,
if it was judged to be so by them, because not cleansed from the sins of
the former inhabitants of it by sacrifice, or because there was no altar
in it to offer up sacrifice for the expiation of sin:

then pass ye over unto the land of the possession of the Lord,

wherein the Lord's tabernacle dwelleth; if you repent of the choice you
have made of a country to dwell in, quit it, and come over into the land
of Canaan, which the Lord has taken possession of, and residence in, and
where his tabernacle is fixed, the place of his presence and worship,
and where an altar is erected to sacrifice upon:

and take possession among us; they were willing to quit possession of
their own, and make room for them in each of their tribes, and even
though they straitened themselves, and parted with much of their
estates, rather than they should make a schism, or go into idolatrous
practices; which was a brave, noble, spirit indeed, and showed their
great concern for the honour and glory of God, and his worship, and
their love to their brethren, and affectionate regard for their
spiritual welfare, above their own private, personal, and temporal good:

but rebel not against the Lord: the Word of the Lord, as the Targum,
either Christ the essential Word, the Angel of Jehovah's presence, or
his word of command:

nor rebel against us; by breaking off from us, and setting up another
religion or form of worship:

in building you an altar beside the altar of the Lord our God: which
ought to be common to both, and no other to be set up against it, or
used beside it.

[Joshua 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 22:20</span></span>

Did not Achan the son of Zerah,.... One that descended from Zerah the
son of Judah, [Jos 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#018),

commit a trespass in the accursed thing; in taking what was devoted to
sacred uses:

and wrath fell on all the congregation of Israel? and which was what was
feared now; and this instance is brought to show that such fears were
not groundless:

and that man perished not alone in his iniquity: which seems to confirm
the notion of those who think that his children suffered with him;
though it may be observed, that it was through his sin that thirty six
men were slain by the men of Ai, [Jos
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#005).

[Joshua 22:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 22:21</span></span>

Then the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and the half tribe
of Manasseh, answered,.... By some person whom they appointed to deliver
the answer in their name:

and said unto the heads of the thousands of Israel; who were over those
that were rulers of the thousands of Israel, persons of greater
authority than they, being princes of the respective tribes to which
they belonged.

[Joshua 22:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 22:22</span></span>

The Lord God of gods, the Lord God of gods,.... They first set out in
their answer with asserting their firm belief of Jehovah, the God of
Israel, being the supreme God, God over all; over all that are called
gods, whether angels, of whom Kimchi and Ben Melech interpret it; or
civil magistrates and judges of the earth, who bare the same name; nor
are the gods of the Gentiles to be spoken of with Jehovah, the God of
Israel, who is the supreme Being, self-existent, the Being of beings,
eternal and immutable, all which is contained in his name Jehovah; now
this is repeated by them for the confirmation of their faith in this
great article of it, and shows the steadiness of it, and to express
their earnest and vehement affection for this truth, and to clear
themselves from any imputation of idolatry, or thought of it, or doing
anything that might have a tendency to it:

he knoweth; he is the omniscient God, the searcher of the hearts and the
trier of the reins of the children of men; he knows our cordial belief
of this truth, the integrity of our hearts, the intention of our minds,
that we never had a thought in us of departing from his worship, and of
setting up an altar beside his in opposition to it:

and Israel he shall know; our brethren the Israelites that dwell in the
land of Canaan, whose representatives you are, shall know, not only by
our present declaration, but by our future conduct, and strict adherence
to the pure worship of God in time to come, that it was never our view
by what we have done to depart from it:

if it be in rebellion, or if in transgression against the Lord; with a
design to rebel against his word, and transgress his command:

save us not this day; this is said with respect to God, and as an
apostrophe to him, as Jarchi, Kimchi, and Abarbinel observe; as
expressing their desire to have no mercy shown them by him, but that
vengeance might be taken on them by him, to whom all things were naked
and open, and who full well knew whether they were guilty or not; or
else the address is to Phinehas, and the princes, that they would rise
up and put them to death by sword, if this appeared to be the case; or
that all the other tribes would rise up, and make war against them, and
cut them off with the edge of the sword, and not spare them.

[Joshua 22:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 22:23</span></span>

That we have built us an altar, to turn from following the Lord,....
That is, we desire, as we deserve, to be cut to pieces, and not saved,
if it should appear to be our view, in building this altar, to revolt
from the pure worship of God:

or if to offer thereon burnt offering, or meat offering, or if to offer
peace offerings; even to the Lord himself: they declare that as they had
no design to apostatize from God, and worship idols, so it was not their
intention to offer any kind of sacrifice on the altar they had built,
even to the Lord himself; and they take notice of every kind of
offering, to remove every charge of this sort from them, and to purge
themselves of every imputation of this nature: then

let the Lord himself require it; seek it out, who is the omniscient God,
and revenge it, who is the Lord God Almighty, just and true.

[Joshua 22:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 22:24</span></span>

And if we have not rather done it for fear of this thing,.... So far
they suggest were they from doing this, in order to turn from the pure
worship of God, and introduce idolatrous worship, that it was to guard
against everything of that kind for the future; and through fear of it,
and anxiety and distress of mind, lest some time or another there should
be any temptation to it in their posterity, had they built this altar:

saying, in time to come your children might speak unto our children; or
"tomorrow" (m), in a short time after your heads, and ours, are laid in
the grave, your posterity will accost us:

saying, what have you to do with the Lord God of Israel? you are aliens
and strangers from the commonwealth of Israel, live in a foreign land,
and not in the land, of Canaan; are separated from us by the river
Jordan, are a different people from us, and have nothing to do with the
tabernacle of the Lord, and the service of it, or with the altar of the
Lord, to offer sacrifice on it. Now as they returned to their own
country, or when got there, such anxious thoughts and fears rose up in
their minds, which they communicated to one another, and thought of this
expedient to prevent what would be so fatal to their posterity. The
Targum is,"you have no part in the Word of the Lord God of Israel;''see
[Joh 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#008).

\(m\) "cras", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Joshua 22:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 22:25</span></span>

For the Lord hath made Jordan a border between us and you,.... And by it
separated them from them, as if they were a distinct people; not that
this was really the case, but so they feared it would be represented in
time to come; for though Jordan was the border of the land of Canaan,
strictly so called, eastward, [Num
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#012); yet it did not exclude the land
of the two tribes and a half from being part of the land of promise; for
the Amorites, which before inhabited it, and were driven out of it, were
Canaanites, and were one part of the people, whose land the Lord
promised to Abraham, [Gen 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#018),

ye children of Reuben, and children of Gad, have no part in the Lord; in
his covenant and promises, in his worship, word, and ordinances; these
are things you have nothing to do with, being separated from us his
peculiar people; or "have no part in the Word of the Lord", as the
Targum, the promised Messiah, being without, or separated from him, as
the Gentiles are said to be, [Eph
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012),

so shall your children make our children cease from fearing the Lord;
from worshipping the Lord, the fear of the Lord being often put for the
whole worship of God, external and internal, [Ecc
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#013); by behaving in the above manner
towards them, they would be the cause and occasion of their apostasy
from the true God, and it would be in effect to say to them, "go, serve
other gods", [Sa1 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#019).

[Joshua 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 22:26</span></span>

Therefore we said,.... One to another, in order to prevent the apostasy
of our children from God, their departure from his worship, and going
into idolatry:

let us now prepare to build us an altar; get materials ready, and set
about it instantly, without any delay, while the thing dwells upon our
minds:

not for burnt offering, nor for sacrifice; not for offerings of any kind
required by the law, neither for sin offerings nor trespass offerings,
nor any other not named.

[Joshua 22:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 22:27</span></span>

But that it may be a witness between us and you, and our generations
after us,.... That we are one people, worship one God, and serve at one
altar, of which this built was a resemblance, and would put them in mind
of it:

that we might do the service of the Lord before him; in the tabernacle,
and at the altar, in the place where he had chosen to put his name and
dwell:

with our burnt offerings, and with our sacrifices, and with our peace
offerings; to be brought at stated times, or as occasion required:

that your children may not say to our children, in time to come, ye have
no part in the Lord; nor right to his altar, and so forbid them offering
their sacrifices on it; or"have no part in the Word of the Lord,''as the
Targum; the Messiah, whose sacrifice was typified by the sacrifices of
the legal dispensation, and all such, who offered theirs in the faith of
that, had a part in it, and their sins were expiated by it.

[Joshua 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 22:28</span></span>

Therefore said we,.... To prevent any such usage of our children, and
that they might have a ready answer to give:

that it shall be, when they should so say unto us, or to our
generations, in time to come; as above suggested, that they were a
separate people from them, and had no interest in the Lord, nor right to
his altar, nor concern in his worship:

that we may say again; in reply, that is, our posterity:

behold the pattern of the altar of the Lord, which our fathers made;
which exactly agrees with the Mosaic altar, and which they could never
have framed in so exact a manner if they had not seen it, and served at
it; wherefore this was a plain proof of their being originally
worshippers of the same God, partakers of the same altar, and were in
the faith, fellowship, and communion of Israel. According to Gussetius
(n), this was not the altar the Reubenites, &c. built, which the
children of Israel would be bid to behold, but the Mosaic altar at the
tabernacle or temple, which was the archetype and exemplar, according to
which that of the Reubenites was formed; and therefore say not, come and
behold, but behold the altar present before them, that of Moses, and
acknowledge that to be a type and exemplar, which they had related, and
so confess it to be a testimony of their mutual fellowship: and what
they had made in imitation of it, which exactly answered to it, was

not for burnt offerings, nor for sacrifices; of any sort, that was not
the intention of erecting it:

but it is a witness between us and you; that we worship the same God,
and are of the same faith and fellowship.

\(n\) Ebr. Comment. p. 135.

[Joshua 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jos 22:29</span></span>

God forbid that we should rebel against the Lord,.... Against the
command of the Lord, who ordered one altar to be made, to which all
sacrifices were to be brought from the several parts of the land of
Israel, and there to be offered on it; or

"against the Word of the Lord,''as the Targum, Christ typified both by
the altar and the sacrifices on it; and who is but one, one priest, one
sacrifice, one altar, one Mediator and Saviour:

and turn this day from following the Lord; apostatize from him, and from
his worship:

to build an altar for burnt offerings, for meat offerings, or for
sacrifices; which was never our intention, or ever entered into our
hearts to erect one for such a purpose:

besides the altar of the Lord our God, that is before his tabernacle; it
standing in the court of the tabernacle before the holy place.

[Joshua 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 22:30</span></span>

And when Phinehas the priest,.... For he was, being the son of Eleazar
the high priest, so the word "priest", [Jos
22:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#013); is to be joined, not to Eleazar
but to Phinehas:

and the princes of the congregation; the ten princes, who were sent by
the congregation of Israel, one out of each tribe:

and heads out of the thousands of Israel; these are the same with the
princes, and this belongs to their title, who were heads of the
Chiliarchs, or those who were rulers of thousands in Israel:

which were with him; with Phinehas, who were joined with him in the
embassy, and now present with him:

heard the words that the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad,

and the children of Manasseh; spake; in defence of themselves,
explaining the meaning and design of the altar they had built:

it pleased them; they were not only satisfied with their answer, but
highly delighted with what they had done, as tending to preserve the
common faith and fellowship of Israel.

[Joshua 22:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jos 22:31</span></span>

And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest,.... As the mouth of the
deputation, and in their name:

said unto the children of Reuben, and to the children of Gad, and to the
children of Manasseh; the representatives of them assembled together on
this occasion:

this day we perceive that the Lord is among us; his Shechinah, as the
Targum; his powerful Presence in preserving their brethren from
committing a trespass, as they feared; his gracious Presence smiling
upon them; and as the God of peace and order, and not of confusion,
uniting and cementing their hearts in love to one another:

because ye have not committed this trespass against the Lord; which they
were fearful and jealous of they had, but they found that the Lord had
been good and gracious in preserving them from it:

now ye have delivered the children of Israel out of the hand of the
Lord; into which they would have fallen, had that been the case, and
would have felt the effects of the divine resentment, but now they were
secure from them.

[Joshua 22:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 22:32</span></span>

And Phinehas the son of Eleazar the priest, and the princes,.... Being
fully satisfied with the relation of things that had been given them,
and having taken their leave of the assembly:

returned from the children of Reuben, and from the children of Gad; the
Greek version adds, "and from the half tribe of Manasseh"; which, though
not in the Hebrew text, is undoubtedly meant:

out of the land of Gilead: which, though only a part of the country
these tribes inhabited, is put for the whole, and it is not improbable
that the assembly might be held in it:

unto the land of Canaan, to the children of Israel; the rest of the
children of Israel who dwelt in the land of Canaan, properly so called:

and brought them word again; reported the whole affair, related all that
had passed, and acquainted them with the intention and design of their
brethren erecting the altar, and what had been the issue of their
embassy to them.

[Joshua 22:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jos 22:33</span></span>

And the thing pleased the children of Israel,.... They were quite
satisfied with the account of things, and were pleased and delighted
with what their brethren, the other two tribes, had done:

and the children of Israel blessed God: returned thanks to him, that
there was no trespass committed against him, and no schism like to be
made among them, nor any wrath to come upon them:

and did not intend to go up against them in battle; for though upon
first hearing of their building an altar, which they supposed was for
idolatry, they had intended to make war against them, but now
understanding the design of that building, they laid aside all thoughts
of that kind:

to destroy the land wherein the children of Reuben and Gad dwelt; which
they judged by the law in [Deu 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu013.htm#012)
they were obliged to do. The Greek version here adds also, "and the half
tribe of Manasseh", and renders the last clause, and "they dwelt in it";
continued to dwell in it undisturbed by their brethren.

[Joshua 22:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos022.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jos 22:34</span></span>

And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, called the altar
Ed,.... Which signifies a "witness"; they caused such an inscription to
be put upon it, or this word to be engraved on it, that so the intention
of erecting it might be known in future time; that it was not for
sacrifice, but to be a testimony of their being one with their brethren
on the other side Jordan, in worship, faith, and fellowship:

for it shall be a witness between us that the Lord is God; is the one
God, the God of them both, of all Israel, whether on the one or the
other side of Jordan; to be worshipped by them in one and the same
manner, and their sacrifices to be offered to him on his altar before
the tabernacle.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 23](jos023)

</div>
