<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos003)  [Next](jos005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOSHUA 4

This chapter relates an order, that is men, should take twelve stones
out of the midst of Jordan, and carry them to the first place they
lodged at as a memorial of their passage over it, [Jos
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001); and how Joshua set up twelve
other stones in the river itself, [Jos
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#009); and how many of the tribes of
Reuben, Gad, and Manasseh, went before the Israelites when they passed
over, [Jos 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#010); which being done, the
priests were ordered to come out of Jordan, when the waters returned to
their place, [Jos 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#015); The time when
this miracle was wrought is observed, [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019); and an account is given of
Joshua's pitching the twelve stones taken out of Jordan in Gilgal, and
the use they were to be of in future time, [Jos
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020).

[Joshua 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 4:1</span></span>

And it came to pass, when all the people were clean passed over
Jordan,.... As related, [Jos 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#017),

that the Lord spake unto Joshua, saying: as follows.

[Joshua 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 4:2</span></span>

Take you twelve men out of the people,.... Joshua had before this
ordered twelve men to be taken from among them, which seems to have been
done of himself; and now he has a direction from God for it, and what to
employ them in:

out of every tribe a man; so that what they did was in the name of the
several tribes, and as representing them.

[Joshua 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 4:3</span></span>

And command you them, saying,.... As follows:

take you hence out of the midst of Jordan; so that they were obliged to
go back into the midst of Jordan, having already passed over it, as
appears from [Jos 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#001),

out of the place where the priests' feet stood firm; where being stones,
they chose to stand upon them, and which were a firm standing for them;
and which secured them from the slime and mud at the bottom of the river
the waters left behind; though it is not absolutely necessary to
understand it that they were to take, and did take, the stones from
under their feet, but those that lay about the place where they stood:

twelve stones; each man a stone; and, according to the Samaritan
Chronicle (f), every man inscribed his name on the stone:

and ye shall carry them over with you; from the place they took them up,
to the place they should next stop at:

and leave them in the lodging place where you shall lodge this night:
which was in the place afterwards called Gilgal, [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019).

\(f\) Apud Hottinger. Smegma Oriental. p. 500, 503.

[Joshua 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 4:4</span></span>

Then Joshua called the twelve men whom he had prepared of the children
of Israel,.... It may be for some other purpose, [Jos
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#012); but this was the destination of
them eventually, and as by divine direction:

out of every tribe a man: as he had before ordered, and was now directed
to.

[Joshua 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 4:5</span></span>

And Joshua said unto them,.... The twelve men:

pass ye over before the ark of the Lord your God into the midst of
Jordan; that is, they were to go back to Jordan again, which they had
passed over, and go into the midst of it, where were the priests bearing
the ark; for it is not to be imagined that the ark went along with them,
or followed them, they going before it; but they went where that was,
just before it, from whence they were to take the stones, as next
directed:

and take you up every man of you a stone upon his shoulder; by which it
appears they were large stones they were to take, not what they could
carry in their hands, but what they were obliged to take upon their
shoulders:

according unto the number of the tribes of the children of Israel; who
had that day passed over Jordan, of which these stones were to be a
memorial.

[Joshua 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 4:6</span></span>

That this may be a sign among you,.... A commemorative one:

that when your children ask their fathers in time to come; or "tomorrow"
(g) and so in all time, or any time hereafter:

saying, what mean you by these stones? what is the reason of setting
them up, and in this place, and being just of such a number?

\(g\) Sept. "eras", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Joshua 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 4:7</span></span>

Then ye shall answer them,.... By informing them of the design and use
of them:

that the waters of Jordan were cut off before the ark of the covenant of
the Lord when it passed over Jordan; the waters below from those that
were, above, which stood up on an heap; so that they were divided and
separated from each other, and made dry land for a passage of the
children of Israel; and this was done before, and in the presence of the
ark of the covenant, to show that is was owing to the power of God, of
whose presence the ark was a symbol:

the waters of Jordan were cut off; which is repeated for the
confirmation of it, and that it might be taken notice of as a very
marvellous event, and to be ascribed to the divine omnipotence and
goodness:

and these stones shall be for a memorial unto the children of Israel for
ever; which, whenever seen and observed by them, would put them in mind
of this wonderful appearance of God for them; and Jerom (h) speaks of
them as if seen by Paula in his time, whose life and travels in those
parts are written by him.

\(h\) Epitaph. Paulae in tom. 1. Oper. fol. 59. K.

[Joshua 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 4:8</span></span>

And the children of Israel did so as Joshua commanded,.... That is, the
twelve men taken out of the twelve tribes of Israel, and who were the
representatives of them in this action:

and took up twelve stones out of the midst of Jordan, as the Lord spake
unto Joshua, according to the number of the tribes of the children of
Israel; they took the exact number, and out of the very place Joshua was
ordered to direct them to do:

and carried them over with them unto the place where they lodged: which,
as Josephus says (i), was fifty furlongs from Jordan, which was above
six miles; so far they carried these stones on their shoulders:

and laid them down there; which afterwards were put in proper order by
Joshua, or at least by his direction.

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 4.

[Joshua 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 4:9</span></span>

And Joshua set up twelve stones in the midst of Jordan,.... Twelve other
stones, as the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions, and so Jarchi;
which he set one upon another, so that they might be seen above the
water; or however the water of Jordan being clear, they might easily be
discerned by those who either passed over the river, or walked by the
side of it, where they were; and perhaps may be the very stones John the
Baptist pointed at in [Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009); since
it was at Bethabara he was baptizing, supposed to be the very place of
the passage of the children of Israel over Jordan, and had its name from
thence, [Joh 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028),

in the place where the feet of the priests which bare the ark of the
covenant stood; and which was done in commemoration of it: the words
will bear to be read "under the station" of the feet of the priests:
hence Jarchi fancies these were set, that their feet might not sink in
the mud at the bottom of the river; but this, though here recorded,
might be done by Joshua immediately after the priests were come out of
Jordan, or as they were coming up: hence some think Joshua was the last
that came up from it; but Abarbinel observes, that the word signifies
"in the room" or "stead of"; see Gill on [Exo
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#024); so that these stones were
placed in the room and stead of the station of the priests, in the midst
of the river, and in memory of it:

and they are there unto this day; to the time of the writing of this
book, which is no objection to Joshua being the writer of it, though it
is by some made one; since it might be wrote by him, as doubtless it
was, when such an observation could not be impertinent; and if what has
been before observed is true, these stones were in the same place in the
times of John the Baptist; and that they were in the order in which they
were first set; for that they were in the waters of Jordan, there could
scarce be any question of it. This was done to perpetuate the memory of
this remarkable event: so Alexander the great set up twelve altars on
the borders of India, by the river Oraxes, in commemoration of his
exploits (k).

\(k\) Arrian. Expedit. Alex. l. 5. Curtius, l. 9. sect. 3.

[Joshua 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 4:10</span></span>

For the priests which bare the ark stood in the midst of Jordan,....
Though on dry ground, the waters being divided:

until everything was finished that the Lord commanded Joshua to speak
unto the people, according to all that Moses commanded Joshua; that is,
until all the people had passed over Jordan, as the Lord had ordered
Joshua, to encourage them unto, and go over with them, [Jos
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#002); and which Moses, by divine
direction, had given Joshua in charge to do, [Deu
31:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu031.htm#007); Kimchi interprets this of the
setting up of the stones in Jordan, and the removal of the other to
Gilgal, of which Moses said nothing to Joshua; and though it may be true
of the former, that the priests stood in Jordan till that was done,
which is not certain, yet not of the latter; for it is plain, and it is
most reasonable to conclude, that the priests were come up from the
midst of Jordan before Israel marched to Gilgal, or even began their
march, see [Jos 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#018); and much less is
this to be understood of the stones at Ebal, as others, and so referred
to [Deu 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#002); which was not done until
after Ai was taken, [Jos 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#024). And it
is not reasonable to imagine that the priests should continue in Jordan
to that time; Abarbinel thinks it refers to the words in [Jos
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#003); which had been spoken by the Lord
to Joshua, and had been expressed by Moses, [Deu
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#024); and which he supposes were now
repeated by Joshua, and the priests continued in their station until he
had made an end of rehearsing them; the last clause relating to Moses is
left out in the Septuagint version:

and the people hasted and passed over; not stood in fear of the waters
of the river returning upon them; rather through an eager desire of
setting their feet on the land of Canaan, and it may be to relieve the
priests from their station as soon as might be.

[Joshua 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 4:11</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the people were clean passed over,.... Every
one of them, as in [Jos 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#017),

that the ark of the Lord passed over, and the priests, in the presence
of the people; that is, the priests bearing the ark came out of the
midst of Jordan in the sight of all the people, who were on the banks of
it, on the other side, where they had been stationed during the passage
of the people; though this motion of them was not until they received an
order for it, of which there is an after mention. The Septuagint version
reads, "and the stones before them"; see [Jos
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#008).

[Joshua 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 4:12</span></span>

And the children of Reuben, and the children of Gad, and half the tribe
of Manasseh,.... Who were settled on the other side Jordan, in the
countries taken from Sihon and Og:

passed over armed before the children of Israel; the rest of the tribes:

as Moses spake unto them; or ordered them, and as they promised they
would, [Num 32:17](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#017).

[Joshua 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 4:13</span></span>

About forty thousand prepared for war,.... Accoutred with proper armour
to defend themselves, and their brethren, and annoy their enemies: this
is to be understood of such a number of the above mentioned tribes;
otherwise the number of all Israel that went over Jordan, even armed or
fighting men, besides women and children, were five hundred thousand or
more. Now though the number of men fit for war, of these tribes, were an
hundred thirty thousand, who were all, according to the original
agreement, under obligation to go with their brethren over Jordan into
Canaan's land, and continue with them until it was subdued, and they had
rest in it; yet Joshua took no more than about forty thousand of them,
who we may suppose were select men, and fit for his purpose; the rest
were left to look after their flocks, their families, and their lands:
these

passed over before the Lord unto battle; over Jordan, before the ark of
the Lord, as that stood in Jordan, bore by the priests there, being
ready to engage in battle whenever it was necessary: and they went on
with their brethren

to the plains of Jericho; to a place afterwards called Gilgal; see [Jos
4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019). The Septuagint version is, to
the city Jericho.

[Joshua 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 4:14</span></span>

On that day the Lord magnified Joshua in the sight of Israel,.... Made
him great and honourable in their esteem, by doing what he foretold
would be done, dividing the waters of Jordan, drying up the river to
make a passage for them through it, as on dry land:

and they feared him, as they feared Moses, all the days of his life; had
a reverend esteem of him, and affection for him, and yielded obedience
to him all his days; see [Exo 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#031).

[Joshua 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 4:15</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Joshua,.... When all the people had passed over
jordan:

saying; as follows.

[Joshua 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 4:16</span></span>

Command the priests that bear the ark of the testimony,.... In all
places before, in this history, the ark is called the ark of the
covenant, here the ark of the testimony, which signifies the same thing,
the law; which was both the covenant between God and the people, and a
testimony of his will unto them; the Septuagint version has both words:

that they come up out of Jordan; where they stayed until all the people
passed over, for the encouragement of them, and until they received this
order.

[Joshua 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 4:17</span></span>

Joshua therefore commanded the priests,.... In obedience to the Lord,
and sent them an order:

saying; as follows:

come ye up out of Jordan; from the midst of the river to the bank of it,
which was properly an ascent.

[Joshua 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 4:18</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the priests that bare the ark of the covenant
of the Lord were come up out of the midst of Jordan,.... According to
the command of Joshua in the name of the Lord:

and the soles of the priests' feet were lift up upon the dry land; and
set upon it, on the bank of Jordan, and shores of the land of Canaan:

that the waters of Jordan returned unto their place; those that came
from above, and had stood on an heap, gradually came down into the
channel, and those below that were cut off returned:

and flowed over all his banks, as they did before; and usually did at
this time of the year, see [Jos 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#015);
so that there was no decrease or loss of the waters by their failing,
and being cut off.

[Joshua 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 4:19</span></span>

And the people came up out of Jordan,.... The channel of it, to the
shore:

on the tenth day of the first month; the month Nisan or Abib, which from
the time of Israel's coming out of Egypt was appointed the first month
of the year, [Exo 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002); on the
fifteenth of which month they came out of Egypt, having kept the
passover on the fourteenth at even; so that their coming out of Egypt,
to their entrance into Canaan, was just forty years, wanting five days.
This tenth day was the day in which the passover was taken from the
flock, and kept till the fourteenth, on which day the children of Israel
kept their first passover in Canaan, in the plains of Jericho, [Jos
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#010),

and encamped in Gilgal, in the east border of Jericho; it has its name
here by anticipation, for it was so named after this for a reason given,
[Jos 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos005.htm#009); It was, according to
Josephus (l), ten furlongs, or a mile and a quarter, from Jericho. Jerom
says (m), there was shown in his time a desert place two miles from
Jericho, had in wonderful esteem by men of that country, which he
suggests was this place; as it was had in great veneration, both by the
worshippers of the true God, and by idolaters, for many ages.

\(l\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 4.) (m) De loc. Heb. fol. 91.
M.

[Joshua 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 4:20</span></span>

And those twelve stones which they took out of Jordan,.... The twelve
men who were sent there for that purpose, and took them from thence, and
brought them hither, [Jos 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#003),

did Joshua pitch in Gilgal; set them in rows, or one upon another, and
made a pillar of them commemorative of their passage over Jordan into
the land of Canaan: according to Josephus (n), he made an altar of these
stones; and Ben Gersom is of opinion, that they were placed in the
sanctuary by the ark, though not in it; which yet was the sentiment of
Tertullian (o), but very improbable; since that ark was not capable of
such a number of large stones; and it must be a very large ark or chest,
if one could be supposed to be made on purpose for them; but it is most
likely they were erected in form of a pillar or statue, in memory of
this wonderful event, the passage of Israel over Jordan, see [Jos
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#007); they may be considered as emblems
of the twelve apostles of Christ, and their ministrations and writings;
their number agrees, and so does the time of their appointment to go
into all the world, and preach the Gospel, which was after the
resurrection of Christ, typified by the passage of Joshua over Jordan,
and out of it; the name of one of them, and he a principal one, was
Peter or Cephas, which signifies a stone; and all of them in a spiritual
sense were lively stones, chosen and selected from others, and called by
grace, and were very probably most, if not all of them, baptized in this
very place, Bethabara, from whence these stones were taken; and were
like them unpolished, as to external qualifications, not having an
education, and being illiterate, but wonderfully fitted by Christ for
his service; and were not only pillars, as James, Cephas, and John, but
in some sense foundation stones; as they were the instruments of laying
Christ ministerially, as the foundation of salvation, and of preaching
the fundamental truths of the Gospel, in which they were constant and
immovable; and their ministry and writings, their Gospels and epistles,
are so many memorials of what Christ, our antitypical Joshua, has done
for us in passing over Jordan's river, or through death; finishing
thereby transgression and sin, obtaining peace, pardon, righteousness,
and salvation, opening the way to the heavenly Canaan, abolishing death,
and bringing life and immortality to light.

\(n\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 4.) (o) Contr. Marcion. l. 4.
c. 13.

[Joshua 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 4:21</span></span>

And he spoke unto the children of Israel, saying,.... At the same time
he set up the stones:

when you children shall ask their fathers in time to come, saying,

What mean these stones? See Gill on [Jos
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#006).

[Joshua 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 4:22</span></span>

Then ye shall let your children know,.... The meaning of the erection of
these stones, acquaint them with the whole history, the meaning of which
they are designed to perpetuate:

saying, Israel came over this Jordan on dry land; and if they should ask
how that could possibly be done, or if they did not, they were to inform
them by what means it was brought about, as follows.

[Joshua 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 4:23</span></span>

For the Lord your God dried up the waters of Jordan from before you,
until ye were passed over,.... As this is supposed to be said in future
time, and to persons who were not upon the spot when this was done, and
so entirely ignorant of the affair; it is not to be understood of them
personally, but of the same people they were of, the people of Israel in
former times, of their ancestors, and of them in them; the benefits of
which they enjoyed by possessing the land of Canaan their fathers were
at this time introduced into:

as the Lord your God did to the Red sea, which he dried up from before
us, until we were gone over; for though the generation of men, for the
most part, was dead, that passed through the Red sea; yet as Joshua
himself, and Caleb and Eleazar, and it may be some others that were not
among the murmurers, were still living, for whom that miracle was
wrought, this way of speaking is very properly made use of; and
especially when it is observed, that there were many of the present
generation then young, which passed over, and even those unborn were in
and represented by their ancestors, and who enjoyed the advantages of
that wonderful mercy; so these two strange events are joined together,
as instances of divine power and goodness, in [Psa
114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003).

[Joshua 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 4:24</span></span>

That all the people of the earth might know the hand of the Lord, that
it is mighty,.... Even almighty, and can do that which is marvellous and
surprising, and above the power of nature to effect; things unsearchable
and past finding out, which cannot be expressed, or conceived how and by
what means they are brought about; this the very Heathens would own and
acknowledge when they should see these stones, and be told the meaning
of them, or should hear of this amazing event:

that ye might fear the Lord your God for ever; as the above mentioned
end was to be answered among the people of the earth by these stones,
this among the people of Israel; who upon sight of them would call to
mind the power and goodness of God, which would serve to keep an awe of
his majesty on their mind, a due reverence of him and his greatness, and
engage them to fear, serve, and worship him; who by such acts as these
had abundantly showed himself to be the only true and living God, and
the covenant God of them his people Israel; the Septuagint version
is,"that ye may worship the Lord your God in every work.''

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 5](jos005)

</div>
