<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Joshua Index](jos)  
  [Previous](jos020)  [Next](jos022) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 21](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#001)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 21:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOSHUA 21

This chapter contains the address of the Levites to the court, to have
the cities and suburbs given them according to the command of God by
Moses, [Jos 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#001); the grant of them by
lot out of the several tribes, [Jos
21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#003); the particular cities out of the
tribes of Judah and Simeon are mentioned by name, [Jos
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#009); then those out of the tribe of
Benjamin, [Jos 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#017); next those out
of the tribe of Ephraim, [Jos 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#020);
afterwards those out of the tribe of Dan, [Jos
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#023); then those out of the half
tribe of Manasseh, [Jos 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#027); and out
of the tribe of Issachar, [Jos 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#028);
and out of the tribe of Asher, [Jos
21:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#030); and of Naphtali, [Jos
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#032); and of Zebulun, [Jos
21:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#034); and of Reuben, [Jos
21:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#036); and of Gad, [Jos
21:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#038); which in all made forty eight,
[Jos 21:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#041); and the chapter is
concluded with observing, that God gave Israel all the land of Canaan,
and rest in it, according to his promise, very faithfully and
punctually, [Jos 21:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#043).

[Joshua 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 21:1</span></span>

Then came near the heads of the fathers of the Levites,.... When the
land was divided to the several tribes, and everyone knew the cities
that belonged to them, and what they could and should part with to the
Levites, and when the six cities of refuge were fixed; the Levites came
to put in their claim for cities of habitation, they having no share in
the division of the land; and yet it was necessary they should have
habitations; the persons that undertook to put in a claim for them were
the principal men among them; the fathers of them were Kohath, Gershon,
and Merari; the heads of those were the chief men that were then living:
these came

unto Eleazar the priest, and unto Joshua the son of Nun; the high priest
and chief magistrate:

and unto the heads of the fathers of the tribes of the children of
Israel; the princes appointed to divide the land with the two great
personages before mentioned, [Num
34:17](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#017).

[Joshua 21:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 21:2</span></span>

And they spake unto them at Shiloh in the land of Canaan,.... Where the
tabernacle was fixed, at or near which the above persons met to cast
lots for the division of the land to the seven tribes that had not
received their inheritance:

saying, the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses to give us cities to
dwell in, with the suburbs thereof for our cattle; this command is
extant in [Num 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#002).

[Joshua 21:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 21:3</span></span>

And the children of Israel gave unto the Levites out of their
inheritance,.... Knowing full well there was such a command, made no
objection to their motion, but freely gave them cities out of the
portion of inheritance allotted to them; this they did

at the commandment of the Lord, and in obedience to it, even gave these
cities and suburbs; after mentioned: this was done by the tribes
themselves; as there were a certain number fixed by the commandment of
God, they agreed among themselves how many and what cities should be
given out of each tribe; and then lots were cast for them by Joshua,
what and which cities should be appropriated to their several divisions,
as the Kohathites that sprang from Aaron, and the rest of them that did
not, and the Gershonites and Merarites, as follows.

[Joshua 21:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 21:4</span></span>

And the lot came out for the family of the Kohathites,.... The first lot
that was drawn out of the pot or urn was for the descendants of Kohath,
a son of Levi:

and the children of Aaron the priest, which were of the Levites; who
descended from Amram, the eldest son of Kohath, and these were not only
Levites, but priests: these

had by lot out of the tribe of Judah, and out of the tribe of Simeon,

and out of the tribe of Benjamin, thirteen cities; which are after
mentioned by name; and as these were priests, whose business was to
serve in the temple, and at the altar, the cities assigned them by the
lot, were, by the wise disposal of divine Providence, ordered them out
of those tribes which lay nearest to Jerusalem; the place God had chosen
to put his name in, where the temple would be built, and the altars
erected for sacrifices and incense.

[Joshua 21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 21:5</span></span>

And the rest of the children of Kohath,.... Which did not descend from
him in the line of Amram and Aaron, but of Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel,
who were not priests, but Levites:

had by lot out of the families of the tribe of Ephraim, and out of the
tribe of Dan, and out of the half tribe of Manasseh, ten cities; these
other sort of Kohathites had their cities in tribes next to the other
three where the Kohathites that were priests had theirs.

[Joshua 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 21:6</span></span>

And the children of Gershon had by lot out of the families of the tribe
of Issachar,.... These were Levites who descended from Gershon, the
eldest son of Levi, and had their cities by lot assigned them in tribes
at a greater distance, not only out of Issachar, but

out of the tribe of Asher, and out of the tribe of Naphtali, and out of
the half tribe of Manasseh in Bashan; which was the other half of the
tribe beyond Jordan:

thirteen cities; as many as were given out of the tribes of Judah,
Simeon, and Benjamin.

[Joshua 21:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 21:7</span></span>

The children of Merari by their families,.... The descendants of Merari,
the third son of Levi:

had out of the tribe of Reuben, and out of the tribe of Gad; which were
both on the other side Jordan:

and out of the tribe of Zebulun, twelve cities; in all forty eight, as
the Lord commanded, [Num 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#007).

[Joshua 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 21:8</span></span>

And the children of Israel gave by lot unto the Levites these cities
with their suburbs,.... Reaching two thousand cubits from the cities all
around: these cities did not lie all together, and so could not be
described by their coasts; but in the several tribes, and intermixed
with their cities; which fulfilled Jacob's prophecy, that they should be
divided and scattered in Israel, [Gen
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007); as well as it was so ordered for
the benefit of the several tribes, that they might have the assistance
of the priests and Levites, to instruct them in the knowledge of the
laws and commandments of God, and all divine things:

as the Lord commanded by the hand of Moses; [Num
35:2](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#002).

[Joshua 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 21:9</span></span>

And they gave out of the tribe of the children of Judah,.... Here
follows a particular account of the several cities which were given out
of each tribe, and first out of this:

and out of the tribe of the children of Simeon; which is joined with
that of Judah, because the cities of it lay within it, [Jos
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001),

these cities which are here mentioned by name; [Jos
21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#013).

[Joshua 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 21:10</span></span>

Which the children of Aaron, being of the families of the
Kohathites,.... Who descending from Kohath, in the line of Aaron, were
priests:

who were of the children of Levi, had; they were Levites, as descending
from Levi, but were priests also, as being of the stock of Aaron, and
the cities hereafter mentioned in the said tribe fell to their portion:

for theirs was the first lot; for being of the line of Aaron, and
priests, they had the honour and privilege to have the first lot drawn
for them, and out of the tribe for which the first lot was also drawn,
the tribe of Judah; here they had their cities allotted them, for a
reason before given.

[Joshua 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 21:11</span></span>

And they gave them the city of Arba, the father of Anak,.... Which from
him was called Kirjatharba, [Jos
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015); and Anak, according to Kimchi,
is not the name of a man, but a general name, comprehending the Anakims,
a race of giants, among whom Arba was the chief and principal man, a
prince and ruler over them, as Ben Melech:

which city is Hebron in the hill country of Judah; as in [Jos
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#015); see [Luk
1:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#039),

with the suburbs thereof round about it; as far as two thousand cubits,
which were to put their cattle in, and provision for them.

[Joshua 21:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 21:12</span></span>

But the fields of the city, and the villages thereof,.... Which lay
beyond the two thousand cubits:

gave they to Caleb the son of Jephunneh, for his possession; as Moses
had promised, and Joshua had confirmed to him; and now the children of
Israel gave them to him, and put him in the possession of, [Jos
14:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos014.htm#006); and the same is to be observed
of all the other cities given to the Levites, that they and their
suburbs, extending to such a distance only, were given to them; but the
fields and villages, which belonged to them, continued the inheritance
of the tribes in which they were.

[Joshua 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 21:13</span></span>

Thus they gave to the children of Aaron the priest,.... The families of
the Kohathites, that part of them which descended from him, and were
priests:

Hebron with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for the slayer; that had
slain a person unawares, and without design; see on [Jos
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#003),

and Libnah with her suburbs; a royal city, of which see [Jos
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#029).

[Joshua 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 21:14</span></span>

And Jattir with her suburbs,.... See Gill on [Jos
15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048),

and Eshtemoa with her suburbs; See Gill on [Jos
15:50](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#050).

[Joshua 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 21:15</span></span>

And Holon with her suburbs,.... See Gill on [Jos
15:51](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#051),

and Debir with her suburbs; See Gill on [Jos
15:49](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#049).

[Joshua 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 21:16</span></span>

And Ain with her suburbs,.... See Gill on [Jos
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032),

and Juttah with her suburbs; See Gill on [Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055),

and Bethshemesh with her suburbs; which is not mentioned among the
cities of Judah, [Jos 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#021); only as
in the borders of it, [Jos 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#010); and
perhaps is the same Bethshemesh to which the ark was directed by the
Philistines from Ashdod, [Sa1 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#009); in
it formerly was a temple dedicated to the sun, from whence it had its
name:

nine cities out of those two tribes; and they seem all but one, which is
Ain, to be of the tribe of Judah, and that originally belonged to it;
and as that tribe had the largest number of cities in its lot, the more
were given out of it to the Levites, according to a rule prescribed,
[Num 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#008).

[Joshua 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 21:17</span></span>

And out of the tribe of Benjamin, Gibeon with her suburbs,.... See Gill
on [Jos 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025); from which came the
Gibeonites.

Geba with her suburbs. Of which See Gill on [Jos
18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024).

[Joshua 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 21:18</span></span>

Anathoth with her suburbs,.... This is not mentioned among the cities of
Benjamin, [Jos 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011); it was the
native place of the Prophet Jeremiah; see Gill on [Jer
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001); it lay about two or three miles
north of Jerusalem; three, says, Jerom (k). Rauwolff (l) speaks of it as
a small village, when he travelled into those parts, and as lying on a
height or eminence, and which was within twenty furlongs of Jerusalem,
as Josephus writes (m):

and Almon with her suburbs; this also is not mentioned among the cities
of Benjamin, [Jos 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#011); it is called
Alemeth, [Ch1 6:60](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#060). Jarchi and Kimchi
say it is the same with Bahurim, [Sa2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#016); where the Targum renders it by
Almeth, and both words signify the same thing, "youth":

four cities; which were a large number for so small a tribe as little
Benjamin to give.

\(k\) De loc. Heb. fol. 88. H. (l) Travels, par. 3. c. 2. p. 216. (m)
Antiqu. l. 10. c. 7. sect. 3.

[Joshua 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 21:19</span></span>

All the cities of the children of Aaron, the priests,.... Those of the
Kohathites that came from him:

were thirteen cities with their suburbs; and just so many are mentioned
by name in [Jos 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#011).

[Joshua 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 21:20</span></span>

And the families of the children of Kohath, the Levites,.... Who were
not priests:

which remained of the children of Kohath; these are the children of
Moses, as Jarchi says, and those that descended from Kohath in the lines
of Izhar, Hebron, and Uzziel:

even they had the cities of their lot out of the tribe of Ephraim; and
were as follow.

[Joshua 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 21:21</span></span>

For they gave them Shechem, with her suburbs, in Mount Ephraim,.... Of
which see [Jos 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007),

to be a city of refuge for the slayer; which being on a mountain, was
the more conspicuous, and the fitter for this purpose, as was Hebron in
the hill country of Judea, [Jos 21:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#011);
this is the second; city of refuge mentioned:

and Gezer with her suburbs: a place from whence the Canaanites were not
expelled; See Gill on [Jos 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#010).

[Joshua 21:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 21:22</span></span>

And Kibzaim with her suburbs,.... Which seems to, be the same with
Jokneam, [Ch1 6:68](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#068); of it we read
nowhere else:

and Bethhoron with her suburbs; upper Bethhoron, for there were two, an
upper and a nether: see [Jos 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#003),

four cities; as mentioned by name.

[Joshua 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 21:23</span></span>

And out of the tribe of Dan, Eltekeh with her suburbs,.... See Gill on
[Jos 19:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#044),

Gibbethon with her suburbs; see Gill on [Jos
19:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#044).

[Joshua 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 21:24</span></span>

Aijalon with her suburbs,.... See Gill on [Jos
19:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#042),

Gathrimmon with her suburbs, four cities; See Gill on [Jos
19:45](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#045).

[Joshua 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 21:25</span></span>

And out of the half tribe of Manasseh, Taanach with her suburbs,.... Of
which see [Jos 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#010),

and Gathrimmon with her suburbs, there was a city of this name in Dan,
as in [Jos 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#024); nor was it unusual
for cities to be called by the same name in different tribes:

two cities; these are called Aner and Bilean in [Ch1
6:70](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#070); in process of time cities
changed their names; two cities were a proper proportion for this half
tribe; two more were given out of the other half tribe on the other side
Jordan, as appears by what follows.

[Joshua 21:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 21:26</span></span>

All the cities were ten, with their suburbs,.... Four out of Ephraim,
four out of Dan, and two out of the half tribe of Manasseh: which were

for the families of the children of Kohath that remained: who were of
the other branch of the Kohathites, and who did not descend from Aaron,
and were only Levites, and not priests; See Gill on [Jos
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#020).

[Joshua 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 21:27</span></span>

And unto the children of Gershon, of the families of the Levites,....
The descendants of the second son of Levi:

out of the other half tribe of Manasseh; that which was settled beyond
Jordan:

they gave Golan in Bashan, with her suburbs, to be a city of refuge for
the slayer; see [Jos 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008); this is the
third city of refuge mentioned:

and Beeshterah with her suburbs; called Ashtaroth, [Ch1
6:71](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#071); which had been the royal city of
Og, king of Bashan, where he had his palace, [Deu
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu001.htm#004). Here seems to have been formerly
a temple dedicated to the goddess Astarte; for Beeshterah is a compound
of "Beth" and "Ashterah", or Astarte; that is, the house or temple of
Astarte, but now become a city of the Levites:

two cities; two more having been before given out of the other half
tribe.

[Joshua 21:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 21:28</span></span>

And out of the tribe of Issachar, Kishon with her suburbs,.... From
whence the river Kishon probably had its name, or the city from that; it
is the same with Kishion, [Jos 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#020);
and called Kedesh, [Ch1 6:72](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#072).

Dabareh with her suburbs; the same with Daberath on the border of
Zebulun; see Gill on [Jos 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#012).

[Joshua 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jos 21:29</span></span>

Jarmuth with her suburbs,.... Called Ramoth, [Ch1
6:73](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#073); very probably the same with
Remeth, [Jos 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#021),

Engannim with her suburbs; called Anem, [Ch1
6:73](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#073),

four cities; so many are mentioned by name.

[Joshua 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 21:30</span></span>

And out of the tribe of Asher, Mishal with her suburbs,.... The same
with Misheal, [Jos 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#026); called
Mashal, [Ch1 6:74](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#074),

Abdon with her suburbs; not mentioned among the cities of Asher, unless
the same with Hebron, [Jos 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#028).

[Joshua 21:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jos 21:31</span></span>

Helkath with her suburbs,.... See Gill on [Jos
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#025); the same with Hukok in [Ch1
6:75](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#075),

and Rehob with her suburbs, four cities; See Gill on [Jos
19:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#028).

[Joshua 21:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 21:32</span></span>

And out of the tribe of Naphtali, Kedesh in Galilee with her
suburbs,.... Of which see [Jos 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007),

to be a city of refuge for the slayer; this is the fourth city of refuge
mentioned:

and Hammothdor with her suburbs; the same with Hammon, [Ch1
6:76](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#076); and with Hammath, [Jos
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#035); and is thought by some to be
Tiberias, so called from the hot baths in or near it:

and Kartan with her suburbs; called Kirjathaim, [Ch1
6:76](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#076); but cannot be the Kirjathaim in
[Num 32:37](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#037); for that belonged to the
tribe of Reuben, and was on the other side Jordan:

three cities; this being a lesser tribe than some others gave fewer
cities, according to the rule in [Num
35:8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#008).

[Joshua 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jos 21:33</span></span>

All the cities of the Gershonites, according to their families,....
Which were divided among them, according to the number of their
families:

were thirteen cities with their suburbs; two out of the half tribe of
Manasseh beyond Jordan, four out of Issachar, four out of Asher, and
three out of Naphtali.

[Joshua 21:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jos 21:34</span></span>

And unto the families of the children of Merari, the rest of the
Levites,.... The descendants of the youngest son of Levi, who were all
that remained of the Levites unprovided of cities:

out of the tribe of Zebulun, Jokneam with her suburbs; which lay near
Carmel, and was a royal city; See Gill on [Jos
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#022),

and Kartah with her suburbs; perhaps the same with Kattath, [Jos
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015).

[Joshua 21:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jos 21:35</span></span>

Dimnah with her suburbs,.... Nowhere mentioned, unless the same with
Rimmon, [Ch1 6:77](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#077),

Nahalal with her suburbs; see [Jos
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015),

four cities; only two are mentioned, [Ch1
6:77](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#077); and they by different names; the
one is Rimmon, before observed, and the other Tabor; perhaps the same
with Chislothtabor, [Jos 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#012).

[Joshua 21:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">jos 21:36</span></span>

And out of the tribe of Reuben, Bezer with her suburbs,.... Which was a
city of refuge, and the fifth of them in this account, though not
observed as such here, but is in the Greek version; see [Jos
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008),

and Jahazah with her suburbs; called Jahaz; see Gill on [Num
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#023).

[Joshua 21:37](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">jos 21:37</span></span>

Kedemoth with her suburbs,.... Near to which was a wilderness of that
name; see [Deu 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#026),

and Mephaath with her suburbs; of which See Gill on [Jos
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#018); where the two preceding cities
are mentioned along with it:

four cities, [Jos 21:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#035), are not in
some ancient copies of the Hebrew Bible, as is noted by the Masorites;
but are in some others, as Kimchi owns, and stand in the Targum, in the
Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions, and in a manuscript referred to
by Hottinger (e); and the same words are to be, found in [Ch1
6:78](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#078), and are absolutely necessary to
be retained, since without them there would be but eight cities for the
Merarites, whereas they are expressly said to be twelve, [Jos
21:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#040).

\(e\) Thesaur. Philolog. l. 1. c. 2. p. 181, &c.

[Joshua 21:38](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">jos 21:38</span></span>

And out of the tribe of Gad,.... Which also, as that of Reuben, lay on
the other side Jordan:

Ramoth in Gilead with her suburbs; of which see [Jos
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008),

to be a city of refuge for the slayer; and is the sixth and last city of
refuge in this account:

and Mahanaim with her suburbs; here it was the angels met Jacob, which
gave rise to the name of the place, [Gen
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen032.htm#001); afterwards a city was built
here, and was on the borders of the tribe of Gad, and belonged to it,
[Jos 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos013.htm#026); mention is made of it in
other places, [Sa2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#008) [Kg1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#008).

[Joshua 21:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">jos 21:39</span></span>

Heshbon with her suburbs,.... Which was formerly the royal city of Sihon
king of the Amorites, and was first given to and rebuilt by the
Reubenites, but was upon the border of the tribe of Gad; and appears
from hence to have been one of their cities, [Num
21:26](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#026),

Jazer with her suburbs; sometimes called Jaazer, another city in the
same country, and near Heshbon; see [Num
21:32](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#032),

four cities in all: which were Ramothgilead, Mahanaim, Heshbon, and
Jazer.

[Joshua 21:40](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">jos 21:40</span></span>

So all the cities for the children of Merari by their families,....
Which were distributed by lot to them, according to the number of their
families, and were sufficient for them:

which were remaining of the families of the Levites; the last division
of them, besides those of the Kohathites, Levites, and the Gershonites:

were by their lot twelve cities; four out of the tribe of Zebulun, four
out of the tribe of Reuben, and four out of the tribe of Gad, whose
names are before given,

[Joshua 21:41](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">jos 21:41</span></span>

All the cities of the Levites, within the possession of the children of
Israel,.... As comprised in one sum total:

were forty and eight cities with their suburbs; which is just the number
that Moses from the mouth of God ordered to be given unto them, before
they entered into the land, and before they were in possession of one
city in it, [Num 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#007); which, as it is
a proof of the omniscience, prescience, and predetermination of God; so
of the sure and true prediction of Moses, who could not be otherwise
certain than from the Lord of the Israelites being able to give so many
cities to them, out of each of their tribes: and it is to be observed,
that this tribe of Levi, though it had no share in the division of the
land, yet had more cities by lot given to it than any other, excepting
the tribe of Judah; though indeed, in the account of some of the tribes,
all the cities in them are not mentioned; and besides, they had only the
cities they had with their suburbs round about them, but not the lands
belonging to them, nor the villages; however this shows that a large and
liberal maintenance of the ministers of the Lord, that serve in his
sanctuary should be allowed and made for them, as in the legal, so under
the Gospel dispensation.

[Joshua 21:42](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">jos 21:42</span></span>

These cities were everyone with their suburbs round about them,....
Which reached to the space of two thousand cubits on every side; and
such a space was assigned to everyone of the above cities for their
cattle, to keep them in and lay up provision for them:

thus were all their cities; six of them cities of refuge, and forty two
for the priests and Levites to dwell in, and for the commodious use of
their herds and flocks.

[Joshua 21:43](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">jos 21:43</span></span>

And the Lord gave unto Israel all the land which he sware to give unto
their fathers,.... It was all given them by lot, whether subdued or not
subdued, and the far greater part was actually put into their hands, and
they had as much as they could for the present occupy and cultivate; and
such as were in the hands of the Canaanites, were subject to pay tribute
to them; and it was owing to their own slothfulness and sluggishness
that they did not possess more hereafter; though it was the will of God
that their enemies should be driven out by little and little, until the
Israelites were so increased as to occupy the whole, lest any part of
the land should lie waste and become barren, and lest the wild beasts of
the field should multiply upon them:

and they possessed it, and dwelt therein; each according to their lot in
the several places assigned them, as many cities as they could at
present people, and as much land as they could now manage.

[Joshua 21:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">jos 21:44</span></span>

And the Lord gave them rest round about,.... Not only from their
travels, with which they had been fatigued forty years in the
wilderness, but from wars with the Canaanites they had been engaged in
for some years past:

according to all that he sware unto their fathers; not only to give them
the land, but peace, rest, and safety in it:

and there stood not a man of all their enemies before them; for whenever
any rose up to oppose them, they were immediately cut off: this is to be
understood while Joshua was living; for afterwards, sinning against God,
they were again and again delivered up into the hands of their enemies:

the Lord delivered all their enemies into their hands; that is, that
made war with them.

[Joshua 21:45](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">jos 21:45</span></span>

There failed not ought of any good thing,.... Not only every good thing
in general, but every part and particular of that good thing; that, with
all that was included in it, or were appendages to it, or circumstances
of it:

which the Lord had spoken to the house of Israel; as of their
deliverance out of Egypt, and passage through the Red sea and
wilderness, with all conveniences for them therein; so of their passage
through Jordan, success of their arms, the conquest of their enemies,
possession of their land, a land flowing with milk and honey:

all came to pass; exactly, precisely, and punctually, even everything
relative to their temporal and spiritual good: so all that God promises
to his spiritual Israel, with respect to their present comfort or
everlasting happiness, all is exactly fulfilled, all his promises in
Christ are yea and amen.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 22](jos022)

</div>
