<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](jos007)  [Next](jos009.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Chapter 8](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001.md)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 8:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOSHUA 8

Joshua is encouraged to go up and take Ai, and is directed what method
to make use of, [Jos 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001.md); accordingly
he set an ambush on the west side of it, and, he and the rest of the
army went up before it, [Jos 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#003.md);
which, when the king of Ai saw, he and all his forces came cut against
them, and the Israelites making a feint as if they were beaten, drew on
the men of Ai to pursue them, upon which the ambush arose and entered
the city and set fire to it, [Jos
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#014.md); the smoke of which being
observed by Joshua and Israel, they turned back upon the pursuers, and
the ambush sallying out of the city behind them, made an entire
destruction of them, then slew all the inhabitants, took the spoil,
burnt the city, and hanged the king of it, [Jos
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#020.md); after this Joshua built an altar
at Ebal, wrote the law on stones, and read the blessings and curses in
it before all Israel, [Jos 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030.md).

[Joshua 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">jos 8:1</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Joshua,.... Immediately after the execution of
Achan, the fierceness of his anger being turned away:

fear not, neither be thou dismayed; on account of the defeat of his
troops he had sent to take Ai:

take all the people of war with thee; all above twenty years of age,
which, with the forty thousand of the tribes on the other side Jordan he
brought over with him, must make an arm, five hundred thousand men;
these Joshua was to take with so much to animate and encourage him, or
to terrify the enemy, nor because such a number was necessary for the
reduction of Ai, which was but a small city; but that all might have a
part in the spoil and plunder of it, which they were denied at Jericho,
and chiefly to draw all the men out of the city, seeing such a numerous
host approaching:

and arise, go up to Ai; which lay high, and Joshua being now in the
plains of Jericho; see Gill on [Jos
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002.md),

see, I have given into thy hand the king of Ai, and his people, and his
city, and his land; this city, though a small one, had a king over it,
as most cities in the land of Canaan had; the number of his people in it
were twelve thousand, and his land were the fields about it; all which
were given to Joshua by the Lord, and were as sure as if he had them
already in his hand.

[Joshua 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">jos 8:2</span></span>

And thou shalt do to Ai and her king as thou didst to Jericho and her
king,.... Burn the one and slay the other:

only the spoil thereof, and the cattle thereof, shall ye take for a prey
unto yourselves; which they were not allowed to do at Jericho:

lay thee an ambush for the city behind it; at the west side of it: some
have called in question the lawfulness of the ambush, but, as this was
appointed by the Lord, there is no room for it.

[Joshua 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">jos 8:3</span></span>

So Joshua arose, and all the people of war, to go up against Ai,.... As
the Lord had commanded him:

and Joshua chose out thirty thousand mighty men of valour; out of all
the men of war; these were a select company, picked men, not the whole
army, as some have thought, for he was ordered to take all the people of
war, as he did:

and sent them away by night; from the main army, that they might pass
the city and get behind it undiscovered, for they were sent for an
ambush; and of these some were to take the city, and be left in it to
burn it, and some to smite the men of Ai, as Abarbinel notes.

[Joshua 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">jos 8:4</span></span>

And he commanded them, saying,.... At the time he sent them away:

behold, ye shall lie in wait against the city, even behind the city;
that is, on the west side of it, [Jos
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#009.md),

go not very far from the city, but be ye all ready; to enter into it, as
soon as the forces are drawn out eastward to meet the army of Israel.

[Joshua 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">jos 8:5</span></span>

And I and all the people that are with me will approach unto the
city,.... That is, Joshua with the main body of the army would march up
to the city the next morning, in order to draw out the inhabitants of it
to fight them:

and it shall come to pass, when they come out against us, as at the
first; as they had done before, when the three thousand were sent
against them, [Jos 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#004.md),

that we will flee before them; as the three thousand did, which would
animate them to pursue them with the greater eagerness, and to a
distance from their city.

[Joshua 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">jos 8:6</span></span>

For they will come out after us,.... Of which there could be no doubt,
when they should see them run from them:

till we have drawn them from the city; some distance from it, that they
could not return soon enough to save it from the ambush, or prevent
their entrance into it, and burning it:

for they will say, they will flee before us, as at the first; they run
away as they did before, and let us pursue them and smite them as we did
then:

therefore we will flee before them; to draw them out of the city, and
make your way easy to get into it,

[Joshua 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">jos 8:7</span></span>

Then ye shall rise up from the ambush,.... When they should see a signal
made, that in [Jos 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#018.md); and when
their watch, they might set in a proper place, should see Israel flee,
and the men of Ai at a distance from their city, pursuing, and give
notice of it to the ambush:

and seize upon the city; enter into it, and take possession of it, its
fortresses, and secure its passes:

for the Lord your God will deliver it into your hand; Joshua expresses
himself with great confidence, having the promise of God, and relying on
it.

[Joshua 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">jos 8:8</span></span>

And it shall be, when ye have taken the city,.... Entered it and become
masters of it:

that ye shall set the city on fire; not the whole city, only some
outlying houses of it, to make a smoke which might be seen both by
Israel and the men of Ai, for different purposes; for the spoil of the
city was first to be taken before it was utterly burnt with fire:

according to the commandment of the Lord shall ye do; plunder the city,
destroy the inhabitants of it, and then burn it:

see I have commanded you; delivered the command of the Lord unto them,
and therefore were left without excuse, and could not plead ignorance;
besides, he was their general, and he expected his orders to be obeyed,
as they ought to have been.

[Joshua 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">jos 8:9</span></span>

Joshua therefore sent them forth,.... The thirty thousand chosen men:

and they went to lie in ambush; as they were ordered, [Jos
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#002.md),

and abode between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of Ai; for as Ai was
on the east of Bethel, [Jos 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002.md).
Bethel must be on the west of Ai, as Jarchi notes:

but Joshua lodged that night among the people; the main body of the
army, to direct them in the affair of war, how they should behave the
next day, when they came to fight; and to inspire them with courage and
confidence, that they might not be afraid, because of their having been
smitten before by this people, so Ben Gersom; or rather that he and they
might be ready in the morning to march towards Ai, as Jarchi and Kimchi.

[Joshua 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">jos 8:10</span></span>

And Joshua rose up early in the morning, and numbered the people,.... To
see if there were any wanting, and to put them in proper order for their
march:

and went up, he and the elders of Israel, before the people to Ai; these
elders were either the seventy elders who went with Joshua as council to
him; or it may be rather they were inferior officers, who went at the
head of their respective corps under them.

[Joshua 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">jos 8:11</span></span>

And all the people, even the people of war that were with him, and went
up, and drew nigh,.... To the city of Ai:

and came before the city; as if they intended to besiege it, storm it,
or force an entrance into it:

and pitched on the north side of Ai; which was judged fittest for the
purpose:

now there was a valley between them and Ai; which the Rabbins call the
valley of Halacah, as Jarchi says; so that they were upon a hill, at
least on rising ground, and might the more easily be seen by the
inhabitants of Ai, whom they wanted to draw out of their city.

[Joshua 8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">jos 8:12</span></span>

And he took about five thousand men, and set them to lie in ambush,....
This was another ambush, as both Jarchi and Kimchi observe; and the
latter adds, perhaps he set them nearer the city than the former; though
some are of opinion that these are the same ambush spoken of, whose
number is here given, being set on the same side of the city; and they
suppose that Joshua had with him but thirty thousand men in all, five
thousand of which he sent to lie in ambush, and the other twenty five
thousand remained with him; but it seems clear that all the men of war
were to be taken, and were taken by them, and that out of them thirty
thousand were sent by him to lie in wait at first, and now five thousand
more:

between Bethel and Ai, on the west side of the city; and though they
were on the same side of the city with the first and larger ambush, yet,
as Abarbinel observes, they might be set nearer the city and to the
army; and he supposes the first ambush was to take the city, and the
second little ambush, as he calls it, was placed, that when the men of
the city came out, they might make a noise and a stir, and skirmish with
them, that so they might not come upon the camp suddenly.

[Joshua 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">jos 8:13</span></span>

And when they had set the people,.... In battle array, as in [Kg1
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#012.md); that is, Joshua and the
officers of the army:

even all the host that was on the north of the city; where Joshua and
the main army were:

and the liers in wait on the west of the city: both the first and second
ambush; when all, were prepared and got ready by their several officers,
to act the part they were to do:

Joshua went that night into the midst of the valley; according to Ben
Gersom, to see whether the guards or sentinels which were placed there
were awake or asleep, lest the men of Ai should come suddenly upon them
and smite them; but perhaps it might be to pray and meditate.

[Joshua 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">jos 8:14</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the king of Ai saw it,.... Not the ambush on
the west side, but the host or army on the north side, or, however, some
of his people gave him notice of it:

that they hasted and rose up early; or made haste to rise out of their
beds, on the alarm given of Israel's near approach:

and the men of the city went out against Israel to battle; being raised
out of their beds and accoutred with armour, and put into a military
order, they marched out with their king at the head of them, to give
Israel battle:

he and all his people, at a time appointed, before the plain; which was
before the city, the same with the valley mentioned, [Jos
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#011.md); the city was built on an
eminence, and this plain or valley lay at the bottom of it; and on an
eminence on the other side of the valley the army of Israel was pitched;
wherefore the king of Ai and all his men of war went out hither to
attack Israel, and this is said to be at an appointed time; it is
difficult to say what is meant by it, when they seem to have hurried out
as best as they could, as soon as they perceived the Israelites were
near them: Ben Gersom and Abarbinel think it was the same time of the
day they went out at first, which the king might choose as lucky, being
before successful, and to encourage the men, that as they conquered then
they should now; which seems not amiss, though perhaps it rather designs
an appointed place, as their rendezvous, and where to attack Israel, and
where they had been before victorious:

but he wist not that there were liers in ambush against him behind the
city; that he knew nothing of, and therefore took no precaution against
them to prevent their design.

[Joshua 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">jos 8:15</span></span>

And Joshua and all Israel made as if they were beaten before them,....
Or smitten, as some of them might be in the pursuit:

and fled by the way of the wilderness; not a barren desert, but,
according to Kimchi and Ben Melech, a place for the pasture of cattle;
though perhaps it is the same with the wilderness of Bethaven, [Jos
18:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#012). Epiphanius (w.md) makes mention of
the wilderness of Bethel and Ephraim as near Jericho.

\(w\) Contr. Haeres. l. 1. tom. 2.

[Joshua 8:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">jos 8:16</span></span>

And all the people that were in Ai were called together to pursue after
them,.... Because the host of Israel was very numerous, it was judged
proper that all the people in Ai should assist in pursuing them, not
only to kill the more in the pursuit, but to carry off the spoil and
prisoners they should take; or rather the sense is, that all the people
in Ai, which were come out with the king to battle, when they saw Israel
flee, "cried" (x), or shouted, as soldiers do when victorious, "in" or
"while pursuing" (y) after them:

and they pursued after Joshua, and were drawn away from the city; at
some considerable distance from it; which was the design to be answered
by feigning a flight.

\(x\) "vociferantes", V. L. "vociferati sunt", Pagninus, Montanus. (y)
"persequendo", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Joshua 8:17](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">jos 8:17</span></span>

And there was not a man left in Ai or Bethel that went not out after
Israel,.... For as these two places were very near to each other, but a
mile apart, they were in confederacy, and acted together, and could
easily be called to the help of each other when required: though there
is a difficulty how the men of Bethel could join those of Ai, when the
ambush lay between them both, [Jos
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#012.md); they either went another way, or
the ambush purposely let them pass, for fear of a discovery by a
skirmish with them, and that Bethel as well as Ai might be cleared of
its armed inhabitants, and so fall an easy prey to them as well as Ai:
this must be understood only of men of war; for otherwise there were
inhabitants left, as old men, and such as were unfit for war, afterwards
slain, [Jos 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#024.md),

and they left the city open: they did not stay to shut the gates, nor
left porters or any guards about, to take care of, protect, and defend
the city:

and pursued after Israel; with great eagerness and vehemence, not having
the least apprehension of their city being in any danger.

[Joshua 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">jos 8:18</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Joshua, stretch out the spear that is in thy hand
towards Ai,.... On which was a flag, as Abarbinel and Ben Melech think;
and which is not improbable, and served for a signal for the ambush to
come out and seize the city, as both they and Jarchi observe, as well as
a signal also to the army of Israel to prepare to turn and face about,
and engage with the enemy; though they did not actually do this until
they saw the smoke of the city, [Jos
8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#021.md),

for I will give it into thine hand; of which the stretching out of his
spear seems also to be a confirming sign to him, and which he kept
stretched out until all the inhabitants of Ai were destroyed, [Jos
8:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#026.md),

and Joshua stretched out the spear that he had in his hand toward the
city: and therefore must turn himself towards it; and it is highly
probable that at the same time there was a full stop of the army, and
that they immediately turned or prepared to turn about.

[Joshua 8:19](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">jos 8:19</span></span>

And the ambush arose quickly out of their place,.... As soon as the
sentinels set in proper places observed the signal, and gave them notice
of it, which was the stretching out of the spear, as appears by what
follows:

and they ran as soon as he had stretched out his hand; and the spear in
his hand; from whence it is plain, that though the Lord is said to bid
Joshua do this now, he had orders from him for it before and the ambush
must have been made acquainted with it before they were sent away; and
this was only a renewal of the order from the Lord, and which pointed
out the proper time, the very crisis, when it should be stretched out:

and they entered into the city; without any difficulty, the gates being
open:

and took it; took possession of it, and the strong holds in it:

and hasted and set the city on fire; that is, they made haste to set
some houses on fire as the signal to the army of Israel to return.

[Joshua 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">jos 8:20</span></span>

And when the men of Ai looked behind them,.... On some account or
another, perhaps observing that the army of Israel made a full stop and
was gazing at the city:

they saw, and, behold, the smoke of the city ascended up to heaven; from
whence they concluded an enemy was there, and had set fire to it:

and they had no power to flee this way or that way; for if they turned
back to their city there was an enemy, how powerful they knew not,
possessed of it, and whom they might expect would meet them; and if they
pushed forward, there was the whole army of Israel against them, which
now turned and faced them, showing no fear of them:

and the people that fled to the wilderness turned back upon the
pursuers; the people of Israel, that fled by the way of the wilderness,
[Jos 8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#015.md), turned about, and fell upon
the men of Ai that pursued them.

[Joshua 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">jos 8:21</span></span>

And when Joshua,.... Or "for Joshua" (z):

and all Israel saw that the ambush had taken the city; which they knew
by the smoke, as follows:

and that the smoke of the city ascended; in large columns, which
sufficiently indicated that the whole city was taken and fired by the
ambush:

then, or, "and":

they turned again and slew the men of Ai; great numbers of them.

\(z\) "et enim Josua", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so Masius.

[Joshua 8:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">jos 8:22</span></span>

And the other issued out of the city against them,.... That is, the
ambush, or at least a part of them:

so that they were in the midst of Israel, some on this side, and some on
that side; or, as we commonly say, they were between two fires, the
ambush on one side, the army of Israel on the other:

and they smote them, so that they let none of them remain or escape; not
one was saved alive, excepting their king, as in [Jos
8:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#023.md); no quarter was given them, nor
any suffered to make their escape.

[Joshua 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">jos 8:23</span></span>

And the king of Ai they took alive,.... They spared him, and reserved
him for a more shameful death:

and brought him to Joshua; their general; delivering him into his hands
as his prisoner, to do will, him as seemed good in his sight.

[Joshua 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">jos 8:24</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Israel had made an end of slaying all the
inhabitants of Ai,.... That came out against them:

in the field, in the wilderness wherein they chased them; both in the
arable lands that were sown with corn, and now clothed with it, the
wheat especially, not being gathered in, as not yet ripe, and in the
pasture ground, designed by the wilderness, see [Jos
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#015.md); so Kimchi and Ben Melech
interpret it:

and when they were all fallen on the edge of the sword; and were slain
by it:

until they were consumed; and not one left:

that all the Israelites returned unto Ai; both the ambush that came out
of it, and the army that came against it:

and smote it with the edge of the sword; that is, the inhabitants that
were left in it unfit for war, as old men, infirm persons, women and
children, as follows.

[Joshua 8:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">jos 8:25</span></span>

And so it was, that all that fell that day,.... Partly in the city, and
partly in the field, both by the ambush and the army: both of men and
women:

were twelve thousand, even all the men of Ai; so that the city was not a
very large one, and the numbers of inhabitants were comparatively but
few, as in [Jos 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#003.md).

[Joshua 8:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">jos 8:26</span></span>

For Joshua drew not his hand back wherewith he stretched out his
spear,.... But continued it, and that stretched out:

until he had utterly destroyed all the inhabitants of Ai; just as the
hand of Moses was held up, and kept held up until Amalek was discomfited
by Joshua, [Exo 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#012.md).

[Joshua 8:27](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">jos 8:27</span></span>

Only the cattle, and the spoil of the city, Israel took for a prey unto
themselves,.... Even all their substance, as besides their cattle, also
their gold, silver, household goods, merchandise, &c.

according unto the word of the Lord which he commanded Joshua, [Jos
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#002.md).

[Joshua 8:28](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">jos 8:28</span></span>

And Joshua burnt Ai,.... The whole city, fire being only set before to a
few houses, to make a smoke as a signal; he did with it as he had done
with Jericho, for so he was ordered, [Jos
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#002.md),

and made it an heap for ever; that is, for a long time, for it appears
to have been rebuilt, and to have been inhabited by the Jews, after
their return from their Babylonish captivity, [Neh
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#031.md),

even a desolation unto this day; to the time of the writing of this
book; and by what has been just observed, it appears that Ezra could not
be the writer of it, since this city was inhabited in his time.

[Joshua 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">jos 8:29</span></span>

And the king of Ai he hanged on a tree until eventide,.... By way of
terror to other kings in the land of Canaan, that should refuse to
submit unto him:

and as soon as the sun was down, Joshua commanded that they should take
his carcass down from the tree; according to the law in [Deu
21:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#023.md); and that the land might not be
defiled:

and cast it at the entering of the gate of the city; this was done,
according to Ben Gersom and Abarbinel, that it might be publicly known
to the rest of the kings of the nations, that they might be afraid to
fight with Israel:

and raise thereon a great heap of stones, that remaineth unto this day;
as a sepulchral monument, showing that there was a person lay interred
there; whether there was any inscription on the stone, showing who he
was, does not appear; it looks as if it was only a rude heap of stones;
and such kind of sepulchral monuments were common in former times in
other countries.

[Joshua 8:30](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">jos 8:30</span></span>

Then Joshua built an altar unto the Lord God of Israel in Mount Ebal. As
was commanded, [Deu 27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005.md). The
Samaritan Chronicle says, it was built in Mount Gerizim; but there is a
difficulty arises, when this was done by Joshua; it should seem by
inserting the account here, that it was done immediately after the
destruction of Ai; and Mercator endeavours to prove that Ebal was near
to Ai, but what he has said does not give satisfaction; for certain it
is, that Ebal and Gerizim were near Shechem in Samaria, at a great
distance from Ai, see [Jdg 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#006.md). The
Jews (a) generally are of opinion, that this was done as soon as Israel,
even the very day, they passed over Jordan, which they think the letter
of the command required, [Deu 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/deu011.htm#029.md);
though it does not, only that it should be done after they were passed
over it; Ebal being at too great a distance from Jordan for them to
accomplish it on that day, being, as they themselves say (b), sixty
miles from Jordan; so that they are obliged to make Israel travel that
day an hundred twenty miles, and as they assert they did (c) and which
they must do, if what they say was true, it being sixty miles to Ebal,
and sixty more to return again to Gilgal that night, where they
encamped, but this is incredible: and as this account of Joshua's
building the altar is too soon after he had passed Jordan, what R.
Ishmael (d) has pitched upon is too late, who says this was not done
till after fourteen years, when the land was conquered, which was seven
years doing, and when it was divided, which were seven years more; what
Josephus says (e) is more probable than either, which is, that Joshua,
five years after he had entered Canaan, when he had placed the
tabernacle at Shiloh, went from thence and built an altar at Ebal; as
for what R. Eliezer suggests (f), that Ebal and Gerizim here mentioned
are not the Ebal and Gerizim of the Samaritans, only two hills were
made, and they were called by these names, cannot merit any belief or
regard.

\(a\) Misn. Sotah, c. 7. sect. 5. Seder Olam Rabba, c. 11. p. 30. Jarchi
in loc. (b) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 36. 1. (c) T. Hieros. Sotah, fol. 21. 3.
(d) Apud ib. (e) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 14. (f) In T. Hieros. Sotah,
ut supra. (c))

[Joshua 8:31](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">jos 8:31</span></span>

As Moses the servant of the Lord commanded the children of Israel, as it
is written in the book of the law of Moses,.... [Deu
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005.md),

an altar of whole stones, on which no man hath lift up any iron; See
Gill on [Exo 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#025.md); see Gill on [Deu
27:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#005.md), and; see Gill on [Deu
27:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#006.md),

and they offered thereon burnt offerings unto the Lord, and sacrificed
peace offerings; by way of thanksgiving for the good land they were
introduced into, and this was what they were ordered to do by Moses,
[Deu 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#006.md).

[Joshua 8:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">jos 8:32</span></span>

And he wrote there upon the stones a copy of the law of Moses,.... Not
upon the stones of which the altar was made, though some have so
thought; but upon other stones erected in the form of a pillar, and
plastered over, [Deu 27:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#004.md); which copy
of the law was not the whole book of Deuteronomy, as some, at least only
an abstract of the laws in it; but rather the decalogue, as Abarbinel;
or the blessings and curses later read, as Ben Gersom:

which he wrote in the presence of the children of Israel: they being
witness of it, that he did what was enjoined.

[Joshua 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">jos 8:33</span></span>

And all Israel, and their elders, and officers, and their judges, stood
on this side the ark, and on that side,.... Some on Ebal, and some on
Gerizim:

before the priests and the Levites, which bare the ark of the covenant
of the Lord; it being brought out of the tabernacle on this occasion,
and bottle by the priests and Levites:

as well the stranger, as he that was born among them; that is, as well
the proselytes as the native Israelites, both appeared and were in the
same situation:

half of them over against Mount Gerizim; that is, half of the tribes,
and these were Simeon, Levi, Judah, Issachar, Joseph, and Benjamin:

and half of them over against Mount Ebal; which were the tribes of
Reuben, Gad, Asher, Zebulun, Dan, and Naphtali; See Gill on [Deu
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012.md) and See Gill on [Deu
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#013.md),

as Moses the servant of the Lord had commanded before, that they should
bless the people of Israel, as in [Deu
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#012.md).

[Joshua 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">jos 8:34</span></span>

And afterwards he read all the words of the law,.... Not the whole
Pentateuch, nor the whole book of Deuteronomy, but either some parts of
it, the decalogue, or whatsoever he had written on the stones, and as
follows:

the blessings and cursings, according to all that was written in the
book of the law; [Deu 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#014.md); See Gill
on [Deu 27:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu027.htm#011.md).

[Joshua 8:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">jos 8:35</span></span>

There was not a word of all that Moses commanded, which Joshua read
not,.... So punctually, precisely, and exactly did he observe the
instructions and commands that were given him by Moses; and this he did
in the most public manner:

before all the congregation of Israel; who were on this occasion called
together, and not before the men only, but

with the women, and little ones: who all had a concern in the things
that were read to them: yea, even

and the strangers that were conversant among them; not the proselytes of
righteousness only, but the proselytes of the gate, that dwelt, walked,
and conversed with them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 9](jos009.md)

</div>
