<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Joshua Index](jos.md)  
  [Previous](deu034)  [Next](jos001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Joshua Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

[Joshua](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">jos 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO JOSHUA

The Jews distinguish the prophets into former and latter; the first of
the former prophets is Joshua, or Sepher Joshua, the book of Joshua, as
it is commonly called in the Hebrew copies; the Syriac inscription is,

"the book of Joshua, the son of Nun, the disciple of Moses:''

in the Arabic version it is reckoned a book of the judges, which adds,

"the first among the judges of the children of Israel was Joshua, the
son of Nun, the twenty eighth from Adam, who reigned over Israel after
the Prophet Moses.''

This book bears the name of Joshua, either because it is concerning him,
his actions and exploits in the land of Canaan, or because it was
written by him, or both; though some ascribe it to Ezra, and others to
Isaiah; but it must have been written before the times of Ahab, as
appears from [Kg1 16:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#034.md); and even
before the times of David, as is clear from [Jos
15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063.md), compared with [Sa2
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006.md); for though mention is made in it
of the mountains of Judah and of Israel, from whence some have
concluded, that the writer must have lived after the times of Rehoboam,
in whose days the kingdom was divided; yet we find the distinction of
Israel and Judah took place before, even in the times of David and
Asaph, [Psa 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md); It is most likely
that this book was written by Joshua himself, as the Jews in their
Talmud (a) assert; and, indeed, who more fit for it than himself? and if
written or put together by another, it is most probable that it was
taken out of his diary, annals, or memoirs; and though there are some
things recorded in it, which were done after his death, these might be
inserted under a divine direction and influence by Eleazar, or Phinehas,
or Samuel, to each of whom some ascribe the writing of this book, just
as Joshua is supposed to add some verses concerning Moses at the end of
the Pentateuch: however, be it wrote by whom it may, there is no doubt
to be made of the divine inspiration and authenticity of it by us
Christians, since some histories recorded in it are taken from it, or
referred to, in [Heb 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#030.md); and the
promise made to Joshua is quoted, and applied to every believer, [Heb
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#005.md); and the Apostle James refers to
the case of Rahab, her character and conduct in it, [Jam
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/jam002.htm#025.md). The subject matter of this book
is Joshua's taking upon him the government of the children of Israel,
after the death of Moses, by a divine commission, exhortation, and
encouragement given him to engage in war with the Canaanites; his
conquests of them, the division of the land of Canaan to the children of
Israel, and their settlement in it. It is of great use not only to give
us the geography of the land of Canaan, and the history of the church of
God, from the death of Moses to the times of the judges; but shows the
exact fulfilment of prophecy, and the faithfulness of God to his
promises in giving the land of Canaan to Israel, according to those made
to their fathers, and the justice of God in punishing the Canaanites for
their abominable sins, as had been foretold; and the wonderful care, of
God, and his love to the people of Israel in preserving and protecting
them, and in settling them in such a good land, notwithstanding all
their murmurings, ingratitude, and unbelief, in the wilderness; and may
serve to lead us to Christ, whose type Joshua was in the whole affair
here related: his name has the signification of the salvation of the
Lord in and he is by the Greek writers, and so in the New Testament,
called Jesus, a Saviour, [Act 7:45](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#045.md),
[Heb 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#008.md); and as they agree in their
name, so they do in their state, condition, and character; Joshua was a
servant of Moses, Christ was made under the law, and became subject to
it, both moral and ceremonial; and also in their office, Joshua was the
governor of Israel, and the commander of their forces, for which he was
well qualified with wisdom, courage, and integrity; Christ is King of
saints, the Leader and Commander of the people, who has fought their
battles for them, being abundantly qualified, having the spirit of
wisdom, counsel, might, and of the fear of the Lord, resting on him.
Joshua was a type of Christ in various actions of his; in leading the
people through the river Jordan, an emblem either of baptism, or of
afflictions, or of death itself, in which Christ is with his people, and
carries them through; in saving Rahab and her family, so Christ saves
the worst and chief of sinners; in receiving the Gibeonites, who
submitted to him, as Christ does all that come to him; in his conquest
of the several kings of the Canaanites, so Christ has conquered all the
spiritual enemies of his people, sin, Satan, and the world; in bringing
and settling the people of Israel in the land of Canaan, their rest, and
dividing it to them by lot, which Moses might not do; so Christ only
brings souls into the true rest, into spiritual rest here, and eternal
rest hereafter; in whom they obtain the inheritance of the heavenly
glory by lot, and by whom only they enjoy salvation and eternal life,
and not by the works of the law. This book contains an history of
Joshua, of his government, his acts and deeds, from the death of Moses
to his own; how long that was is not certain; the Jewish chronologers
(b) observe, that the time of his principality we find not in the text;
though they (c) say he succeeded Moses when he was eighty two years of
age, and governed Israel twenty eight years; Eupolemus (d), an Heathen
writer, says thirty years. Christian writers commonly make his reign to
be twenty seven years (e); but an Arabic writer (f) stretches it further
to thirty one years; he says, he took the government of the people in
the seventy ninth year of his age, and reigned thirty one; but it seems
more probable that he was ninety three years of age when Moses died, who
lived to be an hundred ten, so that only seventeen years intervened
between the death of the one and of the other; seven years Joshua was in
subduing the land, and ten years more were taken up in dividing it to
the people, and settling them in it, and in the government of them;
after which Eleazar might rule ten years more, whose death is mentioned
in it; so indeed the book may be reckoned an history of twenty seven
years, though Joshua lived only seventeen of them. The Chronicle, to
which the Samaritans give the name of the book of Joshua, is a spurious
work; an epitome of which Hottinger (g) has compiled, and translated out
of the Arabic exemplar into Latin.

\(a\) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 14. 2. (b) Ganz. Tzemach David, par. 1.
fol. 7. 2. (c) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 12. p. 33. Juchasin, fol. 10. 1. (d)
Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 30. (e) Tertullian, Lactantius,
Eusebius, Augustin. apud Hottinger. Thesaur. Philolog. l . 2. c. 1.
sect. 2. p. 960. so Ben Gersom in Jud. 11. 26. & Abulpharag. Hist.
Dynast. p. 25. (f) Elmacinus apud Hottinger. p. 524. (g) Ad Calcem
Exercitat. Antimorin.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Joshua Chapter 1](jos001.md)

</div>
