<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1005)  [Next](kg1007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 KINGS 6

This chapter gives an account of the building of the temple, for which
preparations were before made and begins with the time of its building,
[Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001); gives the dimensions of it
and the porch before it, [Kg1 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002);
observes the windows in it and chambers about it, [Kg1
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#004); and while it was building,
Solomon had a word from the Lord relative to it, [Kg1
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#011); and then the account goes on
concerning the walls of the house, and the flooring of it, [Kg1
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#015); and the oracle in it, and the
cherubim in that, [Kg1 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#019); and the
doors into it, and the carved work of them, [Kg1
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#031); and the chapter is concluded
with observing the time when it was begun and finished [Kg1
6:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#037).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 6:1</span></span>

And it came to pass in the four hundred and eightieth year after the
children of Israel were come out of the land of Egypt,.... The Tyrian
writers (k) make it five hundred sixty years from hence; but this no
doubt is tightest, which Junius reckons thus; forty years Israel were in
the wilderness, seventeen under Joshua, two hundred ninety nine under
the judges, eighty under Eli, Samuel, and Saul, forty under David, add
to which the four years of Solomon, and they make four hundred eighty
(l); they are somewhat differently reckoned by others (m) from the
coming out of Egypt to Joshua forty years, from thence to the first
servitude under Cushan twenty five, from thence to the death of
Abimelech two hundred fifty six, under Thola twenty three, from thence
to the Ammonitish servitude four, under that eighteen, under the judges,
Jephthah, Ibzan, Elon, and Abdon, thirty one, Samuel and Saul forty,
David forty, and Solomon three, in all four hundred eighty;

in the, fourth year of Solomon's reign over Israel; when he was clear of
all disturbers of his government, and had got all things ready for the
building of the temple, and had gathered together gold and silver enough
of his own to defray the expenses; for, as for what David gave him, he
put that into the treasury of the Lord's house, see [Kg1
7:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1007.htm#051);

in the month Zif, which is the second month; and so must be Jiar, for
Abib or Nisan was the first, and Jiar was the second, which answered to
part of our April and part of May; called Zif either from the splendour
of the sun, being now higher, and so the greater; or from the trees and
flowers of the field being in all their glory; and so the Targum here
calls it, the month of splendour of flowers: and it was on the second
day of it,

that he began to build the house of the Lord: and a very fit and proper
season of the year it was to begin it in, see [Ch2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#002).

\(k\) Apud Theophil. ad Autolyc. l. 3. p. 131. (l) So Gerard. Voss.
Chron. Sacr. Isagoge, dissert. 8. c. 7. p. 128. (m) Vid. Vitring.
Hypotypos. Hist. Sacr. p. 43.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 6:2</span></span>

And the house which King Solomon built for the Lord,.... For his
worship, honour, and glory:

the length thereof was threescore cubits; sixty cubits from east to
west, including the holy place and the most holy place; the holy place
was forty cubits, and the most holy place twenty; the same measure, as
to length, Eupolemus, an Heathen writer (n), gives of the temple, but is
mistaken in the other measures:

and the breadth thereof twenty cubits; from north to south:

and the height thereof thirty cubits; this must be understood of the
holy place, for the oracle or most holy place was but twenty cubits
high, [Kg1 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#020); though the holy
place, with the chambers that were over it, which were ninety cubits,
three stories high, was in all an hundred twenty cubits, [Ch2
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#004); some restrain it to the porch
only, which stood at the end, like one of our high steeples, as they
think.

\(n\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 34.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 6:3</span></span>

And the porch before the temple of the house,.... Which stood at the
east end of it:

twenty cubits was the length thereof, according to the breadth of the
house; which was from north to south, and of the same dimension, so that
they exactly answered each other:

and ten cubits was the breadth thereof before the house; which being
added to it, make the whole of the building, most holy place, holy
place, and porch, seventy cubits; the height of the porch is not here
given, but in [Ch2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#004); where it is
said to be an hundred twenty cubits high, equal to the height of the
house, with the chambers over it; but there the breadth of the porch is
not given, as it is here; by these dimensions we may observe the
difference between the tabernacle and the temple; the temple was twice
as long, and as broad, and thrice as high as that, see [Exo
26:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#008). This fabric was an emblem of the
church of God, sometimes called an holy temple, and the temple of the
living God, [Co2 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#016).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 6:4</span></span>

And for the house he made windows of narrow lights. Or "open, shut" (o),
which could be both, having shutters to them, to open or shut at
pleasure; windows which they could open, and look through at them, or
shut when they pleased; the Targum is,

"open within, and shut without;''

or, as others understand it, they were wide within, and narrow without;
by being narrow without, the house was preserved from bad weather, as
well as could not so easily be looked into by those without; and by
being broader within, the light that was let in spread itself within the
house; which some interpret only of the holy place, the most holy place
having, as they suppose, no windows in it, which yet is not certain: now
these windows may denote the word and ordinances of the church of God,
whereby light is communicated to men; which in the present state is but
narrow or small, in comparison of the new Jerusalem church state, and
the ultimate glory; and especially so it was under the legal
dispensation, which was very obscure; see [Sol
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#009) [Isa
55:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa055.htm#008).

\(o\) "apertas clausas", Vatablus; "perspectui accommodas, clausas",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 6:5</span></span>

And against the wall of the house he built chambers round about,.... Or
near it, as Jarchi interprets it, for the beams of them were not
fastened in in it, [Kg1 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#006); or rather
"upon" it (p); and when they are said to be round about the house, it
must be understood of the two sides, north and south, and of the west
end only, for at the east end, where the porch was, there were none:

against the walls of the house round about, both of the temple and of
the oracle; that is, both of the holy and the most holy place:

and he made chambers round about; the said buildings; which is repeated
that it might be observed; how many chambers there were, is not said;
Josephus says (q) there were thirty of them, and over them others of the
same measure and number, and over them others also; so that there were
three stories of them, and in all ninety; and which is countenanced by
what follows in [Kg1 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#006), and agrees
with [Eze 41:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#006); the Jewish doctors say
(r), there were thirty eight of them, fifteen on the north, fifteen on
the south, and eight on the west; they that were to the north and south
were five upon five, and five over them; and they that were to the west
were three upon three, and two over them; upper rooms or chambers were
rare in Heathen temples (s): these chambers were for the priests, where
they lodged and laid up their garments, and ate their holy things; and
were emblems of congregated churches, where the true members thereof,
who are priests to God, have communion with him, and partake of divine
things.

\(p\) "super parietem", V. L. Montanus. (q) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 3. sect. 2.
(r) Misn. Middot, c. 4. sect. 3. (s) Pausan. Laconic. sive. l. 3. p.
190.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 6:6</span></span>

And the nethermost chamber was five cubits broad,.... The nethermost row
of them, which were upon the first floor:

and the middle was six cubits broad, and the third was seven cubits
broad; so that the middlemost was a cubit larger than the lowest, and
the highest a cubit larger than that: the reason of which was,

for without in the wall of the house he made narrowed rests round about;
or rebatements; the thickness of the wall, as it was raised, became
narrower at the height of every five cubits; thus the wall being
supposed to be six cubits broad, as in [Eze
41:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#005); when it came to be five cubits
high, it was narrowed a cubit, which left a projection, rebatement, or
bench for the beams of the first chambers to be laid upon, which made
the second row of chambers broader by a cubit; and the same being
observed in the next story, made the highest a cubit broader than the
middlemost: and this was done,

that the beams should not be fastened in the walls of the house; or be
inserted into them, which could not be done without making holes in it;
and these holes could not be made without an iron instrument, and which
was not to be used, as the next words show; whereas by the above method
the beams of the chambers could be laid upon the buttresses, benches, or
rebatements left, without the use of any: the gradual enlargement of
these chambers, as they rose higher, may denote the enlargement of the
church of God, both as to numbers, gifts, and grace, the nearer it comes
to the heavenly state, as in the spiritual and personal reign of Christ.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 6:7</span></span>

And the house, when it was in building,.... And all the while it was
building:

was built of stone made ready before it was brought thither; being hewn
or squared by the builders and stonesquarers of Solomon and Hiram, [Kg1
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#018); wherefore the builders had
nothing more to do than to lay them in their proper places in the
building; it was built with these stones quite up to the ceiling, as
Josephus says (t); and these so admirably polished, and so artificially
joined together, that not the least sign of an axe, or of any working
tool, could be discerned in them:

so that there was neither hammer, nor axe, nor any tool of iron, heard
in the house while it was in building; the first of these observations
shows, that none are to be laid in the spiritual building of the church,
but such as are first hewed and squared by the Spirit, grace, and word
of God: or who have an experience of the grace of God, are sound in the
faith, and of becoming lives and good conduct; and the other denotes,
that such as are therein, whether ministers or members, should do all
they do for the edification of the church in a quiet and peaceable
manner, without clamour, contention, fights, and tumults.

\(t\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 3. sect. 2.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 6:8</span></span>

The door of the middle chamber was in the right side of the house,....
The south side of it:

and they went up with winding stairs into the middle chamber; which were
outside the chambers, and which winded about for the sake of taking up
less room, and which led up to the door of the middle chamber, on the
south of which they went into it; according to the Vulgate Latin and
Tigurine versions, they went up in the forth of a cockle, or the shell
of a snail; in like manner as was the ascent of the temple of Pan at
Alexandria, as Strabo (u) relates:

and out of the middle into the third; the third chamber, and by winding
stairs up to that; and the like might be on the north side, though not
expressed, and on the west: the Jews say (w), that in the second temple,
these winding stairs went from the northeast to the northwest, whereby
they went up to the roof of the chambers, and so to the south and west;
with this compare [Eze 41:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#007); and which
may represent the windings and turnings of God's people in this present
state, their many afflictions and tribulations, through which they pass
from one state to another.

\(u\) Geograph. l. 17. p. 547. (w) Misn. Middot, c. 4. sect. 5. See
Lightfoot's Prospect of the Temple, &c. c. 12. p. 1071.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 6:9</span></span>

So he built the house, and finished it,.... The body of it, the walls of
the holy and most holy place, with the chambers on the sides of them,
and the porch at the end that led into them:

and covered the house with beams and boards of cedar; with hollow
boards, as the Targum, which formed an arch ceiling to it, and made it
look very grand and beautiful; and then over them were laid beams and
planks of cedar, not properly as a flat roof to it, but rather as a
flooring for other buildings; for upon this, as in [Kg1
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#010), there were chambers built.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 6:10</span></span>

And then he built chambers against all the house five cubits high,....
Which some understand of the same chambers in [Kg1
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#005); here made mention of again for
the sake of giving the height of them, not before given; but they were
built against, or upon the wall of the house, these against, or rather
upon the whole house itself; and are the chambers referred to; see Gill
on [Kg1 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002); which consisting of three
stories of ninety cubits, raised the whole house to an equal height with
the porch, [Ch2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#004); as is there
intended (x); these are the upper chambers in [Ch2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#009); and they rested on the house with
timber of cedar; or on the timber of cedar, the beams of cedar, with
which the house was covered, as in [Kg1
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#009); on these the chambers rested,
being built upon them; and in one of these chambers the disciples might
be after Christ's ascension, [Act
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#013).

\(x\) Vid. Joseph. Antiqu. ut supra. (l. 8. c. 3. sect. 2.)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 6:11</span></span>

And the word of the Lord came to Solomon,.... The word of prophecy, as
the Targum, foretelling what would be the case of this building,
according to the obedience or disobedience of him and the people of
Israel; which was brought to him either by an impulse of the Spirit of
God upon him; or by the hand of a prophet, as Kimchi thinks; and some of
the Jewish writers (y), as he particularly, name Ahijah the Shilonite as
the prophet that was sent with this message to him:

saying, as follows.

\(y\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 20. p. 53.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 6:12</span></span>

Concerning this house which thou art in building,.... Or with respect to
that, these things are to be said as from the Lord:

if thou wilt walk in my statutes, and execute my judgments, and keep all
my commandments to walk in them; even all the laws of God, moral,
ceremonial, and judicial; and this respects not only Solomon personally,
but his successors, and even all the people of Israel:

then will I perform my covenant with thee, which I spake unto David thy
father; by Nathan the prophet; not only that he should build an house
for God, which should be a settled dwelling place, but that his own
house and kingdom should be established for a long time to come, and his
posterity should enjoy the presence of God in this house, provided
regard was had to the precepts and ordinances of the Lord, [Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 6:13</span></span>

And I will dwell among the children of Israel,.... In this house now
building, and which was in the middle of the land, and where he would
meet with them, and accept their sacrifices, not only of slain beasts,
but of prayer and praise:

and will not forsake my people Israel; and leave them to the mercy of
their enemies, and to be carried captive by them, but protect and defend
them.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 6:14</span></span>

So Solomon built the house, and finished it. He went on with it until he
had completed it, animated and encouraged by the promise of the divine
Presence in it, provided a proper regard was had to the will and ways of
God. Abarbinel thinks the above message was sent him in the midst of his
work, to strengthen and caution him from a dependence on the continuance
of the fabric, because of the strength of it; since its perpetuity
depended on his, his successors', and the people's conduct and
behaviour; wherefore conscious to himself of his own integrity, and
hoping well of posterity, he was not discouraged, but proceeded in his
undertaking until he had brought it to perfection.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 6:15</span></span>

And he built the walls of the house within with boards of cedar,.... For
as yet he had only built the stone walls of it without, but now he
wainscotted it with cedar boards: and not only them, but

both the floor of the house, and the walls of the ceiling; or from "the
floor of the house unto the walls of the ceiling"; that is, from the
floor, including that, to the walls on each side, reaching up to the
ceiling,

he covered them on the inside with wood: of one sort or another, cedar
or fir, or both: particularly he

covered the floor of the house with planks of fir: which Hiram sent him,
[Kg1 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#008); which is differently
interpreted; by Josephus cypress; by others, as the Tigurine version,
pine tree wood; it is very probable it was of the cedar kind, and not
the floor only, but the ceiling also, [Ch2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#005).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 6:16</span></span>

And he built twenty cubits on the sides of the house,.... At the end or
extremity of it, as the Targum; that is, he built the most holy place,
which was twenty two cubits long, at the end of the holy place, which he
wainscotted as the other:

both the floor and the walls with boards of cedar; or from the floor,
including that, to the walls on each side, from wall to wall, and taking
in them, they were all lined with cedar wood:

he even built them for it within, even for the oracle, even for the most
holy place; which explains what building is spoken of, and that the
inside of that was covered with cedar from bottom to top.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 6:17</span></span>

And the house, that is, the temple before it,.... The holy place, which
was before the of holies:

was forty cubits long; and which, with the most holy place, being twenty
cubits, as in the preceding verse, made the length of the whole house
sixty cubits, as in [Kg1 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#002).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 6:18</span></span>

And the cedar of the house within,.... With which the inside of the
place was lined:

was carved with knops; of an oval form; so the Targum says, they had the
appearance of eggs; and Ben Gersom likewise, that they were in the form
of eggs:

and open flowers; not in the figure of buds, but flowers blown, and
open, as lilies and others; so the Targum:

all was cedar; the wainscotting of the house, the sides of it at least,
if not the floor, and the carved work of it; and this was done, that the
gold might be laid upon it, which could not be done on stone as on wood:
and all was so covered, that

there was no stone seen; of which the outward walls were built: all this
denotes the inward beauty of the church, and the curious workmanship of
the Spirit of God in the hearts of his people, whereby they become all
glorious within, adorned with the graces of the blessed Spirit, their
stony hearts being kept out of sight, yea, taken away.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 6:19</span></span>

And the oracle he prepared in the house within,.... In the innermost
part of the house he fitted up the oracle, or speaking place, from
whence the Lord spake and gave answer, to receive what was to be put
into it: particularly

to set there the ark of the covenant of the Lord; even the very same
that Moses made, [Exo 37:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo037.htm#001), for which
David had pitched a tent in Zion, [Ch1
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#001), and where it now was; for
Solomon made no new ark.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 6:20</span></span>

And the oracle in the forepart,.... Which stood in the forepart of the
temple, before a man's face as he entered into it, and went on; or the
forepart of the holy of holies, next to the holy place, was of the
dimensions as follows, when the back part of it might be higher at
least, and be equal to the holy place, even thirty feet; the forepart
being lower, and left open to let in the light of the candlesticks, and
the smoke of the incense, out of the holy place: this

was twenty cubits in length, and twenty cubits in breadth, and twenty
cubits in the height thereof: and was a perfect square, and as the most
holy place may be an emblem of the church triumphant, it may denote the
perfection of its heavenly state; so the new Jerusalem is a foursquare,
[Rev 21:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#016);

and he overlaid it with pure gold; make it rich, glorious, and
magnificent, and may denote the glory of the heavenly state, [Rev
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021); and so Florus (z), the Roman
historian, calls it the golden heaven, as it were, into which Pompey
went, and saw the great secret of the Jewish nation, the ark:

and so covered the altar which was of cedar; the altar of incense, which
is here mentioned, because it was near the most holy place, [Kg1
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#022); this altar by Moses was made of
shittim wood, but Solomon's was of cedar it seems; unless, as the words
will bear to be rendered, "he covered the altar with cedar" (a); though
made of shittim wood, it had a covering of cedar over it; or if of
stone, such a covering was on it, that it might better receive the gold
which was afterwards put upon it.

\(z\) De Gest. Roman. l. 3. c. 5. (a) "operuit cedro", Montanus.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 6:21</span></span>

So Solomon overlaid the house within with pure gold,.... The inside of
the holy of holies with fine gold, which gold amounted to six hundred
talents, [Ch2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#008); and these to
7,332,000 ducats of gold, or 3,045,000 pounds sterling:

and he made a partition by the chains of gold before the oracle; between
the holy and the most holy, and were instead of a vail in the tabernacle
of Moses between them; here was also a vail beside the partition made by
chains of gold across the oracle; for the partition was a wall of the
thickness of a cubit, as Maimonides (b) says; and in [Ch2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#014) express mention is made of a vail
of blue, &c. and in imitation of this had the Heathens their deities
within vails (c):

and he overlaid it with gold; the partition wall.

\(b\) Hilchot Beth Habechirah, c. 4. sect. 2. (c) Apulei Metamorph. l.
xi. p. 176.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 6:22</span></span>

And the whole house he overlaid with gold,.... Both the holy place, and
the most holy place:

until he had finished all the house; in this splendid and glorious
manner:

also the whole altar that was by the oracle; the altar of incense, which
stood just before the entrance into the oracle, or most holy place:

he overlaid with gold; he overlaid it all over with gold; hence it is
called the golden altar, and was an emblem of the excellent and
effectual mediation and intercession of Christ, [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003). Agreeably to this account
Eupolemus, an Heathen writer (d) testifies, that the whole house, from
the floor to the tool, was covered with gold, as well as with cedar and
cypress wood, that the stonework might not appear; and so the capitol at
Rome, perhaps in imitation of this temple, its roofs and tiles were
glided with gold (e); a magnificent temple, like this, was at Upsal in
Switzerland, as Olaus Magnus relates (f).

\(d\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 34. p. 450. (e) Plin. Nat.
Hist. l. 33. c. 3. Vid. Rycquium de Capitol. Roman. c. 16. (f) De Ritu
Gent. Septent. l. 3. c. 5.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 6:23</span></span>

And within the oracle he made two cherubim of olive tree,.... Or of the
oil tree, as in [Isa 41:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#019); see [Neh
8:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh008.htm#015); for there are other trees
besides olives, out of which oil is pressed, as pine trees, cypress
trees, &c. and which some think are here meant; though the Targum
interprets it of the olive tree: these cherubim are different from those
made by Moses, and were besides them; these were larger than they; these
were made of olive wood, they of gold; these stood on the floor of the
house, they at the two ends of the mercy seat, and were made out of it,
and were with it in this holy place in Solomon's temple: these two
cherubim may be emblems of the angels in their greatness and glory, who
are always in the presence of God, behold his face, and wait to do his
will; or it may be rather of the two witnesses, said to be the two olive
trees standing before the God of the whole earth, [Rev
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003); who have boldness to enter into
the holiest of all, and have sight and knowledge of the mysteries of the
ark and mercy seat; have their commission from heaven, and speak
according to the oracles of God; these are said to be of image work,
[Ch2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#010); that is, of various forms,
as the thee of a man, a lion, an ox, and eagle, [Eze
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze001.htm#010). Dr. Lightfoot thinks (g) they
resembled the two Testaments, which in their beginning and end reach the
two sides of the world, the creation and the last judgment, and in the
middle do sweetly join the one to the other:

each ten cubits high; half as high as the most holy place; emblems
either of the high angels, those thrones, dominions, principalities, and
powers, or of men of uncommon size as to their gifts and grace.

\(g\) Prospect of the Temple, c. 15. sect. 4.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 6:24</span></span>

And five cubits was the one wing of the cherub,.... When stretched out
on one side:

and five cubits the other wing of the cherub; on the other side him:

from the uttermost part of the one wing, to the uttermost part of the
other wing, were ten cubits; half the breadth of the house.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 6:25</span></span>

And the other cherub was ten cubits,.... That is, its wings stretched
out measured so many cubits, as did those of the other:

both the cherubim were of one measure, and of one size; of the same
height and stature, of the same breadth of their wings, and of the same
bulk of their bodies; they were of "image work"; [Ch2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#010); very probably in the form of
men: and this uniformity may denote the perfect agreement of angels; or
else the consent of the true faithful witnesses of Christ in all ages,
who have all agreed in the person, office, and grace of Christ, as
represented by the mercy seat and ark, which these cherubim covered with
their wings.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 6:26</span></span>

The height of the one cherub was ten cubits, and so was it of the other
cherub. Which is repeated from [Kg1
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#023); that it might be observed, being
of an extraordinary size.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 6:27</span></span>

And he set the cherubim within the inner house,.... The holy of holies:

and they stretched forth the wings of the cherubims; the carvers that
framed them, they wrought them in that form; or impersonally, the wings
of the cherubim were stretched out; this was the position of them, they
overshadowed and covered the mercy seat and ark, and even the other two
cherubim that were at the ends of the mercy seat:

so that the wing of the one touched the one wall; the southern wall:

and the wing of the other cherub touched the other wall; the northern
wall; they reached from wall to wall, even the whole breadth of the
house, which was twenty cubits, as their wings thus spread were, [Kg1
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#024);

and their wings touched one another in the midst of the house; which was
ten cubits, and that was the spread of the wings of each of them; so
that the wing of the right side of the one, stretched out, touched the
wing of the left side of the other fit the same position; in [Ch2
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#013); their faces are said to be
"inward", or "toward the house"; either toward the holy place, and so
faced those that came into that and saw them; or towards the inner part
of the holy of holies, their backs being to the holy place, or their
faces were inward, and looked obliquely to each other.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 6:28</span></span>

And he overlaid the cherubim with gold. Which may denote the purity and
excellency of angels; or the precious gifts and graces of the Spirit,
with which the witnesses of Christ are adorned.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 6:29</span></span>

And he carved all the walls of the house about with carved figures of
cherubim, and palm trees, and open flowers,.... That is, of palm trees,
those in full blow: if the cherubim are an emblem of angels, the palm
trees fitly enough represent just and upright men, who both appear in
the church of God below, and in heaven above; in both which are to be
seen the open and full-blown flowers of divine grace, especially in the
latter state:

within and without; on the walls of the most holy place, both within and
without; and so upon the walls of the holy place, in each of which were
these sculptures, which were very ornamental, and were emblematical; see
[Eze 41:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#017).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 6:30</span></span>

And the floor of the house he overlaid with gold within and without.
Both the floor of the holy place, and of the holy of holies; so the
street of the new Jerusalem is said to be pure gold, [Rev
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#021); this expresses the purity and
magnificence of it, particularly the holy conversation of them that
dwell in the church, in heaven, signified hereby.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 6:31</span></span>

And for the entering of the oracle he made doors of olive tree,.... The
door of the holy of holies was a two leaved or folding door, made of
olive wood; typical of Christ, the door into the church above and below,
the way to heaven and eternal life, the true olive tree:

the lintel and side posts were a fifth part of the wall; four cubits,
twenty cubits being the breadth of the oracle; or the lintel was four
cubits, twenty being the height of it also, [Kg1
6:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#020).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 6:32</span></span>

The two doors also were of olive tree,.... The two leaves of the door,
as before observed, repeated for the sake of the ornament of them, as
follows:

and he carved upon them carvings of cherubims, and palm trees, and open
flowers; as upon the walls, [Kg1 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#029);

and overlaid them with gold; the two doors:

and spread gold upon the cherubims, and upon the palm trees; thin plates
of gold.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 6:33</span></span>

So also made he for the door of the temple,.... The holy place:

posts of olive tree, a fourth part of the wall; which was five cubits,
its breadth being twenty, [Kg1 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#020);
this door was a cubit wider than that into the most holy place, [Kg1
6:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#031), more entering into the one than
into the other; as more go into the church on earth than into the
heavenly glory.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 6:34</span></span>

And the two doors were of fir tree,.... the posts were of olive, but the
doors of fir, and they were both folding doors, as appears by what
follows:

the two leaves of the one door were folding, and the two leaves of the
other door were folding; which, taking up less room, made the passage
wider, see [Eze 41:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#024).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg1 6:35</span></span>

And he carved thereon cherubims, and palm trees, and open flowers,....
As upon the doors of the most holy place, [Kg1
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#032); see [Eze
41:25](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#025);

and covered them with gold, fitted upon the carved work; plates of gold
were fitted, as to the dimensions of them, to the cherubim, palm trees,
and open flowers.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 6:36</span></span>

And he built the inner court,.... The court of the priests, [Ch2
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#009); so called to distinguish it from
the outer court, where the people assembled: this was built

with three rows of hewed stone, and a row of cedar beams; the rows of
stones were one upon another, topped with a row of cedar beams; or
rather the cedar was a lining to the stones; and the whole is supposed
to be about three cubits high, and was so low, that the people in the
outward court might see priests ministering for them, and could converse
with them; under the second temple, as Maimonides (h) says, the court of
the priests was higher than that of the court of Israel two cubits and
an half, called the great court, for which doors were made, and those
overlaid with brass, [Ch2 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2004.htm#009).

\(h\) Hilchot Beth Habechirah, c. 6. sect. 3.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg1 6:37</span></span>

In the fourth year was the foundation of the house of the Lord laid,....
The fourth year of Solomon's reign:

in the month Zif; See Gill on [Kg1
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 6:38</span></span>

In the eleventh year,.... That is, of the reign of Solomon:

in the month Bul, which is the eighth month; from the month Abib or
Nisan; this month answers to part of our October, and part of November;
it is the same month sometimes called Marchesvan; it had the name of
Bul, because of the rains which usually fell in this month, as Kimchi
thinks, like a flood; and Noah's flood is called Mabbul, from the same
root (i), and when all the fruits were withered, and the leaves were
fallen from the trees; or, as Jarchi supposes, because the grass was
consumed in the field, and they were obliged to mix provender for
cattle, deriving the word from another root (k): in this month

was the house finished throughout all the parts thereof; the porch, the
holy place, and holy of holies, with all the chambers and courts
belonging to it:

and according to all the fashion of it; which David had given to
Solomon, to frame it by:

so he was seven years in building it; and six months, which are not
mentioned, only the round number is given, as appears by comparing it
with [Kg1 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#001).

\(i\) "concidit", Buxtorf. (k) "consumpsit, vel" "miscuit", ib.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 7](kg1007)

</div>
