<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1004)  [Next](kg1006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 KINGS 5

This chapter relates Solomon's preparation for building the temple: on
Hiram, king of Tyre, sending a congratulatory letter to him, he returned
another to him, signifying his intention to build an house for God, and
requesting him to supply him with timber, and men to work it, [Kg1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001); to which Hiram readily agreed,
and sent him cedar and fir, and Solomon in return sent him food for his
household; and things went on very amicably between them, [Kg1
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#007); the chapter concludes with an
account of Solomon's workmen, where, how, and in what they were
employed, [Kg1 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#013).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 5:1</span></span>

And Hiram king of Tyre sent servants unto Solomon,.... His ambassadors,
to condole him on the death of his father, and congratulate him on his
accession to the throne; this king is called by the Phoenician
historians (s) Hirom, and by Eupolemus (t) Suron, as he is Huram in [Ch2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#003); and by Theophilus of Antioch (u)
Hierom the son of Abelmalus, in the twelfth year of whose reign the
temple was built:

for he had heard that they had anointed him, king in the room of his
father; that the Israelites had anointed him king:

for Hiram was ever a lover of David; a friend and ally of his; and we
never read of the Tyrians being at war with him, or assisting any of his
enemies.

\(s\) Apud Joseph. contr. Apion. l. 1. c. 17, 18. (t) Apud Euseb.
Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 33, 34. (u) Ad Antolyc. l. 3. p. 131, 132.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 5:2</span></span>

And Solomon sent to Hiram,.... A letter, either by the hand of his
ambassadors when they returned, as Kimchi thinks, or by ambassadors
Solomon sent on purpose. Josephus (w) appeals to the Tyrian archives for
the genuineness of these letters that passed between Hiram and Solomon;
and Eupolemus, an Heathen writer (x) has both this which Solomon sent to
Hiram, and that which Hiram sent in answer to it, which agree with those
in the sacred records:

saying: as follows.

\(w\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 2. sect. 8. (x) Ut Supra. (Apud Euseb. Praepar.
Evangel. l. 9. c. 32, 34.)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 5:3</span></span>

Thou knowest how that David my father could not build an house unto the
name of the Lord his God,.... As he designed, and was desirous of; and
which Hiram might know not only by common fame, but from David himself,
between whom there was an intercourse, and that in relation to cedars
for building, which David had of Hiram, [Ch2
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#003);

for the wars which were about him on every side; or warriors, as the
Targum, the Philistines, Moabites, Edomites, and Syrians:

until the Lord put them under the soles of his feet; made them subject
and tributary to him, as he did at length, see [Sa2
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#001), &c. so the "Cetib", or textual
reading, is; but the "Keri", or marginal reading, is, "under the soles
of my feet"; that is, Solomon's, which agrees with what follows; it was
true of both.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 5:4</span></span>

But now the Lord my God hath given me rest on every side,.... From
foreign enemies; for Solomon had no wars with any:

so that there is neither adversary; or Satan, no internal enemy in his
kingdom, as well as no external ones, Adonijah, Joab, and other
ill-designing persons, being cut off:

nor evil occurrent; nothing that rose up, and met him, to discourage or
hinder the prosecution of the good work he had in view.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 5:5</span></span>

And, behold, I purpose to build an house unto the name of the Lord my
God,.... For his worship, and for his honour and glory:

as the Lord spake unto David my father; by the prophet Nathan, [Sa2
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012);

saying, thy son whom I will set upon thy throne in thy room, he shall
build an house unto my name; which was no small encouragement to Solomon
to go about this work; in which he was a type of Christ, the builder of
his temple, the church, see [Zac 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#012).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 5:6</span></span>

Now therefore command thou that they hew me cedars out of Lebanon,....
That is, order his servants to cut them down there for him. Some think
that Lebanon belonged to the land of Israel, and therefore Solomon did
not ask for the cedars upon it, but for his servants to hew them for
him; but as it lay upon the borders of Israel, part of it might belong
to them, and another part to Hiram, and on which the best cedars might
grow, and so he furnished Solomon both with trees, and men to cut them,
as it seems from [Kg1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#010); see also
[Ch2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#003);

and my servants shall be with thy servants: to assist them, and to carry
the timber from place to place, and to learn how to hew timber:

and unto thee will I give hire for thy servants, according to all that
thou shalt appoint; pay them for their work and service, as Hiram
himself should judge fit and reasonable for them; no mention being made
of paying for the timber, seems to countenance the notion that the trees
were Solomon's; but when the quantity of provisions sent yearly to Hiram
for his household, besides what the servants had, is observed, it seems
to have been sent as an equivalent to the timber received by Solomon,
see [Kg1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#010);

for thou knowest that there is not among us any that can skill to hew
timber like unto the Sidonians; it is not said Tyrians, the Sidonians,
perhaps, being more skilful in this than they were; and the Sidonians
are said by Homer (y) to be very ingenious: and they were both under the
jurisdiction and at the command of Hiram; so Eupolemus (z) makes the
inscription of Solomon's letter to him to run thus, to Suron (that is,
Hiram) king of Tyre, Sidon, and Phoenicia. The Jews being chiefly
employed in husbandry, and in feeding cattle, were very unskilful in
mechanic arts, and in this of cutting down trees, and hewing timber; for
there is skill to be exercised therein; the proper time of cutting down
trees should be observed, the part in which they are to be cut, and the
position in which they are to be put when cut down, as Vitruvius (a)
directs, with other things, and Pliny (b) observes the same.

\(y\) Iliad. 23. ver. 743. (z) Ut supra. (Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel.
l. 9. c. 32, 34.) (a) De Architectura, l. 2. c. 9. (b) Nat. Hist. l. 16.
c. 39.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 5:7</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Hiram heard the words of Solomon,.... The
letter read he sent him:

that he rejoiced greatly; that the friendship which had subsisted
between him and David was like to be continued between him and his
successor, but chiefly for what follows:

saying, blessed be the Lord this day; or Jehovah, by which he seems to
have some knowledge of the true God, the God of Israel, and might
worship him, though along with him other deities, as some Heathen
princes did:

which hath given unto David a wise son over this great people; which he
perceived by the letter he sent him, and by his solicitous concern to
build an house for the worship and honour of God, and by various other
things which his ambassadors reported to him they had seen and heard in
Solomon's court.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 5:8</span></span>

And Hiram sent to Solomon,.... A letter to him, to the following
purpose:

saying, I have considered the things which thou sentest to me for;
whether he could, and whether it was fitting he should grant his
request; which was acting like a wise and prudent prince:

and I will do all thy desire concerning timber of cedar, and concerning
timber of fir; or of cypress, as in Josephus's copy of this letter, and
which grew on Lebanon (c); these were odorous, sound, and durable
timber, especially the cedar, and therefore chosen by Solomon for
building.

\(c\) Diodor. Sic. l. 19. p. 700.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 5:9</span></span>

My servants shall bring them down from Lebanon unto the sea,.... The
Mediterranean sea, on which Tyre stood:

and I will convey them by sea in floats; which were either a sort of
carriage for the timber the Tyrians and Sidonians had, being furnished
with various navigable vessels; or these were the timber itself, and the
planks of it, which being fastened together, were set afloat under the
direction of some boats with oars, of which they had plenty:

unto the place that thou shalt appoint me; which was Joppa, as appears
from [Ch2 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#016); belonging to the land
of Israel, in the same sea:

and will cause them to be discharged there; either to be unloaded from
the vessels, or to be unloosed and taken up separately:

and thou shalt receive them; by his servants appointed there to bring
them to Jerusalem, which was forty miles from Joppa:

and thou shalt accomplish my desire in giving food for my household;
signifying, that all that he desired in return was, that he would supply
him with corn or wheat, which he stood in need of, and his letter in
Josephus (d) expresses; and we find in later times this place was
supplied with bread corn from Judea, see [Ezr
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/ezr003.htm#007) [Act
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#020).

\(d\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 8. c. 2. sect. 8.)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 5:10</span></span>

So Hiram, gave Solomon cedar trees, and fir trees,.... Ordered his
servants to cut them down from Lebanon, and sent them to him in floats,
which he received:

according to all his desire; he had as many as he requested, and what he
wanted.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 5:11</span></span>

And Solomon gave Hiram twenty thousand measures of wheat for food to his
household,.... This measure was the Hebrew measure "cor", or "corus",
and, according to Bishop Cumberland (e), its contents were 17,477 solid
inches; it was equal to ten ephahs, each of which held two gallons and
an half, and the cor held seventy five wine gallons five pints, and
somewhat more; according to some (f), what it held was equal to six
hundred forty eight Roman pounds; so that twenty thousand of them
contained 12,960,000 pounds of wheat:

and twenty measures of pure oil; squeezed out of the olives without
breaking them; the same kind of measure is here expressed as before, and
the quantity answered to 12,960 Roman pounds; another writer (g) reckons
a cor to contain 1080 Roman pounds; so that Hiram had every year 21,600
pounds of oil. In [Ch2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#010), it is
twenty thousand baths of oil now not to take notice that the measures
are different, a bath was but the tenth part of a cor, reference is had
to different things; here the writer relates what was given to Hiram for
his own family, there what was given to the workmen, where several other
things are mentioned besides these:

thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by year: so long as the building lasted,
and the workmen were employed; but Abarbinel thinks that he gave it to
him as long as he lived, out of his great munificence and liberality.

\(e\) Scripture Weights and Measures, c. 3. p. 86. (f) Vid. Scheuchzer.
Physic. Sacr. p. 517. (g) Van Till in Cantic. Mosis, p. 54.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 5:12</span></span>

And the Lord gave Solomon wisdom, as he promised him,.... Which, among
other things, appeared in his preparations for building the temple, and
in his agreements with Hiram for timber and workmen for that purpose and
by continuing and confirming friendship between himself and Hiram, who
was so serviceable to him:

and there was peace between Hiram and Solomon, and they two made a
league together; in order to continue and establish peace and friendship
between them, which Solomon might lawfully do, the Tyrians being no part
of the seven nations with whom alliances were forbidden.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 5:13</span></span>

And King Solomon raised a levy out of all Israel,.... Not of money, but
of men, as follows:

and the levy was thirty thousand men; for what purpose, and how they
were employed, [Kg1 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#014) shows.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 5:14</span></span>

And he sent them to Lebanon, ten thousand a month by courses,.... In
their turns; these are the servants of his he proposed to be with
Hiram's servants, assisting in cutting down the trees, and squaring the
timber in Lebanon, [Kg1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#006);

a month they were in Lebanon, and two months at home; that they might
not be overworked; for they wrought but four months in the year in the
hard service in Lebanon, the rest of their time was spent in managing
their domestic affairs; these were Israelites:

and Adoniram was over the levy: the same that was over the tribute or
the collectors of the tax, [Kg1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#006);
and, according to the Targum, these were such persons.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 5:15</span></span>

And Solomon had threescore and ten thousand that bare burdens,....
Seventy thousand to carry the stones from the mountains out of which
they were dug, and which were near Jerusalem, to the city; these were
strangers in Israel, as were those that follow:

and fourscore thousand hewers in the mountains: eighty thousand that dug
the stones out of the quarries, and squared them; these, with the
others, made 150,000, see [Ch2 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#017);
according to Jacob Leon (g), the number of workmen at the temple for
seven years was 163,600, and some make them more.

\(g\) Relation of Memorable Things in the Temple, ch. 3. p. 14.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 5:16</span></span>

Besides the chief of Solomon's officers which were over the work,....
Over the whole work, preparatory for the building of the temple; though
it seems chiefly to have respect to that of hewing the stones, and
bringing them to the city:

three thousand and three hundred which ruled over the people that
wrought in the work; to keep them to their work, and to see that they
performed it well: in [Ch2 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch2002.htm#018); they
are said to be 3600, which is three hundred more than here; those three
hundred are the chief officers mentioned in the former part of this
verse, which were over the whole work, and even over the 3600 overseers,
and with them made up the sum of 3600; so Jacob Leon (h) observes there
were 3300 master workmen, and three hundred commanders over them all.

\(h\) Relation of Memorable Things in the Temple, ch. 3. p. 14.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 5:17</span></span>

And the king commanded, and they brought great stones,.... Not in
quality, but in quantity, large stones, fit to lay in the foundation;
strong, and durable against all the injuries of time, as Josephus says
(i):

costly stones; not what are commonly called precious stones, as gems,
pearls, &c. but stones of value, as marble, porphyry, &c.

and hewed stones; not rough as they were taken out of the quarry, but
hewed, and made smooth:

to lay the foundation of the house; which, though out of sight, was to
be laid with goodly stones for the magnificence of the building; so the
church of Christ, its foundation is said to be laid even with sapphires
and other precious stones, see [Isa
54:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#011).

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 3. sect. 2.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 5:18</span></span>

And Solomon's builders and Hiram's builders did hew them,.... The
stones; for it seems Solomon had not only hewers of wood, but of stone,
from Hiram:

and the stonesquarers; or rather the Giblites, the men of Gebal, which
were under the jurisdiction of Tyre, and were skilful in this sort of
work, as some of them were in others, see [Eze
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#009);

so they prepared timber and stones to build the house; both Solomon's
and Hiram's builders, and the large number of workmen, both Israelites
and strangers; which latter were an emblem of the Gentiles concerned in
the building of the spiritual temple, the church of Christ, [Zac
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#015); and whereas the number of
strangers that wrought for the building was far greater than that of the
Israelites, it may denote the greater number of Gentiles in the Gospel
church state mentioned besides these: thus gave Solomon to Hiram year by
year: so long as the building lasted, and the workmen were employed; but
Abarbinel thinks that he gave it to him as long as he lived, out of his
great munificence and liberality.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 6](kg1006)

</div>
