<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1018)  [Next](kg1020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 19:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 KINGS 19

This chapter gives us a further account of Elijah, of his being obliged
to flee for his life through the threats of Jezebel, [Kg1
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#001.md), of the care the Lord took of
him, providing food for him, in the strength of which he went to Horeb,
[Kg1 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#005.md), of the Lord's appearance to
him there, and conversation with him, [Kg1
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#009.md), of some instructions he gave him
to anoint a king over Syria, another over Israel, and a prophet in his
room, [Kg1 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#015.md), and of his finding
Elisha, and throwing his mantle over him, who left his secular
employment, and followed him, and became his servant, [Kg1
19:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#019.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 19:1</span></span>

And Ahab told Jezebel all that Elijah had done,.... What miracles he had
wrought, how that not only fire came down from heaven, and consumed the
sacrifice, but even the stones and dust of the altar, and licked up
great quantities of water in the trench around it; and that it was at
his prayer that rain came down from heaven in such abundance, of which
she was sensible; by all which he got the people on his side, so that it
was not in his power to seize him and slay him; and this he said to
clear himself, and make her easy:

and withal how he had slain all the prophets with the sword; the four
hundred and fifty prophets of Baal he had gathered to Carmel; the Targum
calls them false prophets, but Ahab would scarcely use that epithet to
Jezebel; as for the four hundred prophets of the grove, they were not
present, and so not included. Jezebel knew they were safe, being with
her, she not suffering them to go to Carmel.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 19:2</span></span>

Then Jezebel sent a messenger unto Elijah,.... In Jezreel, or near it,
to frighten him away; not caring to seize him, and dispatch him, for
fear of the people, in whom he had now a great interest; or otherwise it
is not easy to account for it that she should give him notice of it;
unless she scorned to do it privately, as some think, and was determined
to make a public example of him; but being not as yet prepared for it,
sends him word what he must expect, imagining that as he had the courage
to appear, he would not flee; no doubt there was an hand of Providence
in it, be it which it will, that he might have time to make his escape:

saying, so let the gods do to me, and more also; the gods she served,
Baal and Ashtaroth, and by whom she swore:

if I make not thy life as the life of one of them by tomorrow about this
time; as one of the prophets Elijah had slain; she swore by her gods,
and wished the greatest evils might befall her, if she did not lodge him
in the state of the dead where they were in the space of twenty four
hours; though Abarbinel thinks it is not an oath, but that the words and
meaning of them are, so the gods do; it is their usual way, and they
will go on to do so for the future, because of the holiness of their
name; and therefore do not boast of slaying the prophets, or make use of
that as an argument of their falsehood, for they will do the same by
thee by tomorrow this time.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 19:3</span></span>

And when he saw that,.... That her design and resolution were to take
away his life; the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and Syriac versions read,
"and he was afraid"; or frightened; he that had such courage as not to
be afraid to meet Ahab, and contend with four hundred and fifty priests
of Baal, and in the face of all Israel, who at first were not inclined
to take his part, is now terrified at the threats of a single woman;
which shows that the spirit and courage he had before were of the Lord,
and not of himself; and that those who have the greatest zeal and
courage for religion, for God, and his worship, his truths and
ordinances, if left to themselves, become weak and timorous; and whether
this is the true reading, or not, it was certainly his case by what
follows:

he arose and went for his life; fled to save his life, at a time when he
was much wanted to encourage and increase the reformation from idolatry,
and to preserve the people from relapsing who were converted; and
through the miracles that had been wrought by him, and for him, he had
great reason to trust in the Lord: or "he went unto", or "according to
his own soul" (m); according to his own mind and will, not taking
counsel of God, or any direction from him; and so Abarbinel interprets
it:

and came to Beersheba, which belongeth to Judah; to the tribe of Judah;
for though it was in the inheritance of Simeon, yet that was within the
tribe of Judah, [Jos 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#001.md), or to the
kingdom of Judah, over which Jehoshaphat reigned, and so might think
himself safe, being out of the dominions of Ahab, and reach of Jezebel;
but yet he did not think so, his fears ran so high that he imagined she
would send some after him to search for him, and slay him privately, or
make interest with Jehoshaphat to deliver him up, there being friendship
between him and Ahab; for though this place was eighty four miles from
Jezreel, as Bunting (n) computes it, he left it:

and left his servant there; he took him not with him, either lest he
should betray him, or rather out of compassion to him, that he might not
share in the miseries of life that were like to come upon him.

\(m\) , Sept. "secundum animam suam", Vatablus, Pagninus. (n) Travels,
ut supra. (p. 204.)

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 19:4</span></span>

But he himself went a day's journey into the wilderness,.... Of Paran,
which began near Beersheba, and was the wilderness of Arabia, in which
the Israelites were near forty years; this day's journey carried him
about twenty miles from Beersheba southward, as the above writer
reckons:

and came and sat down under a juniper tree; Abarbinel supposes that
Elijah chose to sit under this tree, to preserve him from venomous
creatures, which naturalists say will not come near it; and Pliny (o)
indeed observes, that it being burnt will drive away serpents, and that
some persons anoint themselves with the oil of it, for fear of them; and
yet Virgil (p) represents the shade of a juniper tree as noxious; hence
some interpreters take this to be a piece of carelessness and
indifference of the prophet's, where he sat:

and he requested for himself that he might die; for though he fled from
Jezebel to preserve his life, not choosing to die by her hands, which
would cause her prophets to exult and triumph, yet was now desirous of
dying by the hand of the Lord, and in a place where his death would not
be known:

it is enough, now, O Lord, take away my life; intimating that he had
lived long enough, even as long as he desired; and he had done as much
work for God as he thought he had to do; he supposed his service and
usefulness were at an end, and therefore desired his dismission:

for I am not better than my fathers that he should not die, or live
longer than they; but this desire was not like that of the Apostle
Paul's, but like that of Job and of Jonah; not so much to be with God
and Christ, as to be rid of the troubles of life.

\(o\) Nat. Hist. l. 24. c. 8. (p) "Juniperi gravis umbra----" Bucol.
Eclog. 10. ver. 76.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 19:5</span></span>

And as he lay and slept under a juniper tree,.... Being weary and
fatigued with his journey, the same under which he sat; for there was
but one, as that is said to be in the preceding verse:

behold, then an angel touched him, and said unto him, arise, and eat; so
far was the Lord from granting his request to take away his life, that
he made provision to preserve it; so careful was he of him, as to give
an angel charge to get food ready for him, and then awake him to eat of
it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 19:6</span></span>

And he looked, and, behold, there was a cake baked on the coals,....
Just took off the coals, quite hot. Bochart (q) thinks it should be
rendered, "baked on hot stones"; and such was the way of baking cakes in
some of the eastern countries; see Gill on [Gen
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#006.md), the stones hereabout might be
heated by a supernatural power, and the cake baked on them by an angel;
these sort of cakes are in Hebrew called "huggoth", as some pronounce
the word, and are said to be now common in Bulgaria, where they are
called "hugaces" (r):

and a cruse of water at his head; to drink of in eating the cake; which
cruse or pot a learned man (s) thinks was Elijah's, not brought by the
angel, only water put into it by him; see [Sa1
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#011.md), and he did eat and drink; but
not all that was set before him:

and laid him down again; to take some more sleep for his greater
refreshment.

\(q\) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 33. col. 528. (r) Busbequius apud
Calmet on the word "Bread". (s) Schacchi Elaeochrism. Myrothec. l. 1. c.
44. col. 224.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 19:7</span></span>

And the angel of the Lord came again the second time, and touched
him,.... In order to awake him out of sleep:

and said unto him, arise, and eat, because the journey is too great for
thee; which he had to go to Horeb, without eating more than he had; and
there were no provisions to be had in a common way and manner in his
road thither.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 19:8</span></span>

And he arose, and did eat and drink,.... Of what was left of the cake
and cruse of water, before provided for him:

and went in the strength of that meat forty days and forty nights unto
Horeb the mount of God; for so long he was going to that place, though
it might have been gone in three or four days; but he went in byways,
and wandered about in the wilderness, as the Israelites did, and that
for the space of forty days, as they did near forty years; and all this
while he had no other sustenance than what he had taken under the
juniper tree, from whence he set out, which must be supernatural; for it
is said (t), a man cannot live without food beyond seven days; see Gill
on [Exo 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo024.htm#018.md) the food either staying
in his stomach all this while, or however the nutritive virtue of it, by
which he was supported, and held out till he came to Horeb or Sinai;
called the mount of the Lord, because here he had appeared to Moses in
the bush, and from hence gave the law to the children of Israel.
Abarbinel is of opinion that this term of forty days was consumed in his
whole journey to Horeb, his stay there, and return to the land of
Israel.

\(t\) Macrob. in Soma Scipion. l. 1. c. 6.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 19:9</span></span>

And he came thither unto a cave, and lodged there,.... This cave, some
travellers say (u), is to be seen at this day, not far from a church
dedicated to the prophet Elijah, and that the cave itself has the
appearance of a chapel; but a more particular account of it is given in
a journal (w) lately published, which says, this cave exists to this
very day, and is situated at the foot of Mount Sinai, and is now
enclosed in a church built of red and white granite marble, the entrance
into which is from the west; the dimensions of this cave are in length
five feet, in depth four feet, and in height four and a half. The Jewish
writers are of opinion that this was the cleft of the rock in which
Moses was put, when the Lord passed before him; but, if so, there would
have been no need of Elijah to have gone forth to and stand upon the
mount when the Lord passed by, [Kg1
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011.md),

and, behold, the word of the Lord came to him; an articulate voice was
heard by him:

and he said unto him, what dost thou here, Elijah? this is not a proper
place for a prophet to be in, in a wilderness, in a mountain, in a cave
in it: what work could he do for God? or what service to his people? in
the land of Israel he might bear his testimony against idolatry, and so
be a means of reclaiming backsliders, and of establishing those that
were in the true religion; but of what usefulness could he be here?
Abarbinel takes it to be a reproof of Elijah, for going into a place so
holy as it was, and in which Moses, the chief of the prophets, had been,
and that it did not become such a man as he was to be in such a place.

\(u\) Egmont and Heyman's Travels, vol. 2. p. 166. (w) Journal from
Cairo to Mount Sinai in 1722, p. 26. Ed. 2.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 19:10</span></span>

And he said, I have been jealous for the Lord God of hosts,.... Through
zeal for the glory of God he had slain four hundred and fifty prophets
of Baal, and this had stirred up the malice and revenge of Jezebel
against him, who sought his life, and which had obliged him to flee, and
come to this place for shelter; this is the first part of his answer,
others follow:

for the children of Israel have forsaken thy covenant; the law,
especially the two first commandments delivered in this very place; and
therefore he could hope for no protection from them, but was forced to
leave his country:

thrown down thy altars: which had been built in times past for the
worship of God, to sacrifice thereon to him, but were now demolished,
that those that would not bow the knee to Baal, and could not go to
Jerusalem, might make no use of them:

and slain thy prophets with the sword; which was done by Jezebel, the
Israelites conniving at it, and consenting to it, and not daring to
oppose her; slain all she had knowledge of, or even were known by the
prophet: hence it follows,

and I, even I only am left, and they seek my life to take it away: all
this Elijah said, as it seems, not only to excuse himself for fleeing,
and taking up his abode where he was, but to stir up the indignation of
God against Israel for their idolatries and murders, and to put him upon
inflicting his judgments on them for the same.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 19:11</span></span>

And he said, go forth and stand upon the mount before the Lord,.... Who
would appear there as he had to Moses formerly, though not in the same
manner:

and, behold, the Lord passed by; or was about to pass, for as yet he had
not; his messengers first went before him:

and a great and strong wind rent the mountains, and brake in pieces the
rocks before the Lord; strong enough to do all this, and so it might:

but the Lord was not in the wind; as he sometimes is, [Nah
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#003.md), he spake to Job out of a
whirlwind, [Job 38:1](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#001.md),

and after the wind an earthquake; that shook the earth all around, and
the mountain also, as it did when the law was given on it, [Psa
68:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#008.md).

but the Lord was not in the earthquake; as he was when it trembled in
the times of Moses, [Exo 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 19:12</span></span>

And after the earthquake a fire, but the Lord was not in the fire,....
As he was when he descended on this mount, and spake to Moses, [Exo
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001.md), the Targum, and so Jarchi,
interpret all these appearances of angels, and not amiss; the wind, of
an host of angels of wind; the earthquake, of an host of angels of
commotion; the fire, of an host of angels of fire; see [Psa
104:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#004.md), these ministers of the Lord
went before him, to prepare the way of his glorious Majesty; which
emblems may represent the power of God, the terribleness of his majesty,
and the fury of his wrath, which he could display, if he would, to the
destruction of his enemies; and could as easily destroy the idolatrous
kingdom of Israel, which Elijah seems to be solicitous of, as the wind
rent the mountains, and broke the rocks, and the earthquake shook the
earth, and the fire consumed all in its way; but he chose not to do it
now, but to use lenity, and show mercy, signified by the next emblem:

and after the fire a still small voice: not rough, but gentle, more like
whispering than roaring; something soft, easy, and musical; the Targum
is, the voice of those that praise God in silence; and all this may be
considered as showing the difference between the two dispensations of
law and Gospel; the law is a voice of terrible words, and was given
amidst a tempest of wind, thunder, and lightning, attended with an
earthquake, [Heb 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#018.md), but the Gospel
is a gentle voice of love, grace, and mercy, of peace, pardon,
righteousness, and salvation by Christ; and may also point at the order
and manner of the Lord's dealings with the souls of men, who usually by
the law breaks the rocky hearts of men in pieces, shakes their
consciences, and fills their minds with a sense of fiery wrath and
indignation they deserve, and then speaks comfortably to them, speaks
peace and pardon through the ministration of the Gospel by his Spirit;
blessed are the people that hear this still, small, gentle voice, the
joyful sound, [Psa 89:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#015.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 19:13</span></span>

And it was so, when Elijah heard it, that he wrapped his face in his
mantle,.... Through reverence of the divine Majesty he perceived was
there, and through shame and confusion under a sense of his impurity,
imperfections, and unworthiness, as the seraphim in [Isa
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#002.md), and as Moses, [Exo
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#006.md), and went out and stood in the
entering in of the cave; he attempted to come forth out of the cave upon
the divine order, [Kg1 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#011.md), but was
stopped by the terrible appearances of the wind, earthquake, and fire, a
little within it; but now he came quite out, and stood at the mouth of
it, to hear what the Lord would say unto him:

and, behold, there came a voice unto him, and said, what dost thou here,
Elijah? the same question is here put as in [Kg1
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#009.md), though there by an angel, here
by the Lord himself.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 19:14</span></span>

And he said,.... Elijah, in answer to the question put, and he says the
same as before:

I have been very jealous,.... which the question was designed to draw
from him, in order to give him some instructions and directions; which
would suggest to him, that though he should not deal severely with
Israel, nor with Ahab and his house, yet he would hereafter by the kings
he should anoint over Syria and Israel, and by the prophet he should
anoint in his room, as instruments of his vengeance.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 19:15</span></span>

And the Lord said unto him, go, return on thy way to the wilderness of
Damascus,.... He is bid to go back the way he came, through the
wilderness of Arabia, which was part of his way to Damascus, near to
which was another wilderness, which took its name from thence; though
Fortunatus Schacchus (x) thinks no other is meant by this phrase than
returning to his former course and custom of preach the law of God, and
reclaiming men from the error of their ways:

and when thou comest, anoint Hazael to be king over Syria; it is nowhere
related that Elijah did go to Damascus, and anoint Hazael, though it may
be he did; however he acquainted Elisha with it, and he declared it to
Hazael, that he should be king of Syria, and which perhaps is all that
is meant by anointing; that is, that he should be made king, and which
was declared by both these prophets, see [Kg2
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#013.md).

\(x\) Elaeochrism. Myrothec. l. 1. c. 39. col. 198.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 19:16</span></span>

And Jehu the son of Nimshi shalt thou anoint to be king over Israel,....
This was a son of Jehoshaphat, and a grandson of Nimshi; nor does he
appear to have been anointed by Elijah, but by Elisha; and being done by
his order and direction was the same as if it was done by himself,
unless he was twice anointed, see [Kg2
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#001.md).

and Elisha the son of Shaphat of Abelmeholah shalt thou anoint to be
prophet in thy room; which was in the half tribe of Manasseh, on this
side Jordan; See Gill on [Jdg 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#022.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 19:17</span></span>

And it shall come to pass, that him that escapeth the sword of Hazael
shall Jehu slay,.... Which suggests that many should be slain in Israel
by them both, as were by Hazael, [Kg2
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#032.md) and by Jehu, [Kg2
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#024.md),

and him that escapeth from the sword of Jehu shall Elisha slay; which
may be understood either literally of the forty two children cursed by
him, in consequence of which they were destroyed by bears, [Kg2
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#024.md) or rather figuratively by his
prophecies, see [Hos 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005.md) who foretold
the slaughters made by Hazael and Jehu, as well as others, see [Kg2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#012.md), these several things were not
done in the order in which they are here put; for what Elisha did was
before Hazael and Jehu, and Jehu before Hazael; these words therefore do
not respect the exact order of time in which they should be done, only
that each should do the part appointed and assigned unto him, and what
could not be so well done by the other; thus Hazael was to destroy those
that came out to war; and Jehu Ahab's family that did not; and Elisha
the children of idolatrous parents at Bethel, that came not within the
reach of either; though it may be observed, that Hazael began to
distress Israel before Jehu appeared, [Kg2
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#028.md) and the prophecies of Elisha
might not have their full accomplishment until after Hazael and Jehu had
done what was appointed for them.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 19:18</span></span>

Yet I have left me seven thousand in Israel,.... From perishing by the
sword of either of them:

all the knees which have not bowed to Baal; that is, had not worshipped
him, which was signified by this gesture:

and every mouth which hath not kissed him; either the image of Baal
itself, or the hand, in reverence of him; which rites, one or other, or
both, were used by his worshippers; See Gill on [Hos
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#002.md). This either refers, as some
think, to the present time, and so is an answer to Elijah, who thought
he was the only worshipper left with which seems to agree [Rom
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#002.md), or to the times to come, when
destruction should be made by the above persons, and when God would have
some faithful worshippers, and would take care of them; so some render
the words, "I will reserve", &c. (y).

\(y\) "reservabo vel servabo", Vatablus; so V. L. Pagninus, Montanus,
Tigurine version.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 19:19</span></span>

So he departed thence,.... From Mount Horeb, and came to Abelmeholah,
which Bunting computes (z) at one hundred and fifty six miles:

and found Elisha the son of Shaphat, who was ploughing with twelve yoke
of oxen before him, and he with the twelfth; which may be understood
either of twelve couple of oxen drawing one plough; which was a large
number, but will not seem strange when it is observed, that Abelmeholah,
where Elisha was ploughing, lay in the vale of Jordan, which was a
clayey stiff ground, and required such a number of oxen to plough it up,
especially at the first tilling of it, as this might be (a); compare
[Kg1 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#012) A late traveller (b.md)
observes, that at Damegraed, in upper Egypt on the Nile, six oxen yoked
to plough had a great deal of difficulty to turn up the ground; or else,
as the Jewish writers generally understand it, there were twelve
ploughs, and a yoke of oxen to each, and a ploughman to attend everyone,
and Elisha attended the twelfth; or was with one of the twelve, as the
Targum, and might have the oversight of them all; Kimchi thinks, and so
Abarbiuel after him, that this signified that he should be leader of the
twelve tribes of Israel:

and Elijah passed by him, and cast his mantle upon him; the skirts of
it.

\(z\) Travels, &c. p. 204. (a) See Fuller's Pisgah-Sight, &c. B. 2. ch.
8. p. 175. (b) Norden's Travels in Egypt and Arabia, vol. 2. p. 85.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 19:20</span></span>

And he left the oxen, and ran after Elijah,.... His heart being touched
by the Lord at the same time, and his mind enlightened to understand
what was meant by that action:

and said, let me, I pray thee, kiss my father and my mother; take his
leave of them in this way, which was what was used by friends at
parting, see [Rut 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#009.md).

and then I will follow thee; which he understood was meant by his
casting his mantle over him:

and he said unto him, go back again; to his plough:

for what have I done to thee? he had only cast the skirts of his mantle
over him, and had said nothing to him; this he said to try him, and get
out of him what was in his heart, and how it had been touched by the
Spirit of God; and if so, then he suggests it was not what he had done,
but what the Lord had impressed upon him, that would oblige him to
return, and follow him, after he had taken his leave of his parents.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 19:21</span></span>

And he returned back from him,.... To his father's house, and took his
leave, and then came back into the field, perhaps with others
accompanying him:

and took a yoke of oxen and slew them, and boiled their flesh with the
instruments of the oxen: their yokes, and the plough, with an addition
of other things sufficient to boil them:

and gave unto the people, and they did eat; the ploughmen and others
that came together on this occasion; he made a feast for them, to
express his joy at being called to such service he was:

then he arose and went after Elijah; left his worldly employment, the
riches he was heir to, his parents, and his friends, and followed the
prophet:

and ministered unto him; became his servant, whereby he attained to
great knowledge and understanding of divine things, and was trained up
to the prophetic office, which he was invested with upon the removal of
Elijah; see [Mat 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#021.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 20](kg1020.md)

</div>
