<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1)  
  [Previous](kg1012)  [Next](kg1014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 13:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 KINGS 13

In this chapter is an account of a man of God being sent to exclaim
against Jeroboam's altar, and threaten its destruction, of which he gave
a sign, which was accomplished, and with it the withering of the king's
hand, which was healed upon the prophet's prayer for him, [Kg1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001), who would have entertained him
at his house, but he refused the offer, and departed, [Kg1
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#008), but an old prophet in Bethel
hearing of him, rode after him, and fetched him back to eat bread with
him, through a lie he told him, [Kg1
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011) upon which the word came to the
old prophet, threatening the man of God with death for disobeying his
command, and which was accordingly executed by a lion that met him in
the way, and slew him, [Kg1 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#020), of
which the old prophet being informed, went and took up his carcass, and
buried it in his own sepulchre, where he charged his sons to bury him
also when dead, believing that all the man of God had said would be
fulfilled, [Kg1 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#025) and the chapter
is closed with observing the continuance of Jeroboam in his idolatry,
[Kg1 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#033).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 13:1</span></span>

And, behold, there came a man of God out of Judah,.... Whom Josephus (x)
calls Jadon, perhaps the same with Iddo, who is by the Jewish writers
(y) generally thought to be this man of God, and which may seem to be
countenanced by [Ch2 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029) but cannot
be, because this man was quickly slain, whereas Iddo lived after
Rehoboam, and wrote his acts, first and last, nay, after Ahijah his son,
[Ch2 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2013.htm#022) and for the same reason
Shemaiah cannot be the man of God, [Kg1
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#022), though Tertullian (z) calls him
Sameas, and designs Shemaiah: but, whoever he was, he came

by the word of the Lord to Bethel: that is, by his command:

and Jeroboam stood by the altar to burn incense; at the time he came,
[Kg1 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1012.htm#033).

\(x\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 8. c. 8. sect. 3.) (y) Seder Olam Rabba, c.
20. Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 11. 1. Jarch & Kimchi in loc. (z) De
Jejuniis, c. 16.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 13:2</span></span>

And he cried against the altar in the word of the Lord,.... By his order
and command:

and said, O altar, altar; addressing himself not to Jeroboam, but the
altar, thereby reproving his stupidity, the altar being as ready to hear
as he; and because that was what moved the indignation of the Lord; and
the word is repeated, to show the vehemency of the prophet's spirit, and
his zeal against it; though the Jews commonly say it respects both
altars, that at Dan, as well as this at Bethel:

thus saith the Lord, a child shall be born unto the house of David,
Josiah by name; who was not born until three hundred years after this,
according to the Jewish writers (a): but it is generally reckoned to be
more, even three hundred and fifty or three hundred and sixty years;
this is a clear proof of the prescience, predetermination, and
providence of God with respect to future events, contingent ones, such
as depend upon the will of men; for what more so than giving a name to a
child?

upon thee shall he offer the priests of the high places that burn
incense upon thee, and men's bones shall be burnt upon thee; all which
was fulfilled by Josiah, [Kg2 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015),
it may be read, "the bones of a man", which the Jews understand of
Jeroboam; but may only signify that, instead of the bones of beasts,
which were burnt on it, the bones of men should be burnt, and even of
the priests themselves; a glaring proof this of the truth of prophecy,
and of divine revelation.

\(a\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 17.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 13:3</span></span>

And he gave a sign the same day, saying, this is the sign which the Lord
hath spoken,.... As a confirmation of the truth of what the prophet had
said, and for the proof of his being a true prophet of the Lord:

behold, the altar shall be rent; of itself, by an invisible hand, by the
power of God:

and the ashes that are upon it shall be poured out; signifying it should
be entirely demolished, not only shaken but destroyed, so as not to be
capable of retaining the ashes on it; this was an emblem of the utter
abolition of idolatry here in future times.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 13:4</span></span>

And it came to pass, when King Jeroboam heard the saying of the man of
God, who had cried against the altar in Bethel,.... He was highly
provoked: so that he put forth his hand from the altar; on which he was
burning incense:

saying, lay hold on him; he put forth his hand, and either shook it at
the prophet, threatening what he would do to him; or as beckoning to the
people to seize him, and which he also expressed:

and his hand, which he put forth against him, dried up, so that he could
not pull it in again to him; he could not move it one way nor another,
but it remained in the same position, the nerves and muscles being
shrunk; which was a further confirmation of the prophet's mission from
God, being one of those concerning whom he says, "do my prophets no
harm", and a fresh token of the certain performance of what he had said.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 13:5</span></span>

The altar also was rent,.... Split into two parts perhaps, and one fell
one way, and the other another;

and the ashes poured out from the altar; the ashes of the burnt
offering, these were spilled on the ground; all which was done without
any outward force, or any visible means thereof:

according to the sign which the man of God had given by the word of the
Lord; by his direction and order.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 13:6</span></span>

And the king answered and said unto the man of God,.... In another tone
than when he bid the people lay hold on him; not in a haughty, but
humble manner; not as threatening, but supplicating:

entreat now the face of the Lord thy God; he does not say "my God", for
he had apostatized from him, and served other gods, but "thy" God, whose
prophet he was, and who had an interest in him, as clearly appeared by
what he had said and done by him;

and pray for me, that my hand may be restored me again; not that the
anger of God might be turned away from him, and he enjoy the divine
favour, and have an application of pardoning grace made to him, only to
have this outward mercy, this temporal favour restored to him, the use
of his hand:

and the man of God besought the Lord; not rendering evil for evil; but
being of a forgiving spirit, though the king had stretched out his hand
against him, he lifted up his hands to heaven for him:

and the king's hand was restored again, and became as it was before;
which was another instance of divine power, and a further proof of the
prophet's divine mission; from whence it might be concluded, that what
he had prophesied of would be fulfilled, and was an instance also of
divine goodness to the king, which should have led him to repentance,
but did not.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 13:7</span></span>

And the king said unto the man of God, come home with me, and refresh
thyself,.... By eating a meal with him, after such a journey he had
taken, and delivered his prophecies, and put up his prayers for the
king:

and I will give thee a reward; for his prayers, by means of which his
hand was restored to him; but takes no notice of the Lord, the author of
this miraculous cure, nor expresses the least degree of thankfulness and
gratitude to him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 13:8</span></span>

And the man of God said unto the king,.... In answer to his civility to
him, to assure him it was not out of contempt to him, or ill will to
him, or slight of his favour, but in obedience to the will of God:

if thou wilt give half of thine house; of the riches in it, and even of
his kingdom:

I will not go in with thee, neither will I eat bread nor drink water in
this place; this idolatrous place; the reason follows.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 13:9</span></span>

For so it was charged me by the word of the Lord,.... The command of the
Lord, by which he came to Bethel, and cried against the altar there,
[Kg1 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#001).

saying, eat no bread, nor drink water, nor turn again by the same way
that thou camest: signifying that no communion was to be had with
idolaters, nor any example to be set and followed; but the way to them,
and to their idolatry, was to be shunned and avoided.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 13:10</span></span>

So he went another way, and returned not by the way that he came to
Bethel. Neither ate nor drank with the king, though that is not
expressed; nor did he go back the same way he came; but in each
particular observed the divine command, and was obedient to it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 13:11</span></span>

Now there dwelt an old prophet in Bethel,.... The Targum is, a false
prophet, so Josephus (b); it is hard to say what he was, a good man or a
bad man; if a good man, he was guilty of many things which are not in
his favour, as dwelling in such an idolatrous place suffering his sons
to attend idolatrous worship, and telling the man of God a premeditated
lie; and yet there are several things which seem contrary to his being a
bad man, and of an ill character, since he is called an old prophet, did
not attend idolatrous worship, showed great respect to the man of God,
had the word of God sent unto him concerning him, believed that what he
had prophesied should come to pass, buried the man of God in his own
grave, and desired his sons to bury him with him. In some copies his
name is said to be Micah, as Kimchi observes, and other Jewish writers
(c) say the same; though some take him to be Amaziah the priest of
Bethel, and others Gersom the son of Moses (d), but without any
foundation; though he now dwelt at Bethel, he was originally of Samaria,
[Kg2 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#018),

and his sons came and told him all the works that the man of God had
done that day in Bethel; that the altar was rent, and the ashes poured
out, as he had said, and that Jeroboam's hand withered, and was restored
upon his prayer to God:

the words which he had spoken unto the king; that one should be born of
the family of David, Josiah by name, that should offer the idolatrous
priests, and burn the bones of men upon that altar, and that that should
be rent, and its ashes poured forth, which was done:

them they told also their father; gave him a particular account of his
actions and words.

\(b\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 9. sect. 1. (c) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 104. 1.
(d) Shalshalet Hakabala, ut supra. (fol. 11. 1.) Shirhalbirim Rabba,
fol. 10. 2.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 13:12</span></span>

And their father said unto them, what way went he?.... Having a strong
inclination to see him, and converse with him:

for his sons had seen what way the man of God went which came from
Judah; they took notice of it; and, as the Targum, they showed it to
their father.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 13:13</span></span>

And he said unto his sons, saddle me the ass,.... Which he used to ride
on; intimating he had a mind to ride after him, and overtake him, as he
might reasonably think he might, since the man of God was on foot:

so they saddled him the ass, and he rode thereon; after the man of God,
taking the way his sons directed.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 13:14</span></span>

And went after the man of God, and found him sitting under an oak,....
To shelter him from the heat, and being faint, hungry, and thirsty; so
the ancients of old made use of oaks for a covering, before houses were
invented (e); thus Abraham pitched his tent in the plain, or under the
oak, of Mamre, [Gen 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#018).

and he said unto him, art thou the man of God that camest from Judah?
which he might guess at from his habit, and from the description his
sons had given of him:

and he said, I am; owned himself to be the person he inquired after.

\(e\) Suidas in voce

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 13:15</span></span>

Then said he unto him, come home with me, and eat bread. In which
invitation no doubt he was hearty, and might have no ill design in it,
only to have some conversation with him, as being a good man, and a
prophet of the Lord, especially upon the subject of his prophecies at
Bethel.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 13:16</span></span>

And he said, I may not return with thee, nor go in with thee,.... Into
the city, and into his house in it, being such an idolatrous place, and
especially being forbidden of God:

neither will I eat bread nor drink water with thee in this place; he was
resolute and determined to abide by the commandment of the Lord, though
there is reason to believe that he was now both hungry and thirsty.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 13:17</span></span>

For it was said to me by the word of the Lord,.... By the angel that was
sent to him, who gave him his message and instructions; which he was
persuaded came from the Lord himself, and therefore looked upon himself
under obligation to regard them as such:

thou shall eat no bread, &c. the same that he observed to the king, [Kg1
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#009).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 13:18</span></span>

And he said unto him,.... That is, the old prophet said to the man of
God:

I am a prophet also as thou art; meaning, that he was a prophet of the
true God, and not of any idol deity; that he not only believed in him,
and was a worshipper of him, but had revelations from him, and of the
same things this man of God had, and that he believed that what he had
prophesied of would certainly come to pass:

and an angel spoke unto me by the word of the Lord; was sent and
dispatched by the order of the Lord with the following message:

saying, bring him back with thee into thine house, that he may eat bread
and drink water; and so be refreshed, and be fit to proceed on in his
journey:

but he lied unto him; no messenger nor message being sent to him by the
Lord, but was wholly a device and stratagem of his own to persuade the
man of God to return with him, that he might have his company and
conversation.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 13:19</span></span>

So he went back with him,.... In which he sinned; for as he had most
certainly the command of God not to eat and drink in that place, he
ought to have had the countermand from the Lord, and not trusted to
another person. There are some things indeed which may be said in his
favour, and be an apology for him, as that this man was an ancient
prophet of the Lord, as he appeared to him; and that though he was
forbid to eat and drink with idolaters, yet he thought he might with a
prophet of the Lord, and especially as he affirmed he had the direction
of an angel of the Lord for it; nor could he conceive that the prophet
had any interest to serve by it, but rather it might be chargeable and
burdensome to him; and he might think the Lord, out of compassion on
him, had countermanded his former orders, and the circumstances he was
in might the more incline him to listen to these plausible pretences;
but, after all, he ought to have taken no directions but from the Lord
himself; in this he failed:

and did eat bread in his house, and drink water; contrary to the express
command of God.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 13:20</span></span>

And it came to pass, as they sat at the table,.... The old prophet, with
his sons, and the man of God; the Arabic version adds, "and did eat",
there being a pause in the Hebrew text, as if something was wanting, and
to be understood and supplied:

that the word of the Lord came unto the prophet that brought him back;
that is, to the old prophet, who was the means of bringing back the man
of God; the word did not come to him who had transgressed the command of
the Lord, but to him who was the occasion of it; though Abarbinel is of
opinion that the word came to the latter, and so some versions, both
ancient and modern, render the clause, "to the prophet whom he had
brought back" (f) and which is countenanced by what is said, [Kg1
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#026),

according to the word of the Lord which he spoke unto him: but the
former sense best agrees with what follows.

\(f\) Syr. Ar. Junius & Tremellius.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 13:21</span></span>

And he cried unto the man of God that came from Judah,.... His mind
being greatly affected with the word brought to him, partly on his own
account, who, by a lie his conscience must accuse him of, had been the
means of seducing the man of God, and partly on his account, who was
threatened with death for complying with him:

saying, thus saith the Lord; being obliged to deliver, in the name of
the Lord, what was said unto him:

forasmuch as thou hast disobeyed the mouth of the Lord; the order that
came out of his mouth, as follows:

and hast not kept the commandment which the Lord thy God commanded thee;
not to eat nor drink in Bethel.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 13:22</span></span>

But camest back, and hast eaten bread and drunk water in the place, of
the which the Lord did say to thee, eat no bread, nor drink no
water,.... Which command he observed when first there, though invited by
the king; and yet, after he had got out of the place, was prevailed upon
to return and transgress the command:

thy carcass shall not come unto the sepulchre of thy fathers; signifying
that he should die before he came to the land of Judah, and he should be
buried in another place, and which was verified.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 13:23</span></span>

And it came to pass, after he had eaten bread, and after he had
drunk,.... That is, had finished the meal; for he had begun to eat and
drink before the word came, which came while they were eating and
drinking; and it seems this did not hinder their proceeding to make an
end of their meal, which one would have thought would have spoiled their
appetite:

that he saddled for him the ass, to wit, for the prophet whom he had
brought back; he ordered his sons to get it ready for him, that he might
not walk on foot as he had; though it does not appear that either he or
any of his servants accompanied him, but the contrary.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 13:24</span></span>

And when he was gone, a lion met him by the way, and slew him,....
Perhaps not far from Bethel; and this lion might come out of the same
wood the she bears did, that devoured the children that mocked the
prophet, as Bishop Patrick conjectures, [Kg2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#023).

and his carcass was cast in the way; in the high road, where it seems
the lion seized him, and he fell:

and the ass stood by it; disregarded and unhurt by the lion, though the
prophet was pulled off of the back of him:

the lion also stood by the carcass: not offering to tear it in pieces
and devour it, but rather, as if he was the guard of it, to keep off all
others from meddling with it; these circumstances are very surprising,
and show the thing to be of God; for when the lion had done what he had
a commission to do, which was to kill the prophet, he was to do no more.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 13:25</span></span>

And, behold, men passed by,.... Travellers on the road; nor did the lion
offer to seize on them, nor desert the carcass upon their approach:

and saw the carcass cast in the way, and the lion standing by the
carcass; as before described:

and they came and told it in the city where the old prophet dwelt; which
was Bethel, by which means he came to have knowledge of it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 13:26</span></span>

And when the prophet that brought him back from the way heard
thereof,.... The old prophet, that had deceived him, by telling him a
lie:

he said, it is the man of God, who was disobedient unto the word of the
Lord; but not a syllable does he say of his own sin in deceiving him;
though one would think his own conscience must smite him for it:

therefore the Lord hath delivered him unto the lion, which hath torn
him, and slain him, according to the word of the Lord, which he spake
unto him; and that by himself, [Kg1
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#021).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 13:27</span></span>

And he spoke to his sons, saying, saddle me the ass,.... For it seems he
had more than one, for he had sent away the man of God with one before:
and they saddled him; the ass he commonly rode on.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 13:28</span></span>

And he went and found his carcass cast in the way, and the ass and the
lion standing by the carcass,.... As before described:

the lion had not eaten the carcass, nor torn the ass; both which were
very marvellous; as also that the ass should stand so quietly, and
without fear, by the carcass along with the lion and not run away; but
here both stayed till the prophet came to take care of the carcass,
which shows the singular providence of God in this affair; and that
though he chastised the man of God with a temporal judgment for his
offence, yet he was dear to him, and even his carcass precious in his
sight.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 13:29</span></span>

And the prophet took up the carcass of the man of God,.... The lion
perhaps made off as soon as he came, or, if he stayed, the prophet was
not afraid of him, seeing he did not attempt to devour the carcass, nor
touch the ass, nor do any hurt to those that passed by:

and laid it upon the ass, and brought it back; to his own city:

and the old prophet came to the city to mourn, and to bury him; to
perform the funeral rites, according to the custom of the place.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 13:30</span></span>

And he laid his carcass in his own grave,.... Which he had prepared for
himself; for, as he came from Samaria, it could not be the sepulchre of
his fathers; and this was showing all the respect, and doing all the
honour to him, he well could:

and they mourned over him; the prophet and his sons: saying,

alas, my brother; which was an usual form of lamentation at funerals in
later times, see [Jer 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer022.htm#018).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 13:31</span></span>

And it came to pass, after he had buried him, that he spoke to his sons,
saying,.... He gave them the following charge:

when I am dead, then bury me in the sepulchre wherein the man of God is
buried; as it was his own, it might be reasonably thought they would
bury him in it without such a charge; but, lest they should not, he
gives it:

lay my bones beside his bones; his view in this was, that when Josiah
came to burn the bones of the priests, he would spare the bones of this
man of God; and so his, lying by them, and mingled with them, would be
spared also, and so it proved, [Kg2
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#018).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 13:32</span></span>

For the saying which he cried by the word of the Lord against the altar
in Bethel,.... That the priests should be offered on it, and men's bones
be burnt upon it; for as for its being rent, and the ashes of it poured
out, that had been done already:

and against all the houses of the high places which are in Samaria,
shall surely come to pass: by which it appears that there were temples,
and high places, and altars built in other parts of the kingdom besides
Dan and Bethel, of the destruction of which the man of God prophesied,
though not before mentioned; all which the old prophet gave credit to,
and firmly believed would be accomplished. The kingdom of Israel, in
later times, had the name of Samaria, from the chief city of it, [Isa
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#009), here spoken of by anticipation,
for as yet it was not in being, see [Kg1
16:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#024) and either it has its name here
by way of prophecy, or else given by the writer of this book, as what it
went by in his time.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 13:33</span></span>

After this thing Jeroboam returned not from his evil way,.... From the
idolatrous practices he had started, and was establishing; though he had
seen his altar rent, and the ashes poured out as the man of God
predicted, his own hand withered, and that restored again upon the
prayer of the prophet; and though he had heard of the death he died for
his disobedience to the command of God, and the several marvellous
things that attended it; these were so far from reforming him, that he
seemed to be the more hardened thereby:

but made again of the lowest of the people priests of the high places:
and officiated there, and indeed those of the tribe of Levi would not
serve there, and therefore were expelled their cities; see [Ch2
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#014).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1013.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 13:34</span></span>

And this thing became sin unto the house of Jeroboam,.... All the above
things were sins in themselves, as building high places, and putting
priests in them, whoever would; but the sense is, that these were the
causes of punishment, or of evil things being inflicted on Jeroboam's
family; sin is put for the punishment of sin, as it often is:

even to cut it off, and to destroy it from off the face of the earth; so
that it become utterly extinct; and the next thing we hear of is the
sickness and death of his son.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 14](kg1014)

</div>
