<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[3 Kings (1 Kings) Index](kg1.md)  
  [Previous](kg1010)  [Next](kg1012.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001.md)

[3 Kings (1 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg1 11:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 KINGS 11

This chapter relates the false steps Solomon took, notwithstanding all
his wisdom, in marrying strange wives, and worshipping other gods, [Kg1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001.md) upon which the Lord threatens him
to rend the kingdom in his son's time, [Kg1
11:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#009.md) and he raised up adversaries
against him, Hadad, Rezon, and Jeroboam, [Kg1
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014.md) of which last an account is
given, and of his being assured by Ahijah the prophet of his having ten
of the tribes of Israel given to him; which Solomon having notice of
sought to slay him, [Kg1 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#027.md) and the
chapter is concluded with an account of Solomon's death and burial, [Kg1
11:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#041.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg1 11:1</span></span>

But King Solomon loved many strange women,.... His love was a lustful
and not a lawful one, and of women who were not only of foreign
countries, but not his lawful wives, and these many:

together with the daughter of Pharaoh; besides her, or as he loved her,
and perhaps more; his sin was not that he loved her who was his lawful
wife, but others with her; it is very probable she was a proselytess,
and had no hand in turning him to idolatry, since we read not of any
high place built for an Egyptian idol:

women of the Moabites, Anmonites, Edomites, Zidonians, and Hittites; all
of the neighbouring nations. Some think he did this with political
views, to get intelligence of the state of those countries, or to abate
and extinguish their enmity; but it rather seems to be the fruit of lust
or pride.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg1 11:2</span></span>

Of the nations concerning which the Lord said unto the children of
Israel, ye shall not go in to them, neither shall they come in unto
you,.... That is, they should not intermarry with one another; this is
to be understood of the last mentioned, the Hittites, who were one of
the seven nations this law respected, [Deu
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#001.md).

for surely they will turn away your heart after their gods; which is the
reason given for the making the above law, and was sadly verified in
Solomon:

Solomon clave unto these in love; he not only took them, but kept them,
and expressed a strong affection for them.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg1 11:3</span></span>

And he had seven hundred wives, princesses, and three hundred
concubines,.... In all 1000, a prodigious number; though these might not
be all for use, but for state after the manner of the eastern monarchs;
these were a far greater number than are alluded to in [Sol
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#008.md), unless the virgins without number
there, were such of these as were not defiled by him; but the number
here seems plainly referred to in [Ecc
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#028.md),

and his wives turned away his heart; both from his duty to his God, and
from attendance to his business as a king, especially the former, as
follows.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg1 11:4</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Solomon was old,.... Toward the latter end of
his reign, when he might be near sixty years of age; for Rehoboam his
son and successor was forty one when he began to reign, [Kg1
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021.md) which is observed either as an
aggravation of the sin of Solomon, that in his old age, when by long
experience he might have been thought to be still wiser, and less
lustful: and yet

that his wives turned away his heart after other gods; or as pointing at
the advantage his wives took of his age:

and his heart was not perfect with the Lord his God, as was the heart of
David his father; who, though guilty of many sins, never inclined to
idolatry; his heart was always right in that point, and sincere in his
worship, see [Psa 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg1 11:5</span></span>

And Solomon went after Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians,....
Enticed by the Zidonian women, or woman, he had, [Kg1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001.md). According to the Phoenician
histories (i), Solomon married a daughter of Hiram, king of Tyre and
Zidon; so Clemens of Alexandria says (k), that Hiram gave his daughter
to Solomon; Ashtoreth is Astarte, the same with the Venus of the Greeks,
so Suidas (l); and Lucian (m) expressly says, the Sidonians had a
temple, said by them to belong to Astarte, which he takes to be the
moon; and both Venus and Juno signify the same planet; See Gill on [Jdg
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013.md).

and after Milcom the abomination of the Amnonites; the same with Molech,
[Kg1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007.md). See Gill on [Lev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#021.md). See Gill on [Amo
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#013.md). After this he was drawn by his
Ammonitish wife, or wives, [Kg1 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001.md),
though the Jewish writers think he did not worship these idols, but
suffered his wives to do it, and connived at it, which was his sin; so
Ben Gersom and Abarbinel.

\(i\) Apud Tatian. contr. Graecos, p. 171. (k) Stromat. l. 1. p. 325.
(l) In voce (m) De Dea Syria.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg1 11:6</span></span>

And Solomon did evil in the sight of the Lord,.... As idolatry is,
nothing more provoking to him:

and went not fully after the Lord, as did David his father; for though
he did not relinquish the worship of the true God, and the service of
the temple, yet inasmuch as he worshipped other gods besides, or
connived at the worship of them, he did not wholly, and constantly, and
solely serve the Lord, as his father did.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg1 11:7</span></span>

Then did Solomon build an high place for Chemosh, the abomination of
Mesh,.... Of this idol see Gill on [Jer
48:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer048.htm#007.md), an high place for which he
ordered to be built, or at least suffered it to be built, at the
instigation of his Moabitish woman or women, [Kg1
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#001.md), this was built in the hill that
is before Jerusalem; on the mount of Olives, as Jarchi, called from
hence afterwards the mount of corruption, [Kg2
23:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#015.md) and for Molech, the abomination
of the children of Ammon, [Kg1 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg1 11:8</span></span>

And likewise did he for all his strange wives,.... That is, built high
places for their idols, or suffered them to be built; for when he had
done it for one, he could not refuse it to another, without greatly
disobliging them; even for as many of them,

which burnt incense, and sacrificed unto their gods; the gods of the
countries from whence they came, and in the worship of which they had
been brought up: this shows that the best and wisest of men, when left
to themselves, may do the worst and most foolish of all things; as
nothing can be more so than the worship of such wretched deities.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg1 11:9</span></span>

And the Lord was angry with Solomon, because his heart was turned from
the Lord God of Israel,.... Or from the fear of him, as the Targum,
which must in a great measure be cast off, or he could not have given in
to idolatry in any shape as he did; for it was for that the Lord was
displeased, the which nothing is more provoking to him, as may be often
observed:

which had appeared unto him twice; once at Gibeon, and again after his
prayer at the dedication of the temple, [Kg1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1003.htm#005.md), which is mentioned here as an
aggravation of his sin, that he should fall into it, when the Lord had
condescended to appear to him so graciously.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg1 11:10</span></span>

And had commanded him concerning this thing that he should not go after
other gods,.... Which is another aggravation of his sin that it was
against an express command of God, and was particularly given him, and
he was warned to observe it, and threatened with evil should he break
it:

but he kept not that which the Lord commanded: see [Kg1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#005.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg1 11:11</span></span>

Wherefore the Lord said unto Solomon,.... Not in a vision, as before,
but by a prophet; the Jews say (n), Ahijah the Shilonite, which is
probable, see [Kg1 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029.md).

forasmuch as this is done of thee, that thou hast not kept my covenant
and my statutes which I have commanded thee; but broke them by his
idolatry:

I will surely rend the kingdom from thee, and I will give it to thy
servant; meaning Jeroboam, who was not only a subject, but in office
under him, [Kg1 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026.md).

\(n\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 20. p. 53. Kimchi in loc.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg1 11:12</span></span>

Notwithstanding in thy days I will not do it for David thy father's
sake,.... Not for the merits of David, but the promises made to him,
[Sa2 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#012.md),

but I will rend it out of the hand of thy son; and immediate successor,
Rehoboam.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg1 11:13</span></span>

Howbeit, I will not rend away all the kingdom,.... The whole kingdom of
Israel:

but will give one tribe to thy son; but it seems he had both Benjamin
and Judah, and only ten tribes were rent from him; the reason of this
mode of expression may be, either because he gave him one of the tribes
of Israel, besides that of Judah, which was his own tribe; or only the
tribe of Judah is meant, the whole tribe of Benjamin not being his,
since Bethel, and some other places in that tribe, were in the
possession of Jeroboam; or rather both these are called but one, because
their inheritances lay together, and were mixed with one another; and
particularly both had a share in the city of Jerusalem, and the kingdom
always after the division went by the name of Judah only: and this tribe
was given

for David my servant's sake; because of the promise to him, that there
should not want one of his seed to sit on his throne, [Kg1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1009.htm#005.md).

and for Jerusalem's sake, whom I have chosen; to have the house of his
sanctuary and worship in, and therefore thought fit to have one rule
there, that, would have a regard to his service in it.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg1 11:14</span></span>

And the Lord stirred up an adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the
Edomite,.... Though he did not take his kingdom from him for his sin, he
chastised him with the rod of men, as he said he would; suffering one,
and then another, to rise up and disturb his peace in his old age, see
[Sa2 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014.md).

he was of the king's seed in Edom; of the blood royal.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg1 11:15</span></span>

For it came to pass, when David was in Edom,.... Fighting with the
Edomites, and subduing them, and putting garrisons in the land, [Sa2
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#014.md).

and Joab the captain of the host was gone up to bury the slain: the
Israelites that fell in battle, or whom the Edomites afterwards, through
stratagem and surprise, fell upon in their garrisons and destroyed, and
which caused Joab to go thither to bury them, and take vengeance on the
Edomites for it; or these were the Edomites slain by David and Joab; and
it has been always reckoned a piece of humanity to bury the dead of an
enemy, and is to the honour of the conqueror, see [Eze
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#012.md) or to suffer the enemy to bury
them themselves: it is said (o), that Hercules was the first that
brought up this practice, and that before they were left on the field,
to be devoured by dogs; so they were in the times of the Trojan war, as
appears by the writings of Homer; but burying them, in later times, was
used by the Romans (p) and Greeks; and Josephus (q) delivers it as a law
of Moses to bury enemies, and not suffer any dead to lie without
partaking of the earth, nor to pass by or overlook any unburied; but
from whence he took it, or grounds it upon, is not very evident; this is
the first mention of it; though the Targum is,

"to strip the slain:''

after he had smitten every male in Edom; as he thought, intending to
root out the name of them; being enraged at their falling upon the
garrisons, if that was the case.

\(o\) Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 12. c. 27. (p) Liv. Hist. l. 39. c. 21. Vid.
Kirchman. Append. ad. lib. de Funer. Roman. c. 3, 4, & 5. (q) Antiqu. l.
4. c. 8. sect. 24. contr. Apion. l. 2. c. 29.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg1 11:16</span></span>

For six months did Joab remain with all Israel,.... With the whole army:

until he had cut off every male in Edom; as he supposed; for it was not
fact, since after this they increased again, and became a powerful
people, and had a king over them, and revolted from Judah, [Kg2
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#020.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg1 11:17</span></span>

That Hadad fled,.... While Joab was burying the slain:

he and certain Edomites of his father's servants with him; who either
was a king, and these some of his officers and courtiers; or however was
of the royal family, and had an equipage, and these some of them:

to go into Egypt; that was their view at first setting out, where they
might hope for help, at least shelter:

Hadad being yet a little child; whom his father's servants hid, while
Joab was making the slaughter he did, and took the opportunity of
fleeing with him while he was burying the dead.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg1 11:18</span></span>

And they arose out of Midian,.... A country which lay in their way to
Egypt, and where it seems they made some stay, and then departed:

and came to Paran; near to which was a wilderness of the same name, in
which the Israelites wandered when they came out of Egypt, and which lay
between Edom and Egypt:

and they took men with them out of Paran; either as guides and guards
through the wilderness, or to make the better appearance before Pharaoh,
and that they might meet with the better reception:

and they came to Egypt, unto Pharaoh king of Egypt; and told their case,
and informed him who Hadad was: who, pitying an unfortunate young
prince,

gave him an house; for him and his servants to dwell in:

and appointed him victuals; a daily provision for him and his men:

and gave him land; for his servants to cultivate, and from thence to
raise a revenue for his support; the Jewish writers say he gave him
cities to rule over; but as he was but a little child when he came, it
cannot be thought that was done, at least directly.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg1 11:19</span></span>

And Hadad found great favour in the sight of Pharaoh,.... Perhaps for
his comely personage, princely qualities, and good behaviour, as he grew
up:

so that he gave him to wife the sister of his own wife, the sister of
Tahpenes the queen; it seems the kings of Egypt used to marry their
favourites to great personages; see [Gen
41:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#045.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg1 11:20</span></span>

And the sister of Tahpenes bore him Genubath his son,.... Which
signifies "stealth", and the name might be given in memory of himself
being carried away by stealth from his own land:

whom Tahpenes weaned in Pharaoh's house: who was so fond of the child,
that she took it, and weaned it for her in the king's palace:

and Genubath was in Pharaoh's household among the sons of Pharaoh;
brought up among them, as if he was one of them.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg1 11:21</span></span>

And when Hadad heard in Egypt that David slept with his fathers,.... Was
dead and buried, as the death of princes is soon known in other
countries, and especially a king of such fame as David:

and that Joab the captain of the host was dead: whose name might be
terrible to Hadad, because of the slaughter of men he had made in his
country:

Hadad said unto Pharaoh, let me depart, that I may go to mine own
country; with a view and an hope to recover it, now David and Joab were
dead.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg1 11:22</span></span>

Then Pharaoh said unto him, but what hast thou lacked with me,....
Either of an equipage suitable to his birth and marriage, or of
provisions for his household, or of honour and respect, or of any favour
from him:

that, behold, thou seekest to go into thine own country? as if not well
used where he was, or would be better provided for there:

and he answered, nothing; he wanted nothing at all, had all he could
wish for:

howbeit, let me go in any wise: he had such an extreme desire to go,
that he begged it might not be denied him on any account; whether he
acquainted Pharaoh with his view in this request is not said, but it is
probable he did, and it is certain Pharaoh gave him leave to go, see
[Kg1 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#025.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg1 11:23</span></span>

And God stirred him up another adversary,.... One from the north, as the
other was from the south:

Rezon, the son of Eliadah, which fled from his lord Hadadezer king of
Zobah: when David fought with him; and this man seeing the battle go
against his master, and that he was like to be worsted, deserted him and
fled, see [Sa2 8:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#003.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg1 11:24</span></span>

And he gathered men unto him,.... Perhaps some of the scattered forces
of his master:

and became captain over a band, when David slew them of Zobah; some that
escaped enlisted under this man, and lived by plunder the remainder of
David's reign, and so in the reign of Solomon unto his old age, when his
heart was turned away from God to idols, by his wives:

and they went to Damascus, and dwelt therein, and reigned in Damascus;
Rezon and his men went thither, not in David's time, for he put a
garrison there, [Sa2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#006.md) but towards
the close of Solomon's days, and when Hadad set up in Edom, which gave
him the hint to do the same at Damascus, of which he became king, and
was the founder of that kingdom; after him there was a long race of
kings there.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg1 11:25</span></span>

And he was an adversary to Israel all the days of Solomon,.... Not all
the days of his life, see [Kg1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#004.md),
but all his days, from his first going into idolatry, to the end of his
life:

beside the mischief that Hadad did; and which, whatever it was, was not
done till this time; for either, when he got leave from Pharaoh to go
into his country, he lay hid there, waiting an opportunity to seize upon
it; or by means of Pharaoh he got himself to be king of it, through the
permission of Solomon, paying a tribute to him; but when Solomon was
grown old, he revolted and refused to pay it, and rebelled against him,
and gave him much trouble:

and he abhorred Israel, and reigned over Syria; not Hadad, but Rezon; he
had an aversion to them, was a thorn in their side, and gave them much
trouble, as well as had them in contempt, and bid them defiance, having
made himself not only master of Damascus, but of all Syria.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg1 11:26</span></span>

And Jeroboam the son of Nebat,.... According to some Jewish writers (r),
this was Sheba the son of Bichri; but, as Kimchi observes, he was of the
tribe of Benjamin, this of Ephraim; and besides, his head was cut off,
and thrown over the wall to Joab, [Sa2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2020.htm#001.md),

an Ephrathite of Zereda; some where in the tribe of Ephraim, but nowhere
else mentioned. There was a famous Jewish doctor, before the times of
Christ, of this place, as it seems, who was called Jose ben Joezer, a
man of Zereda (s):

Solomon's servant; not only his subject, but one that had been advanced
by him to an office, and served under him, [Kg1
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#028.md),

whose mother's name was Zeruah, a widow woman; who very probably was
supported by this her son, an industrious and ingenious man:

even he lifted up his hand against the king; either against Solomon, by
reproaching and reproving him for some things he did; or rather against
Rehoboam his son, which was very ungrateful.

\(r\) Shalshalet Hakabala, p. 11. (s) Pirke Abot, c. 1. sect. 4.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg1 11:27</span></span>

And this was the cause that he lifted up his hand against the king,....
The occasion of it, his being advanced to some posts under Solomon,
which elated him, and what passed between him and the prophet Ahijah,
after related:

Solomon built Millo, and repaired the breaches of the city of David his
father: in the oversight of which, it is supposed by the Jews, he
employed this man, who reproached him for doing these works; building an
house in Millo for Pharaoh's daughter, and stopping up the passage to
the city of David, and the people's access thither upon occasion.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg1 11:28</span></span>

And the man Jeroboam was a mighty man of valour,.... A man of great
strength of body, and fortitude of mind:

and Solomon seeing the young man that he was industrious; in what he was
set about in the above buildings and repairs:

he made him ruler over all the charge of the house of Joseph; the tribes
of Ephraim and Manasseh, to be a prince or a deputy governor of them; or
rather to collect the king's tax from them, or the revenues of that part
of the country, see [Pro 22:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#029.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg1 11:29</span></span>

And it came to pass at that time, when Jeroboam went out of
Jerusalem,.... Either to enter upon his new office: or having been with
Solomon to pay in the revenues, and to make up his accounts with him was
going back to the country to do the duty of his office:

that the prophet Ahijah the Shilonite found him in the way; not
accidentally, but purposely was in the way to meet him, and converse
with him; this prophet was of the city of Shiloh, and where was now his
abode, see [Kg1 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#002.md).

and he had clad himself with a new garment; not Jeroboam, but the
prophet, and that by the direction of the Lord, for the following
purpose:

and they two were alone in the field: it is possible Jeroboam might have
some servants with him; but Ahijah desiring some private conversation
with him, he sent them onwards, or bid them stay at some distance; who
yet might be capable of observing what was done, though not of hearing
what was said; or otherwise how should Solomon come to the knowledge of
it? [Kg1 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg1 11:30</span></span>

And Ahijah caught the new garment that was on him,.... This looks as if
it was Jeroboam's garment, having got a new one to appear before the
king in; though the sense may be this, that the prophet took hold of his
own garment that was upon himself:

and rent it in twelve pieces; as symbolical of the twelve tribes of
Israel.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg1 11:31</span></span>

And he said to Jeroboam, take thee ten pieces,.... Of the twelve, an
emblem of the ten tribes he was to have:

for thus saith the Lord God of Israel, behold, I will rend the kingdom
out of the hand of Solomon; that is, out of his family:

and will give ten tribes unto thee; to rule over.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg1 11:32</span></span>

But he shall have one tribe for my servant David's sake,.... See Gill on
[Kg1 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg1 11:33</span></span>

Because that they have forsaken me,.... My worship, as the Targum; both
Solomon and the children of Israel following his example; which is not
to be wondered at, considering how prone they always were to idolatry:

and have worshipped Ashtoreth the goddess of the Zidonians, Chemosh the
god of the Moabites, and Milcom the god of the children of Ammon; of
which deities; see Gill on [Kg1 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005.md),
[Kg1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#007.md).

and have not walked in my ways, to do that which is right in mine eyes,
and to keep my statutes and my judgments, as did David his father; the
several laws of God relating to religious worship especially, which
David was a strict observer of; and therefore Solomon, having such a
pattern before him, was the more blameworthy.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg1 11:34</span></span>

Howbeit, I will not take the kingdom out of his hand,.... Not any part
of it, [Kg1 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#012.md),

but I will make him prince all the days of his life; that is, he shall
continue to hold the government of all the tribes so long as he lives:

for David my servant's sake, whom I chose, because he kept my
commandments and my statutes; see [Kg1
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#012.md), or was well pleased with, as
the Targum; for keeping the commands of God from right principles, and
with right views, is well pleasing to him.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg1 11:35</span></span>

But I will take the kingdom out of his son's hand,.... All but the
tribes of Judah and Benjamin:

and will give it unto thee, even ten tribes: signified by ten pieces of
the rent garment he had given him, [Kg1
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#031.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg1 11:36</span></span>

And unto his son will I give one tribe,.... Judah and Benjamin reckoned
as one; See Gill on [Kg1 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#013.md), that
David my servant may have a light always before me in Jerusalem, the
city which I have chosen me to put my name there; or a kingdom, as the
Targum; or an illustrious prince, a successor, shining in royal majesty
and glory, to guide and direct, cheer and comfort, the people of Israel;
be an honour to David's family, and a means of continuing the pure
worship of God in the temple at Jerusalem; see [Sa2
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#017.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">kg1 11:37</span></span>

And I will take thee,.... From the low estate in which he was, to be
king:

and thou shall reign according to all that thy soul desireth; he being
ambitious of the kingdom, and having already formed in his mind some
designs upon it:

and shall be king over Israel; the ten tribes.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">kg1 11:38</span></span>

And it shall be, if thou wilt hearken unto all that I command thee,....
And be obedient thereunto:

and wilt walk in my ways; directed to in the law of Moses:

and do that is right in my sight, to keep my statutes, and my
commandments; those particularly respecting divine worship:

as David my servant did; who very diligently and constantly attended to
the ordinances of religion:

that I will be with thee; to guide and direct, protect and defend,
prosper and succeed:

and build thee a sure house, as I built for David; continue the
succession of the kingdom in his posterity:

and will give Israel unto thee; to rule over them.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:39](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">kg1 11:39</span></span>

And I will for this afflict the seed of David,.... For the idolatry
Solomon had been guilty of, and connived at:

but not for ever; for when the ten tribes were carried captive, the
kingdom of Judah flourished under Hezekiah, Josiah, &c. and though the
tribe of Judah was carried captive, yet it returned after seventy years
captivity, and had rulers over it of the seed of David; and especially
to the Messiah has God given the throne of his father David, of whose
kingdom there will he no end, [Luk
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032.md), and Jarchi's note on the text
is,

"for in the days of the Messiah the kingdom shall return to it,''

the seed of David; and Abarbinel says, of a truth, at the coming of our
Messiah, this prophecy will be fulfilled; but the true Messiah is come
already, in whom it is fulfilled; see Kimchi and Abendana, who refer to
[Eze 37:19](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#019.md).

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:40](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">kg1 11:40</span></span>

Solomon sought therefore to kill Jeroboam,.... Which is another instance
of his folly, to seek to detest the counsel of God, when he himself was
assured by the Lord the kingdom should be rent, and given to his
servant, [Kg1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#011.md) and especially if
he was informed of what passed between Ahijah and Jeroboam, as it should
seem by this he was; either through Ahijah's making no secret of it, or
through Jeroboam not being able to keep his own counsel, or through the
report of the servants what they saw done, [Kg1
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#029.md), which Solomon would easily
understand:

and Jeroboam arose and fled into Egypt; the common sanctuary of persons
in distress in those days:

unto Shishak king of Egypt; either the father in law or the brother in
law of Solomon, or one of another family, on whom the kingdom devolved;
and who might not have any good respect for Solomon, and therefore
Jeroboam thought himself safe with him: this is the only king of Egypt,
in Scripture, that is called by his own name, and not Pharaoh; he is
generally supposed to be the same with the Sesostris of Herodotus (t),
and the Vexoris or Vexosis of Justin (u); and the rather he may be
meant, since, according to Herodotus (w), he was the only king of Egypt
that ruled over the Ethiopians: and Strabo says (x) he was the first
that subdued Ethiopia and the country of the Troglodytes; also Diodorus
Siculus affirms (y), that he fought with the Ethiopians dwelling to the
south, and obliged them to pay tribute; out of which countries Shishak
brought many with him in his expedition against Jerusalem, [Ch2
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2012.htm#002.md).

and was in Egypt until the death of Solomon; not daring to return till
that time, and then he did.

\(t\) Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 102. (u) E Trogo, l. 1. c. 1. (w) Ut
supra, (Euterpe, sive, l. 2.) c. 110. (x) Geograph. l. 16. p. 529. (y)
Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 50.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">kg1 11:41</span></span>

And the rest of the acts of Solomon, and all that he did, and his
wisdom, are they not written in the book of the acts of Solomon? Either
written by himself, as Kimchi suggests, though not in being; or by some
chronologer or historiographer employed by him in writing the most
memorable things that happened in his reign; or by several prophets, as
in [Ch2 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029.md) out of which the inspired
writer of this book took what he was directed to by the Lord to be
transmitted to future ages.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">kg1 11:42</span></span>

And the time that Solomon reigned in Jerusalem, over all Israel, was
forty years. The same says Eupolemus (z), an Heathen writer, who makes
him to live but fifty two years; which is the common tradition of the
Jews, who suppose he was but twelve years of age when he began to reign;
which is to be confuted from the age of his son Rehoboam, see [Kg1
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#021). Josephus (a.md), on the other
hand, makes him to live to too great an age, who says that he reigned
eighty years, and lived to ninety four.

\(z\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 34. (a) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 7.
sect. 8.

[3 Kings (1 Kings) 11:43](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">kg1 11:43</span></span>

And Solomon slept with his fathers,.... Died as they did:

and was buried in the city of David his father; not in Bethlehem, but
Zion, [Kg1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#010.md).

and Rehoboam his son reigned in his stead; of whom more in the following
chapter. Though nothing is said of Solomon's repentance, there is no
doubt but he was a good man, repented of his sins, and was saved; as may
be concluded from the commendations of him after his death, [Ch2
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#017.md) from the promise of God that he
made, that his mercy should not depart from him, though he chastised
him, [Sa2 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014.md) from his being an
inspired writer, who were all holy men, [Pe2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020.md), and especially from his writing
the book of Ecclesiastes after his fall, which contains a full
acknowledgment of all his evils, a recantation of them, and repentance
for them. Abulpharagius (b), an Arabic writer, rashly asserts that he
died without repentance.

\(b\) Hist. Dynast. Dyn. 3. p. 55.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 3 Kings (1 Kings) Chapter 12](kg1012.md)

</div>
