<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2009)  [Next](kg2011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 10

This chapter gives a further account of the destruction of the house of
Ahab by Jehu, or his orders, even of all his sons and relations, [Kg2
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#001.md), and also of the brethren of
Ahaziah king of Judah, [Kg2 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#012.md), of
his taking up Jehonadab the son of Rechab into his chariot, to be a
witness of his zeal for the Lord, [Kg2
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#015.md), and of his gathering together
the prophets, priests, and worshippers of Baal, and slaying them, [Kg2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#018.md) and of his extirpation of the
idolatry of Baal, [Kg2 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#026.md),
nevertheless he continued the worship of the calves, [Kg2
10:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#029.md) wherefore Israel was distressed
by the king of Syria, [Kg2 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#032.md) and
the chapter is concluded with the reign and death of Jehu, [Kg2
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#034.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 10:1</span></span>

And Ahab had seventy sons in Samaria,.... These might not be all his
immediate sons, but some of them his grandsons, as such are sometimes
called in Scripture:

and Jehu wrote letters, and sent to Samaria, unto the rulers of Jezreel;
who fled thither, perhaps on Jehu's coming to Jezreel, having slain
Joram, being the metropolis of the kingdom, to consult about a
successor, or how to oppose Jehu, and to frustrate his designs: but the
Septuagint version is, "to the rulers of Samaria", which seems most
likely to be the true reading:

to the elders; the civil magistrates of the city of Samaria:

and to them that brought up Ahab's children: who had the care of their
education; who either always dwelt at Samaria, being the royal city, or
were sent with their charge thither, when Joram went to Ramothgilead,
for safety, supposing he should be worsted by the Syrians; or they fled
thither with them upon the death of Joram:

saying; as follows.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 10:2</span></span>

Now as soon as this letter cometh to you, seeing your master's sons are
with you,.... Sons of Ahab, and some of Joram, and all either the sons
or grandsons of Ahab:

and there are with you chariots and horses; military ones:

a fenced city also: as Samaria was, well walled and fortified, and able
to hold out a long siege:

and armour; of all sorts, to arm themselves and people with in their
defence.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 10:3</span></span>

Look even out the best and meetest of your master's sons,.... Most fit
for government, whether on account of age or proper qualifications, and
wisdom, courage, &c.

and set him on his father's throne; proclaim him king:

and fight for your master's house; that the crown may continue in his
family; all which he did not desire might be, but in this sarcastic and
sneering manner dares them to do it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 10:4</span></span>

But they were exceedingly afraid,.... They were intimidated at once; for
they saw the purport of those letters, that should they attempt anything
of this kind, he would come upon them with his forces:

and said, behold, two kings stood not before him; the kings of Israel
and Judah, Joram and Ahaziah; but they were unarmed, and therefore how
should they stand before an armed body of men Jehu had with him? this
shows the pusillanimity of these men to make use of such an argument as
this:

how then shall we stand? that is, before Jehu; but they were in much
better circumstances than the two kings, as they are truly represented
in [Kg2 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#002.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 10:5</span></span>

And he that was over the house,.... The king's palace in Samaria, who
had the custody, care, and government of it:

and he that was over the city; the commander and governor of it, that
had the highest post in it under the king;

the elders also all other subordinate officers and magistrates:

and the bringers up of the children; who had the education of the king's
sons committed to them:

sent to Jehu, saying, we are thy servants, and will do all that thou
shall bid us. They were ready to do homage, and swear allegiance to him
as their king, and obey all his commands as faithful subjects:

we will not make any king; or set up any on the throne, no, not any of
the sons or grandsons of Ahab:

do thou that which is good in thine eyes, we will never oppose thee.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 10:6</span></span>

Then he wrote a letter the second time to them,.... Having gained his
point by the former:

saying, if ye be mine, acknowledge yourselves my subjects and servants:

and if ye will hearken to my voice; obey my commands:

take ye the heads of the men your master's sons; that is, take off their
heads:

and come to me to Jezreel by tomorrow this time meaning with the heads
along with them:

(now the king's sons, being seventy persons, were with the great men of
the city, which brought them up;) they were in their houses, and under
their tuition, and so had an authority over them, and could dispose of
them at pleasure; they were not ordinary persons to whose care they were
committed, but the principal men of the city.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 10:7</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the letter came to them,.... They did not in
the least hesitate, but immediately complied with the contents of it:

that they took the king's sons, and slew seventy persons; which was the
whole number of them:

and put their heads in baskets, and sent them to Jezreel; as a present
to Jehu, just as they carried the firstfruits, as Abarbinel observes.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 10:8</span></span>

And there came a messenger, and told him, saying, they have brought the
heads of the king's sons,.... Perhaps this messenger to Jehu came from
the great men of Samaria themselves, to let him know that they had
obeyed his orders:

and he said, lay ye them in two heaps at the entering in of the gate
until the morning; very probably it was towards or at the evening they
were brought; and he ordered them to be taken out of the baskets, and
laid in two heaps at the entering of the gate of the city, that they
might be taken notice of, and publicly viewed by the people that passed
and repassed the gate; and where they met in great numbers, either on
account of the market there, or court of judicature there held,
especially in mornings; and here they were to remain till the morning,
though not without a guard, that they might still be more exposed to
view; Noldius (p) renders it, "without the door of the gate", for they
were brought at night, when the gate was shut.

\(p\) Ebr. Conc. Part. p. 68. No. 340.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 10:9</span></span>

And it came to pass in the morning, that he went out, and stood, and
said to all the people,.... Who were gathered together to this shocking
sight, or on the above accounts:

ye be righteous; having had no concern in taking off the heads of those
men:

behold, I conspired against my master, and slew him; I own it, and some
may blame me for it, and charge me with treason and murder:

but who slew all these? not he, but the chief men of Samaria, and
therefore must be more guilty than he, having shed the blood of so many
persons, who had not offended against God and man to so great a degree
as Joram; this he said to lessen his own sin, and wipe off the reproach
of it, that his character might appear fairer in the eyes of the people,
concealing, at the same time, his orders for the slaying of them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 10:10</span></span>

Know now, that there shall fall unto the earth nothing of the word of
the Lord, which the Lord spake concerning the house of Ahab,.... He
would have them observe, that all this, and what else should follow of
the same kind, were and would be brought about by the providence of God,
according to divine predictions, and as just punishments on Ahab's
family for their sins; and therefore neither he nor others were to be
blamed for what was done, since they were only instruments made use of
by the Lord, who both foretold all this, and gave orders for the
execution of it:

for the Lord hath done that which he spake by his servant Elijah; see
[Kg1 21:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#021.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 10:11</span></span>

So Jehu slew all that remained of the house of Ahab in Jezreel,....
Which to do, and to justify himself in so doing, was the design of what
he said in the preceding verses:

and his great men; his ministers of state and counsellors, that advised
him to, and abetted him in his idolatrous practices, and so justly
suffered for the same; and perhaps some of them at least were those very
men that cut off the heads of his sons in complaisance to Jehu:

and his kinsfolks: more distantly related to him or his acquaintance and
familiars, his associates in sin and wickedness:

and his priests: who officiated for him and offered his sacrifices to
Baal; the priests he kept in his palace, and ate at his table:

until he left him none remaining; either of his kindred or his priests,
that is, that were at Jezreel; for there were others at Samaria, [Kg2
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#017.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 10:12</span></span>

To make a clear riddance there of all that belonged to Ahab, as at
Jezreel, and abolish idolatry there:

and as he was at the shearing house in the way; or, "the house of the
binding of the shepherds", who, in shearing their sheep, bind their legs
together; the Targum is,"the house of the gathering of the
shepherds;''where they used to meet and converse together; with some it
is the proper name of a place, Betheked, a country village between
Jezreel and Samaria. Jerom speaks (q) of a village of this name,
situated in a large plain, about fifteen miles from a place called
Legion, which village he takes to be this here.

\(q\) De loc. Heb. fol. 89. K.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 10:13</span></span>

Jehu met with the brethren of Ahaziah king of Judah,.... At the above
place; these were the sons of his brethren, called his brethren, as Lot
was called Abraham's brother, being his brother's son; for as for his
brethren, they had been slain by the Arabians before he was made king,
[Ch2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2022.htm#001.md),

and said, who are ye? though perhaps he knew who they were:

and they answered, we are the brethren of Ahaziah; the sons of his
brethren:

and we go down to salute the children of the king, and the children of
the queen; meaning either the children of Ahab and Jezebel, or of Joram
and his queen; for they knew nothing of the death of Joram and Jezebel,
and the revolution made in the kingdom, and therefore with great
simplicity tell who they were, and where they were going, and on what
account.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 10:14</span></span>

And he said, take them alive,.... Gave orders to his guards to seize
them, and make them captives:

and they took them alive, and slew them at the pit of the shearing
house; where they washed the sheep when they sheered them:

even forty and two men, neither left he any of them; they being, by
their grandmother's side, of the house of Ahab, and so within the
commission of Jehu to slay them, at least as he thought; though his
chief view might be, lest they should make any pretensions to the crown,
being descended from that house, or should hereafter attempt to avenge
the death of their relations; but by the judgment of God they were cut
off as idolaters.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 10:15</span></span>

And when he was departed thence,.... From Betheked, or the shearing
house:

he lighted on Jehonadab the son of Rechab coming to meet him; a Kenite,
a descendant of Jethro, the father-in-law of Moses, a wise and good man,
as appears by the laws and rules he gave to his posterity, who continued
to the times of Jeremiah, and were then observant of them, [Jer
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#006.md) this good man hearing of Jehu's
coming to the throne, and of his destruction of the idolatrous family of
Ahab, and of his zeal for the worship of God, and against idolatry, came
forth from his tent to meet him, and congratulate him upon it:

and he saluted him; Jonadab saluted Jehu, according to Abarbinel; or
"blessed him" (r), wished him all happiness in his kingdom, and success
in the reformation of it; though most understand it of Jehu's saluting
Jonadab, which seems best to agree with the following:

and said to him, is thy heart right, as my heart is with thy heart? that
is, hast thou the same cordial affection and sincere respect for me as I
have for thee?

and Jehonadab answered, it is: to which some join the next clause, and
read, "and it is"; which is doubling the answer, for the confirmation of
it, as Kimchi says; though he also observes, that the latter may be
interpreted as the answer of Jehu, by way of interrogation, "is it?":

then give me thine hand; and to the same purpose is our version:

if it be, and he gave him his hand; Jonadab gave Jehu his hand as a
token of sincere friendship (s), and cordial respect, and for the
confirmation of the covenant between them, as Ben Melech; who also
observes, that Jehu might bid him give him his hand to help him up into
the chariot, since it follows:

and he took him up to him into the chariot; to ride with him to Samaria;
the company of such a man, so famous for wisdom and goodness, he knew
would give him much countenance among the people, and sanction to what
he did.

\(r\) "et benedixit ei", V. L. Montanus. (s) "Ipse pater dextram
Anchises", &c. Virgil. Aeneid. l. 3. prope finem. Vid. Servium in ib.
Vid. Cornel. Nepot. Vit. Themistocl. l. 2. c. 8. & Datam. l. 14. c. 10.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 10:16</span></span>

And he said, come with me, and see my zeal for the Lord of hosts,.... In
destroying idolaters and idolatry, with an intent to do which he was
going to Samaria; this seems to savour very much of vain glory,
hypocrisy, and a pharisaical spirit:

so they made him ride in his chariot; the servants of Jehu by his order
opened the chariot door, and assisted Jonadab in getting into it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 10:17</span></span>

And when he came to Samaria, he slew all that remained unto Ahab in
Samaria,.... All that were in any connection with him, as related to his
family, or as ministers of his in civil or religious things:

till he had destroyed him; his whole house, as he was ordered:

according to the word of the Lord, which he spake to Elijah; which is
observed, to show the exact fulfilment of prophecy, see [Kg1
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#021.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 10:18</span></span>

And Jehu gathered all the people together,.... The people of Samaria, at
least the principal of them:

and said unto them, Ahab served Baal a little, but Jehu shall serve him
much; which some understand as spoken ironically; but the words seem to
be spoken with a design to deceive the idolatrous inhabitants of
Samaria, making them to believe that he was hearty in the worship of
Baal, and should show a greater respect to it, and more constantly
attend it, than Ahab had done; and this he said with a view to draw them
to the temple of Baal, and there destroy them, as the sequel shows; and
in which he is not to be justified, however good his intention was; for
evil is not to be done that good may come.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 10:19</span></span>

All that were employed in the several parts of religious worship given
him, and in performing any rite and ceremony belonging to it; in
invocation of him, and singing praises to him, as the prophets; in
offering sacrifices to him, as the priests; or in assisting them in
their service, who may be meant by his servants or ministers:

for I have a great sacrifice to do to Baal; by which, though he might
mean a sacrifice of his prophets, priests, servants, and worshippers, he
would have it otherwise understood, and his design was to deceive, which
cannot be justified:

whosoever shall be wanting, he shall not live: but be put to death; this
he said, pretending his great zeal for Baal, when his view was by this
threatening to get all his worshippers together to destroy them, that
none might escape as follows:

but Jehu did it in subtlety, to the intent that he might destroy the
worshippers of Baal: the Targum renders it, "with wisdom"; but Jarchi
and Ben Gersom much better, "in deceit"; the word signifies
supplantation, such as Esau charged Jacob with.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 10:20</span></span>

And Jehu said, proclaim a solemn assembly for Baal,.... Such as with the
Jews was an holy convocation, when they were forbidden and restrained
from doing any work on that day; and such a day Jehu would have
appointed and proclaimed for Baal, that the people might be at leisure
to attend:

and they proclaimed it; according to his order, in Samaria.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 10:21</span></span>

And Jehu sent through all Israel,.... Persons to proclaim this solemn
assembly:

and all the worshippers of Baal came, so that there was not a man left
that came not; some no doubt came cheerfully, having no suspicion of
him, and the rather, as he might have been a worshipper of Baal in the
times of Ahab; and as for what he had done to Baal's priests, they might
consider that only as they were in connection with Ahab's family, whom
to destroy was his political interest; and they were glad at heart their
new king was so affected to Baal, and fond to see such a grand solemnity
as they expected this to be; and others that might be suspicious of him,
yet as they must die if they did not appear, and there was a possibility
they might live, chose therefore to come:

and they came into the house of Baal; the temple which Ahab had built
for him in Samaria, [Kg1 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#032.md).

and the house of Baal was full from one end to the other; not only the
body of the temple, but all the outward court, every mouth, or corner,
as in the original text: and this single house might be sufficient for
all in the land; since the number of them might be greatly lessened by
the ministry of Elijah and Elisha, as well as by the destruction the
former made of the prophets of Baal; and by the schools of the prophets
set up in various places, from whence prophets were sent out to instruct
the people; and by Joram's putting away the image of Baal, which no
doubt lessened the number of his worshippers.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 10:22</span></span>

And he said unto him that was over the vestry,.... That had the care of
the garments, in which the priests of Baal ministered:

bring forth vestments for all the worshippers of Baal; not for the
priests only, but for all that worshipped; and this he ordered for the
greater solemnity of this service, as he would have it thought; but, in
truth, that the worshippers of Baal might be separated, and
distinguished from the worshippers of the Lord, that not one of them
might be among them:

and he brought them forth vestments; out of the chamber or wardrobe in
which they were, and they put them on.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 10:23</span></span>

And Jehu went, and Jehonadab the son of Rechab, into the house of
Baal,.... Who no doubt was led into the secret, and knew the design of
Jehu, or he would not have gone into such an idolatrous place:

and said unto the worshippers of Baal, search and look, that there be
here with you none of the servants of the Lord, but the worshippers of
Baal only; pretending a great regard to the purity of their worship and
sacrifices, that they might not be profaned (t) by the company of such
who were not worshippers of Baal, but of Jehovah; whereas his view was
to prevent any of the worshippers of God perishing with them, who might
out of curiosity go in among them, to behold the manner of their
service.

\(t\) "----procul, o procul este profani". Virgil. Aeneid. 6. ver. 258.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 10:24</span></span>

And when they went in to offer sacrifices and burnt offerings,.... To
Baal, all things being ready for them:

Jehu appointed eighty men without; without the temple of Baal, at the
several doors and avenues of it:

and said, if any of the men whom I have brought into your hands escape,
he that letteth him go, his life shall be for the life of him; should be
put to death for it in his room; the life of a watchman set to guard
should go for the life of one that escaped.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 10:25</span></span>

And it came to pass, as soon as he had made an end of offering the burnt
offering,.... The chief of the priests of Baal, whose office it was to
do this service:

that Jehu said to the guard, and to the captains, go in and slay them,
let none come forth; this he said to the eighty men set to guard the
temple, and the officers over them; and perhaps they might also have a
reinforcement, since such a number seems scarcely sufficient to destroy
so many as were here; though indeed it must be considered they were
armed men:

and they smote them with the edge of the sword; put them all to death:

and the guard and the captains cast them out; those that were slain, as
the Targum, their dead bodies; but it can hardly be thought they would
be at the trouble of casting them out, when the house was to be pulled
down, and made a jakes (a common sewer or dung house) of, as follows;
rather therefore it should be rendered, "they cast" or "flung
themselves" (u) with great force, and in great haste, as Kimchi, and
rushed out of the temple, being eager to do as follows:

and went to the city of the house of Baal; to pull it down; to some city
near Samaria where was a temple of Baal; or rather this may design the
buildings about the temple of Baal, in which the priests and their
families lived, and were so large that they might be called a city of
themselves.

\(u\) "et proripuerunt se", De Dicu.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 10:26</span></span>

And they brought forth the images out of the house of Baal, and burnt
them. Lesser images, the images of other deities, or what were placed as
decorations of the temple.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 10:27</span></span>

And they broke down the temple of Baal,.... Which some take to be Belus,
others Saturn, others the sun, which seems most probable:

and broke down the house of Baal; his temple, demolished it:

and made it a draught house until this day; a common sewer, a jakes; a
fit place for dunghill gods to be thrown into, and an idol temple to be
turned into.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg2 10:28</span></span>

Thus Jehu destroyed Baal out of Israel. His images and temples being
served thus in all places, throughout the land of Israel, where there
were any.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 10:29</span></span>

Howbeit from the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made Israel to
sin,.... Which is the common character given of that king, a blot never
to be wiped off:

Jehu departed not from after them, to wit, the golden calves that were
in Bethel, and that were in Dan: he did not abstain from the worship of
them, partly because he might not think it idolatry, because God was
worshipped in them; hence he calls the worshippers of the calves the
servants of the Lord, [Kg2 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#023.md), and
partly that he might not displease the princes of the people of Israel,
who generally gave in to the worship of them; but chiefly lest the
kingdom of Israel should return to the house of David, the worship of
the calves being a piece of state policy, to keep them from going to
Jerusalem to worship, lest thereby they should be drawn off from their
allegiance to the king of Israel.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">kg2 10:30</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Jehu,.... By a prophet, he not being one himself;
and this is generally supposed, by the Jews (w), to be Jonah the son of
Amittai:

because thou hast done well in executing that which is right in mine
eyes: in rooting out the idolatry of Baal, which was right in the sight
of God, and was materially a good work, though it might not be done from
a good principle, nor every step taken in doing it justifiable:

and hast done unto the house of Ahab according to all that was in mine
heart: that he had decreed within himself should be done, and had
foretold by his prophets would be done, the doing of which was
acceptable and well pleasing to him:

thy children of the fourth generation shall sit on the throne of Israel;
as they did, namely, Jehoahaz, Joash, Jeroboam, and Zachariah, though
the last reigned but six months, just enough to fulfil this promise.

\(w\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 19.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">kg2 10:31</span></span>

But Jehu took no heed to walk in the law of the Lord God of Israel with
all his heart,.... As to his moral conversation, he was not careful that
it was according to the law of God, and what he did agreeable to it, it
was not sincerely, and from the right principle:

for he departed not from the sins of Jeroboam, which made Israel to sin;
which he would, if he had had a cordial respect to all the commandments
of the law.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">kg2 10:32</span></span>

In those days the Lord began to cut Israel short,.... To bring their
dominions into a narrower compass; this was done in the days of Jehu,
though he was so active and courageous, wherefore the hand of God was
the more seen in it:

and Hazael smote them in all the coasts of Israel; which bordered on his
country, when he did what Elisha foretold he would, [Kg2
8:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#012.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">kg2 10:33</span></span>

From Jordan eastward,.... This was principally the coast on which Hazael
smote them, to the east of the land of Canaan:

all the land of Gilead, the Gadites, and the Reubenites, and the
Moabites; the country on the other side Jordan, given to these tribes by
Moses, at their request, which were before the kingdoms of Sihon and of
Og:

from Aroer, which is by the river Arnon, even Gilead and Bashan:
countries which the Israelites first conquered, and were the first they
lost.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">kg2 10:34</span></span>

Now the rest of the acts of Jehu, and all that he did, and all his
might, are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings
of Israel? Of the preceding kings from the times of Jeroboam, in which
their several acts were recorded, and his also.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">kg2 10:35</span></span>

And Jehu slept with his fathers,.... Died as they did:

and they buried him in Samaria; where Omri and Ahab, his predecessors,
were buried, [Kg1 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#028.md).

and Jehoahaz his son reigned in his stead; who reigned seventeen years,
[Kg2 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#001.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">kg2 10:36</span></span>

And the time that Jehu reigned was twenty and eight years. Which was
longer than any king of Israel had reigned.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 11](kg2011.md)

</div>
