<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2013)  [Next](kg2015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 14:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 14

In this chapter we have the good reign of Amaziah king of Judah, his
victories over the Edomites, and war with Jehoash king of Israel, by
whom he was taken, who died quickly after, [Kg2
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#001.md), but Amaziah lived fifteen years
afterwards, and was slain by a conspiracy against him, and Azariah his
son reigned in his stead, [Kg2 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017.md),
and a short account is given of the reign of Jeroboam the second, king
of Israel, [Kg2 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#023.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 14:1</span></span>

In the second year of Joash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel reigned
Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah. As Joash king of Israel began to
reign in the thirty seventh of Joash king of Judah, [Kg2
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#010.md), who reigned forty years,
Amaziah must therefore begin his reign in the fourth of Joash king of
Israel; this therefore must be understood of his second year after he
reigned alone, for he reigned two or three years in his father's
lifetime.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 14:2</span></span>

He was twenty and five years old when he began to reign, and reigned
twenty and nine years in Jerusalem,.... Fourteen years contemporary with
Joash king of Israel, who reigned sixteen years, [Kg2
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#010.md) and fifteen after him, [Kg2
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017.md),

and his mother's name was Jehoaddan of Jerusalem; of whom we nowhere
else read,

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 14:3</span></span>

And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,..... At least
externally, and at the beginning of his reign:

yet not like David his father; not with a perfect heart, with that
sincerity and uprightness as he did, see [Ch2
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#002.md),

he did according to all things as Joash his father did; who at first
reigned well, and then fell into idolatry, as this his son did.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 14:4</span></span>

Howbeit the high places were not taken away,.... Though he first did
that which was right before God; nor did his father take them away; see
[Kg2 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#003.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 14:5</span></span>

And it came to pass, as soon as the kingdom was strengthened in his
hand,.... That he was well settled on the throne, and had a share in the
affection of the people, and the idolatry and murder his father had
committed were worn off of the minds of the people, and the friends of
the conspirators against him were become few or none:

that he slew his servants that had slain the king his father; charged
them with the murder in a court of judicature, obtained a sentence
against them, and had them executed.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 14:6</span></span>

But the children of the murderers he slew not,.... Which is an instance
of his clemency and goodness, and of his strict regard to justice, and
to the law of God; though he might fear, these, being spared, would one
time or other revenge their fathers' deaths:

according to that which is written in the book of the law of Moses, see
[Deu 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#016.md),

wherein the Lord commanded, saying, the fathers shall not be put to
death for the children, nor the children, &c. to which command Amaziah
was obedient.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 14:7</span></span>

He slew of Edom in the valley of Salt ten thousand,.... Of which valley;
see Gill on [Sa2 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#013.md), the Edomites
having revolted from Judah in the days of Joram, [Kg2
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2008.htm#020.md). Amaziah undertook to reduce them
with an army of 300,000 choice men; and, besides these, hired also of
Israel 100,000 valiant men, for one hundred talents of silver; but at
the instance of a prophet of the Lord he dismissed the latter, and went
against Edom only with his men, and slew of the Edomites 10,000, besides
other 10,000 he took alive, and cast headlong from a rock, which came
into his hands, see [Ch2 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#005.md),

and took Selah by war; which signifies a rock, the same with Petra, the
metropolis of Arabia Petraea, the country of the Edomites. The city
itself was not a rock, nor built on one, but was situated in a plain,
surrounded with rocks and mountains, as Strabo (z) and Pliny (a) relate,
from whence it seems to have its name; and by the Syrians called Recem,
where Rocan a king of Midian reigned (b), called in the Greek version of
[Num 31:8](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#008), Recon; though Vitringa (c.md)
is of opinion, that not Petra, the metropolis of Edom, is meant, but
Maalehakrabbim, [Jos 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#003.md), which lay
on the south border of Judea, near the salt sea:

and called the name of it Joktheel; which signifies "the obedience of
God"; in memory of his obedience to the prophet of the Lord, in
consequence of which he obtained this victory: and the name continued
unto this day: the time of the writing this book.

\(z\) Geograph. l. 16. p. 536. (a) Nat. Hist. l. 6. c. 28. (b) Hieron.
de loc. Heb. fol. 93. M. & 94. A. Vid. Joseph. Antiqu. l. 4. c. 7. sect.
1. (c) Comment. in Jesaiam, c. 16. 1.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 14:8</span></span>

Then Amaziah sent messengers to Jehoash the son of Jehoahaz the son of
Jehu king of Israel,.... The occasion of it was this, when Amaziah
dismissed the hired soldiers of Israel they were displeased, and fell
upon the cities of Judea from Samaria to Bethhoron, slew 3000 men, and
took much spoil, [Ch2 25:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#013.md),
wherefore, when Amaziah returned from the slaughter of the Edomites,
being elated with his victories, he sent the following message to the
king of Israel, in order to revenge the injuries his soldiers had done;
and perhaps retaining an old grudge for what Jehu, the grandfather of
the king of Israel, had done to his ancestors, and it may be in hope of
reducing the ten tribes to obedience to the house of David:

saying, come, let us look one another in the face; that is, in battle,
as the Targum adds; it was a challenge to meet him in the field of
battle, and fight with him, and try each other's courage, and see who
was the best man.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 14:9</span></span>

And Jehoash the king of Israel sent to Amaziah the king of Judah,.... By
the return of his messengers:

saying, the thistle that was in Lebanon sent to the cedar that was in
Lebanon; intending by this proverbial way of speaking to humble the
pride of Amaziah; comparing him to a thistle or thorn, a low, mean,
abject, weak, prickly, and troublesome shrub, and himself to a cedar, a
tree high and lofty, strong, large, and spreading:

saying, give thy daughter to my son to wife; signifying, that if in a
peaceable manner he had desired to contract affinity with him, and so
establish mutual friendship, he should have despised him as being as
much below him as the thistle is below a cedar; and therefore should
still more despise and defy him, who addressed him in an hostile manner,
and in such haughty language:

and there passed by a wild beast that was in Lebanon, and trod down the
thistle; and so there was an end put at once to its pride and ambition,
and to its treaty with the cedar; intimating hereby, that his soldiers
would as easily vanquish and destroy the army of Amaziah as a wild beast
can destroy a thistle.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 14:10</span></span>

Thou hast indeed smitten Edom, and thine heart hath lifted thee up,....
Swelled him with pride and vanity on account of the victory he had
obtained over the Edomites; which pride was at the bottom of his message
to him, and that goes before a fall: [Pro
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#018.md).

glory of this, and tarry at home; be content with the glory of it, and
boast of it at home, but do not swagger abroad, and insult thy
neighbours:

for why shouldest thou meddle to thy hurt, that thou shouldest fall,
even thou, and Judah with thee? suggesting to him, that he had better be
quiet, since it would be to the harm, if not the ruin, of him and his
kingdom.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 14:11</span></span>

But Amaziah would not hear,.... Being given up to a judicial hardness of
heart through pride; for this was of God, and by his overruling
providence, that he might be punished for his idolatry, in setting up
the gods of Edom to be his gods, and offering to them, [Ch2
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#014.md).

therefore Jehoash king Israel went up; from Samaria to the land of
Judah, which was higher ground:

and he and Amaziah looked one another in the face; in the field of
battle:

at Bethshemesh, which belongeth to Judah; which is observed, not merely
to distinguish it from another Bethshemesh in Naphtali, but to observe,
that the king of Israel waited not for him to give him the challenge,
but met his adversary in his own country, whither he carried the war,
not suffering him to come into his.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 14:12</span></span>

And Judah was put to the worse before Israel,.... Could not face them;
but, as Josephus (d) says, a sudden fear and consternation seized them,
and before they joined battle with the Israelites, turned their backs:

and they fled every man to their tents; to their cities, as the Targum,
and left their king alone.

\(d\) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 9. sect. 3.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 14:13</span></span>

And Jehoash king of Israel took Amaziah king of Judah, the son of
Jehoash the son of Ahaziah, at Bethshemesh,.... And then they looked one
another in the face indeed, but Amaziah must look very silly:

and came to Jerusalem; the metropolis of Judah, with his royal prisoner:

and broke down the wall of Jerusalem; in at the breach of which he went
with his chariot, as Josephus says (e), in triumph:

from the gate of Ephraim unto the corner gate, four hundred cubits; the
gate of Ephraim was to the north of the city, towards the tribe of
Ephraim, from whence it had its name; and the corner gate was that which
joined the northern and western walls together, or rather the northern
and eastern walls; for Rauwolff says (f), there is still the corner gate
in its old place, where the north and east walls meet on large and high
rocks, and is still called by some the gate of Naphtali.

\(e\) Antiqu. l. 9. c. 9. sect. 3. (f) Travels, par. 3. ch. 3. p. 228.
by Ray.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 14:14</span></span>

And he took all the gold and silver, and all the vessels that were found
in the house of the Lord,.... In [Ch2
25:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#024.md) it is added, "with Obededom",
who, and his family, had the care of them by lot, see [Ch1
26:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#015.md).

and in the treasures of the king's house; which were also spoiled and
plundered:

and hostages; either such as the king of Judah had taken from Edom, as
pledges of their fidelity, that they might not rebel; or which the king
of Israel took of Judah, even sons of the princes, as the Targum, for
security, that they would give him no more trouble:

and returned to Samaria; without attempting to bring the kingdom of
Judah into subjection to him, which he might suppose he could not hold,
and having enough to do with the Syrians, his avowed enemies.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 14:15</span></span>

Now the rest of the acts of Jehoash which he did, and his might,.... His
valiant and mighty acts which he did in his wars with the Syrians, [Kg2
13:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2013.htm#025.md),

and how he fought with Amaziah king of Judah; a short account of which
is given in the preceding verses:

are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Israel? a book very often mentioned and referred to, as containing the
history of the events and transactions of every reign.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 14:16</span></span>

And Jehoash slept with his fathers,.... Died as they died:

and was buried in Samaria with the kings of Israel; where they were:

and Jeroboam his son reigned in his stead; which was Jeroboam the
second.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 14:17</span></span>

And Amaziah the son of Joash king of Judah lived after the death of
Jehoash son of Jehoahaz king of Israel fifteen years. Which, with the
fourteen he reigned contemporary with him, made the twenty nine years he
reigned, [Kg2 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#002.md). The Vulgate Latin
version is, "twenty five years".

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 14:18</span></span>

And the rest of the acts of Amaziah, are they not written in the book of
the chronicles of the kings of Judah? Not in the canonical book of
Chronicles; though there are some things of him recorded there, which
are not here; but in the annals of each reign, written by the king's
historian appointed for that purpose.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 14:19</span></span>

Now they made a conspiracy against him in Jerusalem,.... Against
Amaziah; the inhabitants of Jerusalem, the principal men of it; perhaps
those whose sons the king of Israel had carried away as hostages, which
they imputed to the ill conduct of Amaziah, as well as the breaking of
the wall of Jerusalem, and the pillaging of the temple, and the king's
palace:

and he fled to Lachish; a fortified city in the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#039.md) but they sent after him to
Lachish, and slew him there; in a private manner, as Josephus (g)
relates.

\(g\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 9. c. 9. sect. 3.)

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 14:20</span></span>

And they brought him on horses,.... That is, in a chariot or hearse
drawn by horses; though the Jews (h) suppose he was carried on horses,
and that because he worshipped the gods of the Edomites, who were
themselves carried on horses; and he was not carried on the shoulders of
men, because he neglected to serve the God of Israel, whose mysteries
were carried on the shoulders of men:

and he was buried at Jerusalem with his fathers in the city of David;
and very probably in the sepulchre of the kings, though his father was
not.

\(h\) Hieron. Trad. Heb. in lib. paralip. fol. 85. L.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 14:21</span></span>

And all the people of Judah took Azariah,.... Called Uzziah in the next
chapter, and so in the book of Chronicles; both names signifying much
the same, the one "the help of the Lord", the other "the strength of the
Lord":

(which was sixteen years old;) yet as he began to reign in the twenty
seventh year of Jeroboam, [Kg2 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001.md)
and Jeroboam began to reign in the fifteenth yaer of Amaziah, [Kg2
14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#023.md), he could be but four years of
age, for the solution of which; see Gill on [Kg2
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#001.md),

and made him king instead of his father Amaziah; which was after his
death, and not when he fled to Lachish, as Kimchi thinks.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 14:22</span></span>

He built Elath,.... A port which belonged to Edom, [Deu
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#008.md) which very probably David took
from them when he made them tributary, and which they retook when they
revolted, and Amaziah got again when he defeated them; and this his son
rebuilt and fortified:

and restored it to Judah; annexed it to the kingdom of Judah, as in the
days of David and Solomon:

after that the king slept with his fathers; after the death of his
father Amaziah.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 14:23</span></span>

In the fifteenth year of Amaziah, the son of Joash king of Judah,
Jeroboam the son of Joash king of Israel began to reign in Samaria,....
So that he reigned fourteen or fifteen years contemporary with him; for
Amaziah reigned twenty nine years:

and reigned forty and one years; Josephus says (i) forty, giving only
the round number.

\(i\) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 9.) c. 10. sect. 1.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 14:24</span></span>

And he did that which was evil in the sight of the Lord,.... Was guilty
of idolatry:

he departed not from all the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat, who made
Israel to sin; the worship of the calves is especially meant; he was in
all respects of the same cast with his ancestor of the same name, from
whom he had it, in veneration of him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 14:25</span></span>

He restored the coast of Israel,.... The cities upon it, which had been
taken away from them by their enemies:

from the entering of Hamath; which was the northern border of the land
of Canaan, the entrance into it from Syria, see [Num
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/num034.htm#008.md),

unto the sea of the plain: of Jordan, called sometimes the salt sea and
the Dead Sea; the lake Asphaltites, as Josephus (k), where formerly
stood Sodom and Gomorrah:

according to the word of the Lord God of Israel, which he spake by the
hand of his servant Jonah the son of Amittai; the same with him whose
prophecy among the small prophets bears this name; and though his
prophecy concerning Jeroboam's success and victories is not there, nor
anywhere else, recorded at length, yet needed not to be doubted of; this
is the first of the prophets spoken of whose books are extant:

which was of Gathhepher; a city in the tribe of Zebulun, [Jos
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#013.md), which contradicts a notion of
the Jews, that no prophet came out of Galilee, when the very first of
those that were the penmen of the books of prophecies was from thence,
see [Joh 7:52](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#052.md).

\(k\) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 9.) c. 10. sect. 1.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 14:26</span></span>

For the Lord saw the affliction of Israel, that it was very bitter,....
Being sorely oppressed by their enemies, especially the Syrians; and he
was moved to have compassion upon them, and show mercy to them: for,
there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel: they
were in the most forlorn and helpless condition; See Gill on [Deu
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#036.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 14:27</span></span>

And the Lord said not that he would blot out the name of Israel from
under heaven,.... Had not as yet declared it by any of his prophets,
that he would do it, as he afterwards did by Hosea, [Hos
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos001.htm#004.md), and was fulfilled in the reign of
Hoshea king of Israel, [Kg2 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#001.md).

but he saved them by the hand of Jeroboam the son of Joash; the
instrument of their deliverance from the hands of their enemies, and of
recovering their borders as afore time.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">kg2 14:28</span></span>

Now the rest of the acts of Jeroboam, and all that he did, and his
might, how he warred,.... His valiant acts and warlike exploits:

and how he recovered Damascus and Hamath, which belonged to Judah, for
Israel; which cities, in the times of David and Solomon, were tributary
to Judah, but afterwards fell into the hands of the Syrians, from whom
Jeroboam recovered them, and annexed them to the kingdom of Israel; or,
as Kimchi, though Jeroboam was king of Israel, yet, having taken them,
he restored them to the king of Judah, to whom they belonged:

are they not written in the book of the chronicles of the kings of
Israel? where all events of any moment were registered.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">kg2 14:29</span></span>

And Jeroboam slept with his fathers, even with the kings of Israel,....
Died, and was buried with them:

and Zachariah his son reigned in his stead: who was of the fourth
generation from Jehu, as was promised to him, [Kg2
10:30](../../../bib/kjv/kg2010.htm#030.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 15](kg2015.md)

</div>
