<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2.md)  
  [Previous](kg2002)  [Next](kg2004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001.md)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 3

This chapter gives the character of Jehoram king of Israel, [Kg2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001.md), relates the rebellion of the king
of Moab against him, [Kg2 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004.md), the war
that he and his allies entered into on that account, [Kg2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#006.md) the distress the combined army
were in for want of water, their application upon this to Elisha, who
promised them water, and they had it in a wonderful manner, [Kg2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#010.md) and the chapter is concluded with
the rout of the Moabites, and the barbarity of their king to his eldest
son, [Kg2 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#021.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 3:1</span></span>

Now Jehoram the son of Ahab began to reign over Israel in Samaria the
eighteenth year of Jehoshaphat king of Judah,.... So that the two years
of the reign of his brother Ahaziah were not complete, only part of the
seventeenth and part of the eighteenth of Jehoshaphat, since he began to
reign in his seventeenth year, at the beginning of that, and died
towards the close of the eighteenth, when Jehoram succeeded him, see
[Kg1 22:51](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#051.md), and reigned twelve years.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 3:2</span></span>

And he wrought evil in the sight of the Lord,.... Was guilty of
idolatry:

but not like his father, and like his mother; his father Ahab, and his
mother Jezebel:

for he put away the image of Baal that his father had made; he did not
destroy it, only removed it from the temple of Baal where it was set,
that it might not be worshipped, at least publicly, see [Kg1
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#031.md) this he did, either moved to it
by his own conscience, observing the sudden deaths of his father and
brother, which he might suppose was for their idolatry; or in order to
obtain success in his war with Moab he was entering into; or being
instigated by Jehoshaphat to do it, or otherwise he might refuse to join
him.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 3:3</span></span>

Nevertheless he cleaved unto the sins of Jeroboam the son of Nebat,
which made Israel to sin,.... He closely adhered to the worship of the
calves set up by him:

he departed not therefrom: that being a piece of state policy, to keep
up the division of the two kingdoms.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 3:4</span></span>

And Mesha king of Moab was a sheep master,.... With which his country
abounded; he kept great numbers of them, and shepherds to take care of
them; he traded in them, and got great riches by them; his substance
chiefly consisted in them:

and rendered unto the king of Israel: either as a present, or as an
annual tribute:

an hundred thousand lambs, and an hundred thousand rams, with the wool;
that is, upon them, unshorn, and so the more valuable; and it was usual
for tributary nations to pay their tribute to those to whom they were
subject in such commodities which they most abounded with; so the
Cappadocians, as Strabo (c) relates, used to pay, as a tribute to the
Persians, every year, 1500 horses and 2000 mules, and five myriads of
sheep, or 50,000; and formerly, Pliny (d) says, the only tribute was
from the pastures.

\(c\) Geograph. l. 11. p. 362. (d) Nat. Hist. l. 18. c. 3.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 3:5</span></span>

But it came to pass, when Ahab was dead, that the king of Moab rebelled
against the king of Israel. Who then was Ahaziah; but either through the
pusillanimity of his temper, or the sickness that attended him, or the
shortness of his reign, he took no steps to the reduction of him, or to
oblige him to pay his tribute, which he neglected to do, and is meant by
his rebellion.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 3:6</span></span>

And King Jehoram went out of Samaria the same time, As soon as he came
to the throne:

and numbered all Israel; who were fit to bear arms, got them together at
some certain place, and mustered them, and prepared for a war with Moab,
to reduce them.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 3:7</span></span>

And he went and sent to Jehoshaphat the king of Judah, saying, the king
of Moab hath rebelled against me,.... By refusing to pay him tribute:

wilt thou go up with me against Moab to battle? and he said, I will go
up; which he agreed to, partly to encourage in the reformation of
religion which he had begun, and partly to chastise the Moabites for
their invasion of his country, [Ch2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#001.md).

I am as thou art, my people as thy people, and my horses as thy horses;
the same answer he returned to Ahab; see Gill on [Kg1
22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#004.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 3:8</span></span>

And he said, which way shall we go up.... That is, Jehoram said so to
Jehoshaphat, consulting with him which was the best way to take to the
land of Moab, whether the shortest way, over Jordan; or some other:

and he answered, the way through the wilderness of Edom; which bordered
upon it, and the same through which the Israelites passed; for Kadesh
was on the extreme border of Edom, whither they came, [Num
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001.md) and this Jehoshaphat proposed,
partly that they might come upon Moab unawares, and attack them where
they were weakest, and not on their guard; and partly, to take the king
of Edom with them, who was no other than Jehoshaphat's deputy, and so be
assisting to them, and prevent him from revolting, which otherwise he
might take this opportunity of doing.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 3:9</span></span>

So the king of Israel went, and the king of Judah,.... The way of the
wilderness of Edom, proposed by the latter:

and the king of Edom; whom they took with them in their way, who was not
properly a king, but a viceroy or deputy, see [Kg1
22:47](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#047.md).

and they fetched a compass of seven days journey; they went round the
Dead Sea, and through the wilderness of Edom, and so to the borders of
Moab:

and there was no water for the host, and for the cattle that followed
them; neither for the soldiers in the army, nor the cattle that drew the
carriages, being in a wilderness.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 3:10</span></span>

And the king of Israel said, alas!.... Lamenting their sad case, as
being desperate; and the rather he was the more concerned, as he was the
principal who had drawn the other kings into this affair, though he
throws it upon the Lord and his providence:

that the Lord hath called these three kings together, to deliver them
into the hands of Moab; into whose hands they must inevitably fall, if
they could have no water to refresh them; since they would be so weak as
not to be able to stand a battle with them, and be dispersed here and
there in search of water, and so fall into their hands. Extreme thirst
is intolerable. It is reported (e) of Lysimachus, that he delivered
himself and his army into the hands of the enemy for a draught of water.
Leo Africanus (f) relates, that in the desert of Azaoad stand two marble
pillars, testifying that a rich merchant bought of a carrier of wares a
cup of water at the price of 10,000 ducats; but there not being water
sufficient neither for the one nor the other, they were both died with
thirst.

\(e\) Plutarch. in Apothegm. (f) Descriptio Africae, l. 1. p. 75.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 3:11</span></span>

But Jehoshaphat said, is there not here a prophet of the Lord, that we
may inquire of the Lord by him?.... This the good king should have done
before be set out, but had neglected it; however, it was not too late:

and one of the king of Israel's servants answered and said; who might be
one that feared the Lord, and was intimate with Elisha, or however had
knowledge of him, as appears by what follows:

here is Elisha the son of Shaphat, which poured water on the hands of
Elijah; or ministered to him, as the Targum; was his menial servant,
waited on him, and assisted him when he washed his hands (g); some
Jewish writers understand it of his pouring water on the hand of Elijah
at Carmel, when the altar and trench were filled with it, and when a
miracle was wrought, as they fancy, and the fingers of Elijah became as
fountains of water.

\(g\) See the like phrase of the business of a servant in Homer, Iliad.
3. ver. 270, & Iliad. 9. ver. 174. Odyss. 1. ver. 147. & Odyss. 3. ver.
388. & Odyss. 4. ver. 258, 261. & passim.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 3:12</span></span>

And Jehoshaphat said, the word of the Lord is with him,.... To give them
an answer, which he concluded from his being a servant and disciple of
Elijah, whom he succeeded in his office, and of whom he had, doubtless,
heard; and from his following the camp, and being in it, which he easily
imagined was not to fight, but to assist by his advice and counsel, and
by his prophecies, as there might be occasion for them:

so the king of Israel and Jehoshaphat and the king of Edom went down to
him; descended from their chariots, and went to the tent in the camp
where he was; they did not send for him to come to them, but, in honour
of him, went to him themselves.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 3:13</span></span>

And Elisha said unto the king of Israel, what have I to do with
thee?.... An idolater; I can hold no discourse nor have any conversation
with thee, nor give thee any advice or assistance:

get thee to the prophets of thy father, and to the prophets of thy
mother; the prophets of Baal, and of the groves:

and the king of Israel said unto him, nay; meaning, he would not apply
to them, who he was sensible could give him no relief, only to the Lord
God, from whom this affliction was, and therefore begs he would pray to
him to have mercy on them; so the Targum,"I beseech thee remember not
the sins of that wickedness, pray for mercy for us:"

for the Lord hath called these three kings together, to deliver them
into the hand of Moab; signifying, that he should not perish alone, but
the other two kings with him, who had no connection with the prophets of
his father and mother in their idolatry, and therefore hoped for their
sakes mercy would be shown.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 3:14</span></span>

Elisha said, as the Lord of hosts liveth, before whom I stand,.... Whose
minster and prophet he was, to whom he prayed, and whose service he was
ready to perform:

surely, were it not that I regard the presence of Jehoshaphat the king
of Judah; revere him not only as a king, but as a pious prince, and a
worshipper of the true God:

I would not look toward thee, nor see thee; give him no countenance at
all, pay no regard to his request, not so much as to look at him in a
civil way; but turn away his face from him with contempt and disdain, as
unworthy to be conversed with by a prophet of the Lord.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 3:15</span></span>

But now bring me a minstrel,.... A piper, a man that knows how to play
upon the harp, as the Targum; according to Procopius Gazaeus, this was
one of the Levites he ordered to be fetched, who was used to the
spiritual melody of David, and could play on musical instruments as he
directed. This he did to allay his passion, and compose his spirits,
ruffled at the sight of Jehoram, and to fit him to receive prophetic
inspiration, which sometimes came upon the Lord's prophets when thus
employed, see [Sa1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005.md). Some think
(h) the music the prophet called for is that sort the Greeks call
"harmony", which is the gravest and saddest, and settles the affections:

and it came to pass, when the minstrel played, that the hand of the Lord
came upon him; the spirit of prophecy, as the Targum, which came by the
power of God, and as a gift from his hand.

\(h\) Weemse's Christ. Synagog. l. 1. c. 6. sect. 4. p. 143.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 3:16</span></span>

And he said, thus saith the Lord, make this valley full of ditches. In
which the allied army lay encamped, that they might be ready to receive
large quantities of water, sufficient for the whole army and cattle,
when it came.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 3:17</span></span>

For thus saith the Lord, ye shall not see wind, neither shall ye see the
rain,.... Neither perceive the south wind blow, which usually brings
rain, nor clouds gathering in the heavens, as portending it, nor any
filling from thence:

yet that valley shall be filled with water; and all the ditches dug in
it:

that ye may drink, both ye and your cattle, and all your beasts; there
would be such a quantity as would be enough for them all, the soldiers,
the horses they rode on, and the beasts that drew their wagons.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 3:18</span></span>

And this is but a light thing in the sight of the Lord,.... To give them
such a plenty of water in such an extraordinary manner: he would do for
them what was greater, not only save them from falling into the hand of
Moab, which they feared,

but he wilt deliver the Moabites into your hands; which was more than
was asked for, or expected.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 3:19</span></span>

And ye shall smite every fenced city and every choice city,.... That is,
the inhabitants of them with the sword, and demolish them also, [Kg2
3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025.md), and shall fell every good tree;
which seems contrary to the law in [Deu
20:19](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#019.md), but that may respect trees
belonging to a city when besieged only, or only to Canaanitish cities;
or the law was now dispensed with, and that for this time only, to make
the punishment of Moab the greater, for their rebellion and other sins:

and stop all wells of water; which must be very distressing to those
that survived the calamity of the sword:

and mar every good piece of land with stones; as that it could not be
ploughed and sowed, nor anything spring up and grow upon it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 3:20</span></span>

And it came to pass in the morning, when the meat offering was
offered,.... At Jerusalem; which always went along with the daily burnt
offering of the lamb, which might not indeed be offered before break of
day, yet quickly after; for no sacrifice could be offered before that;
see Gill on [Exo 29:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#039.md),

that, behold, there came water by the way of Edom; not from the heavens,
but it may be out of some rock, rolling along on the earth from the
hills and mountains, down into the valleys, where the armies were:

and the country was filled with water; all round about them. Who has not
heard of the "thundering" legion, as it was called by the Emperor M.
Aurelius, who, when the army under him was about to engage with the
Germans and Sarmatians, and sadly distressed with thirst, fell down on
their knees and prayed, upon which a large shower of rain came down to
the refreshment of the army, and thunder bolts, which annoyed and put
the enemy to flight (i)? at the battle of the Romans with Jugurtha, a
sudden and unexpected shower of rain fell, to the refreshment of the
Romans, in intolerable thirst (k).

\(i\) Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 5. c. 5. Orosii Hist. l. 7. c. 15. p. 120.
(k) Orosii Hist. l. 5. c. 15. p. 77.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">kg2 3:21</span></span>

And when all the Moabites heard that the kings were come up to fight
against them,.... The kings of Israel, Judah, and Edom:

they gathered all that were able to put on armour, and upward; that were
of an age capable of that, and all who were more grown; or "girt on a
girdle" (l), a military one, with which the sword was girt, who were at
age to wear and knew how to wield a sword: and stood in the border; of
their land, between Edom and them, to defend themselves and their
country against these invaders.

\(l\) "eingente cingulo", Montanus.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">kg2 3:22</span></span>

And they rose up early in the morning,.... To watch the motions of their
enemies, and be upon their guard against them:

and the sun shone upon the water; with which the valley was filled:

and the Moabites saw the water on the other side as red as blood; so it
appeared through the rays of the sun reflected on it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">kg2 3:23</span></span>

And they said, this is blood,.... They were very confident of it, having
no notion of water, there having been no rain for some time; and perhaps
it was not usual to see water at any time in this place:

the kings are surely slain; they and their forces:

and they have smitten one another; having quarrelled either about their
religion, or about want of water, and the distress they were come into
through it, laying the blame of their coming out to war, or of their
coming that way, on one another; and the Moabites might rather think
something of this kind had happened, from what had lately been done
among themselves, and their allies, [Ch2
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#023.md).

now therefore, Moab, to the spoil; having no occasion to fight, or
prepare for it; all they had to do was to march directly to the enemy's
camp, and plunder it.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">kg2 3:24</span></span>

And when they came to the camp of Israel,.... Not in an orderly regular
manner, in rank and file, as an army should march, but in a confused
manner, everyone striving who should get thither first, and have the
largest share of the booty:

the Israelites rose up and smote the Moabites, so that they fled before
them; being prepared for them, they fell upon them sword in hand, and
soon obliged them to flee:

but they went forward smiting the Moabites, even in their country; they
pursued them closely, and slew them as they fled, and followed them not
only to their borders, but into their own country: though Schultens (m),
from the use of the word in the Arabic language, renders the passage,
"and they blunted their swords in it (in that slaughter), even by
smiting the Moabites".

\(m\) De Defect. Hod. Ling. Heb. sect. 26.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">kg2 3:25</span></span>

And they beat down the cities,.... Demolished the walls of them, and
houses in them, wherever they came:

and on every good piece of land cast every man his stone, and filled it;
which they had taken out of the walls and houses they pulled down; or
which they picked up in the highway, as they passed along, being a stony
country; or which being laid in heaps, gathered out of the fields, they
took and scattered them all over them:

and they stopped all the wells of water; with stones and dirt:

and felled all the good trees; fruit bearing ones; See Gill on [Kg2
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#019.md),

only in Kirharaseth left they the stones thereof; not able to demolish
it, it being a strong fortified city, the principal of the kingdom, and
into which the king of Moab had thrown himself, and the remains of his
forces; of which see [Isa 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa016.htm#007.md),

howbeit, the slingers went about it, and smote it; smote the soldiers
that appeared upon the walls of it; though Kimchi, and other Jewish
writers, understand it of engineers, who cast out large stones from a
sort of machines then in use, to batter down and break through the walls
of cities.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">kg2 3:26</span></span>

And when the king of Moab saw that the battle was too sore for him,....
The siege was so close, the slingers or engineers did so much execution,
that he saw the city would soon be taken, and he be obliged to deliver
it up:

he took with him seven hundred men that drew swords; men expert in war,
bold and daring:

to break through even unto the king of Edom; through his quarters, and
so escape, he lying nearest to the city, and perhaps the weakest body of
men with him; or he might think he was not so hearty in the cause of the
kings, and would make but a feeble resistance, and let him pass:

but they could not; break through they met with a greater opposition
than was expected perhaps the Edomites remembered how they had lately
used them, which made them fight more desperately against them, see [Ch2
20:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#023.md).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg2003.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">kg2 3:27</span></span>

Then he took his eldest son, that should have reigned in his stead,....
Not the eldest son of the king of Edom, whom the king of Moab had in his
hands before, which made the king of Edom the more willing to join in
this expedition for the recovery of his son, as Joseph Kimchi thinks; or
whom he took now in his sally out upon him, as Moses Kimchi and Ben
Gersom, proceeding upon a mistaken sense of [Amo
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#001.md) for the king of Edom could have no
son that had a right, or was designed to succeed him, since he was but a
deputy king himself; and besides, the sacrificing of him was not the way
to cause the kings to raise the siege, but rather to provoke them to
press it the more closely: it was the king of Moab that took his son and
heir to the crown,

and offered him for a burnt offering upon the wall; that it might be
seen by the camp of Israel, and move their compassion; or rather this
was done as a religious action, to appease the deity by an human
sacrifice so dear and precious, to give success, and cause the enemy to
break up the siege; and was either offered to the true God, the God of
Israel, in imitation of Abraham, as some Jewish writers fancy (n), or to
his idol Chemosh, the sun; and Jarchi observes, out of an exposition of
theirs, that "vau" is wanting in the word for wall, and so may be
interpreted of the sun, towards which this burnt offering was offered;
and it is observed, from various Heathen authors, that it was usual with
the Heathens, when in calamity and distress, to offer up to their gods
what was most dear and valuable to them; and particularly the
Phoenicians (o), and from them the Carthaginians had this custom, who at
one time offered up two hundred sons of their nobility, to appease their
gods (p):

and there was great indignation against Israel; not of the king of Edom
against them, for not rescuing his son, or because they were the means
of this disaster which befell him; but of the king of Moab, who was
quite desperate, and determined to hold out the siege to the utmost
extremity: and they departed, and returned to their own land; the three
kings, the one to Edom, the other to Israel, and the third to Judah;
when they saw the Moabites would sell their lives so dear, and hold out
to the last man, they thought fit to break up the siege; and perhaps
were greatly affected with the barbarous shocking sight they had seen,
and might fear, should they stay, something else of the like kind would
be done.

\(n\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 39. 2. Pesikta in Abarbinel in loc. (o)
Vid. Euseb. Evangel. Praepar. l. 1. c. 10. p. 40. l. 4. c. 16. p. 156.
Porphyr. de Abstinentia, l. 2. sect. 56. Vid. Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 12.
c. 28. (p) Diodor. Sicul. Bibliothec. l. 20. p. 756.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 4](kg2004.md)

</div>
