<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[4 Kings (2 Kings) Index](kg2)  
  [Previous](kg2021)  [Next](kg2023) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 22](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001)

[4 Kings (2 Kings)](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">kg2 22:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 KINGS 22

This chapter begins with the age and character of Josiah king of Judah,
[Kg2 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001), relates his orders for
repairing the temple, [Kg2 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003), his
attention to the book of the law, which was found, and read to him, and
the effect it had upon him, [Kg2 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008),
the command he gave to certain persons to inquire of the Lord about it,
who applied to Huldah the prophetess, [Kg2
22:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#012), who returned an answer by them
to the king, foretelling the destruction of Jerusalem, and giving the
reason of it, and at the same time assuring the king it should not be in
his days, [Kg2 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#015).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">kg2 22:1</span></span>

Josiah was eight years old when he began to reign,.... And must be born
when his father was but sixteen, for Amon lived but twenty four years,
[Kg2 21:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2021.htm#019),

and he reigned thirty and one years in Jerusalem; and so must die at
thirty nine years of age:

and his mother's name was Jedidah, the daughter of Adaiah of Boscath; a
city of the tribe of Judah; see Gill on [Jos
15:39](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#039).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">kg2 22:2</span></span>

And he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord,.... In the
affair of religious worship especially, as well as in other things:

and walked in all the ways of David his father; in his religious ways,
in which he never departed from his God:

and turned not aside to the right hand or to the left; but kept an even,
constant, path of worship and duty, according to the law of God.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:3](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">kg2 22:3</span></span>

And it came to pass in the eighteenth year of King Josiah,.... Not of
his age, but of his reign, as appears from [Ch2
34:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#008) nor is what follows the first
remarkable act he did in a religious way; for elsewhere we read of what
he did in the eighth and twelfth years of his reign, [Ch2
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#003),

that the king sent Shaphan the son of Azaliah, the son of Meshullam the
scribe, to the house of the Lord; the king's secretary; the Septuagint
version is, the scribe of the house of the Lord, and so the Vulgate
Latin version; that kept the account of the expenses of the temple; with
him two others were sent, [Ch2 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#008),

saying: as follows.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">kg2 22:4</span></span>

Go up to Hilkiah the high priest,.... Who had an apartment in the
temple; there was an Hilkiah, a priest, in those times, who was the
father of Jeremiah the prophet, [Jer
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001), whom an Arabic writer (l) takes
to be the same with this; but it is not likely:

that he may sum the silver which is brought into the house of the Lord
which the people voluntarily offered for the repairing of it; this he
would have the priest take an account of, that the sum total might be
known; his meaning is, that he should take it out of the chest in which
it was put, and count it, that it might be known what it amounted to;
see [Kg2 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#009), some understand this of
melting and coining the silver thus given

which the keepers of the door have gathered of the people: who were
Levites, [Ch2 34:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#009), either porters of
the door, or rather the treasurers, as the Targum; the keepers of the
vessels of the sanctuary, that had the care of them, as the Jewish
commentators generally interpret it.

\(l\) Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. p. 68.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">kg2 22:5</span></span>

And let them deliver it into the hand of the doers of the work,

that have the oversight of the house of the Lord,.... That were
overseers of the workmen, whose names are mentioned, [Ch2
34:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#012) into their hands the money was
to be delivered by the high priest, when he had taken the account of it,
and perhaps along with the king's scribe, see [Kg2
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#010),

and let them give it to the doers of the work, which is in the house of
the Lord, to repair the breaches of the house as their wages for their
work; it seems it had not been repaired from the times of Jehoash, a
space of two hundred and eighteen years, according to the Jewish
chronology (m); but Kimchi and Abarbinel make it two hundred and twenty
four.

\(m\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 24. p. 67.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">kg2 22:6</span></span>

Unto carpenters, and builders, and masons,.... Who were employed, some
in mending the woodwork, and others in repairing the stone walls

and to buy timber and hewn stone to repair the house; not only money was
to be given them for their workmanship, but to buy timber and stone to
work with.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">kg2 22:7</span></span>

Howbeit, there was no reckoning made with them of the money that was
delivered into their hand,.... No account was kept between the high
priest, and the king's scribe who delivered the money and the overseers
of the workmen, who received it from them the latter were not called to
any account by the former, nor any audit made of their accounts:

because they dealt faithfully: they were persons of such known honour
and integrity, that their fidelity was not in the least called in
question, but were trusted without examining their accounts, and how
they disposed of the money committed to them, see [Kg2
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#015).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">kg2 22:8</span></span>

And Hilkiah the high priest said unto Shaphan the scribe,.... Not at the
first time of his message to him, but afterwards that he attended on him
upon the same business; after the high priest had examined the temple to
know what repairs it wanted, and where:

I have found the book of the law in the house of the Lord; some think
this was only the book of Deuteronomy, and some only some part of that;
rather the whole Pentateuch, and that not a copy of it, but the very
autograph of Moses, written with his own hand, as it seems from [Ch2
34:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#014). Some say he found it in the
holy of holies, on the side of the ark; there it was put originally;
but, indeed, had it been there, he might have found it before, and must
have seen it, since, as high priest, he entered there once every year;
more probably some pious predecessor of his had taken it from thence in
a time of general corruption, as in the reign of Manasseh, and hid it in
some private place, under a lay of stones, as Jarchi, in some hole in
the wall, which upon search about repairs was found there:

and Hilkiah gave the book to Shaphan, and he read it; and though there
might be some copies of it in private hands, yet scarce; and perhaps
Shaphan had never seen one, at least a perfect one, or however had never
read it through, as now he did.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">kg2 22:9</span></span>

And Shaphan the scribe came to the king, and brought the king word
again,.... Of the delivery of his message to the high priest, and of
what had been done upon it:

and said, thy servants have gathered the money that was found in the
house; meaning Hilkiah and himself, who had examined the chest in the
temple, into which the money was put for the repairs of it, and had
taken it out, and told it:

and have delivered it into the hand of them that do the work, that have
the oversight of the house of the Lord; according to the king's orders.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">kg2 22:10</span></span>

And Shaphan showed the king,.... Further related to him what follows:

saying, Hilkiah the high priest hath delivered me a book; but did not
say what book it was:

and Shaphan read it before the king; part of it; and it is thought by
Kimchi and Ben Gersom that he particularly read the reproofs and
threatenings in the book of Deuteronomy; they suppose that Hilkiah read
those to Shaphan, and directed him to read them to the king, that he
might take into consideration a further reformation.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">kg2 22:11</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the king had heard the words of the book of
the law,.... From whence it appears that he had never wrote out a copy
of it, as the kings of Israel were ordered to do, when they came to the
throne, [Deu 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#018) nor had read it, at
least not the whole of it; and yet it seems strange that he should be
twenty six years of age, as he now was, and had proceeded far in the
reformation of worship, and yet be without the book of the law, and the
high priest also; it looks as if it was, as some have thought, that they
had till now only some abstracts of the law, and not the whole: and
perhaps the reformation hitherto carried on chiefly lay in abolishing
idolatry, and not so much in restoring the ordinances of worship to
their purity; for it was after this that the ordinance of the passover
was ordered to be kept; and when the king observed, on hearing the law
read, that it had not been kept as it should, that such severe
threatenings were denounced against the transgressors of it;

that he rent his clothes; as expressive of the rending of his heart, and
of his humiliation and sorrow for the sins he and his people were guilty
of.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">kg2 22:12</span></span>

And the king commanded Hilkiah the priest,.... The high priest, as he is
called, [Kg2 22:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#004).

and Ahikam the son of Shaphan; whether the same with Shaphan the scribe,
before mentioned, or another of the same name, is not certain:

and Achbor the son of Michaiah; who is called Abdon, the son of Micah,
[Ch2 34:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#020).

and Shaphan the scribe; who brought and read the book to the king:

and Asahiah, a servant of the king's; that waited on him constantly:

saying; as follows.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">kg2 22:13</span></span>

Go ye, inquire of the Lord,.... Of some of his prophets, as Jeremiah,
who began to prophesy in the thirteenth year of Josiah's reign, and had
been a prophet five years, [Jer 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#001),

for me, and for the people, and for all Judah, concerning the words of
this book that is found; for he observed that this book threatened and
foretold not only the captivity of the ten tribes, but of Judah, and of
their king; and Jarchi thinks, he had a particular respect to that
passage:

the Lord shall bring thee and thy king, &c. [Deu
28:36](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#036) and therefore was desirous of
knowing what he and his people must do to avert those judgments:

for great is the wrath of the Lord that is kindled against us; which he
concluded from the threatenings denounced:

because that our fathers have not hearkened unto the words of this book,
to do according to all which is written concerning us: he clearly saw
that his ancestors more remote and immediate had been very deficient in
observing the laws, commands, and ordinances enjoined them in that book;
and therefore feared that what was threatened would fall upon him and
his people, who, he was sensible, came short of doing their duty.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">kg2 22:14</span></span>

So Hilkiah the priest, and Ahikam, and Achbor, and Shaphan, and Asahiah,
went down to Huldah the prophetess,.... Such as were Miriam and Deborah;
in imitation of those Satan had very early his women prophetesses, the
Sibyls, so called from their being the council and oracle of God, and
consulted as such on occasion, as Huldah now was; and the first of the
Sibyls, according to Suidas (n), was a Chaldean or a Persian; and some
say an Hebrew; and Pausanias expressly says (o), that with the Hebrews
above Palestine was a woman prophetess, whose name was Sabba, whom some
called the Babylonian, others the Egyptian Sibyl. Aelian relates (p)
that one of them was a Jewess:

the wife of Shallum, the son of Tikvah, the son of Harhas, keeper of the
wardrobe; but whether the king's wardrobe in the palace, or the priest's
in the temple, is not certain; he is called Hasrah, [Ch2
34:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#022) who is here called Harhas:

now she dwelt in Jerusalem in the college; in the college of the
prophets; in the house of instruction, as the Targum; the school where
the young prophets were instructed and trained up; though Jarchi
observes, that some interpret this "within the two walls"; Jerusalem it
seems had three walls, and within the second this woman lived; there
were gates in the temple, as he also observes, called the gates of
Huldah (q), but whether from her cannot be said: this place of her
dwelling seems to be mentioned as a reason why these messengers went to
her, because she was near, as well as well known for her prophetic
spirit, prudence, and faithfulness, and not to Jeremiah, who in all
probability was at Anathoth; and so also is the reason why they went not
to Zephaniah, if he as yet had begun to prophesy, because he might be at
a distance also: and they communed with her; upon the subject the king
sent them about.

\(n\) In voce (o) Phocica, sive, l. 10. p. 631. (p) Var. Hist. l. 12. c.
35. (q) Misn. Middot, c. 1. sect. 3.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">kg2 22:15</span></span>

And she said unto them,.... The king's messengers:

thus saith the Lord God of Israel; being immediately inspired by him,
she spake in his name, as prophets did:

tell the man that sent you to me; which may seem somewhat rude and
unmannerly to say of a king; but when it is considered she spake not of
herself, but representing the King of kings and Lord of lords, it will
be seen and judged of in another light.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">kg2 22:16</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord, behold, I will bring evil upon this place, and upon
the inhabitants of it,.... Destruction to the place, and captivity to
the inhabitants of it:

even all the words of the book which the king of Judah hath read;
particularly what is contained in [Lev
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#014), even all the curses in it, as
in [Ch2 34:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2034.htm#024).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">kg2 22:17</span></span>

Because they have forsaken me,.... My worship, as the Targum; his word
and ordinances:

and have burnt incense unto other gods; to Baal, to the host of heaven,
and other Heathen deities:

that they might provoke me to anger with all the works of their hands:
their idols of wood, stone, gold, and silver, which their hands had
made, to worship; than which nothing was more provoking to God:

therefore my wrath shall be kindled against this place, and shall not be
quenched; the decree for the destruction of Jerusalem was gone forth,
and not to be called back; the execution of it could not be stopped or
hindered by cries, prayers, entreaties, or otherwise; this wrath of God
was an emblem of the unquenchable fire of hell, [Mat
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#012).

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">kg2 22:18</span></span>

But to the king of Judah, which sent you to inquire of the Lord,....
That is, with respect to him, or what may concern him:

thus shall ye say unto him; carry back this message to him as from the
Lord he desired to inquire of:

thus saith the Lord God of Israel, as touching the words which thou hast
heard: read out of the law, concerning the destruction of the land, and
its inhabitants therein threatened.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">kg2 22:19</span></span>

Because thine heart was tender,.... Soft like wax, and susceptible of
impressions; or was "moved", or "trembled", as the Targum; for God has
respect to such as are of contrite hearts, and tremble at his word, [Isa
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#002),

and thou hast humbled thyself before the Lord; external humiliation,
such as in Ahab, was regarded by the Lord, much more internal and
cordial humiliation is regarded by him, see [Kg1
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg1021.htm#029),

when thou heardest what I spake against this place, and against the
inhabitants thereof, that they should become a desolation and a curse;
as in [Lev 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#001).

and hast rent thy clothes, and wept before me; as expressive of the
inward contrition, sorrow, and grief of his heart:

I also have heard thee, saith the Lord: his cries and prayers.

[4 Kings (2 Kings) 22:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2022.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">kg2 22:20</span></span>

Behold therefore, I will gather thee unto thy fathers,.... To his godly
ancestors, to share with them in eternal life and happiness; otherwise
it could be no peculiar favour to die in common, as his fathers did, and
be buried in their sepulchres:

and thou shall be gathered into thy grave in peace; in a time of public
peace and tranquillity; for though he was slain in battle with the king
of Egypt, yet it was what he was personally concerned in, and it was not
a public war between the two kingdoms, and his body was carried off by
his servants, and was peaceably interred in the sepulchre of his
ancestors, [Kg2 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#029), as well as he
died in spiritual peace, and entered into eternal peace, which is the
end of the perfect and upright man, as he was, [Psa
37:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#037) but this chiefly regards his not
living to be distressed with the calamities of his nation and people, as
follows:

and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon this
place: he being removed first, though it came upon it in the days of his
sons:

and they brought the king word again; of what Huldah the prophetess had
said unto them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 4 Kings (2 Kings) Chapter 23](kg2023)

</div>
