<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Lamentations Index](lam.md)  
  [Previous](lam004)  [Next](eze000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Lamentations Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#001.md)

[Lamentations](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lam 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LAMENTATIONS 5

In this chapter are reckoned up the various calamities and distresses of
the Jews in Babylon, which the Lord is desired to remember and consider,
[Lam 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#001.md); their great concern for the
desolation of the temple in particular is expressed, [Lam
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#017.md); and the chapter is concluded
with a prayer that God would show favour to them, and turn them to him,
and renew their prosperity as of old, though he had rejected them, and
been wroth with them, [Lam 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#019.md).

[Lamentations 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lam 5:1</span></span>

Remember, O Lord, what is come upon us,.... This chapter is called, in
some Greek copies, and in the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic
versions, "the prayer of Jeremiah". Cocceius interprets the whole of the
state of the Christian church after the last destruction of Jerusalem;
and of what happened to the disciples of Christ in the first times of
the Gospel; and of what Christians have endured under antichrist down to
the present times: but it is best to understand it of the Jews in
Babylon; representing their sorrowful case, as represented by the
prophet; entreating that the Lord would remember the affliction they
were under, and deliver them out of it, that which he had determined
should come upon them. So the Targum,

"remember, O Lord, what was decreed should be unto us;''

and what he had long threatened should come upon them; and which they
had reason to fear would come, though they put away the evil day far
from them; but now it was come, and it lay heavy upon them; and
therefore they desire it might be taken off:

consider, and behold our reproach: cast upon them by their enemies; and
the rather the Lord is entreated to look upon and consider that, since
his name was concerned in it, and it was for his sake, and because of
the true religion they professed; also the disgrace they were in, being
carried into a foreign country for their sins; and so were in contempt
by all the nations around.

[Lamentations 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lam 5:2</span></span>

Our inheritance is turned to strangers,.... The land of Canaan in
general, which was given to Abraham and his seed to be their
inheritance; and their field, and vineyards in particular, which came to
them by inheritance from their fathers, were now in the hands of the
Chaldeans, strangers to God, and aliens from the commonwealth of Israel,
as all Gentiles were, [Eph 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#012.md);

our houses to aliens; which they had built or purchased, or their
fathers had left them, were now inhabited by those of another country.

[Lamentations 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lam 5:3</span></span>

We are orphans and fatherless,.... In every sense; in a natural sense,
their fathers having been cut off by the sword, famine, or pestilence;
in a civil sense, their king being taken from them; and in a religious
sense, God having forsaken them for their sins:

our mothers are as widows; either really so, their husbands being dead;
or were as if they had no husbands, they not being able to provide for
them, protect and deferred them. The Targum adds,

"whose husbands are gone to the cities of the sea, and it is doubtful
whether they are alive.''

Some understand this politically, of their cities being desolate and
defenceless.

[Lamentations 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lam 5:4</span></span>

We have drunken our water for money,.... They who in their own land,
which was a land of brooks of water, of fountains and depths, had wells
of water of their own, and water freely and in abundance, now were
obliged to pay for it, for drink, and other uses:

our wood is sold unto us; or, "comes to us by a price" (r); and a dear
one; in their own land they could have wood out of the forest, for
cutting down and bringing home; but now they were forced to give a large
price for it.

\(r\) "in pretio venerunt", Pagninus, Montanus; "caro nobis pretio
veniunt", Michaelis.

[Lamentations 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lam 5:5</span></span>

Our necks are under persecution,.... A yoke of hard servitude and
bondage was put upon their necks, as Jarchi interprets it; which they
were forced to submit unto: or, "upon our necks we are pursued" (s); or,
"suffer persecution": which Aben Ezra explains thus, in connection with
the [Lam 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#004.md); if we carry water or
wood upon our necks, the enemy pursues us; that is, to take it away from
us. The Targum relates a fable here, that when Nebuchadnezzar saw the
ungodly rulers of the children of Israel, who went empty, he ordered to
sow up the books of the law, and make bags or wallets of them, and fill
them with the stones on the banks of the Euphrates, and loaded them on
their necks:

we labour, and have no rest; night nor day, nor even on sabbath days;
obliged to work continually till they were weary; and, when they were,
were not allowed time to rest themselves, like their forefathers in
Egypt.

\(s\) "super colla nostra persecutionem passi sumus", Pagninus,
Montanus, Calvin; "vel patimur", Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator.

[Lamentations 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lam 5:6</span></span>

We have given our hand to the Egyptians,.... Either by way of
supplication, to beg bread of them; or by way of covenant and agreement;
or to testify subjection to them, in order to be supplied with food:
many of the Jews went into Egypt upon the taking of the city, [Jer
43:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer043.htm#005.md);

and to the Assyrians, to be satisfied with bread; among whom many of the
captives were dispersed; since from hence they are said to be returned,
as well as from Egypt, [Isa 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#016.md).

[Lamentations 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lam 5:7</span></span>

Our fathers have sinned, and are not,.... In the world, as the Targum
adds; they were in being, but not on earth; they were departed from
hence, and gone into another world; and so were free from the miseries
and calamities their children were attended with, and therefore more
happy:

and we have borne their iniquities; the punishment of them, or
chastisement for them: this is not said by way of complaint, much less
as charging God with injustice, in punishing them for their fathers'
sins, or to excuse theirs; for they were ready to own that they had
consented to them, and were guilty of the same; but to obtain mercy and
pity at the hands of God.

[Lamentations 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lam 5:8</span></span>

Servants have ruled over us,.... The Targum is,

"the sons of Ham, who were given to be servants to the sons of Shem,
they have ruled over us;''

referring to the prophecy of Noah, [Gen
9:26](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#026.md); or such as had been tributary to
the Jews, as the Edomites; so Aben Ezra; the Babylon, an, are meant; and
not the nobles and principal inhabitants only, but even their servants,
had power and authority over the Jews and they were at their beck and
command; which made their servitude the more disagreeable and
intolerable:

there is none that doth deliver us out of their hand; out of the hand of
these servants.

[Lamentations 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lam 5:9</span></span>

We gat our bread with the peril of our lives,.... This seems to refer to
the time of the siege when they privately went out of the city to get in
some provision, but went in danger of their lives:

because of the sword of the wilderness: or, "of the plain" (t); because
of the, word of the Chaldean army, which lay in the plain about
Jerusalem into whose hand there was danger of falling, and of being cut
to pieces.

\(t\) "propter gladium in deserto, sive plano", Gataker.

[Lamentations 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lam 5:10</span></span>

Our skin was black like an oven, because of the terrible famine. Or
"terrors and horrors of famine"; which are very dreadful and
distressing: or, "the storms of famine"; see [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006); or, "burning winds" (u.md); such as
are frequent in Africa and Asia; to which the famine is compared that
was in Jerusalem, at the siege of it, both by the Chaldeans and Romans;
and as an oven, furnace, or chimney becomes black by the smoke of the
fire burnt in it, or under it; so the skins of the Jews became black
through these burning winds and storms, or burnings of famine; see [Lam
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/lam004.htm#008.md). So Jarchi says the word has the
signification of "burning"; for famine as it were burns up the bodies of
men when most vehement.

\(u\) "horrorum famis", Montanus; "terrores, vel tremores", Vatablus;
"procellas famis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "exustiones",
Pagninus, Calvin; "adustiones famis", Stockius, p. 281.

[Lamentations 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lam 5:11</span></span>

They ravished the women in Zion,.... Or "humbled" them (w); an
euphemism; the women that were married to men in Zion, as the Targum;
and if this wickedness was committed in the holy mountain of Zion, it
was still more abominable and afflicting, and to be complained of; and
if by the servants before mentioned, as Aben Ezra interprets it, it is
another aggravating circumstance of it; for this was done not in Babylon
when captives there; but at the taking of the city of Jerusalem, and by
the common soldiers, as is too often practised:

and the maids in the cities of Judah; in all parts of the country, where
the Chaldean army ravaged, there they ravished the maids. The Targum is,

"the women that were married to men in Zion were humbled by strangers;
(the Targum in the king of Spain's Bible is, by the Romans;) and virgins
in the cities of Judah by the Chaldeans;''

suggesting that this account has reference to both destructions of the
city, and the concomitants and consequences thereof.

\(w\) Sept. "humiliaverunt", V. L. Munster.

[Lamentations 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lam 5:12</span></span>

Princes are hanged up by their hand,.... According to some, as Aben Ezra
observes, by the hand of the servants before mentioned; however, by the
hand of the Chaldeans or Babylonians; see [Jer
52:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer052.htm#010.md). Some understand it of their own
hands, as if they laid violent hands upon themselves, not being able to
bear the hardships and disgrace they were subjected to but I should
rather think this is to be understood of hanging them, not by the neck,
but by the hand, could any instance be given of such a kind of
punishment so early used, and by this people; which has been in other
nations, and in more modern times:

the faces of elders were not honoured; no reverence or respect were
shown to elders in age or office, or on account of either; but were
treated with rudeness and contempt.

[Lamentations 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lam 5:13</span></span>

They took the young men to grind,.... In the mill, which was laborious
service; and which persons were sometimes put to, by way of punishment;
and was the punishment of servants; see [Jdg
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg016.htm#021.md). Some render it, "the young men
bore the grist" (x); carried the corn, the meal ground, from place to
place. The Targum is,

"the young men carried the millstones;''

and so Jarchi, they put millstones upon their shoulders, and burdens so
as to weary them. Ben Melech, from their Rabbins, relates, that there
were no millstones in Babylon; wherefore the Chaldeans put them upon the
young men of Israel, to carry them thither. The Vulgate Latin version
is,

"they abused the young men in an unchaste manner;''

suggesting something obscene intended by grinding; see [Job
31:10](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#010.md); but the context will not admit
of such a sense:

and the children fell under the wood; such loads of wood were laid upon
them, that they could not bear them, but fell under them. Aben Ezra
understands it of moving the wood of the mill, of turning the wooden
handle of it; or the wooden post, the rider or runner, by which the
upper millstone was turned: this their strength was not equal to, and so
failed. The Targum interprets it of a wooden gibbet, or gallows; some
wooden engine seems to be had in view, used as a punishment, which was
put upon their necks, something like a pillory; which they were not able
to stand up under, but fell.

\(x\) "juvenes farinam portaverunt"; so some in Gataker; "juvenes molam
tulerunt", Cocceius; "juvenes ad molendum portant", Junius & Tremellius.

[Lamentations 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lam 5:14</span></span>

The elders have ceased from the gate,.... Of the sanhedrim, or court of
judicature, as the Targum; from the gate of the city, where they used to
sit and try causes; but now there was nothing of this kind done:

the young men from their music; vocal and instrumental; the latter is
more particularly specified, though both may be intended; neither were
any more heard; their harps were hung upon the willows on the banks of
Euphrates, which ran through the city of Babylon, [Psa
137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001.md).

[Lamentations 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lam 5:15</span></span>

The joy of our heart is ceased,.... ward joy was gone, as well as the
external signs of it: it "sabbatized" (y), as it may be rendered;
alluding perhaps to the cordial joy expressed formerly on their sabbaths
and other festivals, now not observed; at least, not with that joy,
inward and outward, they formerly were:

our dance is turned into mourning; which also was used at their solemn
feasts, as well as at their common diversions, [Jdg
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg021.htm#021.md); but now no more of that; but,
instead of it, mourning at the calamities they were oppressed with; and
at the remembrance of mercies and privileges, civil and religious, they
were deprived of.

\(y\) "sabbatizat".

[Lamentations 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lam 5:16</span></span>

The crown is fallen from our head,.... Or, "the crown of our head is
fallen" (a); all their honour and glory as a nation were gone; the glory
of their kingdom and priesthood, to both which a crown or mitre
belonged; the glory of church and state. Aben Ezra interprets it of the
temple, the place of the divine Majesty. Sanctius thinks there is an
allusion to the crowns they wore upon their heads at their feasts and
festivals; and so the words have a close connection with what goes
before:

woe unto us that we have sinned! which had brought all these evils upon
them: this is not to be considered as an imprecation or denunciation of
misery; but as a commiseration of their case; calling upon others to it,
and particularly God himself, to have mercy upon them; for, alas for
them! they had sinned, and justly deserved what was come upon them; and
therefore throw themselves at the feet of mercy, and implore divine
compassion.

\(a\) "cecidit corona capitis nostri", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Calvin,
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Lamentations 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lam 5:17</span></span>

For this our heart is faint,.... Our spirits sink; we are ready to swoon
and die away; either for this, that we have sinned; because of our sins,
they are so many, so great, and so aggravated; or for those distresses
and calamities they have brought upon us before mentioned; or for the
desolation of Zion, more especially, after expressed; and so the Targum,

"for this house of the sanctuary, which is desolate, our heart is
weak:''

for these things our eyes are dim; or "darkened" (b) almost blinded with
weeping; can scarcely see out of them; or as persons in a swoon; for
dimness of sight usually attends faintness of spirit.

\(b\) "contenebrati sunt", V. L. "obtenebrati", Pagninus, Montanus,
Calvin, Cocceius.

[Lamentations 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lam 5:18</span></span>

Because of the mountain of Zion, which is desolate,.... Meaning either
the city of Jerusalem in general, or the temple in particular, which
both lay in ruins: but the latter gave the truly godly the greatest
concern; that the seat of divine Majesty should be in such a condition;
that the public exercises of religion should cease, and there be no more
opportunities of waiting upon God, and worshipping him as heretofore;
their civil interest, and the loss of that did not so much affect them
as the interest of religion, and what that suffered:

the foxes walk upon it: as they do in desolate places, shunning the
company of men; but here they walked in common, and as freely as in the
woods and deserts: this was fulfilled in the destruction of the second
temple, as well as the first. R. Akiba (c) and his companions were
walking together; they saw a fox come out of the holy of holies; they
wept, but he laughed or rejoiced; they wept, that in the place where the
stranger that drew near should die, now foxes walked upon it; he laughed
or rejoiced, because, as this prophecy was fulfilled, so would others
that predicted good things.

\(c\) T. Bab. Maccot, fol. 24. 1. 2.

[Lamentations 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lam 5:19</span></span>

Thou, O Lord, remainest for ever,.... The same in his nature and
perfections; in his grace and goodness; in his power and faithfulness;
in his purposes and promises; though all things else change, are fickle
and inconstant, he changes not, but abides the same, without any
variableness or shallow of turning; whatever revolutions there are in
the world, or alterations in the course of Providence, yet he remains
firm and unalterable in his counsel and covenant; though all material
things are subject to decay, and even his own sanctuary lay in ruins,
yet he himself continued just as he ever was. The eternity and
unchangeableness of God are of great use and comfort to his people in
times of distress, and to be regarded and observed:

thy throne from generation to generation; though his throne on earth, in
Jerusalem, in the temple, was thrown down, yet his throne in heaven
remained unshaken; there he sits, and reigns, and rules, and overrules
all things here below to his own glory and the good of his people; and
this is the saints' comfort in the worst of times, that Zion's King
reigns; he has reigned, and will reign, throughout all generations. The
Targum is,

"the house of thine habitation in the high heavens; the throne of thy
glory to the generations of generations?''

[Lamentations 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lam 5:20</span></span>

Wherefore dost thou, forget us for ever,.... Since thou art firm,
constant, and unchangeable, and thy love and covenant the same. God
seems to forget his people when he afflicts them, or suffers them to be
oppressed, and does not arise immediately for their help; which being
deferred some time, looks like an eternity to them, or they fear it will
ever be so; at least this they say to express their eager desire after
his gracious presence, and to show how much they prize it:

and forsake us so long time? or, "to length of days" (d)? so long as the
seventy years' captivity; which to be forsaken of God, or to seem to be
forsaken of him, was with them a long time.

\(d\) "in longitudinem dierum", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Lamentations 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lam 5:21</span></span>

Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord, and we shall be turned,.... This prayer
expresses the sense they had of their backslidings from God, and
distance from him; of their inability to turn themselves to the Lord, or
convert themselves; and of their need of divine grace, and of the
efficacy of that to effect it; see [Jer
31:18](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#018.md); for this is to be understood
not only of returning them to their own land, and to the external
worship of God in it; but of turning them to the Lord by true and
perfect repentance, as the Targum; of the conversion of their hearts and
the reformation of their lives:

renew our days as of old; for good, as the Targum adds. The request is,
that their good days might be renewed; that they might enjoy the same
peace and prosperity, and all good things in their own land, as they had
done in days and years past: first they pray for repentance; then
restoration.

[Lamentations 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lam 5:22</span></span>

But thou hast utterly rejected us,.... That looks as if they had no
hope, and were in despair of having their petitions granted; since God
had entirely rejected them from being his people, and would never more
have mercy on them; but the words may be rendered, "though thou hast in
rejecting rejected us" (e); or else, "unless thou hast utterly rejected
us" (f); or rather by an interrogation, "for wilt thou utterly reject",
or "despise us?" (g) surely thou wilt not; such is thy grace and
goodness:

thou art very wroth against us; thou hast been, and still continuest to
be: or, "wilt thou be exceeding wroth against us?" (h) or continue thy
wrath to extremity, and for ever? thou wait not; it is not consistent
with, thy mercy and grace, truth and faithfulness; and so it is an
argument of faith in prayer, and not an expression of despondency;
though the Jews, because they would not have the book end in what is
sorrowful and distressing, repeat the foregoing verse; and the like
method they take at the end of Ecclesiastes, and the prophecies of
Isaiah and Malachi, as Jarchi observes.

\(e\) "quamvis detestatione detestatus es nos", Targ. (f) "Nisi forte
repudiando repudiasti nos", Calvin. (g) "Nam an omnino sperneres nos?"
Junius & Tremellius. (h) "effervesceres contra nos admodum?" Junius &
Tremellius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ezekiel Introduction](eze000.md)

</div>
