<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev002)  [Next](lev004.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001.md)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 3

This chapter contains the law of the peace offerings, and gives an
account what they consisted of, and of the various rites and ceremonies
used at them, as of the bullock and the rites appertaining to that, [Lev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001.md) and of the lamb, and of the rites
peculiar to it, [Lev 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#006.md) and of the
goat, and of the rites belonging to it, [Lev
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#012.md) and the chapter is concluded with
a law forbidding the eating of fat and blood throughout their dwellings
for ever, [Lev 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017.md).

[Leviticus 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 3:1</span></span>

And if his oblation be a sacrifice of peace offering,.... The Targums of
Onkelos and Jonathan render it, the "sacrifice of holinesses", or
"sanctifications"; so called, not because they were more holy than other
sacrifices; for they were what the Jews (c) call the lighter holy
things, in distinction from the most holy things, such as the meat
offerings were, [Lev 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#010.md) but as
Ainsworth suggests, either because none but holy persons might eat of
them, [Lev 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#019.md) though this also was
enjoined in other sacrifices, or because hereby the name of God was
sanctified. These offerings were either by way of thanksgiving for
favours received, or for free devotion, or as a vow, and in order to
obtain for himself that offered and family health and safety, peace and
prosperity, see [Lev 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#011.md) all which
the word used signifies; and these sacrifices are by the Septuagint
called "sacrifices of salvation" or "health", because offered either in
gratitude for it, or to enjoy it; or else they were offered to make
peace and reconciliation, and therefore are called peace offerings, and
that they were for this purpose is certain from [Eze
45:15](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#015.md) and Gersom says they had their
name from hence, because they bring peace between God and men; they were
a kind of a pacific festival between God, the priests, and the owner,
and were typical of Christ, who has made peace for us by his blood and
sacrifice. There is something very offensive to God in sin, it being a
breach of his law, and contrary to his nature and will, provoking to the
eyes of his glory, deserving of wrath, and death itself, and so not only
sets man at a distance from him, but creates an enmity between them;
hence a peace offering became necessary; such an one man could not bring
acceptable to God; for neither his repentance nor good works would do;
but Christ has offered up himself a sacrifice, and thereby has made
reconciliation for sin and sinners, and procured peace with God for
them; the consequence of which is spiritual peace here, and eternal
peace hereafter; and so is a "sacrifice of peaces", as the Hebrew phrase
here may be literally rendered, and is the proper antitype and full
completion of this sort of sacrifice:

if he offer it of the herd; that is, a bullock:

whether it be a male or female; as it might be either; showing, as some
think, that in Christ Jesus, and in the Gospel churches, and under the
Gospel dispensation, there is no distinction of male and female, with
respect to blessings and privileges, [Gal
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#028.md) or rather as others, denoting
both strength and weakness in Christ; strength in his obedience, and
weakness in his sufferings; strong he was as the man of God's right hand
made so by him, and yet was crucified through weakness:

he shall offer it without blemish before the Lord: signifying the
perfection and purity of Christ's sacrifice of peace offering in the
sight of God: "before the Lord"; this, according to Gersom, was on the
west side of the court.

\(c\) Misn. Zebachim, c. 5. sect. 7.

[Leviticus 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 3:2</span></span>

And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering,.... "His right
hand with strength", the Targum of Jonathan says; perhaps both his hands
were imposed; the Septuagint and Arabic versions read it in the plural
number, "hands"; this same rite was used in the sacrifice of burnt
offering; see Gill on [Lev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004.md); which
might be done in any place in the court where it was slain, only with
this difference: according to Maimonides (d), there was no confession of
sin made at laying on of hands upon the peace offerings, but words of
praise were spoken:

and kill it at the door of the congregation; it seems as if it was not
the priest, but the owner that brought it, and laid his hands on it,
that killed it; and so the last mentioned writer says, that slaying the
peace offering by a stranger was right; and as he and others (e) say, it
might be slain in any part of the court; it was not obliged to be slain
in the north part of it, as the burnt offering was, [Lev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011.md).

and Aaron's sons the priests shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar
round about; in like manner as the blood of the burnt offering was, and
it was done with two sprinklings, which were as four (f); See Gill on
[Lev 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005.md) this was typical of the blood
of Christ, called "the blood of sprinkling".

\(d\) Maaseh Hakorbanot, c. 3. sect. 15. (e) Misn. Zebachim, c. 5. sect.
7. (f) Misn. ib.

[Leviticus 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 3:3</span></span>

And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering,.... That is,
the priest, not all of it, but some of it, even what is after mentioned:

an offering made by fire unto the Lord; for what was offered to the Lord
was burnt, and is that part of it which is next mentioned in this and
the following verse:

the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the
inwards; both that which covered them, and that which stuck to them; and
the fat being the best, it was the Lord's, and offered to him, and
denoted Christ the fatted calf, whose sacrifice is best and most
excellent; and which was typified by that which Abel offered up, and
which being of the fat of the flock, and offered up by faith in Christ's
sacrifice, was more excellent than Cain's, [Gen
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#004.md).

[Leviticus 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 3:4</span></span>

And the two kidneys, and the fat that is on them, which is by the
flanks,.... Meaning either the two kidneys which were next the flanks,
or the fat upon them, which was next to them; these, and the burning of
them, may signify the burning zeal and flaming love and affections of
Christ for his people, which instructed him, and put him upon offering
himself a sacrifice of peace offering for them, see [Psa
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#007.md).

and the caul above the liver, with the kidneys, it shall he take away;
or the caul, which is a thin membrane or skin, in which the liver is
enclosed, with the liver, together with the kidneys, he separated from
the rest in order to burn, at least with a part of the liver; so Jarchi
and Gersom interpret it, that he should take a little of the liver with
the caul; and indeed some think the word rendered "caul" signifies a
part of the liver, that which the Greeks call the "table", the broader
part of it, like a table; and which word the Talmudists (g) retain, who
speak of , "the table of the liver"; and by which Jarchi on [Exo
29:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#013.md) interprets the caul above the
liver, the same as here.

\(g\) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 46. 1.

[Leviticus 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 3:5</span></span>

And Aaron's sons shall burn it on the altar,.... That is, the fat of the
several parts before mentioned; this signified the sufferings of Christ,
by which our peace is made, and by whose death we are reconciled to God:
this rite of burning the fat of the inwards of sacrifices was used by
the Pagans, and is still retained by the idolatrous Indians to this day
(h):

upon the burnt sacrifice; which, as Gersom says, was the burnt offering
of the daily sacrifice of the morning, which was offered first of all
sacrifices; so Jarchi says,"we learn that the daily burnt offering
preceded every other offering:''this was an eminent type of Christ's
sacrifice:

which is upon the wood that is on the fire; that is, which burnt
offering was laid upon the wood on the fire, and the fat of the peace
offering upon that:

it is an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord; as
Christ's sacrifice is, [Eph 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002.md); see
Gill on [Lev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009.md).

\(h\) See the Abridgment of Mr. Brainerd's Journal, published in 1748,
p. 30.

[Leviticus 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 3:6</span></span>

And if his offering, for a sacrifice of peace offering unto Lord, be of
the flock,.... As it might be: and be either male or female; which he
pleased:

he shall offer it without blemish; See Gill on [Lev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001.md).

[Leviticus 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 3:7</span></span>

If he offer a lamb for his offering,.... Which was of the flock, and
must be of the first year; this is a rule laid down by Maimonides (i),
that where ever this word is used in the law, it signifies one of the
first year:

then shall he offer it before the Lord; bring it into the court, and
present it to the priest.

\(i\) Maaseh Hakorbanot, c. 1. sect. 14.

[Leviticus 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 3:8</span></span>

And he shall lay his hand upon the head of his offering,.... The Targum
of Jonathan adds here, as before,"his right hand with strength:"

and kill it before the tabernacle of the congregation; in the court, in
any part of it; for, as Gersom says, all places were right for this; the
man that brought it killed it, or the butcher, as the Targum of Jonathan
says here also as on [Lev 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002.md),

and Aaron's sons shall sprinkle the blood thereof round about upon the
altar; upon the four horns of it; see Gill on [Lev
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#002.md).

[Leviticus 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 3:9</span></span>

And he shall offer of the sacrifice of the peace offering,.... That is,
the priest, Aaron, or one of his two sons:

an offering made by fire unto the Lord; that part of it which was to be
burnt with fire; and in the peace offering of the lamb there was
something more than in the peace offering of the bullock, or of the
goat, which follows:

the fat thereof, and the whole rump, it shall he take off hard by the
backbone; not the rump or tail, but the fat of it; the copulative "and"
is not in the text; wherefore Aben Ezra says, that Gaon was mistaken in
reading it as we do, "the fat there of", and "the whole rump"; but it
should be rendered, "its fat of the whole rump", or "tail": in the
eastern countries (k), some sheep and lambs had very large tails, and
very fat ones, the least weighing ten or twelve pounds, the largest
above forty, and were put in little carts for ease and safety; see Gill
on [Exo 29:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#022.md) now such as were
"whole", entire, perfect, and without blemish, as the word signifies,
the fat of them that was next to the backbone was to be taken off of
such as were brought for peace offerings:

and the fat that covereth the inwards, and all the fat that is upon the
inwards; as before; See Gill on [Lev
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#003.md).

\(k\) Vid. Ludolf. Hist. Ethiop. l. 1. c. 10. sect. 14.

[Leviticus 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 3:10</span></span>

And the two kidneys,.... The same direction is given here as about the
bullock of the peace offering; see Gill on [Lev
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#004.md).

[Leviticus 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 3:11</span></span>

And the priest shall burn it upon the altar,.... The fat of the tail, of
the inwards, the two kidneys, and the caul of the liver:

it is the food of the offering made by fire unto the Lord; or "bread";
this part of the offering that was burnt belonged to the Lord; it was
his food, and what was accepted of by him, and therefore is elsewhere
called the bread of God, [Lev 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev021.htm#008.md).

[Leviticus 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 3:12</span></span>

And if his offering be a goat,.... As it might be, and which also was of
the flock:

then he shall offer it before the Lord; in the same place and manner as
the bullock and the lamb,

[Leviticus 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 3:13</span></span>

And he shall lay his hand upon the head of it,.... His right hand,
according to the Targum of Jonathan, as before; the same directions are
given for the killing of it, and for the sprinkling of its blood, as in
the offerings of the bullock and lamb.

[Leviticus 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 3:14</span></span>

And he shall offer thereof his offering,.... The same rules are laid
down about taking the fat off of several parts as in the sacrifice of
the bullock; but nothing is said of the fat of the rump and tail, as is
said of the lamb.

[Leviticus 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 3:16</span></span>

And the priest shall burn them upon the altar,.... Which shows that not
the fat only, but the inwards and the kidneys, were burnt also; so
Maimonides says (l), that the priest salted the parts, and burned them
upon the altar; and the priests might not have the breast and shoulder
(which were what belonged to them) until the parts were burnt:

it is the food of the offering made by fire; which the Lord ate of, or
accepted of:

for a sweet savour; as a type of the sweet smelling sacrifice of Christ,
with which he is well pleased:

all the fat is the Lord's; that is, all that was upon the parts
mentioned in the several sacrifices of peace offerings, which was to be
taken off and burnt: though the Jewish writers understand it of all fat
in general, and so interpret the law that follows.

\(l\) Ut supra, (Maaseh Hakorbanot) c. 9. sect. 11.

[Leviticus 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 3:17</span></span>

It shall be a perpetual statute for your generations,.... That is, unto
the end of the Mosaic dispensation, until the Messiah comes, and his
sacrifice is offered up, and his blood is shed, till that time in all
generations: and

throughout all your dwellings; wherever their habitations should be, it
is a law to be observed:

that ye eat neither fat nor blood; the Jewish writers think, that this
is not to be restrained to the fat and blood of sacrifices, because
these were not offered in their dwellings, but in the tabernacle and
temple, and therefore interpret it of fat and blood in general; but what
fat and blood are meant may be seen in [Lev
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#023.md) the Targum of Jonathan adds,"but
upon the top of the altar it shall be offered to the name of the
Lord,''which seems to restrain it to the sacrifices.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 4](lev004.md)

</div>
