<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev016)  [Next](lev018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 17:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 17

In this chapter a law is given, ordering all sorts of persons,
Israelites and sojourners, to bring their sacrifices to the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, on pain of being cut off, cf11Lev\_17:1;
and a special and particular prohibition of sacrificing to devils is
delivered out, [Lev 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007); and the
eating of blood, and of everything that dies of itself, or is torn with
beasts, is forbidden under the above penalty, cf11Lev\_17:10.

[Leviticus 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 17:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... After he had given him the law about
the day of atonement, and the rites belonging to it:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 17:2</span></span>

Speak unto Aaron, and unto his sons,.... Who were now constituted
priests, the business of whose office it was to offer the sacrifices of
the people, ordinary and extraordinary:

and to all the children of Israel; who were all under obligation to
sacrifices at certain times; under whom may be comprehended the Levites,
who were not priests, and the strangers that sojourned in Israel, for
these are concerned in the following law:

and say unto them; which is spoken to Moses, who was to say what follows
to Aaron, and by him to his sons, and by his sons to the people of
Israel, and by them to the strangers:

this is the thing which the Lord hath commanded; ordered to be observed
as his will and pleasure by everyone of them:

saying; namely, what follows.

[Leviticus 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 17:3</span></span>

What man soever there be of the house of Israel,.... Whether high or
low, rich or poor:

that killeth an ox, or lamb, or goat in the camp; which are particularly
mentioned, as Gersom observes, because of these the offerings were; for
the law respects the killing of them not for common food, but for
sacrifice, as appears from the following verses; for this law was to be
a statute for ever, whereas in that sense it was not, and could not be
observed, especially when they were come into the land of Canaan; nor
would it have been decent or convenient to have brought such vast
numbers of cattle every day to be killed at the door of the tabernacle,
and must have made the service of the priests extremely laborious to
kill them, or even to see that they were killed aright:

or that killeth it out of the camp; which furnishes out another reason
against the same notion, since it was not usual to kill for common food
without the camp, but in their own tents within it; whereas to sacrifice
without the camp was commonly done.

[Leviticus 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 17:4</span></span>

And bringeth it not unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation,.... Near to which stood the altar of burnt offering to
offer it upon, and the priests ready for such service: now the Lord
would have every sacrifice brought thither

to offer an offering to the Lord before the tabernacle of the Lord; that
it might be offered publicly, and be known to be offered to the Lord,
and not to idols or devils, as in [Lev
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007); and so to prevent private
idolatry, and private persons from intruding into the priest's office;
and this was typical of the acceptance of all spiritual sacrifices in
the church of God, through Christ the minister of the tabernacle, which
God pitched, and not man; and who is the door into the house of God,
where such sacrifices are publicly to be offered up:

blood shall be imputed unto that man, he hath shed blood; which though
it was only the blood of a beast, yet being shed as a sacrifice for man,
and typical of the blood of Christ to be shed for man, was sacred and
precious to God; and therefore he resented the shedding of it to any but
himself, or by any person, or in any place but by his appointment; such
a man was to be punished as a murderer, idolatry being equally heinous
in the sight of God as murder, see [Isa
66:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#003),

and that man shall be cut off from among his people; not merely
excommunicated from the church of God, deprived of the privileges of his
house, but even put to death; for such a man was guilty of blood, that
is, of death, and therefore to be put to death either by the hand of the
civil magistrate, if his case was known and came under their cognizance,
or by the immediate hand of God by a premature death, which seems to be
chiefly intended; also see [Lev 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010).

[Leviticus 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 17:5</span></span>

To the end that the children of Israel may bring their sacrifices which
they offer in the open field,.... Which, before the tabernacle was
erected, they were used to offer there, as it was lawful for them to do,
and on high places, but now unlawful; though sometimes this was
dispensed with by the Lord, and was done by some of his prophets, as
Samuel, David, and Elijah, though not by priests:

even that they may bring them unto the Lord, unto the door of the
tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest; by whom they were to be
offered, and by him only, and which is a principal reason why they were
ordered to be brought thither:

and offer them for peace offerings unto the Lord; which though only
mentioned, include all others. These are only taken notice of because
most frequent, and because most profitable to the people, having a part
of them; wherefore if these were to be brought to the tabernacle, which
came the nearest of any to their meals and feasts in their own houses,
then much more burnt offerings, and sin offerings, in which the Lord,
had so great a concern.

[Leviticus 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 17:6</span></span>

And the priest shall sprinkle the blood upon the altar of the Lord,....
The altar of burnt: offering, [Lev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005),

at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation; near to which it
stood, see [Lev 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005),

and burn the fat for a sweet savour to the Lord; the fat that covered
the inwards, the kidneys, the flanks and caul of the liver; see [Lev
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#003).

[Leviticus 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 17:7</span></span>

And they shall no more offer their sacrifices unto devils,.... As it
seems they had done, which was monstrously shocking, and especially by a
people that had the knowledge of the true God. Such shocking idolatry
has been committed, and still is among the Indians, both East and West:
when Columbus discovered Hispaniola, and entered it, he found the
inhabitants worshippers of images they called Zemes, which were in the
likeness of painted devils, which they took to be the mediators and
messengers of the great God, the only one, eternal, omnipotent, and
invisible (a); and so at Calecut and Pego in the East Indies, and in
other parts thereof, they sacrifice to the devil (b): one can hardly
think the Israelites would give into such gross idolatry as this;
wherefore by "devils" may be meant idols in general; for if men do not
worship God and Christ, let them worship what they will, it is only
worshipping devils, [Co1 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#020); and so
the calves of Jeroboam are called devils, [Ch2
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#015); hence the golden calf also, the
Israelites worshipped but lately in the wilderness, might go by the same
name; to which sense is the Targum of Jonathan,"and they shall not offer
again their sacrifices to idols, which are like to devils.''The word
here used signifies "goats", and these creatures were worshipped by the
Egyptians, and so might be by the Israelites, while among them; this is
asserted by several writers. Diodorus Siculus says (c), they deified the
goat, as the Grecians did Priapus, and for the same reason; and that the
Pans and the Satyrs were had in honour by men on the same account; and
Herodotus (d) observes, that the Egyptians paint and engrave Pan as the
Greeks do, with the face and thighs of a goat, and therefore do not kill
a goat, because the Mendesians reckon Pan among the gods; and of the
Mendesians he says, that they worship goats, and the he goats rather
than the she goats; wherefore in the Egyptian language both Pan and a
goat are called Mendes; and Strabo (e) reports of Mendes, that there Pan
and the goat are worshipped: if these sort of creatures were worshipped
by the Egyptians in the times of Moses, which is to be questioned, the
Israelites might be supposed to have followed them in it; but if that be
true, which Maimonides (f) says of the Zabii, a set of idolaters among
the Chaldeans, and other people, long before the times of Moses, that
some of them worshipped devils, whom they supposed to be in the form of
goats, the Israelites might have given in to this idolatry from them,
and be the occasion of this prohibition:

after whom they have gone a whoring; idolatry being a spiritual
adultery, a forsaking God, who had taken them into a conjugal relation,
and been as an husband to them, and cleaving to idols, which were as
paramours; see [Jer 31:32](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#032),

this shall be a statute for ever unto them throughout their generations:
not only this of not sacrificing to devils, but all before commanded,
particularly that they should bring their sacrifices to the priest, at
the door of the tabernacle of the congregation.

\(a\) P. Martyr. de Angleria, Decad. 1. l. 9. (b) Vartoman. Navigat. l.
5. c. 2. 23. & 1. 6. c. 16. 27. (c) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 58, 79. (d)
Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 46. (e) Geograph. l. 17. p. 551. (f) Moreh
Nevochim, p. 3. c. 46.

[Leviticus 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 17:8</span></span>

And thou shalt say unto them,.... To Aaron and his sons, and to the
children of Israel, as in [Lev 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#002),

whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel: belonging to that
nation, and to any of its tribes and families, of whatever age; as a
young man or an old man, as the Targum of Jonathan; or of whatsoever
rank, class, and condition in life:

or of the strangers which sojourn among you; that is, of the proselytes
among them; not the proselytes of the gate, who were not admitted to
offer sacrifice on the altar of the Lord; and if they were, they could
not for non-compliance with this law be cut off from the Jewish church
and commonwealth, of which they were no part, only suffered to dwell
among them, but partook of none of their privileges; but this is to be
understood of proselytes of righteousness, such as embraced the Jewish
religion, and submitted to all the rituals of it, and had communion with
the body of the people, and shared in all the immunities of their civil
and church state, and so liable in case of any real practice to be cut
off from them:

that offereth a burnt offering or sacrifice; any other sacrifice besides
a burnt offering, as a sin offering, or a trespass offering, or a peace
offering.

[Leviticus 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 17:9</span></span>

And bringeth it not to the door of the tabernacle of the congregation,
to offer it unto the Lord,.... In a public manner, by one of the priests
of the Lord; by which it might appear that he did not take upon him to
be a priest himself, nor to offer it to an idol:

even that man shall be cut off from his people; from being one of them,
and having communion with them, and sharing in their privileges; or by
death, either by the hand of the civil magistrate, or rather by the hand
of God; so Jarchi, his seed shall be cut off, and his days shall be cut
off; that is, he shall die childless, and in the midst of his days, a
violent and premature death. Also See Gill on [Lev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004).

[Leviticus 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 17:10</span></span>

And whatsoever man there be of the house of Israel,.... That is by birth
an Israelite, of every age, sex, or condition, as before:

or of the strangers that sojourn among you; proselytes of righteousness,
for the following law was only obligatory on such, and upon Israelites,
as appears from its being lawful to give or sell that which dies of
itself to a stranger, that is, to a proselyte of the gate, or to an
Heathen, [Deu 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#021),

that eateth any manner of blood; that is, as Ben Gersom interprets it,
of beasts and birds, concerning which the prohibition only is, according
to him; for as for the blood of others there was no obligation, nor were
any guilty on account of them; particularly the blood of fishes, and of
locusts, or human blood, the blood of a man's teeth, which a man might
swallow without being guilty of the breach of this law (g). Some
restrain this to the blood of the sacrifices before treated of; but
Jarchi observes, lest any should think, because it is said, it is "the
blood that maketh the atonement for the soul": that a man is not guilty
only on account of the blood of sanctified things, therefore it is said
"any manner of blood":

I will set my face against that soul that eateth blood; signifying how
greatly he should be provoked thereby, how much he should resent it, how
exceedingly displeasing it would be to him, and what severity might be
expected to be exercised towards him for it; for dreadful it is to have
the face of God set against a man, see [Psa
34:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#016). Maimonides (h) observes, that
this form of speech does not occur in any third precept besides these
two, concerning idolatry or sacrificing a son to Moloch, [Lev
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#003), and eating blood; because eating
of blood gives an occasion to one species of idolatry, worshipping of
devils, see [Lev 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026),

and will cut him off from among his people; which confirms the above
sense of the phrase of cutting off as expressive of death by the hand of
God; See Gill on [Lev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004).

\(g\) Hilchot Maacolot Asurot, c. 6. sect. 1. (h) Ut supra. (Moreh
Nevochim, p. 3. c. 46.)

[Leviticus 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 17:11</span></span>

For the life of the flesh is in the blood,.... The animal life or soul,
the life and soul of every creature, and even the animal life and soul
of man; agreeably to which our famous Dr. Harvey, who found out the
circulation of the blood, says of it, that it is the principal part
which first appears in generation; is the genital part, the fountain of
life the first that lives, and the last that dies; the primary seat of
the soul or life, from whence motion and pulsation take their rise; in
which the innate heat is produced the vital spirit is generated and the
life consists (i); and therefore it is spread all over the body, and
according to the condition that it is in, such is the health and such
the diseases of the body; yea, the affections of the mind, such as fear,
shame, joy, and anger are discovered by it. Hence Antoninus the emperor,
more than once, calls the soul a vapour or exhalation arising out of the
blood (k); and the sentiments of various Jewish writers agree herewith:
says Aben Ezra, it is a truth, that the soul or life, with which man
lives, is in the blood of the heart; so says Jarchi the soul or life
depends upon the blood; and Ben Gersom observes, that the blood is the
vessel of the soul to carry in it the fundamental heat, and food to the
parts of the body; and hence the animal only dies when the blood is
removed:

and I have given it unto you to make an atonement for your souls: that
being the life of the creature, was given for theirs to preserve them
alive, and secure them from death their sins deserved; and so the Targum
of Jonathan is, for the sins of the soul; which shows that these
sacrifices were vicarious, in the room of men, and for the life of them,
and to atone for them; and is the reason given why blood should not be
eaten, at least while these typical expiatory sacrifices were used. Ben
Gersom seems to intimate, as if it was only the blood of those that was
forbidden: his words are, hence we learn says he, that they were not
guilty of cutting off, but on account of the blood, which, according to
its way was put upon the altar; and this was the blood of the soul as it
saith the blood of the bullock, and the blood of the goat; but the blood
that was pressed out, and the blood of the members they were not guilty
of cutting off, on account of them:

for it is the blood that maketh an atonement for the soul; so here was
life for life, soul for soul as Aben Ezra expresses it; it was a
vicarious sacrifice and atonement, typical of the sacrifice and
atonement of Christ, in the room and stead of his people, there being no
atonement, no remission of sins without shedding of blood; and the
reason of the prohibition of eating blood was to direct to that blood as
the atonement for sin, and to keep up a reverence of it, and a value and
esteem for it; but now seeing that blood has been shed and atonement
made by it, the end of the law is answered, and the reason of it ceased,
and so the law itself; and as Christ's blood is now to be eaten in a
spiritual sense, the eating of blood in a literal sense, properly
dressed, is lawful. And indeed, as before observed the law concerning it
was never binding upon Gentiles, only on Jews and proselytes.

\(i\) De Generatione Animal. Exercitat. 51. p. 302, 303, &c. (k) De
Seipso, l. 5. sect. 25. & l. 6. sect. 11.

[Leviticus 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 17:12</span></span>

Therefore I said unto the children of Israel, no soul of you shall eat
blood,.... Great or small as Jarchi observes, for the reason above
given; which, though not expressed before, was the true reason of this
law, which had been given before, and now repeated; see [Lev
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#017),

neither shall any stranger that sojourneth among you eat blood; any
proselyte of righteousness; this is not observed before.

[Leviticus 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 17:13</span></span>

And whatsoever man there be of the children of Israel, or of the
strangers that sojourn among you,.... This form of speaking, which is
often used in this chapter, is still observed to point out the persons
on whom the law is obligatory, Israelites and proselytes of
righteousness:

which hunteth and catcheth any beast or fowl that may be eaten; that is,
clean beasts and fowls, such as by a former law are observed; and this
excepts unclean ones, as Jarchi, but includes all clean ones, whether
wild or tame, that may be taken and killed though not taken in hunting;
but such are particularly mentioned, because not only hunting beasts and
fowl were common, but because such persons were more rustic and brutish
and, being hungry, were in haste for their food, and not so careful
about the slaying of the creatures, and of, taking care about their
blood:

he shall even pour out the blood thereof, and cover it with dust; that
it might not be eaten by men, nor licked up by beasts and that there
might be kept up a reverend esteem of blood, being the life of the
creature; and this covering of it, as Maimonides (l) tells us, was
accompanied with a benediction in this form,"Blessed art thou, O Lord
our God, the King of the world, who hath sanctified us by his precepts,
and hath given commandment to us concerning covering of the blood:''and
the same writer elsewhere (m) gives us another reason of this law, that
the Israelites might not meet and feast about the blood, as the Zabians
did, who, when they slew a beast, took its blood and put it into a
vessel, or into a hole dug by them, and sat and feasted around it: see
[Lev 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#026).

\(l\) Hilchot Shechitah, c. 4. sect. 1. (m) Moreh Nevochim, p. 3. c. 46.

[Leviticus 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 17:14</span></span>

For it is the life of all flesh,.... Of every animal:

the blood of it is for the life thereof; for the production,
preservation, and continuance of life; that on which life depends, as
Jarchi observes:

therefore I said unto the children of Israel, ye shall eat the blood of
no manner of flesh; of beasts or birds, whose flesh was fit for food;
but their blood was not to be eaten, for the reasons before given:

for the life of all flesh is the blood thereof; which is repeated, that
it might be observed and taken notice of, as that in which the force of
the reason lay for giving this law:

whosoever eateth it shall be cut off; by death, whether he be an
Israelite or a proselyte of righteousness; wherefore if this law was now
in force, its penalty also would be continued, whereas it is not, and
which shows the abrogation of it. Also See Gill on [Lev
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#004).

[Leviticus 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 17:15</span></span>

And every soul that eateth that which died of itself,.... Through any
disease upon it, or by means of any other creature seizing upon it and
worrying it, or was not lawfully killed; if a man ate ever so little of
it, even but the quantity of an olive, it was a breach of this law;
which is connected with the preceding, there being a similarity between
them, because such creatures must have their blood in them, not being
regularly let out, and so eating of them would offend against the above
law. It is very probable, as Grotius thinks, that Pythagoras took his
notion from hence, and strictly enjoined his followers to abstain from
all animals that died of themselves, as Laertius (n) and Aelianus (o)
relate, and which Porphyry (p) suggests, was what universally obtained
among men:

or that which was torn with beasts; though not dead, yet ready to die,
and so unfit for food; See Gill on [Exo
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#031),

whether it be one of your own country, or a stranger; a native of
Israel, or a proselyte of righteousness; for as for any other stranger
he might eat of it, [Deu 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/deu014.htm#022),

he shall both wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water; in forty
seahs of water, as the Targum of Jonathan, dip himself all over:

and be unclean until the even; and so have no conversation with men in
civil or religious things:

then shall he be clean; when he has washed his garments, and bathed
himself, and the evening is come, and then shall be admitted to society
as before: this is to be understood of one who ignorantly eats of the
above things, not knowing them to be such; otherwise, if he did it
presumptuously, he was to be punished.

\(n\) In Vit. Pythagor. l. 8. p. 588. (o) Var. Hist. l. 4. c. 17. (p) De
Abstiuentia, l. 3. sect. 18.

[Leviticus 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 17:16</span></span>

But if he wash them not,.... Neither wash his clothes: nor bathe his
flesh; if he is negligent, and does not take care to make use of these
ablutions:

then he shall bear his iniquity; his guilt shall remain on him, and he
shall suffer the punishment the law exposes him to, either by the hand
of God, or the civil magistrate, which is due to persons that enter into
the sanctuary in their uncleanness, or eat of holy things. For not
washing his body the punishment was cutting off, and for not washing his
garments, beating, as Jarchi says.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 18](lev018)

</div>
