<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Leviticus Index](lev.md)  
  [Previous](lev000)  [Next](lev002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 1 This chapter contains certain laws and rules
concerning sacrifices, particularly burnt offerings, which were
delivered by the Lord to Moses, [Lev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md) what those offerings should be of,
[Lev 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003.md) what rules should be
observed, what actions should be done, first by the persons that brought
them, [Lev 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003.md) and then by the priest
that offered them, with respect to the burnt offering of the herd, [Lev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005.md) and to the burnt offering of the
sheep and goats, [Lev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011.md) and to the
burnt offering of fowls, [Lev 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015.md) all
which, when offered aright, were of a sweet savour to the Lord, [Lev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009.md).

[Leviticus 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 1:1</span></span>

And the Lord called unto Moses,.... Or "met him", as the phrase is
rendered in [Num 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#004.md). The word
translated "called", the last letter of it is written in a very small
character, to show, as the Jews (b) say, that he met him accidentally,
and unawares to Moses: other mysteries they observe in it, as that it
respects the modesty of Moses, who lessened himself, and got out of the
way, that he might not have the government laid upon him, and therefore
the Lord called him; or to denote the wonderful condescension of the
Lord, whose throne is in heaven, and yet vouchsafed to dwell in the
tabernacle, out of which he called to Moses, and from Mount Sinai, and
out of the cloud (c). The word "Lord" is not in this clause, but the
following, from whence it is supplied by our translators, as it is in
the Syriac version, and as the word "God" is in the Arabic version; the
two Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem paraphrase it,"the Word of the
Lord called to Moses,''by an articulate voice, though it may be it was a
still small one; and which some think is the reason of the smallness of
the letter before mentioned; and Aben Ezra says that Moses heard it, but
all Israel did not hear:

and spoke unto him out of the tabernacle of the congregation; from off
the mercy seat, between the cherubim over the ark, where the glory of
the Lord, or the divine Shechinah and Majesty took up its residence, and
from whence the Lord promised to commune with Moses, [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022.md),

saying; what follows concerning sacrifices; which shows, that these were
not human inventions, but of divine institution, and by the appointment
of God.

\(b\) Vid. Buxtorf. Tiberias, c. 15. p. 39. (c) R. Abraham Seba, Tzeror
Hammor, fol. 92. 1. 2.

[Leviticus 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 1:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them,.... For unto no
other was the law of sacrifices given; not to the Gentiles, but to the
children of Israel:

if any man; or woman, for the word "man", as Ben Gersom observes,
includes the whole species:

of you; of you Israelites; the Targum of Jonathan adds,"and not of the
apostates who worship idols.''Jarchi interprets it of yours, of your
mammon or substance, what was their own property, and not what was
stolen from another (d), see [Isa
61:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008.md),

bring an offering unto the Lord; called "Korban" of "Karab", to draw
nigh, because it was not only brought nigh to God, to the door of the
tabernacle where he dwelt, but because by it they drew nigh to God, and
presented themselves to him, and that for them; typical of believers
under the Gospel dispensation drawing nigh to God through Christ, by
whom their spiritual sacrifices are presented and accepted in virtue of
his:

ye shall bring your offering of the cattle, even of the herd, and of the
flock; that is, of oxen, and of sheep or goats. The Targum of Jonathan
is,"of a clean beast, of oxen, and of sheep, but not of wild beasts
shall ye bring your offerings.''These were appointed, Ben Gersom says,
for these two reasons, partly because the most excellent, and partly
because most easy to be found and come at, as wild creatures are not:
but the true reason is, because they were very fit to represent the
great sacrifice Christ, which all sacrifices were typical of; the ox or
bullock was a proper emblem of him for his strength and laboriousness,
and the sheep for his harmlessness, innocence, and patience, and the
goat, as he was not in himself, but as he was thought to be, a sinner,
being sent in the likeness of sinful flesh, and being traduced as such,
and having the sins of his people imputed to him.

\(d\) Vid. T. Bab. Succah, fol. 30. 1. & not. Abendana in Miclol Yophi
in loc.

[Leviticus 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 1:3</span></span>

If his offering be a burnt sacrifice of the herd,.... So called, because
consumed by fire, see [Lev 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009.md) even
all of it except the skin, and therefore its name with the Greeks is "a
whole burnt offering", as in [Mar
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#033.md) its name in Hebrew is which
comes from a word which signifies to "ascend" or "go up", because not
only it was carried up to the altar by the priest, which was common to
other sacrifices, but being burnt upon it, it ascended upwards in smoke
and vapour; it was typical of Christ's dolorous sufferings and death,
who therein sustained the fire of divine wrath, and his strength was
dried up like a potsherd with it. Jarchi on [Lev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001.md) says, there were in the burnt
offerings mysteries of future things:

let him offer a male; and not a female, pointing at the Messiah's sex,
and his strength and excellency, the child that was to be born, and the
Son to be given, whose name should be Immanuel:

without blemish; or perfect, having no part wanting, nor any part
superfluous, nor any spot upon it, see [Lev
22:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#019.md) denoting the perfection of
Christ as man, being in all things made like unto his brethren, and his
having not the least stain or blemish of sin upon him, either original
or actual, and so could, as he did, offer up himself without spot to
God, [Heb 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#017.md),

and he shall offer it of his own voluntary will; not forced or compelled
to it, or with any reluctancy, but as a pure freewill offering; so our
Lord Jesus Christ laid down his life of himself, and freely gave himself
an offering and a sacrifice, and became cheerfully and readily obedient
unto death:

at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, before the Lord; it
was to be done openly and publicly, and in the presence of the Lord, to
whom it was offered up; showing, that Christ's sacrifice would be
offered up to God, against whom we have sinned, by which his law would
be fulfilled, his justice satisfied, and wrath appeased, and that his
death would be public and notorious; see [Luk
24:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#018.md).

[Leviticus 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 1:4</span></span>

And he shall put his hand on the head of the burnt offering,....
According to the Targum of Jonathan, it was his right hand; but it is
generally thought by the Jewish writers that both hands were laid on; so
Ben Gersom and Aben Ezra, with whom Maimonides (e) agrees, who says, he
that lays on hands ought to lay on with all his strength, with both his
hands upon the head of the beast, as it is said, "upon the head of the
burnt offering": not upon the neck, nor upon the sides; and there should
be nothing between his hands and the beast: and as the same writer says
(f), it must be his own hand, and not the hand of his wife, nor the hand
of his servant, nor his messenger; and who also observes (g), that at
the same time he made confession over the burnt offering both of his
sins committed against affirmative and negative precepts: and indeed by
this action he owned that he had sinned, and deserved to die as that
creature he brought was about to do, and that he expected pardon of his
sin through the death of the great sacrifice that was a type of.
Moreover, this action signified the transferring of his sins from
himself to this sacrifice, which was to be offered up to make atonement
for them; so Gersom observes; see [Lev
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#021.md). This denotes the translation of
our sins from us, and the imputation of them to Christ, who was offered
up in our room and stead, to make atonement for them, as follows:

and it shall be accepted for him to make atonement for him: that is, the
burnt offering should be accepted in his room and stead, and hereby an
atonement of his sins should be made for him, typical of that true,
real, and full atonement made by the sacrifice of Christ, which this led
his faith unto.

\(e\) Hilchot Maaseh Hakorbanot, c. 3. sect. 13. (f) Hilchot Maaseh
Hakorbanot, c. 3. sect. 8. Vid. T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 93. 2. (g) Ib.
sect. 14.

[Leviticus 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 1:5</span></span>

And he shall kill the bullock before the Lord,.... That is, the man that
brings the burnt offering, for no other is yet spoken of; and according
to the traditions of the elders (h), killing of the sacrifice was right
when done by strangers, by women, and by servants, and by unclean
persons, even in the most holy things so be it that the unclean did not
touch the flesh; and it is observed (i), that the service of the priest
begins in the next clause, killing being lawful by him that was not a
priest, according to the Targum of Jonathan, the butcher; but Aben Ezra
interprets it of the priests, and certain it is, that the burnt
offerings of the fowls were killed by the priests, [Lev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015.md) and the Septuagint version
renders it, "and they shall kill": but be this as it will, the burnt
offering was to be killed in the court before the Lord; and this was
typical of the death of Christ, who, according to these types, as well
as to other prophecies, was to die for the sins of men, and accordingly
did; and if this was the proprietor and not the priest that killed the
sacrifice, it may denote that the sins of God's people, for whom
Christ's sacrifice was offered up, were the cause of his death:

and the priests, Aaron's sons, shall bring the blood: in vessels or
basins, as the Targum of Jonathan adds, into which they received it when
slain:

and sprinkle the blood round about upon the altar that is by the door of
the tabernacle of the congregation; which was the altar of burnt
offering, and not the altar of incense, as appears by the situation of
it, see [Exo 40:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#005.md) and the blood was
sprinkled all around the altar with two sprinklings: the rule in the
Misnah is (k); the slaying of the burnt offering is in the north, and
the reception of its blood into the ministering vessels is in the north,
and its blood ought to have two sprinklings, which answer to four; which
Maimonides (l) explains thus; because it is said "round about", it must
needs be that the sprinklings should comprehend the four sides of the
altar; and this is done when the two sprinklings are upon the two horns,
which are diametrically opposite; and this is what is meant, "which are
four"; the sense is, that those two should include the four sides, and
the two opposite horns were the northeast and the southwest, as he and
other Jewish writers observe (m), and which he expresses more clearly
elsewhere (n): when the priest took the blood in the basin, he sprinkled
out of it in the basin, two sprinklings upon the two corners of the
altar opposite from it; and he ordered it so to sprinkle the blood upon
the horn, that the blood might surround the corners in the form of the
Greek letter "gamma" (o); so that the blood of the two sprinklings might
be found upon the four sides of the altar; because it is said of the
burnt offerings, and of the peace offerings "round about"; and this is
the law for the trespass offering, and the rest of the blood was poured
out at the bottom southward: now this was always done by a priest, for
though the bullock might be killed by a stranger, as Gersom on the place
observes, yet its blood must be sprinkled by a priest; and it is the
note of Aben Ezra, that this might be done by many, and therefore it is
said, the "priests, Aaron's sons", when the slaying of it was only by
one. The "altar" on which the blood was sprinkled typified the divinity
of Christ, which gave virtue to his blood, whereby it made atonement for
sin; and in allusion to this rite Christ's blood is called "the blood of
sprinkling", [Pe1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#002.md) [Heb
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#024.md) which being sprinkled on the
heart by the Spirit of God clears it from an evil conscience, and purges
the conscience from dead works, and speaks peace and pardon there, [Heb
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#022.md).

\(h\) Misn. Zebachim, c. 3. sect. 1. & Maimon. in ib. T. Bab. Yoma, fol.
27. 1. & Zebachim, fol. 32. 1. & Menachot, fol. 19. 1. (i) Bartenora in
Misn. Zebachim, ib. (k) Misn. Zebachim, c. 5. sect. 4. (l) Perush in ib.
(m) Jarchi, Bartenora, & Yom Tob, in ib. (n) Hilchot Korbanot, c. 5.
sect. 6. (o) Vid. T. Bab. Zebachim, fol. 53. 2.

[Leviticus 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 1:6</span></span>

And he shall flay the burnt offering,.... Take off its skin; this was
the only part of it that was not burnt, and was the property of the
priest, [Lev 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#008.md) but who this was done
by is not so manifest, since it is in the singular number "he", and
seems to be the bringer of the offering; for Aaron's sons, the priests
that sprinkled the blood, are spoken of plurally; and agreeably, Gersom
observes, that the flaying of the burnt offering and cutting it in
pieces were lawful to be done by a stranger; but Aben Ezra interprets
"he" of the priest; and the Septuagint and Samaritan versions read in
the plural number, "they shall flay", &c. and this was the work of the
priests, and who were sometimes helped in it by their brethren, the
Levites, [Ch2 29:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#034.md) and as this
follows upon the sprinkling of the blood, it was never done till that
was; the rule is, they do not flay them (the sacrifices) until the blood
is sprinkled, except the sin offerings, which are burnt, for they do not
flay them at all (p). The flaying of the burnt offering may denote the
very great sufferings of Christ, when he was stripped of his clothes,
and his back was given to the smiters, and his cheeks to them that
plucked off the hair; and the skin of the sacrifice, which belonged to
the priest, may be an emblem of the righteousness of Christ, and which
also was signified by the coats of skins the Lord God made for Adam and
Eve, [Gen 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#021.md) that robe of
righteousness, and garments of salvation, which all that are made kings
and priests to God are clothed with:

and cut it into his pieces; which was done while he was flaying it, and
after this manner, as Maimonides relates (q), he flays until he comes to
the breast, and then he cuts off the head, then its legs, and finishes
the flaying; then he rends the heart, and brings out its blood; then he
cuts off the hands, and goes to the right foot, and cuts off that, and
after that he cuts down the beast until its bowels are discovered; he
takes the knife and separates the lights from the liver, and the caul of
the liver from the liver, and does not remove the liver out of its
place; and he goes up to the right side, and cuts and descends to the
backbone, and he does not go to the backbone until he comes to the two
tender ribs; he comes to the neck, and leaves in it two ribs here and
two ribs there; he cuts it and comes to the left side, and leaves in it
two tender ribs above and two tender ribs below; then he comes to the
point of the backbone, he cuts it, and gives it and the tail, and the
caul of the liver, and the two kidneys with it; he takes the left foot
and gives it to another; and according to this order they flay and cut
in pieces the burnt offering of the cattle; and these are the pieces
spoken of in the law, [Lev 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006.md) some
apply this to the ministers of the Gospel, rightly dividing the word of
God, and to the effect the word has in dividing asunder soul and spirit;
but it is best to apply it to Christ, either to the evidence given of
him in the Gospel, in which he is clearly set forth in his person,
natures, and offices, and in all the parts and branches thereof; where
every thing is naked and open to view, as the creature was when thus cut
up; or rather to his sufferings, which he endured in every part of his
body, from head to foot.

\(p\) Hilchot Korbanot, c. 5. sect. 18. (q) Ib. c. 6. sect. 5, 6, 7, 8,
9. Vid. Misnah Tamid, c. 4. sect. 2, 3.

[Leviticus 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 1:7</span></span>

And the sons of Aaron the priest shall put fire upon the altar,.... The
fire of the altar originally came down from heaven, and consumed the
sacrifice, and which was a token of God's acceptance of it, see [Lev
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024.md) and this fire was kept burning
continually upon the altar, [Lev 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012.md)
and yet the Jewish writers say, it was the command of God, according to
this passage, that fire should be brought from another place and put
here; Jarchi's note on the text is,"though fire came down from heaven,
it was commanded to bring it from a common or private place:''and
Maimonides (r) says the same thing, and so it is often said in the
Talmud (s); and this, as Gersom observes, was not done by any but a
priest in the time of his priesthood, or when clothed with his priestly
garments; and so in the Talmud it is said, that the putting fire upon
the altar belonged to the priesthood, but not flaying or cutting in
pieces (t): this fire denoted the wrath of God, revealed from heaven
against all unrighteousness and ungodliness of men, and which is the
everlasting fire prepared for the devil and his angels, and all the
workers of iniquity; and which Christ endured for his people in human
nature, when he bore their sins, and became a whole burnt offering for
them:

and lay the wood in order upon the fire; the wood for the sacrifice was
an offering of the people, brought to the temple at the times appointed,
[Neh 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh010.htm#034.md) where was a place called ,
"the wood room", or "wood chamber", and which was in the northeast part
of the court of the women; and here such priests as had blemishes wormed
the wood, or searched the wood for worms; for whatsoever wood had a worm
found in it, it was not fit to be laid upon the altar; and it was from
hence the priests fetched the wood and laid it on the altar (u); for a
private person might not bring it from his own house for his offering
(w), though it was provided by the congregation (x), and brought thither
by private persons; and it might be any sort of wood but that of the
vine and olive (y), which were not used, because they did not burn well,
and were soon reduced to ashes; and because such a consumption would be
made of such useful trees hereby, that there would be no wine or oil in
the land of Israel, so necessary for private and religious uses. The
Vulgate Latin version renders it, "the pile of wood being laid before":
that is, before the fire was put upon the altar; but this is contrary to
the text, for the wood was laid upon the fire, and therefore the fire
must be first; the case seems to be this, the fire was first kindled,
and then the wood laid in order upon it.

\(r\) Hilchot. Tamidin, c. 2. sect. 1. (s) T. Bab. Erubin, fol. 63. 1.
Yoma, fol. 21. 2. & 53. 1. (t) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 26. 2. Vid. T. Bab.
Zebachim, fol. 18. 1. (u) Misn. Middot, c. 2. sect. 5. (w) Issure
Mizbeach, c. 5. sect. 13. T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 27. 1. (x) T. Bab.
Menachot, fol. 22. 1. (y) Misn. Tamid, c. 2. sect. 3. & T. Bab. Tamid,
fol. 29. 2.

[Leviticus 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 1:8</span></span>

And the priests, Aaron's sons, shall lay the parts,.... That were cut in
pieces, [Lev 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006.md) some of which are
particularly mentioned:

the head and the fat; the head which was cut off, and the body, the
trunk of it; so, Aben Ezra says, the wise men interpret the word "fat",
which is only used here and in [Lev
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#012.md) and which he thinks is right;
though others take it to be the fat caul, or midriff, which parts the
entrails; and the Targum of Jonathan renders it, the covering of fat:
these are particularly mentioned, but include in general the rest of the
pieces, which were laid:

in order upon the wood that is on the fire which is upon the altar; this
disposition of the several parts of the burnt offering upon the altar
signifies the laying of Christ upon the cross, and the disposition of
his head, his hands, and feet there; according to the usual order of
crucifixion: the skin, as before observed, was not burnt, but was the
property of the priest, and the sinew that shrunk was taken away, and
cast upon the ashes in the middle of the altar (z).

\(z\) Ib. Maaseh Hakorbanot, c. 6. sect. 4.

[Leviticus 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 1:9</span></span>

But the inwards and his legs shall he wash in water,.... This was first
done in a room in the court of the temple, called , "the room of the
washers", or the washing room, where they washed the inwards of the holy
things (a); and after that they washed them upon the marble tables
between the pillars, where they washed them three times at least (b);
and whereas this is said to be done "in water"; Maimonides (c)
observes,"not in wine, nor in a mixture of wine and water, nor in other
liquids:''the washing of the inwards and legs denoted the internal
purity of Christ's heart, and the external holiness of his life and
conversation, and the saints' purification by him both in heart and
life: with Philo the Jew (d) these things had a mystical meaning; by the
washing of the inwards was signified that lusts were to be washed away,
and such spots removed as were contracted by surfeiting and drunkenness,
very harmful to the lives of men; and by the washing of the feet was
signified that we should no more walk upon the earth, but mount up to
the air, and pass through that, even to heaven:

and the priest shall burn all on the altar; all the other pieces, as
well as the inwards and legs, excepting the skin, which denoted the
painful sufferings of Christ, and the extent of them to all parts of his
body; and indeed his soul felt the fire of divine wrath, and became an
offering for sin:

to be a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire; that is, all the
parts of the bullock were burnt on the altar, that it might appear to be
a whole burnt offering consumed by fire:

of a sweet savour unto the Lord: he accepting of it, and smelling a
sweet savour of rest in it, as an atonement for sin, typical of the
sacrifice of Christ, which is to God for a sweet smelling savour, [Eph
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#002) the Jewish doctors (e.md) gather from
hence, that whether a man offers much or little, it matters not, if his
heart is but directed to God; which Maimonides explains thus (f), he
that studies in the law, it is all one as if he offered a burnt
offering, or a meat offering, or a sin offering, concerning which this
phrase is used.

\(a\) Misn. Middot, c. 5. sect. 2. Maimon Beth Habechirah, c. 5. sect.
17. (b) Ib. c. 3. sect. 5. & Tamid, c. 4. sect. 2. Piske, Tosaphot
Middot, Art. 23. (c) Hilchot Hakorbanot, c. 6. sect. 6. Vid. T. Bab.
Zebachim, fol. 22. 1. (d) De Victimis, p. 839. (e) Misn. Menachot, c.
13. sect. 11. T. Bab. Shebuot, fol. 15. 1. (f) In Misn. ib.

[Leviticus 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 1:10</span></span>

And if his offering be of the flocks,.... As it might be:

namely, of the sheep, or of the goats for a burnt sacrifice; which were
both typical of Christ; see Gill on [Lev
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#002.md).

he shall bring it a male without blemish; See Gill on [Lev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#003.md).

[Leviticus 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 1:11</span></span>

And he shall kill it on the side of the altar northward before the
Lord,.... This is a circumstance not mentioned in the killing of the
bullock: Maimonides (g) says, there was a square place from the wall of
the altar northward, to the wall of the court, and it was sixty cubits,
and all that was over against the breadth of this, from the wall of the
porch to the eastern wall, and it is seventy six cubits; and this
foursquare place is called the "north", for the slaying of the most holy
things; so that it seems this being a large place, was fittest for this
purpose. Aben Ezra intimates, as if some respect was had to the
situation of Mount Zion; his note is, "on the side of the altar
northward", i.e. without, and so "the sides of the north", [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002.md) for so many mistake who say that
the tower of Zion was in the midst of Jerusalem; and with this agrees
Mr. Ainsworth's note on [Lev 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025.md)
hereby was figured, that Christ our sin offering should be killed by the
priests in Jerusalem, and Mount Sion, which was on "the sides of the
north", [Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002.md) crucified on Mount
Calvary, which was on the northwest side of Jerusalem; as by the Jews'
tradition, the morning sacrifice was killed at the northwest horn of the
altar (h):

and the priests, Aaron's sons, shall sprinkle the blood round about upon
the altar; See Gill on [Lev 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#005.md).

\(g\) In Misn. Zebachim, c. 5. sect. 1. (h) Misn. Tamid, c. 4. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 1:12</span></span>

And he shall cut it into his pieces, with his head and his fat,.... Or
"his body", as the Targum of Jonathan; this was to be cut in pieces in
the same manner as the bullock; see Gill on [Lev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#006.md),

and the priest shall lay them in order on the wood that is on the fire,
which is on the altar; See Gill on [Lev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#008.md).

[Leviticus 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 1:13</span></span>

But he shall wash the inwards and the legs with water,.... As he did the
bullock, [Lev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009.md),

and the priest shall bring it all: all the parts to the ascent of the
altar, as the Jews (i) interpret it; all the parts and pieces of it,
even the very wool on the sheep's head, and the hair on the goat's
beard, their bones, sinews, and horns, and hoofs (k), all were burnt, as
it follows:

and burn it on the altar, it is a burnt offering, an offering made by
fire, of a sweet savour unto the Lord; See Gill on [Lev
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009.md).

\(i\) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 65. 2. & Yoma, fol. 27. 1. Chagigah, fol.
11. 1. (k) Misn. Zebachim, c. 9. sect. 5. Maimon. Hilchot Hakorbanot, c.
6. sect. 2.

[Leviticus 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 1:14</span></span>

And if the burnt sacrifice for his offering to the Lord be of fowls,....
As it might be for the poorer sort, who could not offer a bullock, nor a
sheep, or a lamb, [Lev 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#007.md),

then he shall bring his offering of turtledoves, or of young pigeons;
the Jewish writers all agree, that the turtles should be old, and not
young, as the pigeons young, and not old; so the Targum of Jonathan,
Jarchi, Aben Ezra and Gersom (l); the latter gives two reasons for it,
because then they are the choicest and easiest to be found and taken: no
mention is made of their being male or female, either would do, or of
their being perfect and unblemished, as in the other burnt offerings;
but if any part was wanting, it was not fit for sacrifice, as Maimonides
(m) observes. These creatures were proper emblems of Christ, and
therefore used in sacrifice, whose voice is compared to the turtle's,
and his eyes to the eyes of doves, [Sol
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012.md) and who is fitly represented by
them for his meekness and humility, for his chaste and strong affection
to his church, as the turtledove to its mate, and for those dove like
graces of the Spirit which are in him.

\(l\) Vid. T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 22. 1, 2. (m) Issure Mizbeach, c. 3.
sect. 1, 2. Vid. Misn. Zebachim, c. 7. sect. 5. & Maimon. & Bartenora,
in ib.

[Leviticus 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 1:15</span></span>

And the priest shall bring it unto the altar,.... The southeast horn of
it; near which was the place of the ashes, into which the crop and its
feathers were cast (n):

and wring off his head; by twisting it back as it should seem; the word
used is only to be found here, and in [Lev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#008.md) the Jews say, it signifies to cut
with the nail, and that the priest did this, not with a knife or any
other instrument, but with his nail; so Jarchi and Gersom on the place
observe: some think he only let out the blood this way, but did not
separate the head from the body, which seems to be favoured by [Lev
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#008.md) though Maimonides and Bartenora
(o) conclude the reverse from the same place; and that the meaning is,
that he should cut off the head and divide it asunder at the time he
cuts with the nail: the manner of cutting with the nail was this (p),
the priest held both the feet of the bird with his two fingers of his
left hand, and the wings between two other fingers, and the bird upon
the back of his hand, that it might not be within the palm of it; then
he stretches out its neck upon the thumb about two fingers' breadth, and
cuts it over against the neck with his nail, and this is one of the
hardest services in the sanctuary:

and burn it on the altar; that is, the head, after squeezing out the
blood, and rubbing it with salt:

and the blood thereof shall be wrung out at the side of the altar: or
"the wall" of it: this, though mentioned last, must be done before, and
immediately upon the wringing of the head, and between that and the
burning it on the altar: this wringing off the head, and wringing out
the blood, denote violence, and show that Christ's death, which this was
a type of, was a violent one; the Jews laid violent hands upon him, and
pursued his life in a violent manner, were very pressing to have it
taken away, and his life was taken away in such a manner by men, though
not without his Father's secret will, and his own consent.

\(n\) Misn. Zebachim, c. 6. sect. 5. & Bartenora in ib. (o) In Misn. ib.
(p) Maimon. in Misn. ib. sect. 4. & Bartenora. in ib.

[Leviticus 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 1:16</span></span>

And he shall pluck away his crop with his feathers,.... Or "with its
meat", or "dung", as Onkelos renders it, meaning that which was in its
crop; and so the Jerusalem Targum interprets it, "with its dung"; and
Jonathan's paraphrase is, "with its collection", or what was gathered
together in the crop; it includes the entrails, as Gersom observes:

and cast it beside the altar on the east part, by the place of the
ashes; where the ashes of the burnt offering were put every day, and
every time such an offering was made; and all this answered to the
washing of the inwards, and legs of the other burnt offerings, and
signified the same thing, the cleanness and purity of Christ, and of his
people by him.

[Leviticus 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 1:17</span></span>

And he shall cleave it with the wings thereof,.... One wing being on one
side, and the other on the other side:

but shall not divide it asunder; the body of the bird, though it was
cleaved down in the middle, yet not parted asunder, nor any of its wings
separated from it; the Targum of Jonathan paraphrases it, "but shall not
separate its wings from it"; this denoted, that though, by the death of
Christ, his soul and body were separated from each other, yet the human
nature was not separated from his divine Person, the personal union
between the two natures still continuing; nor was he divided from his
divine Father, though he was forsaken by him, yet still in union with
him as the Son of God; nor from the divine Spirit, by which he offered
up himself to God, and by which he was quickened; nor from his church
and people, for whom he suffered, they being united to him as members to
their head:

and the priest shall burn it upon the altar, upon the wood that is upon
the fire; in like manner as the ox, sheep, or goat were burnt: according
to the Misnah, the priest went up the ascent (of the altar) and turned
round about the circuit; when he came to the southeast horn, he cut its
head (or nipped it) with his nail, over against its neck, and divided
it, and squeezed out its blood by the wall of the altar, and turned the
part nipped to the altar, and struck it at it, and rubbed it with salt,
and cast it upon the fires; then he went to the body and removed the
crop and its feathers (or dung) and the entrails that came out along
with it, and threw them into the place of ashes; he cleaved but did not
divide asunder, but if he divided it was right, then he rubbed it with
salt, and cast it upon the fires (q):

it is a burnt sacrifice, an offering made by fire, of a sweet savour
unto the Lord; See Gill on [Lev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#009.md) so
with the Heathens, to the gods of the air they sacrificed fowls for
burnt offerings (r).

\(q\) Misn. Zebachim, c. 6. sect. 5. (r) Porphyr. apud Euseb. Praepar.
Evangel. l. 4. c. 9. p. 146. Vid. Maoreb. Saturnal. l. 3. c. 8.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 2](lev002.md)

</div>
