<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev011)  [Next](lev013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 12:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 12

This chapter treats of the purification of a new mother, the time of
whose purification for a man child was forty days, and for a maid child
eighty, [Lev 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001) at the close of
which she was to bring her offerings to the priests, to make atonement
for her, [Lev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006).

[Leviticus 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 12:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... The laws in the preceding chapter
were delivered both to Moses and Aaron, but what follows in this only to
Moses; but inasmuch as the priest had a concern in it, it being his
business to offer the sacrifices required by the following law, it was
no doubt given to Moses, to be delivered to Aaron, as well as to the
people. R. Semlai remarks, that as the creation of man was after that of
the beasts, fowls, fishes, &c. so the laws concerning the uncleanness of
men are after those relating to beasts, &c, and they begin with the
uncleanness of a new mother, because, as Aben Ezra observes, the birth
is the beginning of man:

saying: as follows.

[Leviticus 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 12:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel,.... For this law only concerned them,
and not other nations of the world:

if a woman have conceived seed; by lying with a man, and so becomes
pregnant, and goes on with her pregnancy until she brings forth a child.
The Jews from hence gather, that this law respects abortions; that if a
woman has conceived and miscarries, eighty one days after the birth of a
female, and forty one after a male, she must bring her offering (m); but
the law seems only to regard such as are with child, and proceed to the
due time of childbirth, whether then the child is born alive or dead:

and born a man child; which is, generally speaking, not only matter of
joy to the mother, but to the whole family, see [Joh
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021) then she shall be unclean seven
days; be separate from all company, except those whose presence is
necessary to take care of her in her circumstances, and do what is
proper for her, and even these became ceremonially unclean thereby; yea,
her husband was not permitted to sit near her, nor to eat and drink with
her:

according to the days of the separation for her infirmity shall she be
unclean; the same number of days, even seven, she was unclean on account
of childbirth, as she was for her monthly courses, called here an
infirmity or sickness, incident to all females when grown up, at which
time they were separate from all persons; and the case was the same with
a new mother; see [Lev 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#014).

\(m\) Misn. Ceritot, c. 1. sect. 6. Maimon. & Bartenora, in ib.

[Leviticus 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 12:3</span></span>

And in the eighth day the flesh of his foreskin shall be circumcised. Or
the foreskin of his flesh, that is, of the man child born according to
the law, [Gen 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#012) and this seems to
furnish out a reason why a male child was not circumcised before the
eighth day, and why it was then, because before that its mother was in
her separation and uncleanness, and then was freed from it; and so the
Targum of Jonathan. The circumcision of a male child on the eighth day
was religiously observed, and even was not omitted on account of the
sabbath, when the eighth day happened to be on that; see Gill on [Joh
7:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#022), [Joh
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#023). It is an observation of Aben
Ezra on this place, that the wise men say "in the day", and not in the
night, lo, he that is born half an hour before the setting of the sun is
circumcised after six days and a half, for the day of the law is not
from time to time.

[Leviticus 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 12:4</span></span>

And she shall continue in the blood of her purifying three and thirty
days,.... That is, so many more, in all forty; for though at the end of
seven days she was in some respects free from her uncleanness, yet not
altogether, but remained in the blood of her purifying, or in the
purifying of her blood, which was more and more purified, and completely
at the end of forty days: so with the Persians it is said, a new mother
must avoid everything for forty days; when that time is passed, she may
wash and be purified (n); and which perhaps Zoroastres, the founder of
the Persian religion, at least the reformer of it, being a Jew, as is by
some supposed, he might take it from hence:

she shall touch no hallowed thing; as the tithe, the heave offering, the
flesh of the peace offerings, as Aben Ezra explains it, if she was a
priest's wife:

nor come into the sanctuary; the court of the tabernacle of the
congregation, or the court of the temple, as the same writer observes;
and so with the Greeks, a pregnant woman might not come into a temple
before the fortieth day (o), that is, of her delivery:

until the days of her purifying be fulfilled; until the setting of the
sun of the fortieth day; on the morrow of that she was to bring the
atonement of her purification, as Jarchi observes; See Gill on [Lev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006).

\(n\) Lib. Shad-der, port. 86. apud Hyde Hist. Relig. Vet. Pers. p. 478.
(o) Censorinus apud Grotium in loc.

[Leviticus 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 12:5</span></span>

But if she bear a maid child,.... A daughter, whether born alive or
dead, if she goes with it her full time:

then she shall be unclean two weeks; or fourteen days running; and on
the fifteenth day be free or loosed, as the Targum of Jonathan, just as
long again as for a man child:

as in her separation; on account of her monthly courses; the sense is,
that she should be fourteen days, to all intents and purposes, as
unclean as when these are upon her:

and she shall continue in the blood of her purifying sixty and six days;
which being added to the fourteen make eighty days, just as many more as
in the case of a male child; the reason of which, as given by some
Jewish writers, is, because of the greater flow of humours, and the
corruption of the blood through the birth of a female than of a male:
but perhaps the truer reason may be, what a learned man (p) suggests,
that a male infant circumcised on the eighth day, by the profusion of
its own blood, bears part of the purgation; wherefore the mother, for
the birth of a female, must suffer twice the time of separation; the
separation is finished within two weeks, but the purgation continues
sixty six days; a male child satisfies the law together, and at once, by
circumcision; but an adult female bears both the purgation and
separation every month. According to Hippocrates (q), the purgation of a
new mother, after the birth of a female, is forty two days, and after
the birth of a male thirty days; so that it should seem there is
something in nature which requires a longer time for purifying after the
one than after the other, and which may in part be regarded by this law;
but it chiefly depends upon the sovereign will of the lawgiver. The Jews
do not now strictly observe this. Buxtorf (r) says, the custom prevails
now with them, that whether a woman bears a male or a female, at the end
of forty days she leaves her bed, and returns to her husband; but Leo of
Modena relates (s), that if she bears a male child, her husband may not
touch her for the space of seven weeks; and if a female, the space of
three months; though he allows, in some places, they continue separated
a less while, according as the custom of the place is.

\(p\) Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. vol. 2. p. 314, 315. (q) Apud Grotium in
loc. (r) Synagog. Jud. c. 5. p. 120. (s) History of Rites, Customs, &c.
of the Jews, par. 4. c. 5. sect. 3.

[Leviticus 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 12:6</span></span>

And when the days of her purifying are fulfilled, for a son, or for a
daughter,.... For a son forty days, and for a daughter eighty; but the
ancient Jews formerly, that they might not break it, ordered, that the
offering enjoined as follows should not be brought until the next day
after the time was up: their canon runs thus (t),"a new mother does not
bring her offering on the fortieth day for a male, nor on the eightieth
day for a female, but after her sun is set; and she brings her offering
on the morrow, which is the forty first for a male, and the eighty first
for a female; and this is the day of which it is said, "when the days",
&c. [Lev 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006)."

She shall bring a lamb of the first year; the Septuagint adds, without
blemish, as all sacrifices should be, if not expressed; "or the son of
his year" (u); some distinguish between "the son of a year", as the
phrase sometimes is, and "the son of his year", as here; the latter
denoting a lamb in its first year, though something wanting of it, the
former a full year old, neither more nor less:

for a burnt offering; in gratitude, and by way of thanksgiving for the
mercies she had received in childbearing:

and a young pigeon, or a turtledove, for a sin offering; either the one
or the other. With the Persians (w), it is incumbent on a new mother, in
Abam (the twelfth month), to bring twelve oblations for the sin which
proceedeth from childbirth, that so she might be purified from her sins.
It is an observation of the Misnic doctors (x), that turtles precede
pigeons in all places; upon which they ask this question, is it because
they are choicer or more excellent than they? observe what is said, [Lev
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#006) from whence may be learned, that
they are both alike, or of equal value. But why a sin offering for
childbearing? is it sinful to bear and bring forth children in lawful
marriage, where the bed is undefiled? The Jews commonly refer this to
some sin or another, that the childbearing woman has been guilty of in
relation to childbirth, or while in her labour; and it is not unlikely
that she may sometimes be guilty of sin in some way or other, either
through an immoderate desire after children, or through impatience and
breaking out into rash expressions in the midst of her pains; so Aben
Ezra suggests, perhaps some thought rose up in her mind in the hour of
childbirth because of pain, or perhaps spoke with her mouth; meaning
what was unbecoming, rash, and sinful. Some take the sin to be a rash
and false oath: but there seems to be something more than all this,
because though one or other of these might be the case of some women,
yet not all; whereas this law is general, and reached every new mother,
and has respect not so much to any particular sin of her's, as of her
first parent Eve, who was first in the transgression; and on account of
which transgression pains are endured by every childbearing woman; and
who also conceives in sin, and is the instrument of propagating the
corruption of nature to her offspring; and therefore was to bring a sin
offering typical of the sin offering Christ is made to take away that,
and all other sin; whereby she shall be saved, even in childbearing, and
that by the birth of a child, the child Jesus, if she continues in
faith, and charity, and holiness, with sobriety, [Ti1
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1002.htm#015) these offerings were to be
brought

unto the door of the tabernacle of the congregation, unto the priest; to
offer them up for her. When the temple was built, these were brought to
the eastern gate, the gate Nicanor, where the lepers were cleansed, and
new mothers purified (y).

\(t\) Maimon. Mechosre Capparah, c. 1. sect. 5. (u) "filium sui anni",
Montanus, Piscator, Drusius. (w) Lib. Shad-der, port. 73. apud Hyde, ut
supra, (Hist. Relig. Vet. Pers.) p. 473. (x) Misn. Ceritot. c. 6. sect.
9. (y) Misn. Sotah, c. 1. sect. 5.

[Leviticus 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 12:7</span></span>

Who shall offer it before the Lord,.... Upon the altar of burnt
offering:

and make an atonement for her; for whatsoever sin in connection with or
that attended childbearing; as typical of the atonement by Christ both
for sin original and actual:

and she shall be cleansed from the issue of her blood; in a ceremonial
sense, and according to that law be pure and clean:

this is the law for her that hath born a male or a female; enjoined her,
and to be observed by her; and though now with the rest of the
ceremonial law it is abolished, yet it has this instruction in it; that
it becomes women in such circumstances to bring the freewill offerings
of their lips, their sacrifices of praise, and in a public manner
signify their gratitude and thankfulness for the mercy and goodness of
God vouchsafed to them, in carrying them through the whole time of
childbearing, and saving them in the perilous hour.

[Leviticus 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 12:8</span></span>

And if she be not able to bring a lamb,.... As everyone was not in
circumstances sufficient to be at the expense of buying a lamb for this
purpose, having none of their own:

then she shall bring two turtles, or two young pigeons; which was a kind
and merciful provision for the poorer sort; since it was necessary that
by them the favour received should be acknowledged, as well as the sin
attending them in such circumstances should be atoned for. This being
the offering brought by the mother of our Lord, shows the state of
poverty in which she was; and by this, and the circumcision of her
child, and the presentation of it before the Lord at the time of her
purification, it appears that they were both under the law, and obedient
to it:

the one for a burnt offering, and the other for a sin offering; Jarchi
observes, that in oblations the sin offering goes before the burnt
offering, for sin being atoned for, the gift was accepted; but here the
burnt offering went first, the reason is not very apparent:

and the priest shall make an atonement for her, and she shall be clean;
equally the same as if she had brought a lamb, instead of young pigeons,
or turtledoves.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 13](lev013)

</div>
