<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev014)  [Next](lev016) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 15:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 15

This chapter treats of uncleanness by issues in men and women; in men, a
running issue, [Lev 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#001), which
defiles him, and everything he touches, or that touches him or them,
[Lev 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#004); the cleansing from which is
directed to, [Lev 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#013); and seed
flowing from him, [Lev 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#016); in
women, their ordinary courses, [Lev
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019); or extraordinary ones, [Lev
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#025); and the law for the cleansing
of them, [Lev 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#028); and a
recapitulation of the whole, [Lev
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#032).

[Leviticus 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 15:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses, and unto Aaron,.... Aaron is spoken to as
well Moses, because some of these purifications, after mentioned,
depended on the priest, as the affair of profluvious men and women, as
Gersom observes:

saying;

as follows.

[Leviticus 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 15:2</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel,.... From whence we learn, says the
above mentioned writer, that these uncleannesses were only usual among
the children of Israel, not among the Gentiles; that is, the laws
respecting them were only binding on the one, and not on the other (s):

and say unto them, when any man; in the Hebrew text it is, "a man, a
man", which the Targum of Jonathan paraphrases, a young man, and an old
man:

hath a running issue out of his flesh; what physicians call a
"gonorrhoea", and we, as in the margin of our Bibles, "the running of
the reins":

because of his issue, he is unclean; in a ceremonial sense, though it
arises from a natural cause; but if not from any criminal one, from a
debauch, but from a strain, or some such like thing, the man was not
defiled, otherwise he was; the Targum of Jonathan is,"if he sees it
three times he is unclean;''so the Misnah (t).

\(s\) So Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Edaiot, c. 5. sect. 1. (t) Zabim,
c. 1. sect. 1. Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Leviticus 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 15:3</span></span>

And this shall be his uncleanness in his issue,.... Or the sign of it,
by which it may be judged whether he is unclean by it or no:

whether his flesh run with his issue; or salivates, or emits a flow of
matter like a saliva, or in the manner of spittle:

or his flesh be stopped from his issue; with it, or because of it;
because it is gross, as Jarchi says, it cannot come forth freely:

it is his uncleanness; whether it be one or the other, he is reckoned on
account of it an unclean person. This was an emblem of the corruption
and vitiosity of nature, and of all evil things that are in or flow out
of the evil heart of man, which are defiling to him; see [Mat
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#018).

[Leviticus 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 15:4</span></span>

Every bed whereon he lieth that hath the issue is unclean,.... Which he
constantly makes use of; so the Targum of Jonathan, which is peculiar to
him, and appointed and appropriated for him to lie upon. Jarchi says,
every bed that is fit to lie upon, thou is appropriated to another
service; but, he adds meaning is, which he shall lie upon (or continue
to lie upon); for it is not said, which he hath laid upon, but which he
lieth upon, and is used by him continually; according to the Misnah (u),
a man that has an issue defiles a bed five ways, so as to defile a man,
and to defile garments; standing, sitting, lying, hanging, and leaning:

and everything whereon he sitteth shall be unclean; which is
appropriated to sit upon; and so the Targum, as before, what is his
proper peculiar seat, what he is used to sit upon, and is fit for that
purpose: and it is observed by some Jewish writers (w) that a vessel
that is not fit to sit upon is excluded, as if a man was to turn up a
bushel, or any other measure, to sit upon it; see [Tit
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#015).

\(u\) Zabim, c. 2. sect. 4. (w) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Niddah, c.
6. sect. 3.

[Leviticus 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 15:5</span></span>

And whosoever toucheth his bed,.... Is unclean. According to the Misnah
(x), a bed defiles a man seven ways, so as to defile garments; standing,
sitting, lying, hanging, and leaning, and by touching, and by bearing:

shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water; in forty seahs of
water, as the Targum of Jonathan:

and be unclean until the even; be unfit for conversation with other men
till the even, though both his body and clothes are washed.

\(x\) Zabim, ut supra. (c. 2. sect. 4.)

[Leviticus 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 15:6</span></span>

And he that sitteth on any thing whereon he sat that hath the issue,....
Shall be unclean, even though he does not touch it. Jarchi says, though
there should be, as he adds, ten things or vessels one upon another,
they all defile because of sitting, and so by lying:

shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until
the even; as in the preceding case. See Gill on [Lev
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#005).

[Leviticus 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 15:7</span></span>

And he that toucheth the flesh of him that hath the issue,.... Shall
also be unclean, even any part of his flesh, or member of his body: the
Jewish canon is (y), he that toucheth one that has an issue, or he that
has an issue touches him, or anyone moves him that has an issue, or he
moves him, defiles food, and drink, and washing vessels by touching, but
not by bearing; and particularly touching the issue itself is instanced
in, and such a man's spittle, &c. are defiled:

shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until
the even; as before. See Gill on [Lev
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#005).

\(y\) Zabim, c. 5. sect. 1, 7.

[Leviticus 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 15:8</span></span>

And if he that hath the issue spit upon him that is clean,.... Not
purposely, which is not usual for a man to do, and whenever it is done,
nothing is more affronting; but accidentally, when, as Aben Ezra
expresses it, he spreads his spittle, and it falls upon a clean person;
and under this, as Gersom observes, is comprehended whatever is brought
up by coughing, as phlegm, or flows from the nose, or is pressed out of
it; and so Maimonides (z): and this may denote all corrupt communication
which proceeds out of the mouth of evil men, whether immoral or
heretical, which not only defiles the man himself, but those he
converses with; for evil communication corrupts good manners:

then he shall wash his clothes, &c. as in the foregoing instances. See
Gill on [Lev 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#005).

\(z\) Hilchot Metame Mishcab, c. 1. sect. 16.

[Leviticus 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 15:9</span></span>

And what saddle soever he sitteth upon that hath the issue,.... When he
rides upon any beast, horse, ass, or camel, whatever is put upon the
creature, and he sits upon it, the saddle, and whatever appertains to
it, the housing and girdle:

shall be unclean; and not fit for another to use, but be defiling to
him, as follows.

[Leviticus 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 15:10</span></span>

And whosoever toucheth anything that was under him shall be unclean
until the even,.... Either when lying along, or sitting, or riding, as
in [Lev 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#004); various are the
traditions of the Jews concerning these things; if one that has an issue
and a clean person sit together, in a ship, or on a beam, or ride
together on a beast, though their garments do not touch, they are
unclean, &c. (a):

and he that beareth any of those things; that carries any of the above
things from place to place, as his bed, his seat, his saddle, or
anything on which he has lain, sat, or rode.

shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean until
the even; See Gill on [Lev 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#005).

\(a\) Misn. Zabim, c. 3. sect. 1. & c. 4. sect. 5, 7.

[Leviticus 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 15:11</span></span>

And whomsoever he toucheth that hath the issue,.... Not only he that
touched him that had the issue, but whomsoever, and indeed whatsoever he
touched, as the Targum of Jonathan, the Septuagint, and Arabic versions,
were unclean; See Gill on [Lev 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#004),

and hath not rinsed his hands in water; which is to be understood, not
of the man that is touched, but of him that toucheth; and is interpreted
by the Jewish writers, generally, of bathing the whole body; according
to Aben Ezra, the simple sense is, every clean person, whom he that hath
an issue touches and hath rinsed his hands, he is indeed unclean, but
not his garments; and if his hands are not rinsed his garments are
unclean, and this is as he that touches all that is under him; wherefore
it follows:

he shall wash his clothes, &c. that is, if a man is touched, as the
Targum of Jonathan, and not a thing, as directed and prescribed in the
above cases instanced in; all which are designed to instruct men to
abstain from conservation with impure persons in doctrine and practice.

[Leviticus 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 15:12</span></span>

And the vessel of earth that he toucheth which hath an issue shall be
broken,.... That it might not be made use of afterwards; which was
ordered, that they might be careful what they touched who were in such
circumstances: according to Gersom an earthen vessel received no
uncleanness but from the middle, though he owns the law does not
distinguish between the middle and the outside; wherefore Jarchi is of
opinion, that if the back or outside of it was touched, it was unclean,
and to be broken:

and every vessel of wood shall be rinsed in water; and after that be
used: what should be the reason why an earthen vessel defiled by
touching should be broken, and a wooden vessel defiled in the same way
should not, but be rinsed and cleansed, when an earthen vessel might as
well be rinsed and fit for use as that, is not easy to say; it depended
upon the will of the lawgiver: according to Ainsworth, the one may
signify the destruction of reprobate persons, the other the cleansing of
penitent sinners.

[Leviticus 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 15:13</span></span>

And when he that hath an issue is cleansed of his issue,.... That is, it
is ceased from him, as the Targum of Jonathan and Jarchi explain it; for
otherwise, according to the ceremonial law, he was not yet cleansed,
until he had done everything next prescribed; but when he perceived
there was an entire stop put to his disorder:

then he shall number to himself seven days for his cleansing; by which
time it would appear whether he was thoroughly rid of it or not; and
these seven days, as Jarchi observes, must be seven pure days, quite
free from pollution, and continued in a constant course, without
interruption; for, as Gersom says, if he saw any impurity in anyone of
these days it did not come into the account: nay, according to
Maimonides (b), he must begin to number again from the day of the last
appearance:

and wash his clothes, and bathe his flesh in running water; typical of
the fountain opened in Christ to wash in for sin and uncleanness, even
the fountain of his blood, which cleanses from all sin; and in which
both the persons and garments of the saints are washed and made white:

and shall be clean; in a ceremonial sense; as all that are washed from
their sins in the blood of Christ are clean in a spiritual and
evangelical sense.

\(b\) Hilchot Mechosre Capharah, c. 3. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 15:14</span></span>

And on the eighth day,.... Having on the seventh done as before
directed:

he shall take to him two turtledoves, or two young pigeons; of his own,
or purchase them; this was the meanest offering that was brought, and of
the least expense, and which, in other cases, the poorer sort were
allowed to bring, but here it was the offering of poor and rich:

and come before the Lord unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation; not into the tabernacle, where he was not admitted till
the sacrifice was offered, and atonement made; but he was to stand at
the door of the tabernacle, at the eastern gate; and so fronting the
west, where stood the holy of holies, the place of the divine Majesty,
he is said to come before the Lord, presenting himself to him to be
cleansed:

and give them unto the priest; the two doves or pigeons, to be offered
for him according to the usual rites.

[Leviticus 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 15:15</span></span>

And the priest shall offer them, the one for a sin offering, and the
other for a burnt offering,.... As in the case of a new mother who is
poor, and of a poor leper, [Lev 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev012.htm#008),

and the priest shall make atonement for him before the Lord for his
issue; which, though not in itself sinful, yet might be occasioned by
sin, for which the atonement was made: or, however, it was a ceremonial
uncleanness, and therefore a ceremonial expiation must he made for it,
typical of the atonement by the blood and sacrifice of Christ, by which
all kinds of sin is expiated and removed.

[Leviticus 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 15:16</span></span>

And if any man's seed of copulation go out from him,.... Not in lawful
cohabitation, nor voluntarily, but involuntarily, as Aben Ezra observes;
not through any disorder, which came by an accident, or in any criminal
way, but through a dream, or any lustful imagination; what is commonly
called nocturnal pollution (c):

then he shall wash all his flesh in water, and be unclean until the
even; and so the Egyptian priests, when it happened that they were
defiled by a dream, they immediately purified themselves in a laver (d)
so the Jewish priests did when the like happened to them asleep in the
temple (e); see [Deu 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#010).

\(c\) "----& noctem flumine purgas." Pers. Satyr. 2. (d) Chaeremon. apud
Porphyr. de Abstinentia, l. 4. c. 7. (e) Misn. Tamid. c. 1. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 15:17</span></span>

And every garment, and every skin,.... Or that is made of skin, which a
man wears, or lies upon, see [Lev
13:48](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#048),

whereon is the seed of copulation; or on any other, for, as Gersom says,
there is the same law concerning the rest of vessels, seeing this is a
principal uncleanness, and defiles vessels; and perhaps the law makes
mention of these, because it is more apt to be found on them:

shall be washed with water, and be unclean until the even; see [Jde
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#023).

[Leviticus 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 15:18</span></span>

The woman also with whom man shall lie with seed of copulation,.... It
seems to respect any congress of a man and woman, whether in fornication
or adultery, or lawful marriage, and particularly the latter; for though
marriage is honourable and holy, and carnal copulation in itself lawful,
yet such is the sinfulness of nature, that as no act is performed
without pollution, so neither that of generation, and by which the
corruption of nature is propagated, and therefore required a ceremonial
cleansing:

they shall both bathe themselves in water, and be unclean until the
even; so Herodotus (f) reports, that as often as a Babylonian man lay
with his wife, he had used to sit by consecrated incense, and the woman
did the same: and in the morning they were both washed, and did not
touch any vessel before they had washed themselves; and he says the
Arabians did the like: and the same historian relates (g) of the
Egyptians, that they never go into their temples from their wives
unwashed; see [Exo 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#015).

\(f\) Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 198. (g) Euterpe, sive, l. 2. c. 64.

[Leviticus 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 15:19</span></span>

And if a woman have an issue,.... Having finished, as Aben Ezra
observes, what was to be said of the male, now the Scripture begins with
the female, whose issue, of a different sort, is thus described:

and her issue in her flesh be blood; or, "blood be her issue in her
flesh"; not in any part of her, but in that which by an euphemism is so
called, in the same sense as the phrase is used of men, [Lev
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#002); and so it distinguishes it from
any flow of blood elsewhere, as a bleeding at the nose, &c.

she shall be put apart seven days; not out of the camp, nor out of the
house, but might not go into the house of God:

whosoever toucheth her shall be unclean until the even; the same as one
that had touched a man that had an issue, [Lev
15:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#007); the pollution of the one reached
to the same things as that of the other; and so, in the Misnah (h), they
are put together, and the same is ascribed to the touch of the one as of
the other; it may be understood of everything as well as of every
person.

\(h\) Zabim, c. 5. sect. 6, 7.

[Leviticus 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 15:20</span></span>

And everything that she lieth upon in her separation shall be
unclean,.... During her being apart from her husband, with whom she
might be, and do all offices for him, but not lie with him; and
whatsoever she lay upon during this time, bed or couch, and the clothes
upon them, were unclean:

everything also that she sitteth upon shall be unclean; chair, stool,
&c. as is the case of a man, [Lev
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#004).

[Leviticus 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 15:21</span></span>

And whosoever toucheth her bed,.... The same thing that is said of a
profluvious man, and so in [Lev 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#022).

[Leviticus 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 15:22</span></span>

And whosoever toucheth anything that she sat upon,.... Which was
appropriated to her to sit upon, as the Targum of Jonathan, which was
her proper and peculiar seat, what she usually sat upon; such were
obliged to wash their clothes and bathe, as in all the above cases. See
[Lev 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#005).

[Leviticus 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 15:23</span></span>

And if it be on her bed, or on anything whereon she sitteth,.... That
is, if any person or thing should be upon her bed or seat; a vessel on
her bed, or a vessel upon a vessel, as Aben Ezra expresses it:

when he toucheth it; that person or thing that should be on her bed or
seat, as well as touch her bed or seat:

shall be unclean until the even; in a ceremonial sense; so defiling was
a woman in such circumstances, and to whom the Scriptures often compare
unclean persons and things: and Pliny (i) speaks of menstrues as very
infectious, or worse, to various creatures and things, in a natural way.

\(i\) Nat. Hist. l. 7. c. 15.

[Leviticus 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 15:24</span></span>

And if any man lie with her at all,.... Not presumptuously but
ignorantly, as Aben Ezra observes; for he was guilty of cutting off,
that lay with her wilfully, [Lev
20:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#018),

and her flowers be upon her; or, "her separation" (k), her monthly
courses not being ceased:

he shall be unclean seven days; and be excluded from all conversation
civil and religious:

and all the bed whereon she lieth shall be unclean; that and every thing
upon it; and this uncleanness also lasted seven days, as Aben Ezra
notes, and defiled others, though it is not written.

\(k\) "menstruum ejus", Pagninus, Montanus; "separatio ejus", Drusius.

[Leviticus 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 15:25</span></span>

And if a woman have an issue of her blood many days out of the time of
her separation,.... Not an ordinary but an extraordinary one, not within
that time, but out of it, and which continued three days at least; so
the Targum of Jonathan, and sometimes many years; as the poor woman
Christ cured, which she had had twelve years; see Gill on [Mat
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#020),

or if it run beyond the time of her separation; beyond the seven days of
her separation, and so out of the usual way and time of it; whereby it
appears to be somewhat extraordinary and unusual:

all the days of the issue of her uncleanness shall be as the days of her
separation: all the while it was upon her, be it ever so many days or
years, she was kept apart from her husband, and in all respects in the
same condition and circumstances, as in the seven days of her separation
because of her monthly courses:

she shall be unclean; as long as it is upon her, and neither be admitted
to her husband's bed, nor to the house of God, which made her condition
a very deplorable one.

[Leviticus 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 15:26</span></span>

Every bed whereon she lieth all the days of her issue shall be unto her
as the bed of her separation,.... As defiled and as defiling as that,
[Lev 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#020),

and whatsoever she sitteth upon shall be unclean, as the uncleanness of
her separation; as such were when she was in that condition, see [Lev
15:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#020).

[Leviticus 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 15:27</span></span>

And whosoever toucheth those things shall be unclean,.... Her bed and
seat; the Septuagint version is, "that toucheth her", see [Lev
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#019),

and shall wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and be unclean
until the even; let it be observed, that in all the above passages,
where it is said, "he shall bathe himself in water", the Targum of
Jonathan adds, in forty seahs or pecks of water; for this was done by
dipping the body all over.

[Leviticus 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 15:28</span></span>

But if she be cleansed of her issue,.... The disease is healed, or a
stop is put to it; there are no signs of it remaining:

then she shall number to herself seven days; from the time she observed
it to cease:

and after that she shall be clean; having bathed herself according to
the usual manner of unclean persons, for their cleansing; when she would
be fit to be admitted to her husband, though not as yet into the
tabernacle, until she had offered her offering next directed to.

[Leviticus 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 15:29</span></span>

And on the eighth day,.... From the cessation of her issue, and the
healing of it, at least from the time she began to number for her
cleansing:

she shall take unto her two turtles, or two young pigeons; the same as
the man that had an issue was obliged to bring. Now this is to be
understood not of a woman that had an ordinary issue, or her monthly
courses; for this would have been both troublesome and expensive to have
brought every month, but of a woman that had laboured under an
extraordinary one; though some think every menstruous woman was obliged
to this offering:

and bring them unto the priest, to the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation; whither the man that had an issue brought his; See Gill on
[Lev 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#014).

[Leviticus 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 15:30</span></span>

And the priest shall offer the one for a sin offering,.... As in the
case of a man that had an issue, the offerings of one and the other were
the same and for the same purpose; See Gill on [Lev
15:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#015); there being a legal uncleanness
in their case, atonement must be made by sacrifice, typical of the
atonement of Christ, who by himself has purged our sins. The design of
these several laws concerning uncleanness by issues, was to set forth
the filthiness of sin arising from the corruption of human nature;
particularly the pollution of fleshly lusts, and the necessity of
purification from them by the grace of God, and blood of Christ, and of
holiness of heart and life, in order to a near approach to God,
particularly in public worship, as the next words suggest.

[Leviticus 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">lev 15:31</span></span>

Thus shall ye separate the children of Israel from their
uncleanness,.... Or because of it, and while they are in it, as from
other persons, even their nearest relations, and from the house of God,
as the next clause shows; or teach them, by observing the above laws and
rules, to separate themselves, and that they be careful and cautions to
keep themselves apart while in such impurities; and the children of
Israel are only made mention of, because these laws are only binding
upon them, with their proselytes and servants, free or not free (l), but
not upon Gentiles; See Gill on [Lev
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#002),

that they die not in their uncleanness, when they defile my tabernacle
that is among them; from whence it appears, that men and women, in the
above circumstances, might not go into the tabernacle; and it was
chiefly to prevent their access to it that these laws were given, for
the greater reverence and honour of it; and that for such persons to
enter there was a pollution of it, and the punishment was cutting off,
or death; and for one to die in his impurity, without purification and
sacrifice, was a dreadful thing, and to be deprecated, and to be guarded
against by an observance of the above laws. But the Jews now say (m),
that forasmuch as the reason of these precepts was, because such persons
were forbidden to enter into the temple, that being destroyed, all these
precepts of uncleanness are ceased also.

\(l\) Misn. Zabim, c. 2. sect. 1. (m) Leo Modena's History of Rites,
Customs, &c. of the present Jews, par. 1. c. 8.

[Leviticus 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">lev 15:32</span></span>

This is the law of him that hath an issue,.... In [Lev
15:32](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#032) is a recapitulation of the
several laws in this chapter, as of a man that has a "gonorrhoea":

and of him whose seed goeth from him, and is defiled therewith;
involuntarily, that suffers a nocturnal pollution.

[Leviticus 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">lev 15:33</span></span>

And of her that is sick of her flowers,.... Her monthly courses, for
these are a sickness, [Lev 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#018); and
make a woman languid and faint, as the word is rendered, [Lam
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#013); or to be in pain (n), as some
render it here; and pains are reckoned among the signs of them by the
Misnic doctors (o):

and of him that hath an issue, of the man, and of the woman; of both,
whether the one or the other:

and of him that lieth with her that is unclean; though her own husband.

\(n\) "et dolentis", Montanus. (o) Misn. Niddah, c. 9. sect. 8.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 16](lev016)

</div>
