<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev005)  [Next](lev007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 6

This chapter treats of the trespass offering for sins committed
knowingly and wilfully, [Lev 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001) and
of the law of the burnt offering, and of cleansing the altar of burnt
offering, and keeping the fire burning on it continually, [Lev
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008) and of the meat offering, which is
repeated with some additional circumstances, [Lev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014) and of the offering at the
consecration of the high priest, [Lev
6:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#019) and of the sin offering, and
where to be killed and eaten, and by whom, [Lev
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#024).

[Leviticus 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 6:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Continuing his speech with him, for
the same law of the trespass offering is still discoursed of, only with
respect to different persons:

saying: as follows.

[Leviticus 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 6:2</span></span>

If a soul sin, and commit a trespass against the Lord,.... All sin is
against the Lord, contrary to his nature and will, and a transgression
of his law; but some sins are more apparently so than others, and
against which he expresses greater indignation and abhorrence, being
attended also with very aggravating circumstances, as these that follow;
which are such as are not only contrary to the will of God, but to the
good of society, and tend to the subversion of it, of which he is the
founder and supporter, and especially when he is sworn by, and appealed
to as a witness, in a case not only injurious but false:

and lie unto his neighbour in that which was delivered him to keep;
whether money or goods, or any living creature, sheep, cow, horse, &c.
and should deny that ever anything was delivered to him, and take his
oath upon it; which is a very grievous crime, and not to go unpunished,
as was known by the light of nature, and declared by the Heathen oracle
(h); and yet there was to be a trespass offering to make atonement for
such a sin: Jarchi thinks, by his neighbour is meant a third person
between them; but if that third person was a witness of the goods being
delivered, there would have been no occasion of an oath, as follows: the
case supposed seems to be, when anything was delivered to the care and
custody of another, without the knowledge of any but the person that
delivered it, and he to whom it was delivered; who retaining it for his
own use, embezzling the goods, and acting the unfaithful part, affirms
to the owner he never had anything of him, and so lies to him, and to
that lie adds an oath of perjury:

or in fellowship: in partnership; as, for instance, having received
money belonging to them both, denies he ever received any, and so cheats
his partner of what was his due, and being put to his oath, takes it:
or, "in putting of the hand" (i), as persons usually do when they enter
into fellowship or partnership, they give each other their hand in token
of it; or in putting anything into the hand, as money to trade with, and
he denies he received any; or by way of purchase for anything bought,
and the person of whom the purchase is made affirms the purchaser never
put anything into his hand, or paid him anything, but insists upon being
paid again; or in a way of lending, as Jarchi and Ben Gersom, because
then money is put into the hand of him that receives it, and, in the
case supposed, the borrower denies that ever any was put into his hand,
or he borrowed any; and being called upon to swear, swears falsely:

or in a thing taken away by violence: without the will and knowledge of
the owner; privately and secretly, but being suspected, is challenged
with it, and denying it, is made to swear, which he does falsely:

or hath deceived his neighbour; cheated him in trade and commerce,
defrauded him in business, extorted money from him; or by calumny and
false accusation got anything out of his hands, see [Luk
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008) or by detaining the wages of the
hireling; so Jarchi and Ben Gersom.

\(h\) "Spartano cuidam respondit", &c. Juvenal. Satyr. 13. prope finem.
(i) "in positione manus", Montanus.

[Leviticus 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 6:3</span></span>

Or have found that which was lost, and lieth concerning it,.... Who
having found anything lost, at once concludes it his own, and converts
it to his own use, never inquiring after the proprietor of it, or taking
any method to get knowledge of him, and restore it to him; but so far
from that, being suspected of finding it, and charged with it denies it:
Maimonides (k) gives a reason why a lost thing should be restored, not
only because so to do is a virtue in itself praiseworthy, but because it
has a reciprocal utility; for if you do not restore another's lost
things, neither will your own be restored to you:

and sweareth falsely; which is to be understood, not of the last case
only, but of all the rest, or of anyone of them, as it follows:

in any of all these that a man doeth, sinning therein; by unfaithfulness
in a trust, cheating, defrauding, lying, and false swearing.

\(k\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c. 40.

[Leviticus 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 6:4</span></span>

Then it shall be, because he hath sinned and is guilty,.... Owns his
guilt through remorse of conscience, and makes a confession of it; or
otherwise, upon conviction, without such confession he was to pay
double, see [Exo 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#007) whereas, in this
case it is only ordered:

that he shall restore that which he took violently away: whether money,
goods, or cattle:

or the thing which he hath deceitfully gotten; by outwitting him, by
extortion, by false accusation, or detention of wages:

or that which was delivered him to keep; in which he was unfaithful to
his trust, be it what it will:

or the lost thing which he found; and denied he had it.

[Leviticus 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 6:5</span></span>

Or all that about which he hath sworn falsely,.... In all and each of
the above cases, in which he had committed a trespass and denied it, and
to the denial adds a false oath, and yet after all acknowledges it:

he shall even restore it in the principal; whatsoever he has embezzled,
or cheated another of, or detained from the right owner, the whole of
that was to be restored:

and shall add the fifth part more thereto; to the principal, see [Lev
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016) but Maimonides (l) says, this was
an instruction to add a fifth to a fifth; and Aben Ezra takes the word
to be plural, and observes, that the least of many is two, and so two
fifths were to be added to the principal, but the first sense seems
best:

and give it unto him to whom appertaineth; as, to his neighbour, who had
deposited anything in his hands; or his partner, he had any ways
wronged; or whomsoever he had defrauded in any respect; or the
proprietor of lost goods; Ben Gersom observes, it was not to be given to
his son, nor to his messenger: in the case of taking anything away by
violence, though but the value of a farthing, it is said, that he shall
be obliged to bring it after him (from whom he has taken it) even unto
Media (should he be there); he shall not give it to his son, nor to his
messenger, but he may give it to the messenger of the sanhedrim; and if
he dies, he must return it to his heirs (m):

in the day of his trespass offering; when he brings that, but
restoration must first be made: the Targum of Jonathan renders it, in
the day he repents of his sin: and so Aben Ezra interprets it,"in the
day he returns from his trespass;''when he owns and confesses it, is
sorry for it, and determines to do so no more. Maimonides observes (n),
that one that takes away anything by violence (which is one of the cases
supposed) is not fined so much as a thief; he only restores the
principal; for the fifth part is for his false oath; the reasons of
which are, because robbery is not so frequently, and is more easily
committed, and is more open, and against which persons may guard and
make resistance, and the robber is more known than a thief who steals
secretly; see [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001).

\(l\) In Misn. Trumot, c. 6. sect. 1. (m) Misnah Bava Kama, c. 9. sect.
6. (n) Ut supra, (l)) c. 41.

[Leviticus 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 6:6</span></span>

And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord,.... That is, to
the tabernacle of the Lord, to the altar of the Lord in it, and to his
priest ministering therein, as it follows:

a ram without blemish out of the flock, with thy estimation, for a
trespass offering unto the priest; the same offering that was ordered
for a trespass through ignorance, [Lev
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016) typical of the sacrifice of
Christ offered up both for sins of ignorance and wilful transgressions,
for his blood cleanses from all sin; see Gill on [Lev
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016); the phrase "with thy
estimation", used there also [Lev
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016), is here interpreted by Ben
Gersom of two shekels, the value the ram was to be of, brought for the
trespass offering.

[Leviticus 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 6:7</span></span>

And the priest shall make an atonement for him before the Lord,.... By
offering the ram he brought, by which a typical, but not real atonement
was made; for the blood of bulls and goats, of sheep and rams, could not
take away sin; but as they were types of Christ, and led to him, the
Lamb of God that takes away the sin of the world:

and it shall be forgiven him, for anything of all that he hath done, in
trespassing therein; any and everyone of the above sins, with all the
aggravations of them, were forgiven, upon the atonement made, though
they were so enormous; and, indeed, all manner of sin is forgiven for
Christ's sake, except the sin against the Holy Ghost: and L'Empereur (o)
rightly observes, against the Socinians, who deny that sacrifices were
offered for crimes very grievous, that these were of such a nature; for
what more vile than unfaithfulness in a trust, than cheating and
defrauding, stealing, lying, and perjury?

\(o\) In Misn. Bava Kama, c. 9. sect. 5.

[Leviticus 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 6:8</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... It maybe after some intermission, or
pause made; for some here begin a new chapter, and indeed a new section
here begins in the Hebrew copies:

saying; as follows:

[Leviticus 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 6:9</span></span>

Command Aaron and his sons,.... Who were nominated, selected, and
appointed to the office, though not yet consecrated to it and invested
with it, see [Lev 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001).

saying, this is the law of the burnt offering; of the daily sacrifice,
morning and evening:

it is the burnt offering, because of, or for the burning upon the altar
all night unto the morning; as there was nothing offered on the altar of
burnt offering after the evening daily sacrifice, nor anything before
the morning daily sacrifice, it was the more difficult to keep the fire
of the altar burning in the night; wherefore a slow fire was used in the
evening sacrifice, and several things remained to be burnt in the night:
so Maimonides (p) says, the remainder of the fat of the members were
burnt all night until the pillar of the morning (first rays of the
rising sun, Editor.):

and the fire of the altar shall be burning in it; not without it, as
Aben Ezra observes, but on it; that is, should be ever burning on it,
night and day, as it is after declared.

\(p\) In Misn. Beracot, c. 1. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 6:10</span></span>

And the priest shall put on his linen garment,.... "His measure" (q), as
the word signifies, a garment that was just the measure of his body, and
exactly fitted it; it was a sort of a shirt, which he wore next his
body, and reached down to his feet; and in this he always officiated,
and was an emblem of the purity and holiness of Christ our high priest,
who was without sin, and so a fit person to take away the sin of others,
by offering up himself without spot to God:

and his linen breeches shall he put upon his flesh; to cover his
nakedness; that indecency might be prevented, and that he might not be
exposed to ridicule; and though these two garments are only mentioned,
yet the wise men say the word "put on" includes the bonnet and the
girdle; for the removing of the ashes from the altar, which is the thing
he was to be thus clothed to do, was done in the four garments, though
the Scripture mentions but two (r):

and take up the ashes which the fire hath consumed, with the burnt
offering on the altar; this was the first thing the priests did in a
morning, and which in later times they cast lots for, and the first lot
was for this service, and which was performed very early (s);"every day
they cleansed or swept the altar, at cockcrowing or near it, whether
before or after, and on the day of atonement at midnight, and at the
feasts from the time of the first watch:"

and he shall put them beside the altar: without, at the corner of the
altar, as Aben Ezra, on the east side of it; so says Jarchi, the priest
takes a full censer of the innermost consumptions (that is, of the
innermost parts of the sacrifice reduced to ashes), and puts them in the
east of the rise of the altar; or, as by another (t) expressed, he takes
the ashes in a censer, more or less, and lays them down at the east of
the rise of the altar, and there leaves them, and this is the beginning
of the morning service: and we are told by another writer (u), that
there was a place called the house of ashes, and it was at the east of
the rise of the altar, at a distance from the foot of it ten cubits and
three hands' breadth; where the priest, before they began to sacrifice,
laid the ashes of the sacrifices, and of the candlestick, and of the
altar of incense, and of the offering of the fowl that were cast out.

\(q\) "est" "proprie vestis commensurata corpori", Munster; so Jarchi.
(r) Maimon. in Misn. Tamid, c. 5. sect. 3. (s) Misn. Yoma, c. 1. sect.
8. (t) Bartenora in ib. (u) Jacob. Jud. Leo. Tabnitid Hecal, No. 90.
apud Wagenseil. Sotah, p. 426.

[Leviticus 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 6:11</span></span>

And he shall put off his garments,.... Those before mentioned, he is
said to put on:

and put on other garments; not common garments or lay-habits, what the
priests wore when they were not on duty; for, as Ben Gersom says, these
were priestly garments, though meaner than the first, or those that were
put off: and so Jarchi says, they were worse than they were: it seems as
if they were such that were spotted and dirty, and threadbare, almost
worn out, and only fit for such sort of work as to carry out ashes: and
so Maimonides (w) observes, that these other garments are not to be
understood of common garments; but of such that are meaner in value and
esteem, for both are holy garments; and, indeed, nothing belonging to
the priestly office was to be performed but with the priestly garments,
and they were only to be worn by the priests while in service:

and carry forth the ashes; when these, gathered on a heap, were become
large, as Jarchi says, and there was no room for the pile of wood, they
carried them out from thence; and this, he observes, was not obligatory
every day, but the taking of them up, as in the preceding verse [Lev
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#010), they were bound to every day:
and these they carried

without the camp, unto a clean place; for though they were ashes, yet
being ashes of holy things, were not to be laid in an unclean place, or
where unclean things were: as the burnt offering was a type of Christ in
his sufferings and death, enduring the fire of divine wrath in the room
and stead of his people; so the carrying forth the ashes of the burnt
offering, and laying them in a clean place, may denote the burial of the
body of Christ without the city of Jerusalem, wrapped in a clean linen
cloth and laid in a new tomb, wherein no man had been laid, [Mat
27:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#059).

\(w\) In Misn. Tamid, c. 5. sect. 3.

[Leviticus 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 6:12</span></span>

And the fire upon the altar shall be burning in it, it shall not be put
out,.... There were three fires, or piles of wood for fire continually;
the first was a large one, on which the daily sacrifice was burnt; the
second less, and called the pile of the incense, because they took from
it fire in a censer to burn the morning and evening incense; and the
third was only for preserving the fire that it might not go out: and of
this it is written, [Lev 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012) (x); and
Maimonides (y) observes, that some say, the first of these is meant by
the burning all night, [Lev 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#009) and
the second by the fire of the altar burning in it, [Lev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#012) but his own sense is, the third
is meant by it; and in the sense of R. Joses, these three fires were all
burning upon the altar; the first was towards the east side of the
altar, the second towards the southwest, as being nearer to the rise of
the altar, where the priests were, and the third was made in any part of
the altar as was thought fit (z); and this is the fire not to be put
out, and he that quenched it, though but one coal, was to be beaten,
yea, though it be brought down from the altar (a):

and the priest shall burn wood in it every morning: until the fourth
hour of the day, according to the Targum of Jonathan; that is, unto ten
o'clock in the morning:

and lay the burnt offering in order upon it; both morning and evening,
and as often as any sacrifices of that kind were offered up:

and he shall burn thereon the fat of the peace offerings; that which was
upon the inwards and covered them, and upon the kidneys, and flanks, and
caul of the liver; see [Lev 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#003).

\(x\) Maimon. Hilchot Tamidin, c. 2. sect. 4. Bartenora in Misn. Tamid,
c. 2. sect. 4. & in Yoma, c. 4. sect. 6. (y) In ib. sect. 5. & in Yoma,
c. 4. sect. 6. (z) Maimon. Hilchot Tamidin, c. 2. sect. 7, 8, 9. (a)
Ibid. sect. 6.

[Leviticus 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 6:13</span></span>

The fire shall ever be burning upon the altar,.... This was what first
fell from heaven, [Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024) and which
in after ages was maintained by constant fuel put unto it, there being
every day burnt offerings upon it; which was an emblem of the love of
Christ to his people, which is ever in a flame and burning, and can
never be quenched by the many waters of their sins and iniquities; nor
by all the sufferings he underwent to atone for them; nor by all the
meanness and afflictions they are attended with; his love is fervent
towards them, and always the same: and also of their love to him, which
is unquenchable by the persecutions of men, by afflictions by the hand
of God, by divine desertions, by Satan's temptations, or their own
corruptions: it likewise may be an emblem of the graces of the Spirit of
God in the hearts of his people, which have both light and heat in them;
and though they are sometimes very low as to exercise, yet are in a
wonderful manner preserved amidst great oppositions made unto them from
within and from without; and may also be a symbol of the word of God,
sometimes compared to fire for its light and heat, and may be signified
by the fire on the altar for its perpetuity, which continues and abides,
notwithstanding the attempts of men and devils to get it out of the
world; and though the ministers of it die, that lives, and has been
preserved in the worst of times, and will burn most clearly, and shine
most brightly in the end of the world. This perpetual fire may also
point at the prayers of saints, the fervency of them, and their
perseverance in them; or rather to the efficacy and acceptance of the
sacrifice of Christ, which always continues; nor may it be amiss applied
to the afflictions of God's people, which constantly attend them in this
world, and they must expect to have while in it; and even to the wrath
of God on wicked men to all eternity, and which is the fire that cannot
be quenched:

it shall never go out; as it is highly probable it never did, until the
destruction of the temple by Nebuchadnezzar; though the author of second
Maccabees states that:"For when our fathers were led into Persia, the
priests that were then devout took the fire of the altar privily, and
hid it in an hollow place of a pit without water, where they kept it
sure, so that the place was unknown to all men.'' 2 Maccabees
1:19)pretends that some devout priests, who were carried captives into
Persia, hid the fire of the altar privily in the hollow of a pit, where
was no water, and in which it was kept sure and unknown to men, and was
found and restored in the times of Nehemiah,"20 Now after many years,
when it pleased God, Neemias, being sent from the king of Persia, did
send of the posterity of those priests that had hid it to the fire: but
when they told us they found no fire, but thick water; 21 Then commanded
he them to draw it up, and to bring it; and when the sacrifices were
laid on, Neemias commanded the priests to sprinkle the wood and the
things laid thereupon with the water. 22 When this was done, and the
time came that the sun shone, which afore was hid in the cloud, there
was a great fire kindled, so that every man marvelled.'' (2 Maccabees
1)but this is contrary to what the Jews always assert (b), that the fire
from heaven was wanting in the second temple; and yet from the account
Josephus (c) gives of a festival called "Xylophoria", or the feast of
the wood carrying, it seems to have been then in being, and great care
was taken to preserve it that it might not go out; for, he says, at that
feast it is a custom for all to bring wood to the altar, that so there
might never be wanting fuel for the fire, for it always remained
unextinguished: as to, what some have observed out of Diodorus Siculus
(d), that Antiochus Epiphanes, when he went into the temple, quenched
this fire, it appears to be a mistake; for Diodorus does not say that he
put out the fire of the altar, but that he extinguished the immortal
lamp, as it was called by them (the Jews), which was always burning in
the temple; by which he plainly means the lamp in the candlestick, and
perhaps what the Jews call the western lamp, which was always burning,
and was the middle lamp bending to the west, and to which the rest bent:
the Heathens in many places imitated this perpetual fire: the Brahmans
among the Indians speak of fire falling from heaven, kept by them on
everlasting hearths, or in fire pans (e), for that purpose: the Persians
had their perpetual fire, having a great opinion of that element: in the
march of Darius against Alexander, it is observed by the historian (f),
that the fire which the Persians call sacred and eternal was placed on
altars of silver, and he is said to adjure his soldiers by the gods of
their country, and by the eternal fire on the altars, &c. to rescue the
Persian name and nation from the last degree of reproach (g): the
Grecians have many traces of this continual fire on the altar among
them: at Mantinia, as Pausanias (h) relates, was a temple of Ceres and
Proserpina, where a fire was kindled, and great care taken that it might
not be extinguished; and in the temple of Pan, a fire burned which was
never quenched: and the same writer says (i), with the Eleans was an
altar which had fire continually burning on it night and day: and
Aelianus (k) makes mention of an altar of Venus at Eryce in Sicily,
which burnt night and day; and of which he says many things wonderful
and fabulous: and it is well known that the Romans had their goddess
Vesta, whom Velleius Paterculus (l) calls the keeper of the perpetual
fires; and there were certain virgins, called the "vestal" virgins,
whose business it was to take care that the fire never went out; and is
by Virgil (m) called the eternal fire: and Vesta itself is thought by
some learned men to be the same with "Esh-jah", the fire of Jehovah: now
these were all satanical imitations of the perpetual fire on the altar
of God.

\(b\) T. Hieros. Taaniot, fol. 65. 1. T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 21. 2. (c) De
Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 17. sect. 6. (d) Eclog. 1. ex l. 34. p. 902. (e)
Ammian. Marcellin. l. 23. (f) Curt. Hist. l. 3. c. 3. (g) Curt. Hist. l.
4. c. 14. (h) Arcadica sive, l. 8. p. 469, 516. (i) Eliac. 1. sive, l.
5. p. 316. (k) Hist. Animal. l. 10. c. 50. (l) Hist. l. 2. in fine. (m)
"Vos aeterni igneis", &c. Aeneid. l. 2.

[Leviticus 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 6:14</span></span>

And this is the law of the meat offering,.... Or the rules to be
observed concerning that, for which, though directions are given, [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001), &c. yet is here repeated with
some additions to it:

the sons of Aaron shall offer it before the Lord; being brought unto
them by the children of Israel:

before the altar; or at the face of it, for what was properly offered
was burnt upon it, as in the following verse [Lev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015), for it should be rather rendered
"in", or "on the altar" (n); the face of it is the top of it, on which
every sacrifice was offered, and not before it.

\(n\) "in altari", Noldius, p. 82. No. 391.

[Leviticus 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 6:15</span></span>

And he shall take of it his handful,.... See Gill on [Lev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#002).

[Leviticus 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 6:16</span></span>

And the remainder thereof shall Aaron and his sons eat,.... What
quantity of fine flour the meat offering consisted of is not said; very
probably it was left to the offerer to bring what he would, since it was
a freewill offering:

with unleavened bread shall it be eaten in the holy place; or rather,
"unleavened shall it be eaten"; for it cannot well be thought that bread
of any sort should be eaten with this offering, which, properly
speaking, was itself a bread offering, and so it should be called,
rather than a meat offering; and certain it is, that no meat offering
was to be made of leaven, but of fine flour unleavened, and so to be
eaten, not by the priests in their own houses, but in the tabernacle;
not in that part of it properly called the holy place, in distinction
from the holy of holies, but as it follows:

in the court of the tabernacle of the congregation they shall eat it; in
a room provided in that court for that purpose, as afterwards in the
temple.

[Leviticus 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 6:17</span></span>

It shall not be baked with leaven,.... Which, as it was a type of
Christ, may denote his sincerity both in doctrine, life, and
conversation; and as it may respect the offerer, may signify his
uprightness and integrity, and his being devoid of hypocrisy and
insincerity:

I have given it unto thee for their portion of my offerings made by
fire; this was part of the provision made for the maintenance of the
priests, as it was but just that they that ministered at the altar
should live of it; and the rather, as the priests and Levites had no
portion and inheritance in the land of Israel, and therefore must be
supported in another way, which the Lord took care of:

it is most holy, as the sin offering, and as the trespass offering; as
they, so this being devoted to sacred uses, what were not consumed upon
the altar belonged to the priests, and were their perquisites, nor might
they be appropriated to the use of any other.

[Leviticus 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 6:18</span></span>

All the males among the children of Aaron shall eat of it,.... And they
only, for none but they might eat in the holy place, and therefore these
holy things that were to be eaten there, were only eaten by them; what
might be eaten by the priests in their own houses, their wives and
daughters ate of, but in the holy place only their males, and a male was
one that was thirteen years of age:

it shall be a statute for ever in your generations, concerning the
offerings of the Lord made by fire; a statute to last till the Messiah
should come, the true meat or bread offering; and the bread he gave was
his flesh, and he that eats of it shall not die, but live for ever, [Joh
6:27](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#027),

everyone that toucheth them shall be holy; signifying, that no one ought
to touch them but a holy person, one devoted to holy services, the
priests and their sons; or "whatsoever" (o) toucheth them, the dishes
they eat those offerings out of, or the knives they cut them with, were
not to be used for anything else.

\(o\) "quicquid", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius.

[Leviticus 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 6:19</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... At the same time the above laws were
delivered:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">lev 6:20</span></span>

This is the offering of Aaron and his sons,.... That is, of such of them
as succeeded him in the high priesthood, as appears from [Lev
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#022) so Aben Ezra, of him, or of one
of his sons in his room; though some think the common priests offered
the following oblation at the time of their initiation into their
office, though they were not anointed as the high priest was, nor
obliged as he to continue the offering daily:

which they shall offer unto the Lord in the day when he is anointed;
when he, or any of his sons in his stead, were anointed, for as yet he
himself was not; see [Lev 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#002) some, as
Aben Ezra observes, think that "in", is instead of "from", and that the
sense is, that Aaron, or his successor, and every of them, were to offer
the following offering perpetually from the time of their being
anointed, and put into the office of the high priest, and which
certainly was the case, as appears by what follows:

the tenth part of an ephah of fine flour for a meat offering perpetual;
which was an omer, and as much as a man could eat in one day; and this
the high priest offered every day, as long as he lived, or was in his
office, and that at his own expense, as Josephus says (p), not
altogether, but in the following manner:

half of it in the morning, and half of it at night; so that this
constantly returned as the morning and evening sacrifices did, and
followed them. Jarchi says of this, that it was the common meat offering
at the consecration of a priest, but the high priest offered it every
day; and it appears from the Misnic writers (q) that this meat offering
consisted of twelve cakes, the same number as those of the shewbread;
the same phrase, a "perpetual statute", being used of one as the other;
and six of these were offered in the morning, and six at evening; and
this as the daily sacrifice had the same mystical meaning, and respected
the continual efficacy of the sacrifice of Christ.

\(p\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 10. sect. 7. (q) Misn. Menachot, c. 6. sect. 5. &
Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Leviticus 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">lev 6:21</span></span>

In a pan it shall be made with oil,.... With oil olive, as the Targum of
Jonathan; the pan in which it was made was a vessel that had no
covering, nor hollow in the middle, nor any lip or edge, but was a
plane, and extended, and the dough made on it was hard and stiff, that
it might not run off (r). In the temple was a chamber of those that made
the cakes (s), where, as Bartenora (t) observes, was prepared the meat
offering, which the high priest offered, one half in the morning, and
the other half in the evening:

and when it is baked, thou shalt bring it in; not thoroughly baked, but
very little, as says Josephus, hastily, so that it swells, and rises up
in bubbles. Jarchi says, the flour was first mixed in hot water, and
after that it was baked in an oven, and then fried in a pan:

and the baked pieces of the meat offering shalt thou offer for a sweet
savour unto the Lord; or the meat offering cut in pieces shalt thou
offer, as both the Targums of Jonathan and Jerusalem; the twelve cakes
were broken each into two, and twelve halves were offered in the
morning, and twelve at evening: the manner in which it was done was, the
priest divided every cake into two by measure, so that he might offer
half in the morning, and half in the evening; and he took the halves and
doubled everyone of them into two, and broke them, until he found every
broken piece doubled into two, and he offered the halves with half the
handful of frankincense in the morning, and in like manner in the
evening (u): this may have respect to the body of Christ being broken
for us, whereby he became fit food for faith, and an offering of a sweet
smelling savour to God.

\(r\) Misn. Menachot, c. 5. sect. 8. & Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.
Maimon. Maasch Hakorbanot, c. 13. sect. 7. (s) Misn. Middot, c. 1. sect.
4. (t) In ib. (u) Maimon. Misn. Middot. sect. 4.

[Leviticus 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">lev 6:22</span></span>

And the priest of his sons that is anointed in his stead shall offer
it,.... The successor of the high priest:

it is a statute for ever unto the Lord; which he by an everlasting
statute appointed to be offered to him by every high priest, until the
Messiah should come:

it shall be wholly burnt; of a common meat offering only a handful was
burnt, and the rest was the priest's; see [Lev
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#015).

[Leviticus 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">lev 6:23</span></span>

For every meat offering for the priest shall be wholly burnt,....
Wherefore the priest that offered this for the high priest got nothing
by it: he served him gratis:

it shall not be eaten; neither by himself, nor any other priest. The
priests by eating the offerings of the people bore their iniquities, and
made atonement for them, [Lev 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017)
but the priests might not eat their own sacrifices, to show that they
could not bear their own sins, and make atonement for them; and this
proves the insufficiency of the legal sacrifices, and the need there was
for one to arise of another order to take away sin; and it is thought by
some to be typical of the active obedience of Christ (w), every day
yielded to the law and will of God, and is perfect, as the word here
signifies, and to be distinguished from "a burnt offering".

\(w\) Vid. Michaelis Observ. Sacr. Exercitat. 6. p. 57. & Mede in ib. p.
58.

[Leviticus 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">lev 6:24</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Continued his discourse with him:

saying; as follows.

[Leviticus 6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">lev 6:25</span></span>

Speak unto Aaron, and to his sons, saying, this is the law of the sin
offering,.... Or the rules to be observed concerning that, besides what
had been already delivered in [Lev
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#001),

in the place where the burnt offering is killed shall the sin offering
be killed before the Lord; and that was on the north side of the altar,
see [Lev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011) and so Aben Ezra and Ben
Gersom observe, that the place of slaying every sin offering was the
north; and some have observed that Mount Calvary, where our Lord was
crucified, lay pretty much to the north of Jerusalem, see [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002),

it is most holy; sacred to the Lord, offered up to him, and accepted by
him, and typical of the most pure and holy sacrifice of Christ, who was
made sin, and an offering for sin, in the room and stead of his people.

[Leviticus 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">lev 6:26</span></span>

The priest that offereth it for sin shall eat it,.... Thereby signifying
that he bore the sin of the person that brought the offering, and made
atonement for it; as a type of Christ, who bore the sins of his people
in his own body on the tree, and made satisfaction for them; see [Lev
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#017). This is to be understood not of
that single individual priest only that was the offerer, but of him and
his family; for, as Ben Gersom observes, it was impossible for one man
to eat all the flesh of a beast at one meal or two; but it means, as he
says, the family of the priest that then officiated, the male part:

in the holy place shall it be eaten, in the court of the tabernacle of
the congregation; within the hangings, as Ben Gersom's note is, with
which the court of the tabernacle was hung and made; in some room in
that part of the sanctuary did the priest, with his sons, eat of the
holy offerings that were appropriated to them; an emblem of spiritual
priests, believers in Christ, feeding in the church upon the provisions
of his house, the goodness and fatness of it.

[Leviticus 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">lev 6:27</span></span>

Whatsoever shall touch the flesh thereof shall be holy,.... None but
holy persons, such as were devoted to holy services, even the priests
and their sons, might touch and eat of the flesh of the sin offering:
all that did so were sacred persons; and even what were used in eating
it, dishes and knives, were to be put to no other use, not to any common
service, or for anything but holy things; which was done to keep up a
veneration for the sacrifices, and especially for the great sacrifice
they typified, the sacrifice of Christ, whose flesh is meat indeed; and
whoever eats of that by faith dwells in Christ, and Christ dwells in
him, [Joh 6:55](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#055),

and when there is sprinkled of the blood thereof upon any garment; the
garment of the priest that slays and offers it:

thou shalt wash that whereon it was sprinkled in the holy place; it was
not to be carried out of the tabernacle, and washed elsewhere, but in
the sanctuary; either at the laver, where the priests washed their hands
and feet, or in some room in the court for that purpose. This was done
to preserve an esteem and value for the blood of the sacrifice, as
typical of the precious blood of Christ.

[Leviticus 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">lev 6:28</span></span>

But the earthen vessel wherein it is sodden shall be broken,.... That
being porous, the liquor in which the sin offering was boiled might soak
into it, and the smell of it be retained, and therefore, as such vessels
were not very costly, they were ordered to be broken; but where the
broken pieces were carried and laid, the Jewish writers are at a loss
about; for, that vessels, which had served for holy uses, should be laid
in an open public place and exposed, they thought was indecent; and as
there might be in a course of time great quantities broken, it would
look very disagreeable and unseemly to have them lie in heaps in the
sanctuary; they therefore have framed a miracle, and conceit that they
were swallowed up in the ground where they were laid (x):

and if it be sodden in a brazen it shall be both scoured and rinsed in
water; brass, being more valuable, must not be destroyed; and besides
the liquor could not soak into that, and whatever scent it retained was
easily and soon removed by scouring and rinsing; the former was with hot
water, and the latter with cold, as Ben Gersom affirms.

\(x\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 21. 1.

[Leviticus 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">lev 6:29</span></span>

And all the males among the priests shall eat thereof,.... As of the
meat offerings, [Lev 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#018) and this
shows that not the single priest that offered only ate of it, [Lev
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#026) but his male children, and not
those only, but those of other priests then upon duty, or in the court:

it is most holy; See Gill on [Lev
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#025).

[Leviticus 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">lev 6:30</span></span>

And no sin offering, whereof any of the blood is brought into the
tabernacle of the congregation to reconcile withal in the holy place,
shall be eaten,.... Every offering, and so every sin offering, was
killed in the court of the tabernacle, on the north side of the altar;
and the blood of some of them, as on the day of atonement, was carried
within the vail and sprinkled on the mercy seat for reconciling the holy
place, and making atonement for it; now the flesh of such sin offerings
might not be eaten by the priests, though all others might:

it shall be burnt in the fire. Ben Gersom says, it was burnt in its
place in the court, in a place prepared there to burn things rejected,
and sanctified; and I think, adds he, this place was on the east side,
i.e. of the court; but it is clear from [Lev
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#027) where the above case is
mentioned, that it was to be carried out without the camp, and burnt
there. What use the apostle makes of this, applying it to Christ, see
[Heb 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 7](lev007)

</div>
