<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](exo040)  [Next](lev001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS

This book is commonly called by the Jews Vajikra, from the first word
with which it begins, and sometimes , "the law of the priests" (a); and
this is its name in the Syriac and Arabic versions: by the Septuagint
interpreters it is called and by the Latins, Leviticus, or the Levitical
book, because it gives an account of the Levitical priesthood, as the
apostle calls it, [Heb 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#011). It treats
of the sacrifices under the Levitical dispensation, and of the priests
concerned in them, and of the times and seasons in which they were
offered, and of many other rites and ceremonies. That it was wrote by
Moses is not only generally believed by the Jews, but is affirmed in the
New Testament; see [Mat 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#004) compared
with [Lev 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#002) from whence, as well as
from other citations out of it in other places, the authority of it may
be concluded. The matter of it was delivered to Moses, and very likely
by him then written upon the erection of the tabernacle, which was in
the second year of the Israelites coming out of Egypt, in the first
month, and the first day of the month, [Exo
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#017) and it was on the same day that
the Lord spake to Moses out of it, and delivered to him the laws
concerning sacrifices, recorded in the first seven chapters; see [Num
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001) compared with [Lev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001) and on the eighth day of the same
month, and some following days, the remainder of it was given to him,
and written by him, see [Lev 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev008.htm#001) to
which agrees the Targum of Jonathan on [Lev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001).

"when Moses had made an end of erecting the tabernacle, Moses thought
and reasoned in his heart, and said, Mount Sinai, its excellency was the
excellency of an hour, and its holiness the holiness of three days, it
was not possible for me to ascend unto it, until the time that the Word
was speaking with me; but this tabernacle of the congregation, its
excellency is an excellency for ever, and its holiness an holiness for
ever, it is fit that I should not enter into it, until the time that be
speaks with me from before the Lord; and therefore the Word of the Lord
called to Moses, and the Word of the Lord spake with him out of the
tabernacle of the congregation, saying;''

and to the same purpose the Jerusalem Targum. It was written in the year
from the creation of the world 2514, and about 1490 years before the
coming of Christ. The various sacrifices, rites, and ceremonies made
mention of in it, were typical of Christ, and shadows of good things to
come by him: there are many things in it, which give great light to
several passages in the New Testament, and it is worthy of diligent
reading and consideration.

\(a\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 103. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 1](lev001)

</div>
