<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Leviticus Index](lev)  
  [Previous](lev004)  [Next](lev006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Leviticus Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)

[Leviticus](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">lev 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LEVITICUS 5

This chapter treats of the trespass offering, points at the sins for
which it was to be made, and the matter of it; it was for secret sins,
and sins of ignorance, such as refusing to bear witness in a known case,
[Lev 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001) touching unclean things and
false swearing, [Lev 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#002) the things
directed to in such cases are confession, [Lev
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#005) sacrifice of a lamb, or kid of the
goats, [Lev 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006) and in case of
poverty, two turtle doves, or two young pigeons; concerning the offering
of which instructions are given, [Lev
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#007) and if not able to bring them,
then a meat offering of fine flour, about which rules are laid down,
[Lev 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011) and for sins committed
through ignorance in holy things or sacrileges, the sacrifice of a ram
is enjoined, and satisfaction ordered to be made for the injury done in
the holy thing, by adding a fifth part to it, [Lev
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#014) and for sins committed ignorantly
against negative precepts, only a ram is appointed for the trespass
offering, [Lev 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#017).

[Leviticus 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">lev 5:1</span></span>

And if a soul sin,.... The soul is put for the person, and is
particularly mentioned, as Ben Melech says, because possessed of will
and desire:

and hear the voice of swearing; or cursing, or adjuration; not of
profane swearing, and taking the name of God in vain, but either of
false swearing, or perjury, as when a man hears another swear to a thing
which he knows is false; or else of adjuration, either the voice of a
magistrate or of a neighbour adjuring another, calling upon him with an
oath to bear testimony in such a case; this is what the Jews (r) call
the oath of testimony or witness, and which they say (s) is binding in
whatsoever language it is heard:

and is a witness; is able to bear witness to the thing he is adjured
about:

whether he hath seen or known of it; what he has seen with his eyes, or
knows by any means: of such a case, the Jews observe (t), that there may
be seeing without knowing, or knowing without seeing, and in either case
a man ought to bear witness:

if he do not utter it; tell the truth, declare what he has seen or
known:

then he shall bear his iniquity; he shall be charged with sin, and be
obliged to acknowledge his offence, and bring a trespass offering for
it: it is said (u), that the witnesses are not guilty of the oath of the
testimony, but in these ten cases; if they are required; if the
testimony is concerning goods; if the goods are movable; if he that
requires binds himself to pay for their testimony only, in case they
bear witness; if they refuse after required; if they refuse in the
sanhedrim; if the adjuration or oath is made there by the name of God,
or his titles; if knowledge of the testimony goes before the oath; if he
particularizes his witnesses in the time of the oath, or at the time of
the requirement; and if the oath is in a language they understood.

\(r\) Misn. Sotah, c. 7. 1. (s) Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. T. Bab.
Sotah, fol. 33. 1. (t) T. Bab. Shebuot, fol. 33. 2. & 34. 1. (u) Maimon.
Hilchot, Shebuot, c. 9. sect. 3.

[Leviticus 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">lev 5:2</span></span>

Or if a soul touch any unclean thing,.... Meaning an Israelite, for only
such were bound by this law, which pronounced a person unclean that
touched anything that was so in a ceremonial sense; this is the general,
including whatsoever by the law was unclean; the particulars follow:

whether it be a carcass of an unclean beast, as the camel, the coney,
the hare, and the swine, [Lev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#002).

or a carcass of unclean cattle; as the horse, and the ass, which were
unclean for food, and their dead carcasses not to be touched, [Lev
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#026).

or the carcass of unclean creeping things: such as are mentioned in [Lev
11:29](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#029).

and if it be hidden from him; that he has touched them; or the
uncleanness contracted by touching, he having inadvertently done it; or
being ignorant of the law concerning such uncleanness:

he also shall be unclean; in a ceremonial sense, by thus touching them:

and guilty; of a breach of the command which forbids the touching of
them: this is by way of prolepsis or anticipation; for as yet the law
concerning unclean beasts, and creeping things, and pollution by
touching them, was not given: Jarchi and Gersom interpret this guilt, of
eating of holy things, and going into the sanctuary when thus defiled:
in the Jewish Misnah (w) it is said, the word "hidden" is twice used, to
show that he is guilty, for the ignorance of uncleanness, and for the
ignorance of the sanctuary.

\(w\) Misn. Shebuot, c. 2. sect. 5.

[Leviticus 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">lev 5:3</span></span>

Or if he touch the uncleanness of man,.... The dead body of a man, or
the bone of a dead body, or a grave, or any profluvious or menstruous
person:

whatsoever uncleanness it be that a man shall be defiled withal: not
morally, but ceremonially:

and it be hid from him; he is not sensible that he has touched any thing
ceremonially unclean:

when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty: acknowledge his guilt,
and offer a sacrifice for it, as after directed.

[Leviticus 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">lev 5:4</span></span>

Or if a soul swear,.... A rash or vain oath:

pronouncing with his lips; not in his heart, as Jarchi notes; not saying
within himself that he would do this, or that, or the other thing, but
expressing his oath plainly and distinctly, with an audible voice:

to do good, or to do evil; which was either impossible or unlawful for
him to do; whether the good or evil he swears to do is to himself or to
another; whether he swears to do good to himself, and evil to another,
or, good to another, and evil to himself, see [Psa
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa015.htm#004). The Targum of Jonathan
paraphrases it,"whatsoever a man expresses, whether of anything present
or future;''as if he swears he has done such and such a thing, whether
good or evil; or that he will do it, be it what it will, and it is not
in the power of his hands to do it, or, if he did it, it would be doing
a wrong thing:

whatsoever it be that a man shall pronounce with an oath, and it be hid
from him; he has forgot that he ever swore such an oath:

and when he knoweth of it, then he shall be guilty in one of these; when
he is told of it, and it is made clearly to appear to him, that he did
at such a time, and in such a place, deliver out a rash oath concerning
this, or the other thing, then he shall be chargeable with guilt in one
of these; either in rashly swearing to do good when it was not in his
power, or to do evil, which would have been unlawful. The Targum of
Jonathan is,"if he knows that he has falsified, and repents not, he is
guilty.''

[Leviticus 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">lev 5:5</span></span>

And it shall be, when he shall be guilty in one of these things,....
Before expressed in the preceding verses; the Targum of Jonathan is,"in
one of the four things,''which Ben Gersom particularly mentions in the
oath of witness, or the pollution of the sanctuary, or the pollution of
its holy things, or a vain oath:

that he shall confess that he hath sinned in that thing; not make
confession of sin in general, but of that particular sin he is guilty
of; and this he was to do before he brought his offering, or at least at
the time of his bringing it; for without confession his offering would
be of no avail; and which he made, as Ben Gersom says, by laying his
hand on the head of the offering, thereby signifying and declaring his
guilt, and that he deserved to die as the creature would about to be
sacrificed for him; or he might make a verbal confession and
acknowledgment of his offence. Fagius, from the Jewish writers, has
given us the form of it, which was this;"I beseech thee, O Lord, I have
sinned, I have done wickedly, I have transgressed before thee, so and so
have I done; and, lo, I repent, and am ashamed of what I have done, and
I will never do the same again.''Though perhaps this form may be of too
modern a date, yet doubtless somewhat like this was pronounced; and they
make confession of sin necessary to all sacrifices, and say (x),
atonement is not made by them without repentance and confession.

\(x\) Maimon. Hilchot Teshubah, c. 1. sect. 1.

[Leviticus 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">lev 5:6</span></span>

And he shall bring his trespass offering unto the Lord, for the sin
which he hath sinned,.... To make atonement for it; this was typical of
the sacrifice of Christ, whose soul was made an offering for sin,
"Asham" a trespass offering, [Isa
53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010) where the same word is used as
here:

a female from the flock, a lamb, or kid of the goats, for a sin
offering; it is generally thought there was a difference between a
trespass offering and a sin offering; but it is not easy to say wherein
the difference lies; and what has been observed by learned men is not
very satisfactory: and certain it is, that the same offering is here
called both a trespass offering and a sin offering; and such as were men
of substance, and capable of it, were to bring a female lamb or kid; it
being for sins of ignorance, a sacrifice of a less value was admitted;
yet it must be a lamb, typical of Christ the Lamb of God; and atonement
cannot be made, even for sins of ignorance, but by the blood and
sacrifice of Christ:

and the priest shall make an atonement for him concerning his sin; that
is, by offering his sacrifice for him, which was a type of the atonement
made by the precious blood of Christ, as of a lamb without spot and
blemish.

[Leviticus 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">lev 5:7</span></span>

And if he be not able to bring a lamb,.... He is not possessed of a
lamb, nor able to purchase one:

then he shall bring for his trespass which he hath committed, two
turtledoves, or two young pigeons, unto the Lord; either the one or the
other; these were common, and in great plenty in the land of Israel, as
Maimonides (y) observes, which was the reason of their being ordered,
since to be had cheap. The turtledoves were larger, as the Targum of
Jonathan calls them, being older, and the pigeons lesser, being young;
or the one were grown, and not little, and the other little, and not
grown, as the Jewish writers (z) observe; and either of them were proper
emblems of Christ in his purity, innocence, and meekness, by whom an
atonement is made both for the rich and poor:

one for a sin offering, and the other for a burnt offering; one of the
turtle doves or pigeons, whichsoever were brought, was offered up as a
sin offering, and the other that remained was offered up as a burnt
offering; so that the poor man had two sorts of offerings out of what he
brought, when the rich had but one; and may denote the completeness of
his sacrifice, and the full atonement made by it.

\(y\) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c. 46. (z) Maimon & Bartenora in Misn.
Cholin, c. 1. sect. 5.

[Leviticus 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">lev 5:8</span></span>

And he shall bring them unto the priest,.... Either two turtledoves, or
two young pigeons:

who shall offer that which is for the sin offering first; that which is
chosen for it, as the Targum of Jonathan; and this choice was made, not
by the priest, but by the man that brought the offering, who separated
it, and said, lo, this is a sin offering, and after that said, lo, this
is a burnt offering (a); the sin offering was offered first, which was
to make atonement for sin, and then the burnt offering, to denote the
divine acceptance of it; and so Ben Gersom observes, it was proper to
offer the sin offering first, to atone for his sin, that after he (God)
was appeased this way, he might receive his gift; for the burnt offering
was as a gift. Jarchi compares it to an advocate, who first goes in to
appease, and when he has appeased, the gift goes in after him:

and wring off his head from his neck, but shall not divide it asunder:
be it a turtledove or a young pigeon, so it was to be served; the head
was not to be separated from the body, but was nipped by the nail of the
priest "in" the neck, as it might be rendered (b); over against the
neck, as the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan render it; the hinder part,
or what is behind the throat, as Jarchi and Ben Molech interpret it; so
that the part which was nipped was the neck; and this nip was made so
large, as that the blood was let out by it, as appears from the
following verse [Lev 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#009), and yet the
head was not divided from the body; the head hung by a piece of skin on
the back part; of the manner of performing this, and the mystery of it;
see Gill on [Lev 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015).

\(a\) Ib. (Maimon & Bratenora) in Misn. Zebachim, c. 10. sect. 4. (b)
Vid. Noldium, p. 611. No. 1637.

[Leviticus 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">lev 5:9</span></span>

And he shall sprinkle of the blood of the sin offering upon the side of
the altar,.... Or "wall" (c) it is asked (d),"what is the wall at which
the rest of the blood is wrung out? this is the lower wall, namely, the
half of the height of the altar below, under the thread (of scarlet that
goes round the middle of the altar) that the rest of the blood may be
squeezed at the bottom of the altar, and because of this the sin
offering of the fowl is below,''that is, the sprinkling of its blood.
And so Ben Gersom observes; from hence we learn, says he, that the
sprinkling of the sin offering of the fowl was in the lower part of the
altar; and I think this sprinkling, adds he, was not in the length, but
in the breadth:

and the rest of the blood shall be wrung out at the bottom of the altar;
the blood sprinkled was that which dropped from it when nipped by the
priest; this here was squeezed out by him, and was shed at the foot of
the altar; so that the altar had all the blood, and nothing but the
blood of the fowl, all the rest belonged to the priest (e): this might
be an emblem both of the drops of blood which fell from Christ in the
garden, and of the shedding of his blood upon the cross, whereby
remission of sin was obtained, and atonement made:

it is a sin offering; an offering whereby sin was typically expiated and
stoned.

\(c\) , Sept. "super parietem", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Drusius; "ad parietem", Tigurine version. (d) Maimon. in Misn.
Zebachim, c. 6. sect. 4. (e) Misn. ib.

[Leviticus 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">lev 5:10</span></span>

And he shall offer the second for a burnt offering, according to the
manner,.... That is, the second turtledove or young pigeon, after the
other was made a sin offering; and the manner according to which this
was offered was not according to the rite or manner of the bird chosen
first for a sin offering, as the Targum of Jonathan, but according to
the burnt offering of the fowl in [Lev
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#015) so Jarchi and Ben Gersom:

and the priest shall make an atonement for him, for his sin which he had
sinned, and it shall be forgiven him; upon the atonement made; and so
forgiveness of sin with God proceeds upon the atonement made by the
blood of Christ, [Heb 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#022). God never
took one step towards it, without a regard to Christ the propitiation
for sin; he promised it with a view to him; there is no instance of
pardon under the Old Testament but in this way, and God always has
respect to Christ in pardon, it is for his sake; and this way of
forgiveness best provides for the glory of the divine perfections; there
can be no better way, or infinite wisdom would have used it; there could
be no other way, considering the council and covenant of peace; to
pardon, without atonement and satisfaction, is not consistent with the
purity, justice, and veracity of God; and to observe this great truth,
the phrase is afterwards frequently repeated,

[Leviticus 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">lev 5:11</span></span>

But if he be not able to bring two turtledoves, or two young
pigeons,.... Which is supposing a man to be in the poorest circumstances
he can well be; and such is the grace and goodness of God, that he has
provided for the atonement and forgiveness of the poorest, as well as of
the rich:

then he that hath sinned shall bring for his offering the tenth part of
an ephah of fine flour for a sin offering; which is an omer, [Exo
16:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#036) and is as much as a man can eat
in one day, as Aben Ezra remarks:

he shall put no oil upon it, neither shall he put any frankincense
thereon; to distinguish it from the common meat offering, which had
both, [Lev 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001) and to make it as easy,
and as little chargeable to the poor as possible, both oil and
frankincense being things of value; and some think that these were
prohibited, to show that atonement and forgiveness, and even the
salvation of men, are not owing to grace in them, comparable to oil, or
to their prayers, signified by frankincense, and so to any or all of
their duties, but to Christ alone, and his atoning sacrifice: or these
were forbidden, because emblems of joy and gladness, and therefore not
so proper at a confession of sin, and humiliation for it: or rather to
show how disagreeable and offensive sin was to the Lord, being contrary
to grace, of which oil was an emblem, and far from being acceptable to
him, which frankincense might signify; and therefore being prohibited,
might denote how unacceptable, yea nauseous, sin is to him; which agrees
with the reason given:

for it is a sin offering, and therefore must not be honoured, as Jarchi,
or must have everything removed from it that is beautiful and amiable,
as Ben Gersom, such as oil and frankincense.

[Leviticus 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">lev 5:12</span></span>

Then shall he bring it to the priest,.... The flour just as it was, not
kneaded and made into a cake, as appears by what follows:

and the priest shall take his handful of it; as much of the flour as he
could hold in one hand:

even a memorial thereof; to bring to mind his sin, and the goodness of
God in admitting of an offering for it, and forgiving it upon that:

and burn it on the altar, according to the offerings made by fire unto
the Lord; in the same manner as other burnt offerings were made:

it is a sin offering; or an expiatory sacrifice for sin.

[Leviticus 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">lev 5:13</span></span>

And the priest shall make an atonement for him,.... By burning the
handful of flour brought by him, as an emblem of the painful sufferings
of Christ, whereby he made atonement for the sins of his people:

as touching his sin that he hath sinned in one of these; for whatsoever
sin he had committed in any of the above cases, [Lev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#001),

and it shall be forgiven him; upon the foot of the atonement made; See
Gill on [Lev 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#010),

and the remnant shall be the priest's as a meat offering; the whole
tenth part of an ephah of fine flour was the priest's, excepting the
handful he took and burnt, just as in the case of a common meat
offering, [Lev 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#003).

[Leviticus 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">lev 5:14</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Out of the tabernacle of the
congregation, [Lev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#001) he continued to
speak to him:

saying, as follows.

[Leviticus 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">lev 5:15</span></span>

If a soul commit a trespass, and sin through ignorance in the holy
things of the Lord,.... In the payment of tithes, or offering first
fruits as he ought, by withholding them, or any part of them, or through
eating of sacred things he ought not:

then shall he bring for his trespass unto the Lord; for it being a
trespass in holy things, it might be properly called a trespass to or
against the Lord; unless this is rather to be understood of the offering
brought to the Lord for his trespass as follows:

a ram without blemish out of the flocks; out of the sheep and not the
goats, as Ben Gersom observes; and this being for sacrifice, or for a
trespass in holy things though ignorantly done, an offering of more
value is required than for sins of ignorance in other cases, [Lev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#006) a type of Christ, who for his
strength may be compared to a ram, and to one without blemish, for his
purity and holiness, and to a choice one, selected out of the flock, for
his being chosen out from among the people:

with thy estimation by shekels of silver, after the shekel of the
sanctuary, for a trespass offering; that is, either an estimation was to
be taken of the damage done in the holy things, an account of which was
to be brought along with the ram, and the cost paid; or else the ram
brought was to be of the value of, or worth shekels of silver; and the
least of many being two, as Aben Ezra and Ben Gersom observe, the sense
is, that the ram brought for the trespass offering should be at least
worth two shekels of silver; so Jarchi and Ben Gersom.

[Leviticus 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">lev 5:16</span></span>

And he shall make amends for the harm that he hath done in the holy
thing,.... This seems to favour the sense of the word "estimation", in
the preceding verse, as understood of the estimate of the damage done in
the holy things, which belonged to the priests, for which recompense was
to be made according as the damage was valued:

and shall add the fifth part thereto, and give it unto the priest;
besides paying the whole damage, he was to give a fifth part of the
whole to the priest; which was ordered to show the evil nature of the
sin of sacrilege, though done ignorantly, and to make men careful and
cautious of committing it: the fifth part, according to the Jewish
writers (f), is the fourth part of that of which a man eats, ("viz." of
the holy things,) which is the fifth of the whole; thus, if he eats the
value of a penny, he pays the penny and the fourth part of one, and so
it is in all the fifths mentioned in the law; or, as Ben Gersom on the
place expresses it, if he has had profit by the holy things to the value
of four shekels, he pays five shekels; for the fifth of the shekels they
add the fifth part to the four shekels; in this he observes, all are
alike, the priest, the anointed, the prince, and a private person, for
the law makes no difference between them in this:

and the priest shall make an atonement for him with the ram of the
trespass offering; by offering it up for him:

and it shall be forgiven him; after he has paid the whole damage, and a
fifth part besides, and offered the trespass offering for atonement; See
Gill on [Lev 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#010).

\(f\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Trumot, c. 6. 1.

[Leviticus 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">lev 5:17</span></span>

And if a soul sin, and commit any of these things which are forbidden to
be done by the commandments of the Lord,.... Respecting holy things:

though he wist it not; or did not know that he had transgressed a
negative command:

yet he is guilty, and shall bear the iniquity; be chargeable with guilt,
and is liable to punishment, and must make an atonement and satisfaction
for it; see [Luk 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048).

[Leviticus 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">lev 5:18</span></span>

And he shall bring a ram without blemish out of the flock,.... See Gill
on [Lev 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015).

with thy estimation for a trespass offering to the priest; along with
the offering was to be brought an estimate of whatsoever damage had been
done through the breach of any of the commands of God, where damage
could take place, that so recompense be made as before directed; or else
the ram brought was to be valued, and examined whether it was worth two
shekels of silver, as before explained; see Gill on [Lev
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#015) but no fifth was required as in
the former cases:

and the priest shall make atonement for him concerning his ignorance
wherein he erred, and wist it not, and it shall be forgiven him; See
Gill on [Lev 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#010) this is what the
Jews call "Asham Talui", doubtful trespass offering.

[Leviticus 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">lev 5:19</span></span>

It is a trespass offering,.... An offering for a trespass committed:

he hath certainly trespassed against the Lord; though committed
ignorantly, and therefore an offering must be brought; for no sin of any
kind must be overlooked, passed by, or forgiven, without a sacrifice, or
without atonement made by sacrifice: or, "he shall offer a trespass
offering to the Lord", or before the Lord, as Onkelos; or before the
Word of the Lord, as Jonathan; and Maimonides out of Siphri (g)
observes, that whereas it is said, a trespass or trespass offering to
the Lord, it was not lawful for the priests to eat of it.

\(g\) Maimon. in Misn. Temurah, c. 7. sect. 6.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Leviticus Chapter 6](lev006)

</div>
