<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk011)  [Next](luk013.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001.md)

[Luke 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 12:1</span></span>

In the mean time,.... While Christ was discoursing with the Pharisees,
and they were using him in the vilest manner, throwing out their
invectives against him in order to draw off the people from him:

when there were gathered together an innumerable multitude of people.
There were "myriads" of them, as in the original text, and a myriad is
ten thousand; the meaning is, that there were several thousands of them:

insomuch that they trod one upon another; striving to get near to
Christ, either to see his person, or to hear his discourses; and
particularly, what he would say to the Pharisees, who had fallen upon
him in so violent a manner:

he began to say unto his disciples first of all; he directed his
discourse not to the Pharisees, nor to the multitude, but to his
disciples in the first place; at least, chiefly to them; for whom he had
a regard, who were his dear friends, and were to be the preachers of his
Gospel every where; and therefore it was proper that they should be
aware of the dissembling arts of the Scribes and Pharisees, and have
their minds fortified against approaching dangers, persecutions, and
death itself: the last phrase, "first of all", is omitted in the Vulgate
Latin version; and by all the Oriental versions, it is joined to the
next clause, and read thus, "especially", or

before all things, beware of the leaven of the Pharisees, which is
hypocrisy; expressed both in their doctrines, and in their lives; which
carried a great show of piety and holiness, but was in appearance only:
very aptly is hypocrisy in doctrine and manners, compared to leaven;
which at first is small and little, but gradually increases and spreads
itself, and lies hid and covered, and is not easily discerned, nor its
influence and effects observed; but in time, it infects and corrupts the
whole of men's principles and practices, and puffs and swells them up
with a vain opinion of themselves; and when our Lord bids his disciples
beware of it, his meaning not only is, that they take heed that they
were not infected with it themselves, but that they were not imposed
upon by the specious pretences of these artful and designing men.

[Luke 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 12:2</span></span>

For there is nothing covered that shall not be revealed,.... No sin, be
it ever so secret or privately done, as nothing is more covered than
hypocrisy, but what shall be detected sooner or later; if not in this
world, which is often the case, yet the last judgment, and in the world
to come:

neither hid, that shall not be known; for how careful soever men may be
to hide their vices from others, they are known to God; who will bring
every thing into judgment, and make manifest the secrets of all hearts.
These were general sentences, which were used by Christ at different
times, upon different occasions, and applied to particular cases; See
Gill on [Mat 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#026.md).

[Luke 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 12:3</span></span>

Therefore whatsoever ye have spoken in darkness,.... In the most private
manner, to one another:

shall be heard in the light; which makes all things manifest, the day
shall declare it:

and that which ye have spoken in the ear in closets; whispered to
persons in their bedchambers, and places of the most secret retirement;

shall be proclaimed upon the housetops; declared in the most public
manner: in [Mat 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027.md) these words are
so expressed, as to carry in them such a sense as this; that what was
told the disciples by Christ, in the most private place and way, should
be published by them, in the most free and open manner; See Gill on [Mat
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027.md).

[Luke 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 12:4</span></span>

And I say unto you, my friends,.... Whom he dearly loved, and had taken
into the greatest intimacy and familiarity; making known to them
whatever he had heard from his Father; giving them the best
instructions, the most faithful and friendly advice, and proper
precautions; all which, and more, showed them to be his friends, and for
whom he after laid down his life:

be not afraid of them that kill the body; though he would have them
beware of the Pharisees, he would not have them be afraid of them; he
would have them know them, and avoid their hypocrisy, and guard against
it; but not fear them, or the worst they could do unto them, which was
to kill the body; and that they had no need to be afraid of, since at
death, their souls would be immediately happy, in the enjoyment and
vision of God; and their bodies would sleep in Jesus, and be raised in
the resurrection morn, and be united to their souls, and be both for
ever blessed:

and after that have no more that they can do; they have nothing more to
kill, or which they can put to pain or misery; the soul is out of their
reach, is an immortal spirit, and cannot be hurt or destroyed by them.

[Luke 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 12:5</span></span>

But I will forewarn you whom ye shall fear, I will be your monitor, and
direct you to the proper object of fear and reverence, and whom you
should be careful to displease and offend:

fear him, which after he hath killed; your body, as the Persic version
adds; hath taken away the life of it, by separating soul and body
asunder, by sending one disease or another, or death in one shape or
another:

hath power to cast into hell; your soul, as the above version also adds;
yea, to destroy both body and soul in hell, as in See Gill on [Mat
10:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#028.md).

yea, I say unto you, fear him; and none else, not with a servile, but
with a filial fear.

[Luke 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 12:6</span></span>

Are not five sparrows sold for two farthings,.... As two were sold for
one farthing; see Gill on [Mat 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#029.md);
so in buying and selling, where more money is laid out, things are
bought cheaper; the Persic version reads, "for two barley corns":

and not one of them is forgotten before God; a single sparrow, a bird of
little value and worth, is taken notice and care of by him; it has its
life from him, and is provided for with food by him, and is under his
protection; nor does he ever forget it, nor can any thing be done to it,
without his permission; it cannot be struck, so as to cause it to fall
on the ground, or be taken in a snare, or be killed in any shape,
without the knowledge of God: his providence reaches to the minutest
creatures and things, and much more then to rational creatures, to men;
and still more to his dear children, ministers, and apostles.

[Luke 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 12:7</span></span>

But even the very hairs of your head are all numbered,.... Not only
their persons had passed under the hands of him that telleth them, who
is the "Palmoni", or "wonderful numberer", as in the margin of [Dan
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013.md) and not only the several members
of their bodies, or the more substantial parts of them, were written in
the book of his purposes, according to which they were fashioned in
time, but the more minute parts, and less to be regarded, were all told
over, and kept in account; even the very hairs of their head, and not
one of them could fall to the ground, any more than a sparrow; or be
plucked off by men, without the knowledge and will of God; so careful is
the providence of God, of all his people:

fear not therefore, ye are of more value than many sparrows; for if the
hairs of their heads are as much regarded as sparrows, their persons and
their lives must be of more account, than an infinite number of them,
nor are they to be mentioned with them.

[Luke 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 12:8</span></span>

Also I say unto you, &c. The same as in [Mat
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#032.md)

whosoever shall confess me before men, him shall the son of man also
confess before the angels of God; only instead of I, he here calls
himself "the son of man"; and instead of "before my Father which is in
heaven", here it is, "before the angels of God"; who will accompany
Christ when he comes to judgment, and will be present, when he shall
acknowledge his true followers as the blessed of his Father, the chosen
of God, his redeemed and sanctified ones; and reject others before his
Father, and the whole universe of rational beings: it is said in the
Targum on [Sol 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#015.md).

"when the children of Israel do the will of their king, he by his word
(the Logos) praises them in the family of the holy angels.''

This Christ, the eternal word, will do at the great day.

[Luke 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 12:9</span></span>

But he that denieth me before men,.... That is, that continues to deny
Christ, and lives and dies a denier of him; for otherwise it is possible
for a person to deny Jesus to be the Son of God, or the Messiah, and
afterwards confess him, as a Pagan or Jew; and through temptation, a
real Christian may be left for a while, in one shape or another, to deny
him and his truths, and afterwards truly repent, and at last be saved,
as Peter; but they that deny Christ publicly, and persist in it,

shall be denied before the angels of God: they will be denied by Christ
as belonging to him; they will be denied admission into heaven; they
will be covered with shame and confusion publicly; they will be sent
into everlasting burnings, and be ever tormented with fire and
brimstone, in the presence of the holy angels.

[Luke 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 12:10</span></span>

And whosoever shall speak a word against the son of man, it shall be
forgiven him,.... These words, though introduced by Luke among the
sayings of Christ, recorded in Matt. 10 yet were said by Christ, on
occasion of the Pharisees, ascribing his works to diabolical influence
and assistance; see Gill on [Mat
12:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#032.md).

but unto him that blasphemeth against the Holy Ghost; as the Pharisees
did, by charging the miracles of Christ with being done by the help of
the devil, when they were wrought by the finger of the Spirit:

it shall not be forgiven. The Ethiopic version adds at the close of this
verse, as in Matthew, "neither in this world, nor in that which is to
come".

[Luke 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 12:11</span></span>

And when they bring you unto the synagogues,.... Of the Jews, to be
examined and scourged by the rulers of them:

and unto magistrates and powers; Heathen ones; the Persic version reads,
"princes and kings"; and the Ethiopic version, "princes, kings, and
judges"; see [Mat 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#018.md)

Take ye no thought how, or what thing ye shall answer, or what ye shall
say; be not anxiously concerned, neither about the manner, nor the
matter of your answer, apology, and defence: in the first part of this
clause, the Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions, only read, "how"; and
the Arabic version only, "what"; See Gill on [Mat
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#019.md).

[Luke 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 12:12</span></span>

For the Holy Ghost shall teach you,.... Shall give both words and
matter: in the same hour; instantly, immediately:

what ye ought to say; what will be proper to be said, for the honour of
Christ, the defence of the Gospel, and the confusion of enemies; See
Gill on [Mat 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#020.md).

[Luke 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 12:13</span></span>

And one of the company said unto him,.... Not one of the disciples of
Christ, but one of the multitude, or crowd, about him, [Luk
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#001.md)

Master, speak to my brother, that he divide the inheritance with me: the
firstborn, according to the law, in [Deu
21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017.md) had a double portion: but the
eider brother here, it seems, was for keeping all, and would not divide
any part to his younger brother; wherefore he applies to Christ, to
interpose his authority, which he imagined would have great weight with
his brother, who might be a hearer of Christ, and favourer of him: or
however, such was the fame of Christ, and such credit he obtained by his
ministry and miracles, that he concluded a word from him, would go a
great way with his brother, to engage him to make a right and proper
division, as he ought; and especially, if he looked upon him, as the
king Messiah the Jews expected, he might take this to be part of his
work and office, to settle such civil affairs as these: we often read in
the Jewish writings, of brethren dividing their substance, left by their
parents; so it is said (f),

, "brethren that divide", (a field,) give two corners (to the poor); if
they return and become partners, they give but one.''

Where there were but two brethren, as here, the one was called "the
firstborn"; and the other, "simple"; having no title or character: and
concerning dividing inheritances, there are the following rules (g):

"the firstborn takes a double portion of his father's goods, as is said,
[Deu 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#017.md) how? a man leaves five
children, and one of them is the firstborn: the firstborn takes the
third part of the substance, and every one of the four simple ones,
takes a sixth part: if he leaves nine children, and one of them is the
firstborn, he takes the fifth part, and every one of the eight simple
ones, takes a tenth part; and so according to this division, they
divided for ever----he that has two sons, a firstborn and a simple one,
and they both die in his lifetime, the firstborn leaves a daughter, and
the simple one leaves a son; lo, the son of the simple one inherits the
third part of the old man's goods, which is his father's part; and the
daughter of the firstborn, inherits the two thirds, which is the part of
her father.''

And again (h),

"two brethren that "divide", and a brother comes to them from the
province of the sea: and so three brethren that "divide", and a creditor
comes and takes the part of one of them, though the one takes land, and
the other money, the division is void, and they return and divide the
rest equally: if any one orders at the time of death, that there should
be given to such an one a palm tree, or a field out of his substance,
and the brethren "divide", and do not give such an one any thing, lo,
the division is void; and how do they do? they give what he ordered the
heirs, and after that they return and divide as at the beginning:
brethren that divide, value what is upon them; but what is upon their
sons and their daughters, which they have in possession, they do not
value--he that leaves fatherless children, some that are grown up, and
others little ones, and they are willing to divide their father's goods,
so that those that are grown up may take their part, the sanhedrim
appoint a guardian for the little ones, and he chooses a good part for
them: and when they are grown up, they cannot make it void, for lo, by
the decree of the sanhedrim, they divided for them; but if the sanhedrim
err in computation, and give them less, they may make it void, and make
another division when, they are grown up.''

But it would be tedious to transcribe all the rules, relating to such
cases.

\(f\) Misn. Peah, c. 3. sect. 5. (g) Maimon. Hilchot Nechalot, c. 2.
sect. 1. 7. (h) Maimon. Hilchot Nechalot, c. 10. sect. 1, 2, 3, 4.

[Luke 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 12:14</span></span>

And he said unto him, man,.... Or "friend", as the Ethiopic version
renders it; that is, Jesus said to him, as the Syriac, Persic, and
Ethiopic versions express it:

who made me a judge, or a divider over you? referring to the words of
one of the Hebrews to Moses, when he interposed in a difference, [Exo
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#014.md) suggesting, that the same might
be retorted on him, should he engage in such an affair: the reason why
Christ avoided meddling with it, was not because it is unlawful for
Christians to concern themselves in arbitrations about civil affairs,
and in making up family differences, which is very commendable; but lest
by such a step, he should give occasion to them, to conclude he was a
temporal king: whereas his kingdom was not of this world, and his
business lay not in civil affairs, and the management of them; but in
spiritual concerns, in preaching the Gospel, and doing good to the souls
of men; wherefore this was out of his province: and besides, it was a
matter of covetousness, either in this person, or his brother, or both;
which Christ takes an occasion from hence to expose, agreeably to his
office; to which may be added, that this man seems to have disturbed
Christ in his public work, and was of such a worldly spirit, as to
prefer the care of his secular affairs, to the hearing of the word, and
the welfare of his immortal soul.

[Luke 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 12:15</span></span>

And he said unto them,.... Either to the two brethren, or to his
disciples, as the Syriac and Persic versions read, or to the whole
company:

take heed, and beware of covetousness; of all covetousness, as read the
Vulgate Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions, and some copies;
that is, of all sorts of covetousness, and every degree of it, which of
all vices is to be avoided and guarded against, being the root of all
evil; and as the Persic version renders it, is worse than all evil, and
leads into it:

for a man's life consisteth not in the abundance of the things which he
possesseth; of flocks and beasts, as the Persic version renders it: a
man's natural life cannot be prolonged by all the good things of the
world he is possessed of; they cannot prevent diseases nor death; nor do
the comfort and happiness of life, lie in these things; which are either
not enjoyed by them, but kept for the hurt of the owners of them, or are
intemperately used, or some way or other imbittered to them, so that
they have no peace nor pleasure in them: and a man's spiritual life is
neither had nor advantaged hereby, and much less is eternal life to be
acquired by any of these things; which a man may have, and be lost for
ever, as the following parable shows.

[Luke 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 12:16</span></span>

And he spake a parable unto them, saying,.... He supposed the following
case, and made use of it by way of illustration of what he had said:

the ground of a certain rich man brought forth plentifully; who
notwithstanding his riches, was but a fool, as the sequel shows; rich
men are not always wise in things natural and civil; and very few of
them are spiritually wise, or wise in spiritual things, in things which
relate to the welfare of their souls; but however, this man was very
prosperous in his worldly affairs, as a man of a small share of common
sense may be, and wicked men often are: the word translated "ground",
signifies a "region", or "country", which expresses the more, the riches
of this man, that he had not a common and ordinary farm, but a whole
country as it were; at least a very large part of one, and all this
fruitful.

[Luke 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 12:17</span></span>

And, he thought within himself,.... And foolish thoughts they were; he
did not think of God, or that there was one, and much less that he was
the author, of all his outward prosperity and plenty; and was still
further off of thinking of returning thanks to God for it: or of asking
counsel of him, what he should do with it; but he consults himself only,
and thought only within, and for himself; and not at all of his poor
neighbours, or for the good of others; nor did he think even of his own
soul, but altogether about his worldly substance:

saying, what shall I do? he does not say what shall I do for God? for
his interest service, and glory? for the poor, the hungry, and thirsty,
and naked? or for my own soul, that that may be eternally saved? but
what shall I do with my goods?

because I have no room where to bestow my fruits: he had gathered in his
harvest, and filled his barns as full as they could hold, so that they
had no room for more; and yet had still an abundance to lay up, and
about which he was anxiously concerned; not thinking of the empty
bellies, barns, and houses of the poor, where he might have stowed much.

[Luke 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 12:18</span></span>

And he said, this will I do,.... This was the resolution he came to, and
which he took up, without consulting God, or asking leave of him:

I will pull down my barns, and build greater; which was not a very wise
one; for he might have let his present barns have stood, and have added
new ones to them:

and there will I bestow all my fruits and my goods; he ascribes the
increase of his substance to himself, and reckons them his own
acquisitions, and entirely owing to his diligence and industry; and
therefore calls them my fruits, and my goods; and accounts them his good
things, his only good things; as worldly men place all good and
happiness in outward enjoyments, having no notion of spiritual and
eternal good things he determines to lay up all in his barns, for his
own use and service, and nothing for God and his interest, nor any thing
for the poor and their relief.

[Luke 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 12:19</span></span>

And I will say to my soul,.... Himself, see [Psa
49:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#018.md) or to his sensual appetite,
which he sought to indulge and gratify, for he was wholly a sensual and
carnal man:

soul, thou hast much goods laid up for many years: he foolishly promises
himself a long life, when no man can boast of tomorrow, or knows what a
day will bring forth; or can assure himself he shall live a day, an
hour, or moment longer: and he also depended upon the safety of his
goods, thus laid up; whereas his barns might be consumed by fire at
once, or his goods be devoured by vermin, or plundered by thieves, and
by various ways taken out of his hands; for riches are uncertain things,
and make themselves wings and fly away:

take thine case, eat, drink, and be merry; spend thy life in ease,
luxury, and mirth; put away the evil day far from thee: never trouble
thyself about a future state, tomorrow shall be as this day, and much
more abundantly; and thou hast enough to make thyself happy, and let
nothing disturb thee, and give a loose to all sensual pleasures, and
carnal joys. This is the language of epicure among the Jews, and is
forbidden to be used, especially on fast days; for so it is said, (i).

"let not a man say I will go to my house, "and I will eat and drink",
(and say) , "peace to thee, O my soul"; if he does so, of him the
Scripture says, [Isa 22:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#013.md) "Behold joy
and gladness, slaying oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and
drinking wine, let us eat and drink, for tomorrow we shall die---surely
this iniquity shall not be purged from you, till ye die, &c."''

\(i\) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 11. 1.

[Luke 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 12:20</span></span>

But God said unto him,.... He determined within himself he should die
that night; for the time of a man's death, as well as of his birth, is
fixed by God; or he sent the messenger of death, some disease or
another, the language of which was, immediate death, or death in a very
short time; or spoke to his conscience, and impressed it on his mind,
that he should die that night, and not live:

thou fool: as he appeared to be, throughout the whole of his conduct:

this night thy soul shall be required of thee: which is of God's
immediate formation, is immortal, of more worth than a world, and its
loss is irreparable; and for which a man is accountable to God, the
Father of spirits; and which he requires at a man's hands at death,
which is here designed; and shows, that a man has no power over it to
retain it, but must give it up when it is called for, even that very
instant, "this night" which may refer to the time when covetous persons
are employing their thoughts about their worldly goods, or when epicures
and sensual persons are indulging themselves in luxury and intemperance;
and to the condition the soul is in, being in the night and in darkness,
and knows not whither it is going; and denotes its immediate remove, and
the suddenness of divine wrath and vengeance; the Vulgate Latin, and
Syriac versions, agreeably to the Greek text, read the words, "this
night do they require thy soul of thee"; or "out of thy body", as the
Persic version reads: the Ethiopic version renders it, "they shall take
thy soul from thee"; that is, the evil angels, the devils having a
commission from God, shall demand thy soul; and as soon as ever it is
separated from the body, shall seize upon it, and carry it to hell; just
as the good angels carry the souls of the saints to heaven, [Luk
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022.md)

Then whose shall those things be, which thou hast provided? not his own,
for he can carry nothing with him; nor does he know whose they will be,
whether the persons he designed them for, or some others whom he
abhorred, and would, if possible, have prevented their enjoyment of
them; and should he have them for whom he intended them, he does not
know how he will turn out, whether a wise man or a fool, or what use he
will make of them.

[Luke 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 12:21</span></span>

So is he that layeth up treasure for himself,.... This is the
accommodation of the parable. Just such a fool is he, and this will be
the end or him, who employs all his thoughts, and spends all his time,
in amassing to himself worldly riches and wealth, in laying up treasures
on earth for himself, for futurity: and makes no use of his earthly
substance to be the good of others; nor shows any concern for spiritual
and eternal riches; but places all his hope, trust, and confidence, in
uncertain riches:

and is not rich towards God; or "in God", as the Syriac and Arabic
versions read; in things pertaining to God, in spiritual things, in
faith, and in good works; and is not concerned to lay up a treasure in
heaven, to have an interest in durable riches and righteousness; whereas
one that is rich towards God, acknowledges that he receives all his
riches from God, as the Ethiopic version reads; he gives up all into the
hands of God, depends upon his providence for the increase, security,
and continuance of it; and uses it to his honour and glory, and for the
good of his interest; and is chiefly concerned for the riches of grace
and glory; and enjoys much of God, and places all his riches in him:
such a man is a wise man, but the reverse of this is the fool in the
parable.

[Luke 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 12:22</span></span>

And he said unto his disciples,.... Having finished the parable which he
spake to the whole audience in common, he directed himself to his
disciples, who were poor, and apt to be over anxious about their living
in the world:

therefore I say unto you, take no thought for your life, what ye shall
eat. The Ethiopic version adds, "and what ye shall drink"; and so a
manuscript in Gonvill and Caius College in Cambridge, which seems to be
transcribed from [Mat 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#027.md) life is
very near and dear to man; all that a man has, he will give for it; and
it is his duty to be careful to preserve it, and to make use of means
for the support of it; but then, as he should not be dainty about the
food he eats, and should refuse no good creature of God, but receive it
with thanksgiving, so he should not distress himself for fear of wanting
bread, nor distrust the promises of God, and a supply from him; but
should cast all his care upon the Lord, who daily cares for him:

neither for the body, what ye shall put on: it is highly proper and
necessary that the body should be clothed, partly for decency, and
partly to secure it from the inclemency of the weather; but then persons
should not be difficult and over nice about what they wear, nor be
distressed, fearing they should be clothed with rags; but should trust
in the Lord, who gives food and raiment, and all things richly to enjoy.

[Luke 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 12:23</span></span>

The life is more than meat,.... What in Matthew is put by way of
question, is here strongly affirmed; and these words contain a reason or
argument to dissuade from an anxious, distressing thought and care about
the necessaries, conveniencies, and comforts of life: and all the
Oriental versions read, "for", or "seeing the life is more than meat";
that is, it is more excellent and valuable in its own nature, being that
for the support of which meat is provided; and seeing God is the author
and giver of life, it need not be doubted but he will give meat for the
maintenance and continuance of it, so long as is his pleasure it should
subsist.

And the body is more than raiment; it is of more worth than the richest
clothing that can be had; the finest piece of embroidery is not
comparable to the curious workmanship of the body, [Psa
139:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#015.md) and he that has so curiously
wrought that, will not fail to provide suitable and proper clothing for
it; and therefore there ought to be no anxiety on this account; See Gill
on [Mat 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005.md).

[Luke 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 12:24</span></span>

Consider the ravens,.... According to the Jews (k) there are three sorts
of ravens, the black raven, the raven of the valley, which is said to be
white, and the raven whose head is like a dove. In Matthew the "fowls of
the air" in general are mentioned, as they are here in the Cambridge
copy of Beza's; but in others, "the ravens" in particular, they being
fowls of very little worth, and disregarded by men, and odious to them,
as well as unclean by the law; and yet these are taken care of by God.
The Arabic version reads, "the young ravens"; and these are which are
said to cry unto God, who provides food for them, and gives it to them,

for they neither sow nor reap, which neither have storehouse nor barn;
and yet they are provided for, and therefore, why should men, and
especially God's own people, distrust his providence over them, when
they both sow and reap, have the seedtime, and harvest in the appointed
seasons: they cast their seed into the earth, and it springs up and
brings forth much fruit, which they reap when ripe, and gather into
their barns and storehouses, from whence they are supplied till another
season returns; wherefore they have no reason to distress themselves,
seeing, though this is not the case of ravens, yet

God feedeth them; their young ones, as the above places show. Jerom says
(l), that it is affirmed by some philosophers, that they live upon dew.
The Jews (m) have a notion, that the old ravens being cruel to their
young, and hating them, the Lord has pity on them, and prepares flies,
or worms for them, which arise out of their dung, and enter into their
mouths, and they them. One of their commentators says (n), when the
young ones are hatched they are white, and the old ones leave them, not
taking them for their own, and therefore bring them no food, and then
they cry to God; and this is mentioned by some Christian writers, but
not sufficiently confirmed: and another of them observes (o), that the
philosophers of the Gentiles say, that the ravens leave their young as
soon as they are hatched; but what Aristotle (p), Pliny (q), and
Aelianus (r) affirm of these creatures is, that as soon as they are able
to fly they turn them out of their nests, and even drive them out of the
country where they are; when, as it is said in Job, "they wander for
lack of meat, and cry unto God, who gives it to them": and since this is
the case, and the providence of God is so much concerned for such
worthless creatures, the people of God, and disciples of Christ, ought
by no means to distrust it: for as it follows,

how much more are ye better than the fowls: or "than these", as the
Vulgate Latin version reads; that is than these ravens, or any other
fowls whatever; See Gill on [Mat 6:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#026.md).

\(k\) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 63. 1. (l) Comment. in Job xxxviii. 41. & in
Psal. cxlvii. 9. (m) Jarchi in Job xxxviii. 41. & in Psal. cxlvii. 9. &
Kimchi in lb. (n) Kimchi ib. Vid. T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 49. 2. & Gloss.
in ib. (o) Aben Ezra in Psal. cxivii. 9. (p) Hist. Animal. l. 9. c. 31.
(q) Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 12. (r) De Animal. Natura, l. 2. c. 49.

[Luke 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 12:25</span></span>

And which of you with taking thought,.... In an anxious and distressing
manner, for food and raiment, in order to preserve and continue life,

add to his stature one cubit? The Persic version reads, "to his stature
and height", as if this referred to the height of stature; whereas it
seems rather to regard the age of a man, and the continuance of his
life; See Gill on [Mat 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#027.md).

[Luke 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 12:26</span></span>

If ye then be not able to do that which is least,.... As to make the
smallest addition to a man's stature, or rather to add one moment to his
days:

why take ye thought for the rest? which are much greater, as to preserve
the body in its whole bulk, and all its parts, or for the feeding and
clothing of it, or rather for the continuation and preservation of life
to any length of time; for if it cannot be by all a man's care and
solicitude lengthened out one moment longer than is the pleasure of God,
how should it be by such anxiety continued for months and years?

[Luke 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 12:27</span></span>

Consider the lilies how they grow,.... Some copies read, "the lilies of
the field", as in [Mat 6:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#028.md) The Persic
version renders the word, "the roses and lilies of the field": and the
Arabic version, the "flowers"; any flowers of the field; for what is
afterwards said, is true of any of them, but particularly of the lilies:
now, as the former instance of God's feeding the ravens is designed to
remove all anxious and distressing thoughts about food for the body;
this is mentioned to take off every thing of that kind with respect to
clothing for it; wherefore, in Matthew, these words are premised to it,
"and why take ye thought for raiment?" there will be no need of it, when
it considered how the lilies, or tulips, or any other flowers grow up
out of the earth, and in what a fine beautiful dress they appear,
without any care or labour of their own, and even without the care and
management of a gardener; for flowers of the field are here meant:

they toil not, they spin not; they neither labour as men do, in sowing
flax, and dressing it, or in combing of wool, or in spinning of either:

and yet I say unto you, that Solomon in all his glory was not arrayed
like one of these. The Ethiopic version renders it, "in the whole time
of his glory"; throughout his glorious reign, at any time; whenever upon
any extraordinary occasion he was dressed out in the finest manner, yet
even then a lily outdid him; its glory being natural to it, whereas his,
at best, was but artificial, and an imitation of nature; See Gill on
[Mat 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#029.md).

[Luke 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 12:28</span></span>

If then God so clothe the grass,.... lilies and tulips; for they are no
other than grass, weak, frail, fading, short lived flowers, which have
all their gaiety and beauty from the great Creator of them:

which is today in the field, and tomorrow is cast into the oven: the
grass is one day in the field, in all its verdure, glory, and beauty;
and being cut down before evening, the next day it is withered and
dried, and made fit to put into an oven, or under a furnace to heat them
with:

how much more will he clothe you, O ye of little faith? The Persic
version renders the words, "how much more excellent are ye than that, O
ye of little faith?" they are more excellent in their nature, and of a
longer duration, and are designed for greater ends and purposes; and
therefore if God clothes the one in such a manner as he does, how much
more will he not clothe the other? and such who are distrustful and
diffident in this matter, may well be called men of little faith; See
Gill on [Mat 6:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#030.md).

[Luke 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 12:29</span></span>

And seek not what ye shall eat, or what ye shall drink,.... That is, in
an anxious and distressing manner, with a tormenting and vexatious care;
otherwise food is to be both asked of God every day, and to be sought
for and after in the use of proper means:

neither be ye of doubtful minds; questioning and distrusting that ye
shall have any thing to eat or drink: be not fickle, unstable, and
inconstant, and wandering in your thoughts about these things, like the
meteors in the air, which are carried about here and there; let not your
minds be disturbed and distracted about them; or be anxiously solicitous
for them; See Gill on [Mat 6:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#031.md).

[Luke 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 12:30</span></span>

For all these things do the nations of the world seek after,.... That
is, the Gentiles, as in [Mat 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032.md) who
are frequently, in the Jewish writings, called, in distinction from the
Jews, , "the nations of the world" (s). This is an argument used to
dissuade from an immediate and anxious concern for food and raiment,
because it is Heathenish, and therefore very unbecoming the disciples
and followers of Christ: it need not be wondered at in those that know
not God, and do not acknowledge his providence, and are strangers to his
covenant and promises; but must be very unsuitable to the characters of
such who know that godliness has the promise of this life, and of that
which is to come:

and your Father knoweth that ye have need of these things; and therefore
it is needless to be so anxious about them: the Persic version reads,
"all these things", and so some copies; that is, meat, drink, and
clothing, all the necessaries of life; See Gill on [Mat
6:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#032.md).

\(s\) Vid. T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 28. 2. & 29.

[Luke 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 12:31</span></span>

But rather seek ye the kingdom of God,.... The Vulgate Latin version
adds, "first", as also, "and his righteousness", as in [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033.md) and the Ethiopic version reads,
"seek his kingdom and righteousness" meaning either the grace of God,
which is not meat and drink, but righteousness, peace and joy in the
Holy Ghost, [Rom 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#017.md) or the heavenly
glory; unless the Gospel, and the dispensation of it, which is the
Messiah's kingdom, and which was then just ushering in, should rather be
intended.

And all these things shall be added unto you; food and raiment, which
are as much as can be enjoyed; and godliness with these, and contentment
with them, is great gain; See Gill on [Mat
6:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#033.md).

[Luke 12:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 12:32</span></span>

Fear not little flock,.... these words are particularly directed to the
immediate apostles and disciples of Christ; but are true of all the
saints in all ages of time, who are compared to a "flock of sheep",
being separated from the rest of the world in election, redemption, and
the effectual calling, and being folded together in a Gospel church
state; and also for their patience, meekness, humility, and
harmlessness: these are a "little" flock; few in number, when compared
with the wicked of the world; and mean and despicable in the account of
men; and little in their own eyes: these are subject to many "fears";
some relate to their outward state, and condition, as that they shall
want food and raiment, and not have the necessaries of life; which seems
to be in the first place here intended, as appears from the context: and
some regard their spiritual and eternal estate, as lest they should have
no interest in the love of God, and in the covenant, in the blessings
and promises of his grace; lest they should not belong to Christ; or the
good work of grace should not be begun in them; or that they should not
persevere to the end, and should at last miscarry of eternal life and
happiness: and these fears arise from a body of sin, from the
temptations of Satan, the hidings of God's face, and the prevalence of
unbelief; for they have no true reason for them: God is on their side,
and will not leave, nor forsake them, nor shall they want any good thing
Christ is their shepherd, and he has bought them, with his own blood,
and will lose none of them; and therefore they need not fear being taken
care of both in soul and body, for time and eternity: and especially
when what follows is considered,

for it is your Father's good pleasure to give you the kingdom; not only
the Gospel, and the knowledge of the mysteries of it; nor the Gospel
church state, and a right to all its ordinances; nor only the kingdom of
grace, which cannot be moved; but the kingdom of glory: and which is a
gift unto them, not obtained by any deserts or works of theirs; nor is
their right unto, and enjoyment of it depending upon any such thing: and
it their Father's gift, who is so by adopting grace, and through Christ
Jesus their Lord; and which he gives according to his sovereign will and
pleasure, and with a good will, delighting in them, and rejoicing over
them to do them good, both here and hereafter: so that they may depend
upon every good thing needful for them both in this world, and in the
world to come; nor should they indulge anxious cares, or slavish fears.

[Luke 12:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 12:33</span></span>

Sell that ye have, and give alms,.... Since they had a kingdom
bequeathed them by their heavenly Father, they should be so far from
indulging an anxious care about food and raiment, that when there was a
call in providence for it, and rather than the poor should go without a
supply, it became them to sell their houses and lands, and whatever
possessions they had, and relieve them; and so they did not long after;
for some of those who sold their estates, and brought the money to the
apostles, [Act 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#034.md), might be now
present; and the more readily and cheerfully do what they did,
remembering these words of Christ:

provide yourselves bags which wax not old; as do the bags of misers:
their bag is, , "a bag pierced through", or that has a hole in it, which
lets the money out as it is put in, [Hag
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#006.md) and which the Targum renders by,
"for a curse"; as money hoarded up in bags by covetous persons generally
is: Christ would have his followers put their money up in other bags;
not in such which rot through age, or are worn out, and are full of
holes through use; but into the hands and bellies of the poor, the fruit
and reward of which will always abide;

a treasure in the heavens that faileth not: whereas treasure on earth
does, being either taken away from the possessors of it by various ways,
or they from that:

where no thief approacheth; can come near to steal it away, which is
often the case here on earth:

neither moth corrupteth; as it does the best of garments, wore by men:
but the robes of glory and immortality can never be corrupted: See Gill
on [Mat 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#020.md).

[Luke 12:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 12:34</span></span>

For where your treasure is,.... Whether in heaven, or in earth, there
will your heart be also: the heart is always set upon the treasure, and
as is a man's treasure, such is his heart, that is, set upon it; if his
treasure is only here, and he has not the true riches, his heart is only
earthly and carnal; but if his treasure is heavenly, his heart and
conversation will be in heaven; See Gill on [Mat
6:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#021.md).

[Luke 12:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 12:35</span></span>

Let your loins be girded about,.... With the girdle of truth, [Eph
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md) keeping close to the doctrines of
the Gospel, abiding faithfully by them, even unto death: the allusion is
either to the eating of the first passover, [Exo
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#011.md) or rather to servants, who, in
these eastern countries, wore long garments; and therefore, when in
business, used to gather them up, and gird them about them, that they
might perform their service with greater strength, more ease, quicker
dispatch, and less hinderance: the phrase denotes readiness for
business:

and your lights burning. The Vulgate Latin version adds, "in your
hands"; meaning torches that were held in the hand: and may design
either the Scriptures of truth, which were to be a light or lamp unto
them, guiding and directing them in the ministration of the Gospel; or
the lamps of profession, which should be kept clear and bright, and good
works, becoming them, that should so shine before men, that all may see
them, and glorify God. The allusion is to persons waiting at a wedding
in the night, with torches and flambeaus in their hands.

[Luke 12:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 12:36</span></span>

And ye yourselves like unto men that wait for their Lord,.... Who either
was at a wedding, or was the bridegroom himself; so be ye in a
readiness, waiting for the coming of Christ, the bridegroom of the
church:

when he will return from the wedding, The Syriac version renders it,
"from the house of feasting"; from any entertainment, or from the
marriage feast, or rather the marriage itself, to the bride chamber: so
when Christ has, by the preaching of the Gospel, and the power of his
grace, espoused all his elect, he will descend from heaven, and take
them to himself; they shall then be called to the marriage supper of the
Lamb, and enter with him into the nuptial chamber, and be for ever with
him:

that when he cometh and knocketh, they may open to him immediately; and
let him in without any delay, as soon as ever he comes to the door; and
at the first knock, open it to him at once, having light, and being in a
posture of readiness, and in constant expectation of him: so such who
have believed in Christ, and have been faithful to his cause and
interest, and have held fast the profession of their faith without
wavering, when Christ shall either come and knock at their doors by
death, or shall come to judgment, and sound the alarm of it, they shall
be ready to obey the summons with the greatest cheerfulness, and meet
him with the utmost pleasure.

[Luke 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 12:37</span></span>

Blessed are those servants whom the Lord,.... The Syriac, Arabic, and
Ethiopic versions read, "their Lord", the master of them, or the Lord
Jesus Christ:

when he cometh shall find watching: for him, and not asleep. The
Ethiopic version reads, "so doing, and watching"; girding up their
loins, trimming their lamps, and waiting for their Lord's coming: such
servants are happy, they will appear to be in the favour of their
master, who will take notice of them and show some marks of respect to
them; as Christ will to all his good and faithful servants, whenever he
comes, whether at death, or at judgment; and who will be happy then,
being found so doing, and found in him:

verily I say unto you that he shall gird himself; not that Christ shall
really do this, or appear in the form of a servant; but that he shall
readily, cheerfully, and at once introduce his servants into his joy,
and make them partakers of all the glories of the other world:

and make them to sit down to meat; at his table in his kingdom; see [Mat
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011.md)

and will come forth and serve them; with food, yea, will feed them
himself, and lead them to fountains of living water, [Rev
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#017.md) The Arabic version renders it,
"he shall stand to minister unto them": the phrase is expressive of the
posture of a servant; who, as Dr. Lightfoot observes, is "walking", and
who goes round about the table, whilst others sit (t): some think there
is allusion in the words to a custom used at some feasts, particularly
at the feasts in honour of Saturn, in which servants changed clothes
with their masters, and sat at their tables, and their masters served
them (u).

\(t\) Jarchi in T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 77. 2. (u) Vide Lipsii
Saturnal. l. 1. c. 2. p. 6.

[Luke 12:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 12:38</span></span>

And if he shall come in the second watch,.... Of the night, that is,
after nine o'clock, or any time between nine or twelve; for the second
watch was from nine o'clock till twelve; and this was coming early from
an entertainment, or a wedding, which were commonly kept in the night,
and late;

or come in the third watch, or after twelve o'clock, or any time between
twelve and three; for the third watch was from twelve o'clock to three,
which was late; See Gill on [Mat 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#025.md)
The Persic version reads, "in the second, or third part of the night";
and the Ethiopic version, "in the second or third hour of the night";

and find them so. The Arabic version adds, "doing"; as above described,
with their loins girt, lights burning, and they watching for their
Lord's coming:

blessed are those servants; since they shall be used and treated as
before related.

[Luke 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 12:39</span></span>

And this know,.... The Ethiopic version reads, "this only know"; only
take notice of this one thing, and it may be of some use to direct you
in your conduct how to behave during the absence of your Lord, until the
time he shall come again:

that if the good man of the house had known what hour the thief would
come; that is, if the owner, or master of the house, whose the goods in
the house are, could by any means know what time of the night the thief
would come to break into his house, in order to plunder it, and carry
off his goods:

he would have watched; either he himself in person, or he would have set
a watch about his house, or in it:

and not have suffered his house to be broken through; either the door to
be broken up, or the wall to be dug through, but by a guard about it, or
within it, would have prevented such a design. And so in like manner,
could it be known in what time Christ would come, either to the
destruction of Jerusalem, or at death, or to judgment, every thoughtful,
prudent man that should know it, would be upon his guard, that he might
not be surprised with it; and though the precise time could not be
known, yet inasmuch as the thing itself is certain, it became all the
servants of Christ to be watching for it; See Gill on [Mat
24:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043.md).

[Luke 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 12:40</span></span>

Be ye therefore ready also,.... Not habitually, but actually, in the
exercise of grace, and the discharge of duty, with loins girt, and
lights burning. This may be understood either of a readiness to meet the
Lord in the way of his judgments, and particularly the destruction of
Jerusalem, which was to be in a few years; or of a preparation for
death, and the last judgment, which lies in the righteousness of Christ
imputed, and his grace imparted: and to have a comfortable view of the
one, and a gracious experience of the other, as they will engage to the
performance of good works, to which such are ready; so they make meet
for the coming of Christ, be it in what way, and whensoever it will: and
the rather, a concern should be had for such a preparation, because of
the following reason,

for the son of man cometh at an hour when ye think not; in either of the
above ways; See Gill on [Mat 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044.md).

[Luke 12:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 12:41</span></span>

Then Peter said unto him, Lord,.... The Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic
versions read, "our Lord":

speakest thou this parable: of the master at the wedding, and his
servants waiting for him, or of the housekeeper watching that his house
be not broken up, or both:

unto us, or unto all? Peter was in doubt whether the above discourse was
peculiarly directed to them, the apostles, as containing special
instructions to them in the discharge of the ministerial work; or
whether it was designed for all his disciples and followers, both in the
present age, and in time to come, to the end of the world.

[Luke 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 12:42</span></span>

And the Lord said, who then is that faithful and wise steward,....
Christ does not directly, and in express words, answer to Peter's
question, but suggests, that though he intended it as a caution to all
his people, and in it spoke to them all to be upon their watch and
guard, [Mar 13:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#037.md) yet that he had a
special regard to them, his apostles, and succeeding ministers of the
Gospel, whose characters, office, work, dignity, and honour, are here
described. Such are stewards in Christ's family, they are entrusted with
the stores and provisions of his house, and "faithfulness" and "wisdom"
are requisite in them; the one, that they do not corrupt and adulterate
the word of God, and mix it with human doctrines, but that they deliver
it out pure and sincere as it is; and the other, that they may rightly
divide it, and wisely distribute it:

whom his Lord shall make ruler over his household: Christ's "household",
or family, is his church, over which the ministers of the Gospel are
appointed "rulers", to govern the house according to the laws of Christ,
and keep every thing in good decorum and order; and particularly their
work, and which agrees to their character as stewards is,

to give them their portion of meat in due season: in doing which they
answer the characters of faithful and wise stewards: they are faithful
who give out the whole portion allotted, without adulterating it, or
keeping back any part of it; and they are wise, who deliver it to them
in proper time and season. The word translated "portion of meat", is
only used in this place, and is rendered in the Vulgate Latin version,
"a measure of wheat"; but it may be applied to any food in general, and
an allotment of it; and signifies such a portion as was given to
servants for one month, or rather every day; and may signify that
portion of the word of God, and the interpretation of it, which is to be
given forth every Lord's day to his people, suitable to their condition,
cases, and circumstances. The Septuagint translators use the verb in
[Gen 47:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#012.md) who render the text thus,
"and Joseph, measured out to his father", and to "his brethren, and to
all the house of father, wheat", or bread, "according to their persons",
i.e. the number of them: to which passage there may be some reference
here; at least it serves to illustrate this; See Gill on [Mat
24:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045.md).

[Luke 12:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 12:43</span></span>

Blessed is that servant,.... Who is faithful and wise, rules well, and
discharges his trust with integrity, and disposes of the provisions of
the house, in his hands, with great discretion and prudence:

whom his Lord, when he cometh; to take vengeance on the wicked Jews, or
by death, or at judgment:

shall find so doing; behaving as a good ruler, and as a wise and
faithful steward.

[Luke 12:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 12:44</span></span>

Of a truth I say unto you,.... This, with Christ, was a strong way of
asserting the truth of any thing; and the sense is, you may assure
yourselves of it, this will certainly be the happy case of such servant:

that he will make him ruler over all that he hath; as Joseph was made by
Pharaoh. Such an one shall reign with Christ on earth a thousand years,
and then in heaven with him to all eternity, where he shall enjoy all
things; See Gill on [Mat 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#047.md)

[Luke 12:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 12:45</span></span>

But and if that servant say in his heart,.... Not the same servant
before spoken of as a wise and faithful steward, that gives to all in
the family the portion of meat in due season, and shall be found doing,
and be made ruler over his master's goods but another, who also, as he,
is made by his Lord ruler over his household, and is in a like post, and
in the same office, but is an "evil servant", as Matthew calls him, to
distinguish him from the other; and so the Arabic and Ethiopic versions
read here:

my Lord delayeth his coming; though a wicked servant, he calls Christ
his Lord; but it is not saying Lord, Lord, that will be of any avail,
but doing the will of God, by believing in Christ, and obeying his
commands: he had a notion of the coming of Christ, though he did not
desire it; and because he tarried longer than was expected, supposed him
to be slack concerning his promise, and began to think, and hope, and at
length to believe, that he would not come at all, and therefore gave
himself up to a wicked and licentious way of living:

and shall begin to beat the menservants and maidens; to persecute the
ministers of the Gospel, and the true disciples of Christ, the undefiled
virgins, that follow the Lamb whithersoever he goes:

and to eat, and drink, and to be drunken: to live a voluptuous and
sensual life, to give himself up to intemperance and debauchery: and,
generally speaking, as professors of religion, when they turn apostates,
are the most violent persecutors of the saints; so such persecutors of
Christ's, faithful followers are commonly drunkards and debauchees; See
Gill on [Mat 24:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#048.md), See Gill on [Mat
24:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#049.md).

[Luke 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 12:46</span></span>

The Lord of that servant will come in a day when he looketh not for
him,.... For, not coming as was expected, he gives over looking, and
concludes he will not come at all; in which he will find himself
mistaken, for he will come in the very day which is appointed, though
men know not of it, and do not look for it:

and at an hour when he is not aware; for as neither the day, nor hour of
Christ's coming are known to any man, it becomes men to look for it
every day and hour, lest it come upon them unawares; as it will, on such
evil servants before described, with whom it will go ill, as follows:

and will cut him in sunder, and appoint him his portion with
unbelievers; whose portion is the lake which burns with fire and
brimstone, which is the second death, [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008.md) and by these are meant, not only
the Heathens, who never heard of Christ; nor the Jews only, who
disbelieved the Messiah, and rejected him when he came; but all deists
and atheists, who deny revelation; even all unbelievers of, and scoffers
at the coming of Christ, and who put away the evil day far from them;
compare with this [Job 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#029.md), See Gill
on [Mat 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#051.md).

[Luke 12:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 12:47</span></span>

And that servant which knew his Lord's will,.... Not his secret, but his
revealed will; the will of God, which lies in the declarations of his
grace and mercy in the Gospel, and in the commands and ordinances
expressed in his word; and which are the good, perfect, and acceptable
will of God; the knowledge of which is necessary, in order to practice:
and where there is a spiritual and saving knowledge, there will be
practice: but there may be knowledge, where there is no practice, and
which was the case here: Christ here distinguishes between wicked
servants, some being knowing, and others ignorant; and accordingly the
aggravations of their guilt are more or less:

and prepared not himself; so the Arabic and Ethiopic versions supply,
but the Syriac version, "for him", that is, for his Lord: but it may as
well be read as in the Vulgate Latin, without any supplement, "and
prepared not"; he took no thought nor care about doing it; there is no
preparation, readiness, nor disposition, in a natural man, to the will
of God: no man is prepared or ready to do it, but he that is
regenerated, or is made a new creature; who has the laws of God written
on his heart, and who has the Spirit of God put within him, to cause him
to keep them; and who has faith in Christ, and strength from him to
observe them; but there may be knowledge, where such a preparation is
wanting; persons may know much, and profess to know more, and in works
deny all, and be to every good work, unfit, disobedient, and reprobate:
this clause is left out in the Persic version:

neither did according to his will; the will of God is done aright, when
what is done, is done according to the command of God, in the strength
of Christ, from love to him, in the exercise of faith on him, and with a
view to his glory, and without any dependence on what is done; but there
may be knowledge, without any thing of this: the words, "neither did",
are wanting in the Syriac version: and such a man that has knowledge
without practice,

shall be beaten with many stripes; alluding to the law of the Jews, by
which a wicked man was to be punished, by beating him with stripes, not
exceeding, forty, according to the nature of his fault, [Deu
25:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#002.md) and here it signifies, that
persons who have light and knowledge, and the means thereof, and act not
according to them, shall be punished with the greatest severity, and
endure the greatest degree of torments in hell; see

[Luke 12:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#048.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 12:48</span></span>

But he that knew not,.... His Lord's will; either not having the means
of knowing it, as the Heathens; or through neglect of them, not
attending to them, and making use of them, which is the case of many,
where the Gospel revelation is:

and did commit things worthy of stripes; or punishment; as the Gentiles,
by sinning against the law, and light of nature; and those who might
have the advantage of a divine revelation, but neglect it: the
Septuagint in [Deu 25:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#002.md) have the same
phrase as here, , "worthy of stripes":

shall be beaten with few stripes; their punishment shall be less, and it
shall be more tolerable for them in the day of judgment, than for
knowing professors. The Jews did not always inflict forty stripes, or
forty save one, upon delinquents; but according to their crimes, and as
they were able to bear them, more or fewer: so it is said (w),

"when they judge a sinner, how many (stripes) he can bear, they do not
reckon, but by stripes that are fit to be trebled: if they judge he is
able to bear "twenty", they do not order that he be beaten with twenty
one, that so they may be trebled, but that he be beaten with "eighteen":
if they condemn him to receive forty, and after he is begun to be
beaten, they observe him to be weak, and they say he cannot bear any
more than these "nine", or "twelve", with which he has been beaten, lo,
he is free; if they condemn him to receive "twelve", and after that he
is beaten, they see that he is strong and able to bear more, lo, he is
free, and he is not to be beaten any more, upon that estimation: if they
condemn him today that he is to be beaten with "twelve" (stripes), and
they do not beat him till tomorrow, and lo, tomorrow he is able to bear
eighteen, they do not beat him but with twelve.''

And elsewhere the rule is (x),

"he that commits a sin, in which there are two negative (commands
broken) if they pronounce but one sentence, he is beaten and is free;
but if not (i.e. if more than one) he is beaten, and when he is healed,
he is beaten again.''

For unto whomsoever much is given, of him shall, much be required: the
more knowledge a man has, the more practice is expected from him; and
the greater his gifts are, the more useful he ought to be, and diligent
in the improvement of them:

and to whom men have committed much, or to whom much is committed, of
him they will ask the more; not more than what was committed to him, but
more than from him, who has less committed to him; in proportion to what
a man is entrusted with, the greater increase and improvement it is
expected he should make.

\(w\) Maimon. Hilchot Sanhedrin, c. 17. sect. 2, 3. (x) Misn. Maccot, c.
3. sect. 11.

[Luke 12:49](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#049.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">luk 12:49</span></span>

I am come to send fire on the earth,.... Meaning either the Gospel,
which is as fire, that gives both light and heat, warms the hearts of
God's people, and causes them to burn within them; though very
distressing and torturing to wicked men; so the word of God is compared
to fire, in [Jer 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009.md). Or else zeal
for it, and which would be opposed with sharp contentions by others; or
rather persecution for the sake of the Gospel, called sometimes the
fiery trial; which tries men, as gold is tried in the fire, what they
are, and what their principles and profession be; unless the Holy Ghost,
and baptizing with him, and with fire, should be meant; since Christ in
the next verse, speaks of the baptism of his sufferings, which that was
to follow:

and what will I? what shall I say concerning this fire? what shall I
wish and pray for? what would be pleasing and agreeable to me? even
this,

if it be already kindled; or "that it were already kindled", or "O that
it were already kindled"; meaning either that the Gospel was warmly
preached by his disciples, and zealously defended by them, as it was
after his death and resurrection; or that hot persecution was raised
against it which was now beginning, since the advantage of it would be
far greater than the evil in it: or that the Holy Ghost was come down in
cloven tongues, like as of fire.

[Luke 12:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#050.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">luk 12:50</span></span>

But I have a baptism to be baptized with,.... Not water baptism, for he
had been baptized with that already; nor the baptism of the Spirit,
which he had also received without measure; though the Ethiopic version
reads it actively, "with which I shall baptize", referring doubtless to
that; but the baptism of his sufferings is meant, which are compared to
a baptism, because of the largeness and abundance of them; he was as it
were immersed, or plunged into them; and which almost all interpreters
observe on the text, and by which they confess the true import and
primary signification of the word used; as in baptism, performed by
immersion, the person is plunged into water, is covered with it, and
continues awhile under it, and then is raised out of it, and which being
once done, is done no more; so the sufferings of Christ were so many and
large, that he was as it were covered with them, and he continued under
them for a time, and under the power of death and the grave, when being
raised from thence, he dies no more, death hath no more dominion over
him. This baptism he "had", there was a necessity of his being baptized
with it, on his Father's account; it was his will, his decree, and the
command he enjoined him as Mediator; it was the portion he allotted him,
and the cup he gave unto him: and on his own part, he obliged himself
unto it, in the counsel and covenant of peace; for this purpose he came
into this world, and had substituted himself in the room and stead of
his people; and it was necessary on their part, for their sins could not
be atoned for without sufferings, nor without the sufferings of Christ;
moreover, the promises and prophecies of the Old Testament concerning
them, made them necessary:

and how am I straitened until it be accomplished: these words express
both the trouble and distress Christ was in, at the apprehension of his
sufferings as man; which were like to the distress of persons, closely
besieged by an enemy; or rather of a woman, whose time of travail draws
nigh, when she dreads it, and yet longs to have it over: and likewise
they signify, his restless desire to have them accomplished; not that he
desired that Judas should betray him, or the Jews crucify him, as these
were sins of theirs; nor merely his sufferings as such; but that thereby
the justice of God might be satisfied, the law might be fulfilled, and
the salvation of his people be obtained: and this eager desire of his,
he had shown in various instances, and did show afterwards; as in his
ready compliance with his Father's proposal in eternity; in his frequent
appearances in human form before his incarnation; in sending one message
after another, to give notice of his coming; in his willingness to be
about his Father's business, as soon as possible; in rebuking Peter,
when he would have dissuaded him from all thoughts of suffering: in
going to Jerusalem on his own accord, in order to suffer there; in his
earnest wish to eat the last passover with his disciples; in the joy
that possessed him, when Judas was gone out, in order to betray him; in
stopping in the midst of his sermon, lest he should overrun, or outslip
the time of meeting him in the garden, [Joh
14:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#030.md) in his going thither, and
willingly surrendering himself up into the hands of his enemies; and in
cheerfully laying down his life: all which arose from the entire love he
had for the persons he died for; and because it was his Father's will,
and his glory was concerned herein, and his own glory also was advanced
thereby; moreover, his death was the life of others, and the work
required haste.

[Luke 12:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#051.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">luk 12:51</span></span>

Suppose ye that I am come to give peace on earth?.... To set up a
temporal kingdom, in great pomp, and outward peace and tranquility?
Christ came to make peace with God for men, and to give the Gospel of
peace, and spiritual and eternal peace to men; but not external peace,
especially that, which is not consistent with the preservation of truth:

I tell you, nay; whatever suppositions you have made, or whatever
notions you have entertained, I solemnly affirm, and you may depend upon
it, I am not come into the world on any such account, as to establish
outward peace among men;

but rather division; so he calls the Gospel, which in Matthew is styled
a "sword"; and the Ethiopic version seems to have read both here, since
it renders it, "but a sword that I may divide": the Gospel is the sword
of the Spirit, which divides asunder soul and Spirit, and separates a
man from his former principles and practices; and sets men apart from
one another, even the nearest relations, at the greatest distance; and
is, through the sin of man, the occasion of great contention, discord,
and division.

[Luke 12:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#052.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">luk 12:52</span></span>

For from henceforth there shall be five in one house,.... Which are the
five following, mentioned in the next verse; the father and the son, the
mother and the daughter, and her daughter-in-law, or son's wife; for the
mother and mother-in-law are one and the same person, only standing in
different relations; as a mother to her own daughter, and a
mother-in-law to her son's wife, or to her husband's daughter by his
first wife; though the former best answers to the word used: now from
the time of Christ's saying these words, or quickly after this,
immediately upon his baptism of sufferings, or soon after his death,
when the Gospel should be preached more publicly and extensively, this
should be the effect of it; that supposing a family consisting of the
above number, they should be

divided from one another, in the following manner:

three against two, and two against three; three that did not believe in
Christ, against two that did believe in him; or two that did not
believe, against three that did; or three that did, against two that did
not; or two that did, against three that did not. The Ethiopic version
reads, "two shall be separated from three, and one shall be separated
from two".

[Luke 12:53](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#053.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">luk 12:53</span></span>

The father shall be divided against the.... Shall oppose him, differ
with him, and be alienated from him, and so the other relations as
follow; See Gill on [Mat 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#035.md), See
Gill on [Mat 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#036.md).

[Luke 12:54](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#054.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">luk 12:54</span></span>

And he said also to the people,.... For what Christ had before said,
were chiefly, if not solely, directed to his disciples; but now he
turned himself to the innumerable multitude that were about him, and
particularly addressed himself to the Scribes and Pharisees that were
among them:

when ye see a cloud rise out of the west; the watery vapours being
attracted by the heat of the sun, out of the Mediterranean Sea, which
lies west of the land of Judea, and formed into a cloud, and drove by
the wind:

straightway ye say there comes a shower; as soon as it is seen, it is
presently concluded and affirmed, that a very heavy shower will soon
fall, it having been frequently observed so to do, when this has been
the case:

and so it is; for the most part, there commonly follows a large shower
on such an appearance, and they were seldom mistaken in their
conclusions.

[Luke 12:55](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#055.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">luk 12:55</span></span>

And when ye see the south wind blow,.... From the hot countries of
Egypt, Ethiopia, and Arabia, which lay south of Judea:

ye say there will be heat; or hot sultry weather, scorching heat, which
such a wind brings with it:

and it cometh to pass; generally speaking, as is asserted.

[Luke 12:56](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#056.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">luk 12:56</span></span>

Ye hypocrites,.... A word often used of the Scribes and Pharisees, and
which suggests, that there were such in company, to whom Christ more
especially directs his discourse; and this may be the rather thought,
since much the like things are said by him to the Pharisees, with the
Sadducees, in [Mat 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#001.md) and the same
appellation is given them there, as here:

ye can discern the face of the sky, and of the earth; from the
appearance of the sky, they could tell how it would be with the earth,
and the inhabitants of it, whether they should have dry or wet weather,
heat or cold:

but how is it that ye do not discern this time? that this is the time of
the Messiah's coming, and that it is the accepted time, and day of
salvation, if ye receive him, and believe in him; and a time of
vengeance, if ye reject him: this might have been discerned by the
prophecies of the Old Testament, which fix the characters of the
Messiah, and the time of his coming; and describe the manners of the men
of that generation, in which he should come: and point out both their
happiness and their ruin; as also by the doctrines they heard Christ
preach, and especially by the miracles which were wrought by him, it
might have been known he was come.

[Luke 12:57](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#057.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">luk 12:57</span></span>

Yea, and why even of yourselves,.... From their own observation, as in
discerning the signs of the weather; in a rational way, by the light of
reason, and according to the dictates of their own consciences; by what
they themselves saw and heard; by the signs and wonders which were done,
they might have concluded, that now was the time of the Messiah's
coming; and that he was come, and that Jesus of Nazareth was he: this
was as easy, by observation, to be discerned, as the face of the sky
was; even of themselves, without any hints or directions from others:

judge ye not what is right? or "truth", as the Syriac and Persic
versions render it; concerning the present time, the coming of the
Messiah, and the accomplishment of the promises and prophecies of the
Old Testament in him: or why do ye not of yourselves judge, what is fit
and right to be done between man and man, without going to law? and
that, in cases which are plain and clear, the consequences of which may
be as easily discerned, as what weather it will be by the signs in the
heavens; to which sense the following words incline.

[Luke 12:58](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#058.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">luk 12:58</span></span>

When thou goest with thine adversary,.... The creditor, as the Persic
version, and who is the prosecutor, that has commenced a suit of law
against another, in order to obtain his right: for Christ is here
speaking of a bad man, that will not pay his just debts, so that his
creditor is obliged to prosecute him, and have him to the

magistrate; ruler, or prince; the Nasi, or prince of the sanhedrim, who
sat as judge there: as thou art in the way; going along with the
creditor, or prosecutor, to the court of judicature;

give diligence that thou mayest be delivered from him. The Persic
version renders it, "give him the money"; and the Arabic version, "give
what thou owest"; and the Syriac version, "give the gain"; or pay the
interest, about which the dispute is, and so escape out of his hands;
lest when the matter is brought into court, sentence should be given, to
pay both interest and principal, with all costs and charges; or however,
make up matters with him, satisfy him in some way or other, before
things are brought to an extremity:

lest he hale thee to the judge; the same that is called the magistrate,
or prince before, that sits chief upon the bench, hears and tries
causes, and passes sentence:

and the judge deliver thee to the officer: who upon hearing the matter
in difference, and giving the cause against the defendant, and for the
prosecutor, delivers the debtor into the hands of a proper officer, in
order to commit him to prison: the word rendered "officer", signifies an
exactor of debts, or fines, and was one that obliged such as were cast,
to do what the judge appointed to be done: in the Septuagint on [Isa
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#012.md) it answers to an "oppressor"; and
such men were wont to use rigour, to bring persons to the payment of
their debts, or fines:

and the officer cast thee into prison; which he had power to do, when
committed into his hands by the judge, in case the sentence pronounced
was not immediately complied with; See Gill on [Mat
5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025.md).

[Luke 12:59](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#059.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_059">luk 12:59</span></span>

I tell thee,.... The Syriac version before these words, prefixes an
"Amen", or "verily", for the sake of the stronger affirmation, which
seems to be taken from [Mat 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#026.md)

thou shalt not depart thence; get out of prison:

till thou hast paid the very last mite: of the sum in debate, which was
what the Jews call a "prutah", and that was the eighth part of an
Italian farthing, and half a common farthing; See Gill on [Mar
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#042.md), with this agrees what
Mainonides says (y), that

"when he that lends, requires what he has lent, though he is rich, and
the borrower is distressed, and straitened for food, there is no mercy
showed him in judgment, but his debt is, demanded of him, , "unto the
last prutah, or mite".''

\(y\) Hilchot M. vah. c. 1. sect. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 13](luk013.md)

</div>
