<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk015)  [Next](luk017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#001.md)

[Luke 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 16:1</span></span>

And he said also to his disciples,.... The Syriac version adds, "a
parable", as the following is; and which is directed to the disciples,
as those in the preceding chapter are to the Pharisees; and who also are
designed in this; though it is particularly spoken to the disciples,
because it might be of some use to them, with respect, to the
stewardship they were in. The Persic and Ethiopic versions read,
"Jesus", or "the Lord Jesus said": and which is to be understood, though
not expressed; for the parable was delivered by him, and is as follows:

there was a certain rich man: by whom God is meant, who is rich in the
perfections of his nature, in the works of his hands, in his government,
and the administration of it, in providential goodness, and in the large
revenues of glory due to him from his creatures; for all temporal riches
are from him; and so are all the riches of mercy, grace, and glory:

which had a steward; by whom is designed, not all mankind; for though
all men are, in a sense, stewards under God, and are entrusted with the
good things of life, the gifts of nature, endowments of mind, health,
strength of body, time, &c. yet all cannot be meant, because some are
distinguished from this steward, [Luk
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#005.md) nor are the disciples intended,
though the parable is directed to them; and they were stewards of the
mysteries and manifold grace of God; and one among them was an
unfaithful one, and was turned out of his stewardship; but the character
of an unjust man will not suit with them: and besides, this steward was
of the children of this world, [Luk
16:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008.md) but the Pharisees are meant: for
these are taken notice of as gravelled at this parable, [Luk
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#014.md) and to them agrees the character
of the men of this world, who were worldly wise men; as also that of a
steward; these are the tutors and governors mentioned in [Gal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#002.md) who had the care of the house of
Israel, the family of God, under the legal dispensation; and to whom
were committed the oracles of God, the writings of Moses, and the
prophets; and whose business it was to open and explain them to the
people.

And the same was accused unto him, that he had wasted his goods; put
false glosses upon the Scriptures; fed the family with bad and
unwholesome food, the traditions of the elders, called the leaven of the
Pharisees: made havoc of the souls of men; and made the hearts of the
righteous sad: and hardened sinners in their wicked ways: and fed
themselves, and not the flock; and plundered persons of their temporal
substance; of all which they were accused by Moses, in whom they
trusted; by his law which they violated; and by their own consciences,
which witnessed against them; and by the cries of those whom they
abused, which came into the ears of the Lord of sabaoth.

[Luke 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 16:2</span></span>

And he called him,.... By the prophets, sent one after another; by John
the Baptist, by Christ himself, and by his apostles:

and said unto him, how is it that I hear this of thee? of thy corrupting
the word; of thy covetousness, rapine, and theft; of thy adultery and
idolatry, and sad violation of the law; see [Rom
2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021.md)

give an account of thy stewardship: what improvement is made of thy
gifts; what care has been taken of my vineyard, the Jewish church; and
where are the fruits that might be expected to have been received at
your hands:

for thou mayest be no longer steward. This was foretold by the prophets,
that God would write a "Loammi" upon the people of the Jews; that he
would cut off three shepherds in one month, and particularly lay aside
the idol shepherd, by whom the Pharisees may be meant, [Zac
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#008.md) and by John the Baptist, who
declared the axe was laid to the root of the tree, and it was just ready
to be cut down, [Mat 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#010.md) and by
Christ, that the kingdom of God should be taken from them, [Mat
21:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#043.md) and by the apostles, who turned
from them to the Gentiles, [Act 13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046.md).

[Luke 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 16:3</span></span>

Then the steward said within himself,.... As the Scribes and Pharisees
were wont to do, [Mat 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009.md)

what shall I do? he does not say, what will become of me? I am undone,
and what shall I do to be saved? or what shall I do for my Lord and
Master I have so much injured? or what shall I do to make up matters
with him? or what account shall I give? but what shall I do for a
maintenance? how shall I live? what shall I do to please men, and gain
their opinion and good will, and so be provided for by them? of this
cast were the Pharisees, men pleasers, and self-seekers:

for my Lord taketh away from me the stewardship: the priesthood was
changed, and there was a change also of the law; the ceremonial law was
abrogated, and the ordinances of the former dispensation were shaken and
removed; so that these men must of course turn out of their places and
offices:

I cannot dig; or "plough", as the Arabic version renders it; or do any
part of husbandry, particularly that which lies in manuring and
cultivating the earth; not but that he was able to do it; but he could
not tell how to submit to such a mean, as well as laborious way of life;
for nothing was meaner among the Jews than husbandry: they have a
saying, that , "you have no trade", or business, "lesser", or meaner
"than husbandry" (g):

and to beg I am ashamed; for nothing could be more disagreeable, to one
who had lived so well in his master's house, and in so much fulness and
luxury, as the Scribes and Pharisees did. The Jews have a saying, that
(h).

"want of necessaries, , "is better than begging": (and says one) I have
tasted the bitterness of all things, and I have not found any thing more
bitter "than begging:"''

and which was literally true of the Jews, after the destruction of
Jerusalem; when multitudes of them were condemned to work in the mines;
and vast numbers were scattered about every where as vagabonds, begging
their bread; both which were very irksome to that people: though both
these phrases may be mystically understood: and "digging" may intend a
laborious searching into the Scriptures, and a diligent performance of
good works: neither of which the Pharisees much cared for, though they
made large pretensions to both; nor did they dig deep to lay a good
foundation whereon to build eternal life and happiness: nor could they
attain to the law of righteousness by all their toil and labour, they
would be thought to have taken: and for "begging", they were above that:
read the Pharisee's prayer in [Luk
18:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011.md) and you will not find one
petition in it. To ask any thing at the throne of grace, in a way of
mere grace and favour, and not merit: or to beg any thing at the hands
of Christ, as life, righteousness, pardon, cleansing, healing, food, &c.
they were ashamed of, and cared not for.

\(g\) T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 63. 1. (h) Mischar Hapeninim apud Buxtorf.
Florileg, Heb. p. 262.

[Luke 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 16:4</span></span>

I am resolved what to do,.... Or "I know what to do"; I have a scheme in
my head, and I am determined to execute it, which will provide for me,
and secure me a maintenance:

that when I am put out of the stewardship; drove from Jerusalem, and
from the temple and the synagogues:

they may receive me into their houses; either Jews or Gentiles, after
their dispersion.

[Luke 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 16:5</span></span>

So he called every one of his Lord's debtors,.... Either the Gentiles,
who were greatly indebted to God, having sinned against him, and the
law, and light of nature, at a great rate; into whose affections,
houses, and palaces, the Jews found ways and means to introduce
themselves; and, in process of time, got leave to have synagogues built,
and their worship set up again: or else the Jews, their countrymen;
since these were under those stewards, tutors, and governors, and were
debtors to do the whole law; and had, by breaking the law, contracted
large debts; and against whom the ceremonial law stood as an
handwriting: these the steward called

unto him, and said unto the first, how much owest thou unto my Lord? and
it is observable, that the debts of these men, of the first, lay in oil,
and of the other in wheat; things much used in the ceremonial law, in
the observance of which they had been, greatly deficient; see

[Luke 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 16:6</span></span>

And he said an hundred measures of oil,.... Or "baths of oil", the same
quantity as in [Ezr 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#022.md) where Aben
Ezra (i) calls them, "measures", as we do here; and Jarchi (k) observes,
that they were, , "to mingle with the meal, or flour offerings"; which
illustrates the above observation, that they were for the temple
service; and the bath was the measure of oil, as the ephah was of wheat
(l); and they were both of the same quantity, [Eze
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#011). According to Godwin (m.md) it held
four gallons and a half; so that a hundred of them contained four
hundred and fifty gallons; though some make the measure much larger.
Some say the "bath" held six gallons, one pottle, and half a pint; and
others, seven gallons, two quarts, and half a pint; and others, nine
gallons, and three quarts.

Take thy bill, or "writing"; which showed the bargain made for so many
measures; and which acknowledged the receipt of them, and promised
payment:

and sit down quickly; for his case required haste;

and write fifty; just half; that it might appear he had bought but
fifty, and was accountable for no more.

\(i\) In Ezr. vii. 22. (k) In ib. (l) Kimchi in Ezek. xlv. 14. (m) Moses
& Aaron, l. 6. c. 9.

[Luke 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 16:7</span></span>

Then said he to another, and how much owest thou?.... To my Lord, as
before:

and he said, an hundred measures of wheat, or "cors of wheat"; the same
with "homers", [Eze 45:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#014.md) the same
quantity as in [Ezr 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/ezr007.htm#022.md) where, as
here, they are called an hundred measures of wheat; and were, as Jarchi
on the place observes, "for the meal, or flour offerings": according to
the above writer (n), this measure held five bushels, and five gallons;
so that the whole was five hundred, sixty bushels, and a half: some make
the measure to hold eight bushels and a half; and others, fourteen
bushels and a pottle, which greatly increases the quantity.

And he said unto him, take thy bill and write fourscore. The Persic
version reads "seventy". Inasmuch now as oil and wheat were things
expended in the observance of the ceremonial law, and these men's debts
lay in them, it may have regard to the deficiency of the Jews in those
things: wherefore by "the bill" may be meant the law; and which is
sometimes called by the same name as here, the "writing", or "letter",
[Co2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2003.htm#006.md) and is so called, not merely
because it was written in letters; but because it is a mere letter,
showing only what is to be done and avoided, without giving strength to
perform, or pointing where it is to be had; and it is so, as obeyed by
an unregenerate man; and as abstracted from the spirituality of it; and
as weak, and without efficacy, to quicken, justify, or sanctify: and
whereas the steward, the Scribes and Pharisees, ordered the debtors to
write a lesser sum; this may regard the lessening, and even laying aside
of many things in the law, after the destruction of the temple; as
particularly the daily sacrifice, and other things; see [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027.md) and the doctrine of the Pharisees
was always a curtailing of the law, and making less of it than it was;
as appears from the glosses they put upon it, refuted by our Lord in
[Mat 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001.md). They compounded the matter
with the people, as some men do now, and taught them, that an imperfect
righteousness would do in the room of a perfect one: a doctrine very
pleasing to men, and which never fails of gaining an access into the
hearts and houses of carnal men; though very injurious to God, and to
his divine perfections, particularly his justice and holiness; as the
methods this steward took were unjust to his Lord, though very agreeable
to his debtors, and were well calculated to answer the end he proposed,
an after provision for himself. I am much indebted to a learned writer
(o), whose name is in the margin, for several thoughts and hints in the
explanation of this parable; and also of that of the rich man and
Lazarus, in the latter part of this chapter.

\(n\) Moses & Aaron, l. 6. c. 9. (o) Teelnianni Specimen Explicat.
Parabolarum.

[Luke 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 16:8</span></span>

And the Lord commended the unjust steward,.... Not the Lord Jesus
Christ, who delivered this parable, as the Syriac version seems to
suggest, rendering it, "our Lord"; but the Lord of the steward, or
"God", as the Ethiopic version reads: not that he commended him for the
fact he did, or the injustice of it for this is contrary to his nature
and perfections; but for his craft and cunning in providing himself a
maintenance for time to come: for he is on that account branded as an
"unjust steward", as he was, in wasting his Lord's goods; putting false
glosses on the Scriptures; doing damage both to the souls and worldly
estates of men: and in neglecting and despising lawful and honest ways
of living, by digging or begging, asking favours at the hand of God, and
doing good works; and in falsifying accounts; breaking the least of the
commandments, and teaching men so to do; and in corrupting others,
making proselytes twofold more the children of hell than himself; and in
being liberal with another's property, to wrong objects, and for a wrong
end. It was not therefore because he had done justly to his Lord, or
right to others, that he is commended; but

became he had done wisely for himself: the wit, and not the goodness of
the man is commended; which, in the language and sense of the Jews, may
be thus expressed (p):

"because a man, , "does good" for himself with "mammon" which is not his
own.''

For the children of this world are in their generation wiser than the
children of light: by "the children of this world" may be meant the
Israelites, who belonged to the Jewish nation and church, called the
"world", and "this world", [Co1 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011.md)
especially the princes of it, the ecclesiastical doctors and rulers: and
who also were the men of this present world; in general they were such
who were, as they were born into the world; in their sins, in the
pollution, and under the guilt of them; were carnal, in the flesh, or
unregenerate, and in darkness and blindness: they were such as were not
only in the world, but of it; they belonged to it, having never been
called out of it; and were under the influence of the God of it; and
were taken with the things of it, its riches, honours, and pleasures;
and had their portion in it, and were of worldly spirits; all which
agrees with the Scribes and Pharisees; see [Psa
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#014.md) and Aben Ezra on it, who has the
very phrase here used: , a "man of the world", is sometimes (q)
distinguished from a scholar, or a wise man; but , "the children of the
world", as they frequently intend the inhabitants of the world (r), are
sometimes distinguished from , "a son of the world to come" (s); and
from "the children of faith" (t), the same as "the children of light"
here; by whom are meant the children of the Gospel dispensation; or
persons enlightened by the Spirit and grace of God, to see the
sinfulness of sin, and their wretched state my nature; the insufficiency
of their own righteousness to justify them before God; the way of life,
righteousness, and salvation by Christ; who see that the several parts
of salvation, and the whole, are of grace; have some light into the
Scriptures of truth, and doctrines of the Gospel; and some glimpse of
heaven, and the unseen glories of another world, though attended with
much darkness in the present state: and who shall enjoy the light of
glory. Now, the men of the world, or carnal men, are, generally
speaking, wiser than these; not in things spiritual, but in things
natural, in the affairs of life, in worldly matters. The phrase seems to
answer to "generations" used in [Gen
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#009.md) "these are the generations of
Noah", &c. and "the generations of Jacob"; by which are meant, not the
genealogies of them, but their affairs; what befell them in life: as so
the Jewish writers (u) explain the phrase by "the things which happened"
unto them in this world, in the course of their pilgrimage: or they are
wise, , "for their own generation": for the temporal good of their
posterity, than saints are for the spiritual good of theirs: or they are
wiser for the time that is to come in this life, than good men are
concerning themselves for the time to come in the other world: or they
are wiser, and more prudent in disposing of their worldly substance for
their own secular good, and that of their offspring, than men of
spiritual light and knowledge are, in disposing of their worldly
substance for the glory of God, the interest of Christ, the honour of
religion, their own spiritual good, and that of their posterity.

\(p\) T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 121. 1. (q) T. Bab Bava Netzia, fol. 27. 2.
(r) Zohar in Exod. fol. 26. 2. & 58. 3, 4. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 99. 3. &
101. 2. & 102. 4. (s) Zohar in Exod. fol. 59. 4. (t) Zohar in Num. fol.
50. 4. (u) Aben Ezra in Gen. vi. 9. & xxxvii. 2. Sol. Urbin Obel Moed,
fol. 85. 1.

[Luke 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 16:9</span></span>

And I say unto you,.... These are the words of Christ, as are also the
latter part of the preceding verse, accommodating and applying the
parable to his disciples, and for their instruction:

make to yourselves friends of the mammon of unrighteousness: by "mammon"
are designed riches, wealth, and substance; See Gill on [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024.md) and is called "mammon of
unrighteousness", because such wealth is often unrighteously detained,
and is not made use of to right and good purposes, by the owners of it;
or because, generally speaking, it is possessed by unrighteous men; and,
for the most part, used in an unrighteous manner, in luxury, pride and
intemperance, and is the root, instrument, and means of such
unrighteousness: or it maybe rendered "mammon of hurt", or "hurtful
mammon"; as it often is to those who are over anxious and desirous of
it, or other disuse or misuse of it: or, as best of all, "mammon of
falsehood", or "deceitful mammon"; so in the Targum (w), frequent
mention is made of , "mammon of falsity"; and stands opposed to "true
riches" in [Luk 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#010.md) for worldly
riches are very empty and fallacious; wherefore deceitfulness is
ascribed to them; and they are called uncertain riches, which are not to
be depended upon. [Mat 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#022.md) unless it
should be rather thought that it is so called, because gotten in an
unrighteous way; as it was by Zacchaeus, and might be by Matthew, one of
the disciples, Christ now speaks to, and the publicans and sinners, who
were lately become his followers, and whom he advises, as the highest
piece of wisdom and prudence, to dispose of in such a manner, as of it
to "make" themselves "friends"; not God, Father, Son, and Spirit. These
indeed are friends to the saints, but they are not made so by money;
reconciliation and redemption are not procured this way; nor is the
favour of the judge to be got by such means; the only means of
reconciliation, are the blood and death of Christ; though indeed acts of
beneficence, rightly performed, are well pleasing to God: nor are the
angels meant, who are very friendly to all good men; nor rich men, to
whom riches are not to be given, [Pro
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#016.md) but rather riches themselves,
which, if not rightly used, and so made friends of, will cry, and be a
witness against the owners of them, [Jam
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#001.md) though it may be the poor saints
are intended; who by their prayers are capable of doing either a great
deal of hurt, or a great deal of good; and it is the interest of rich
men to make them their friends:

that when ye fail: of money; or "that fails", as the Ethiopic version
reads; or rather, when ye leave that, that is, when ye die; so in [Jer
42:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer042.htm#022.md) "know certainly that ye shall
die"; the Septuagint renders it, "ye shall fall by the sword", &c.

they may receive you into everlasting habitations: the mansions of
glory, which are many, and of an eternal duration: this is to be
understood of their being received thither, not by the poor, to whom
they have been benefactors; for though these may now pray for their
reception to glory when they die, and will hereafter rejoice at their
reception thither; yet they themselves will not be receivers of them, or
their introducers into the everlasting tents, or tabernacles: nor are
the angels intended, who carry the souls of the righteous into Abraham's
bosom, and will gather the elect together at the last day; for not they,
but God and Christ, receive the saints to glory: the words may be
rendered impersonally, "you may be received"; in a way of welldoing,
though not for it; mention is made of the "everlasting tabernacles", in

"Their glory also will I take unto me, and give these the everlasting
tabernacles, which I had prepared for them.'' (2 Esdras 2:11)

and so the phrase may be rendered here, as opposed to the earthly and
perishable tabernacles of the body [Co2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001.md)

\(w\) Targum in Job xxvii. 8. & in Isa v. 23. & xxxiii. 15. & in Ezek.
xxii. 27. & in Hos. v. 11.

[Luke 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 16:10</span></span>

He that is faithful in that which is least,.... In quantity and quality,
especially the latter; in that which is of little value and worth, at
least when compared with other things:

is faithful also in much: in matters of greater consequence and
importance: the sense of the proverb is, that, generally speaking, a man
that acts a faithful part in a small trust committed to him, does so
likewise in a much larger; and being tried, and found faithful in things
of less moment, he is intrusted with things of greater importance;
though this is not always the case: for sometimes a man may behave with
great integrity in lesser matters, on purpose that he might gain greater
confidence, which, when he has obtained, he abuses in the vilest manner;
but because it is usually otherwise, our Lord uses the common proverb;
and of like sense is the following;

and he that is unjust in the least, is unjust also in much: that man
that acts the unfaithful part in a small matter, and of little worth,
generally does the same, if a greater trust is committed to him.

[Luke 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 16:11</span></span>

If therefore ye have not been faithful,.... This is the application of
the above proverbial expressions, and seems to be directed to the
disciples of Christ, though not without a view to the covetous Scribes
and Pharisees, who were in hearing of it, and were disturbed at it, [Luk
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#014.md) and the meaning is, that whereas
some of them might have been unfaithful, and have acted the unjust part
of gathering of riches, as Matthew, and other publicans, that were now
become the followers of Christ; if therefore they should be unfaithful

in the unrighteous mammon; in the disposing of it to improper uses,
which was either unrighteously gotten, and therefore called, as it
sometimes was, , "mammon of ungodliness", or "ungodly mammon" (x); or,
which was fallacious, deceitful, vain, and transitory:

who will commit to your trust the true riches; or mammon? that is, how
should you expect to be intrusted with the riches of grace, as the
blessings and promises of the covenant of grace, the graces of the
Spirit of God, which truly enrich persons, and are solid and durable? or
the riches of glory, the better and more enduring substance in heaven,
signified by a kingdom, and an inheritance that fadeth not away? so the
Jews call the good things of another world, and say (y), that

"all the good things of this world are not , "true good things", in
comparison of the good things of the world to come.''

And they use the same distinction with respect to "mammon", as here:

"the holy, blessed God, they say (z), gives him, , "mammon of truth", or
true mammon; and he makes it "false", or deceitful:''

or rather the rich treasure of the Gospel is meant, called a treasure in
earthen vessels, and the unsearchable riches of Christ; and is
comparable to, and of more worth than gold, silver, and precious stones.
And so the Syriac version renders it, "who will trust you with the
truth?" with the truth of the Gospel.

\(x\) Targum in Hab. ii. 9. (y) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 23. 2. (z) Shemot
Rabba, sect. 31. fol. 134. 4.

[Luke 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 16:12</span></span>

And if ye have not been faithful in that which is another man's,....
Which is not a man's own, but what is committed to him by another; ,
"with the mammon of others (a)", to speak in the language of the Jews;
and of mammon, our Lord is speaking, and here of another man's, of which
they were only stewards, as he in the preceding parable was: hence we
read (b) of , "keepers of mammon", who were intrusted with another's
substance; and such are here supposed, which, if unfaithful in,

who shall give you that which is your own? that is, should you unjustly
detain, or make an ill use of another man's substance lodged in your
hands, how can you expect but that you will be dealt with in like manner
by others, who will not pay you yours, they have in their possession,
but convert it to their own use? A like distinction of another's and a
man's own, may be observed among the Jews:

"there are (say they (c),) four sorts of men in respect of giving alms;
he that would give, but would not have others give, his eye is evil, ,
"in that which is other men's" (i.e. as the commentator observes (d),
lest the goods of others should be increased, and they get a good name);
he that would that others should give, but he will not give himself, his
eye is evil, "in that which is his own"; he that gives, and would have
others give, he is a "good man"; he that neither gives, nor would have
others give, he is an "ungodly man";''

see [Rom 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#007.md). Interpreters generally
understand by "that which is another man's", in the first clause, the
things of this world, which men are possessed of, because these are not
of themselves, but from another, from God; and they are but stewards,
rather than proprietors of them; and they are for the good of others,
and not for themselves; and are not lasting, but in a little while will
pass from them to others: and by "that which is your own", they
understand the good things of grace and glory, which, when once bestowed
on man, are his own property, and for his own use, and will never be
alienated from him, but will always abide with him: but if he is
unfaithful in the former, how should he expect the latter to be given to
him?

\(a\) Jarchi in Pirke Abot, c. 5, sect. 13. (b) T. Hieros. Succa, fol.
53. 1. (c) Pirke Abot, c. 5. sect. 13. (d) Jarchi in ib.

[Luke 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 16:13</span></span>

No servant can serve two masters,.... See Gill on [Mat
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#024.md).

[Luke 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 16:14</span></span>

And the Pharisees also who were covetous,.... Or lovers of money, the
love of which is the root of all evil; and that they were, is evident
from their devouring widows' houses, under a pretence of making long
prayers for them, [Mat 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#014.md)

heard all these things; as well as the disciples, being in company with
them, [Luk 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#002.md) even the parable
concerning the unjust steward, and the application of it; and the
directions given about using the things of this world, and the
distributing of them to the poor, and showing a greater concern for
riches of an higher nature:

and they derided him: lift up their nose, or drew it out to him, as the
word signifies, in a sneering way; they rejected and despised what he
said about their injustice, in their stewardship; the calling of them to
an account for it, and the turning of them out of it; and concerning the
true use of worldly riches, and the contempt of them; they looked upon
themselves safe and secure in the good opinion of the people, and happy
in the enjoyment of worldly things; and looked upon him as a weak man,
to talk in the manner he did.

[Luke 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 16:15</span></span>

And he said unto them,.... That is, Jesus said unto them, as the Syriac
and Persic versions express it: "ye are they which justify yourselves
before men": from the sins of injustice, unfaithfulness, covetousness,
and all others; and would be thought, and appear to be righteous; but it
is only in the sight of men, who can only see the outside of things, and
judge thereby:

but God knoweth your hearts; and what is in them, the deceitfulness,
hypocrisy, covetousness, and cruelty of them, which are hid from the
eyes of men:

for that which is highly esteemed among men; or what is high in the
account and esteem of men, as the outward appearance of these men for
morality, religion, and holiness; their zeal for the ceremonies of the
law, and the traditions of the elders:

is abomination in the sight of God; who knew full well from what
principles, and with what views they acted, to gain popular applause,
and amass riches to themselves, without any concern for the glory of
God, and the good of men: see [Isa
65:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#005.md).

[Luke 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 16:16</span></span>

The law and the prophets were until John,.... Till the time that John
the Baptist began his ministry; for till then, the law and the prophets,
with the Hagiographa, or holy writings, for into these three parts the
Jews divided the books of the Old Testament, were the only writings they
had; and which contained the whole of the revelation granted to them;
and which they wrested, and put false glosses on; and therefore it was
no wonder that they derided Christ, and despised his ministry: and
whereas spiritual things were promised in these writings, under the
notion of temporal ones; which they not understanding, might imagine the
doctrine of Christ, concerning the contempt of worldly riches, was
contrary to: and since they valued themselves on having the law and the
prophets, Christ observes, that

since that time, the kingdom of God is preached; the Gospel, and the
mysteries of relating to the kingdom of the Messiah, his person, office,
and grace; and to the kingdom of grace, which lies not in outward, but
in inward and spiritual things; and to the kingdom of heaven, or glory
hereafter; and which is a superior dispensation to that of the law and
the prophets, and sets things in a clearer, plainer, and better light:

and every man presseth into it; the Gospel dispensation, the kingdom of
the Messiah; "that he may enter into it", as the Syriac and Persic
versions add; which the Scribes and Pharisees did all they could to
hinder; see [Mat 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#013.md) large
multitudes crowded the ministry of John, of Christ, and of his apostles;
the people flocked in great numbers to hear the word, and seemed
disposed to embrace the doctrines of the Gospel, and the ordinances of
it; they pressed on one another to hear it, and through many
difficulties, discouragements, and obstacles, the Pharisees threw in
their way; there was scarce a man but seemed very desirous of attending
upon the preaching of it, and pressed hard for it; and with much force
and violence, with great eagerness and endeavour broke his way to it;
though a different sense is given by others reading the words, and
"every one suffers violence to himself for it", as the Arabic version;
or "is oppressed for it", as the Ethiopic; that is, suffers reproach,
contradiction, and persecution, for the sake of hearing it.

[Luke 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 16:17</span></span>

And it is easier for heaven and earth to pass,.... This is said by
Christ, lest it should be thought by his saying, that the law and the
prophets were until John, that they were no longer, nor of any more use;
but were now abrogated and laid aside; whereas heaven and earth might
sooner pass away, and the whole frame of nature be dissolved:

than one tittle of the law to fail; which, and the prophets, in all the
precepts, promises, types, figures, prophecies, &c. thereof, had their
full accomplishment in the person, miracles, obedience, sufferings, and
death of Christ; see [Mat 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018.md).

[Luke 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 16:18</span></span>

Whosoever putteth away his wife,.... For any other cause than for
adultery, as the Jews used to do upon every trifling occasion, and for
every little disgust: by which instance our Lord shows, how the Jews
abused and depraved the law, and as much as in them lay, caused it to
fail; and how he, on the other hand, was so far from destroying and
making it of none effect, that he maintained the purity and spirituality
of it; putting them in mind of what he had formerly said, and of many
other things of the like kind along with it; how that if a man divorces
his wife, for any thing else but the defiling his bed,

and marrieth another, committeth adultery: with her that he marries:
because his marriage with the former still continues, and cannot be made
void by, such a divorce:

and whosoever marrieth her that is put away from her husband; the phrase
"from her husband", is omitted in the Syriac and Persic versions:

committeth adultery; with her that he marries, because notwithstanding
her husband's divorce of her, and his after marriage with her, she still
remains his lawful and proper wife; See Gill on [Mat
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032.md). The Ethiopic version reads this
last clause, quite different from all others, thus, "and whosoever puts
away her husband, and joins to another, commits adultery", agreeably to
See Gill on [Mar 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#012.md).

[Luke 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 16:19</span></span>

There was a certain rich man,.... In Beza's most ancient copy, and in
another manuscript of his it is read by way of preface, "he said also
another parable": which shows, that this is not a history of matter of
fact, or an historical account of two such persons, as the "rich" man
and the beggar, who had lately lived at Jerusalem; though the Papists
pretend, to this day, to point out the very spot of ground in Jerusalem,
where this rich man's house stood: nor is it to be understood
parabolically of any particular rich man, or prince; as Saul the first
king of Israel; or Herod, who now was reigning, and was clothed in
purple, and lived in a sumptuous manner: nor of rich men in general,
though it greatly describes the characters of such, at least of many of
them; who only take care of their bodies, and neglect their souls; adorn
and pamper them, live in pleasure, and grow wanton, and have no regard
to the poor saints; and when they die go to hell; for their riches will
not profit them in a day of wrath, nor deliver from it, or be regarded
by the Judge, any more than hills and mountains will hide them from his
face: but by the rich man are meant, the Jews in general; for that this
man is represented, and to be considered as a Jew, is evident from
Abraham being his father, and his calling him so, and Abraham again
calling him his son, [Luk 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024.md) of
which relation the Jews much boasted and gloried in; and from his
brethren having Moses and the prophets, [Luk
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#029.md) which were peculiar to the
Jewish people; and from that invincible and incurable infidelity in
them, that they would not believe, though one rose from the dead, [Luk
16:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#031.md) as the Jews would not believe in
Christ though he himself rose from the dead, which was the sign he gave
them of his being the Messiah: and the general design of the parable, is
to expose the wickedness and unbelief of the Jews, and to show their
danger and misery, for their contempt and rejection of the Messiah; and
particularly the Pharisees are designed, who being covetous, had derided
Christ for what he had before said; and, who though high in the esteem
of men, were an abomination to God, [Luk
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#014.md). These more especially boasted
of Abraham being their father; and of their being the disciples of
Moses, and trusted in him, and in his law; and thought they should have
eternal life through having and reading the books of Moses and the
prophets: these may be called "a man", because this was the name by
which the Jews style themselves, in distinction from the Gentiles, whom
they compare to beasts; See Gill on [Mat
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026.md) and this they ground on a
passage in [Eze 34:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#031.md) "and ye my
flock, the flock of my pasture, are men": upon which their note is (e),

"ye are called, "men", but the nations of the earth are not called
men.''

And they may be called a "certain" man, a famous man, a man of note, as
the Jews, and especially the Pharisees, thought themselves to be; and
therefore coveted the chief places in the synagogues, and at feasts, and
loved salutations and greetings in market places, and to be called of
men Rabbi, and master: as also a "rich man"; for the Jews in general
were a wealthy people, lived in a very fruitful country, and were
greatly indulged with the riches of providential goodness; and
particularly the Pharisees, many of whom were of the great sanhedrim,
and rulers of synagogues, and elders of the people; and who by various
methods, amassed to themselves great riches, and even devoured widows'
houses; see [Luk 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#024.md) and they were
also rich in outward means and ordinances, having the oracles of God,
his word, worship, and service; and as to their spiritual and eternal
estate, in their own esteem; though they were not truly rich in grace,
not in faith, nor in spiritual knowledge, nor even in good works, of
which they so much boasted; but in appearance, and in their own conceit,
they were rich in the knowledge of the law, and in righteousness, which
they imagined was perfect, and so stood in need of nothing; no, not of
repentance, and especially of Christ, or of any thing from him:

which was clothed in purple and fine linen; or "byssus", which is said
to (f) grow on a tree, in height equal to a poplar, and in leaves like a
willow, and was brought out of India into Egypt, and much used there, as
it also was among the Jews: hence we often read (g) of or "garments of
byssus", or fine linen: the Jews in general dressed well; their common
apparel were fine linen and silk; see [Eze
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010.md) and so the Arabic version here
renders it, "silk and purple"; and the Persic version, "silks and
bombycines": and the priests particularly, were arrayed in such a habit;
the robe of the ephod, and also its curious girdle, were of blue,
purple, scarlet, and fine linen, and at the hem of it were pomegranates
of blue, purple, and scarlet, [Exo
28:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo028.htm#006.md). And as for the Pharisees, they
loved to go in long robes, and to make broad their phylacteries, and
enlarge the borders of their garments, which were fringes of blue,
joined unto them; and which may figuratively express the fine outside
show of holiness and righteousness, they made;

and fared sumptuously every day. The Jews in common lived well, being in
a land that flowed with milk and honey; see [Eze
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#013.md) and especially the priests, who
offered up lambs every day, besides other offerings, of which they had
their part; as also the Pharisees, who were often at feasts, where they
loved the chief places: and this may signify the easy and jocund life
they lived; knowing no sorrow upon spiritual accounts, having no sense
of sin, nor sight of the spirituality of the law, nor view of danger;
but at perfect ease, and not emptied from vessel to vessel.

\(e\) T. Bab. Bava Metzia, fol. 114. 2. & Kimchi in loc. (f) Philostrat.
Vit. Appollon. l. 2. c. 9. (g) Targum in Gen. xli. 42. in 2 Chron. v.
12. & in Ezek. xliv. 17.

[Luke 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 16:20</span></span>

And there was a certain beggar named Lazarus,.... By whom is designed,
not any particular beggar in the times of Christ, that went by this
name; though there were such persons in Israel, and in the times of our
Lord; as blind Bartimaeus, and others: nor David, in the times of Saul,
who was poor and needy; and who sometimes wanted bread, and at a certain
time went to Abimelech for some: nor the godly poor in common, though
the heirs of the heavenly kingdom are, generally speaking, the poor of
this world; these receive Christ and his Gospel, and have their evil
things here, and their good things hereafter; they are now slighted and
neglected by men, but shall hereafter have a place in Abraham's bosom,
and be for ever with the Lord: nor are the Gentiles intended; though
they may be said to be poor and helpless, as they were without Christ,
aliens from the commonwealth of Israel, and strangers to the covenants
of promise, and without hope and God in the world; and were despised and
rejected by the Jews, and not suffered to come into their temple, and
were called and treated as dogs; though, as the Syrophenician woman
pleaded, the dogs might eat of the crumbs which fall from their master's
table; and who, upon the breaking down of the middle wall of partition,
were called by grace, and drawn to Christ, and were blessed with
faithful Abraham, and made to sit down with him in the kingdom of
heaven: but our Lord Jesus Christ himself is here meant; as appears from
the cause and occasion of this parable, which was the derision of Christ
by the covetous Pharisees, who, though high in the esteem of men, were
an abomination to God; and from the scope and design of it, which is to
represent the mean and despicable condition of Christ in this world,
whilst the Pharisees, his enemies, lived in great pomp and splendour;
and the exaltation of Christ hereafter, when they would be in the utmost
distress; and also the infidelity of that people, who continued in their
unbelief, notwithstanding the resurrection of Christ from the dead: the
name Lazarus well agrees with him. The Syriac version calls him
"Loozar", as if it signified one that was helpless, that had no help,
but wanted it, and so a fit name for a beggar; and well suits with
Christ, who looked, and there was none to help, [Isa
63:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#005.md) nor did he receive any help from
men; though rather, the word is the contraction of Eleazar, and so the
Ethiopic version reads it here; and it is easy to observe, that he who
is called R. Eleazar in the Babylonian Talmud, is in the Jerusalem
called, times without number, , R. Lazar (h); and R. Liezer, is put for
R. Eliezer: it is a rule given by one of the Jewish writers (i), that

"in the Jerusalem Talmud, wherever R. Eleazar is written without an
"aleph", R. Lazar ben Azariah is intended.''

And Christ may very well be called by this name; since this was the name
of one of his types, Eleazer the son of Aaron, and one of his ancestors,
who is mentioned in his genealogy, [Mat
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#015.md) and especially as the name
signifies, that the Lord was his helper: see [Exo
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#004.md). Help was promised him by God,
and he expected it, and firmly believed he should have it, and
accordingly he had it: God did help him in a day of salvation: and which
was no indication of weakness in him, who is the mighty God, and mighty
to save; but of the Father's regard to him as man, and mediator; and of
the concern that each of the divine persons had for, and in man's
salvation: and on account of his circumstances of life, he might be
called a "poor man", as he is in [Co2
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009.md) and frequently in prophecy; see
[Psa 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006.md) [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md) and though by assuming human
nature, he did not cease to be God, or to lose the riches of his divine
nature and perfections, yet his divine perfections, and the glory of
them, were much hid and covered in his state of humiliation; and he was
much the reverse of many of them in his human nature; in which he was
exposed to much outward poverty and meanness: he was born of poor
parents; had no liberal education; was brought up to a trade: had not a
foot of ground to call his own, nor where to lay his head: and lived
upon the ministrations of others to him; and when he died, had nothing
to bequeath his mother, but left her to the care of a disciple: and he
is further described, by his posture and situation,

which was laid at his gate; that is, at the "rich man's", as is
expressed in the Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions: this was the
place where beggars stood, or were laid, and asked alms; hence is that
rule with the Jews (k), and in many other places the following phrase;

"if a man dies and leaves sons and daughters---if he leaves but a small
substance, the daughters shall be taken care of, and the sons, , "shall
beg at the gates."''

This denotes the rejection of Christ by the Jews; he came to them, and
they received him not; he had no entrance into their hearts, and was
admitted but into few of their houses; they put those that confessed him
out of their synagogues; and caused him himself to depart out of some of
their cities; they delivered him up unto the Gentiles that were without;
and at last led him without the gate of Jerusalem, where he suffered:

full of sores; so Nahum Gamzu (l) is said to have his whole body, ,
"full of ulcers": sometimes the Jewish phrase, which answers to the word
here used, is , "one plagued with ulcers" (m); and this by the
commentators (n), is explained of a "leprous" person; so one of the
names of the Messiah is with the Jews (o), which signifies "leprous", in
proof of which, they produce [Isa
53:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#004.md). "Surely he hath borne our
griefs", &c. By these "sores" may be meant, sins; see [Psa
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa038.htm#005.md). Christ was holy and righteous in
himself, in his nature, life, and conversation; he was without both
original, and actual sins, yet he was in the likeness of sinful flesh,
and was reproached and calumniated by men as a sinner; and had really
and actually all the sins of his people on him, by imputation; and was
made even sin itself, for them; so that in this sense he might be said
to be full of them, though in himself he was free from them: they may
also intend the temptations of Satan, those fiery darts which were flung
at him, and by which he suffered; as also the reproaches and
persecutions of men, which attended him more or less, from the cradle to
the cross; together with all his other sorrows and sufferings, being
scourged, buffeted, and beaten, and wounded for our sins, and bruised
for our transgressions; of which wounds and bruises he might be said to
be full.

\(h\) T. Hieros. Biccurim, fol. 63. 3, 4. & 64. 1. & 65. 3, 4. &
Sheviith, fol. 36. 3. & passim. (i) Juchasin, fol. 81. 1. (k) Misn. Bava
Bathra, c. 9. sect. 1. & T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 140. 2. Piske Tosaph.
in Cetubot, art. 138, 372. (l) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 21. 1. (m) Misn.
Cetubot, c. 3. sect. 5. & 7. 10. (n) Maimon. & Bartenora in lb. (o) T.
Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 98. 2.

[Luke 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 16:21</span></span>

And desiring to be fed with the crumbs,.... The offal food, broken
bread, fragments of meat: that food which falls from the knife, or
plate, in eating, and from thence on the ground; and literally
understood, may express the low condition Christ was in, in his human
nature: he assumed a true body, like to ours, and partook of the same
flesh and blood with us, and was liable to the same infirmities as ours,
which are sinless; and among the rest, was subject to hunger and thirst,
and was obliged to the ministration of others for a subsistence: and it
may also express his contentment in such a condition; he never murmured
at the providence of God, but was entirely, resigned to his will; he did
not desire to live in fulness and affluence, but avoided and shunned
every step that led unto it; nor did he envy the plenty of others, and
was fully satisfied with his meanness; nor did he ever work a miracle
for the sake of feeding himself. Moreover, the words being understood
mystically, may design the elect of God among the Jews, who, like
crumbs, were few in number, a seed, a remnant, according to the election
of grace; there were but few among them that were chosen of God, and
effectually called by his grace; and but a little flock to whom he gave
the kingdom; and a small number, who entered in at the strait gate, and
were saved; and these few were very mean and despicable for their
outward poverty; for the poor had the Gospel preached to them, and they
received it, when the rich, and the rulers of the people, rejected it:
and they were like crumbs their small degree of worldly wisdom and
knowledge, being babes, simple, and foolish, who followed Christ, while
the learned, wise, and prudent despised him; and for their sinfulness
and vileness, being, generally speaking, notorious sinners, publicans
and harlots; and of these it may be said what follows,

which fell from the rich man's table; being originally of the Jews, but
separated from them by the grace of God, and rejected by them with scorn
and contempt. These Christ "desired"; see [Sol
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol007.htm#010.md) his desire was towards them from
everlasting, when he asked them of his Father, and they were given to
him; and it was not only after their persons, but after their salvation,
and that both in eternity and in time; and which he signified by various
words and actions; and it is towards them, while in a state of
unregeneracy, that they may be converted, and believe in him; and when
they are called, he delights in the grace he puts in them, and in the
righteousness he puts upon them; he takes pleasure in their company; he
desires them for his habitation; he stands at the door and knocks for
admission to them; and nothing is he more earnestly solicitous for, and
eager after, than their being with him in glory to all eternity; and his
end in all, "is to be fed" or "satisfied with them"; see [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011.md) he came into the world to gather
these scattered crumbs and fragments together; it was his meat and
drink, to work out their salvation; and it will be his highest joy and
pleasure to present them to his Father, and himself, complete and
perfect, and introduce them into his kingdom and glory: he will be fully
satisfied in them, and they in him, when they shall awake in his
likeness. Then will all Christ's desires, prayers, and intercessions,
have their full accomplishment. The Vulgate Latin adds, "and no man gave
to him"; which seems to be transcribed from [Luk
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#016.md) and is not supported by any copy
or version.

Moreover, the dogs came and licked his sores: by the dogs are meant not
the Jews, though they are sometimes so called, and especially the
Scribes and Pharisees, [Psa 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#016.md) for
these made his sores and wounds, or were the authors of his sorrows and
sufferings; but rather the Gentiles, who were so called by the Jews; See
Gill on [Mat 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat015.htm#026.md) because these
creatures were unclean by the law, and had in the greatest contempt by
the Jews; and for their barbarity, malice, and cruelty, [Deu
23:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#018.md) as the Gentiles were by the Jews
esteemed unclean and unfit, either for civil or religious conversation;
and were treated as aliens by them; and were indeed in their Heathenish
state, barbarous and inhuman, and lived in malice, hateful, and hating
one another: these, some of them came to Christ in person, as the
centurion, and Syrophenician woman, many of the Samaritans, who, with
the Jews, were all one as Heathens, and several Grecians at the feast;
and many of them also came to him by faith, through the ministry of his
servants, under the influence of divine grace, and that according to
various prophecies in the Old Testament, concerning the calling and
gathering of the Gentiles to him: these embraced a crucified Christ; and
fed upon the slain Lamb of God; eat his flesh, and drank his blood;
stretched forth the hand of faith, and thrust it into his bleeding
wounds; and lived by faith on him, who was wounded and bruised for their
sins, and whose blood was shed for the remission of them.

[Luke 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 16:22</span></span>

And it came to pass that the beggar died,.... The death of Christ was
not a casual thing, a fortuitous event; it was agreed unto, and settled
in the covenant of grace; it was spoken of by the prophets of the Old
Testament; it was typified by the sacrifices of the law, and other
things; it was foretold by Christ himself, and was the end of his coming
into this world, wherein the great love, both of him and of his Father,
is expressed; and is the main article of the Christian faith; so that
this came to pass according to the decrees of God, the counsel, and
covenant of peace, the will of Christ, and his predictions, and as the
accomplishment of the law, and prophets: it was not a natural, but
violent death which Christ died; and yet it was both voluntary and
necessary; it was but once, and is of an eternal efficacy, and is a
sacrifice acceptable to God; it was not for himself, or any sin of his,
who knew none, nor for the angels, and their redemption, whose nature he
did not assume; but for men, and for their sins. Christ died not merely
as an example to them, or only to confirm his doctrines; but as a
substitute, in the room and stead of his people; to atone for their
sins, and satisfy divine justice; to procure the pardon of them in a way
of justice; to take them away, and utterly abolish them; to bring in an
everlasting righteousness; to obtain eternal redemption, and bring such
nigh to God who were afar off, and that men might live through him now,
and have eternal life by him hereafter:

and was carried by the angels into Abraham's bosom: by Abraham's bosom
is meant heaven, a phrase well known to the Jews, by which they commonly
expressed the happiness of the future state: of Abraham's happy state
they had no doubt; and when they spake of the happiness of another's,
they sometimes signified it by going to Abraham; as when the mother of
the seven sons, slain by Caesar, saw her youngest going to be sacrificed
(p).

"she fell upon him, and embraced him, and kissed him, and said unto him,
my son, , "go to Abraham, your father", and tell him, thus saith my
mother, &c.''

and sometimes, as here, by being in his bosom. So it is said (q), that
Eliezer his servant (Abraham's, the same name with Lazarus) , "is laid
in his bosom": and which may refer to the account in the Talmud (r),
that when R. Benaah, the painter of caves, came to the cave of Abraham,
he found Eliezer, the servant of Abraham, , "standing before him". And
it is also said (s) of Rabbi, when he died, , "this day he sits in the
bosom of Abraham"; for as it was usual with them to represent the joys
of heaven by a feast, so the partaking of them, by sitting down at a
table with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; see [Mat
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#011.md) and as their manner at meals was
by lying along on couches at eating; he that lay next another might be
said to lie, or lean, in his bosom: hence Abraham's bosom came to
signify the near and intimate enjoyment of happiness with him in the
other world. The ascension of Christ is expressed by a being "carried up
into heaven", [Luk 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#051.md) and here he
is entered, and has been received, and will be retained, until the time
of the restitution of all things; here he is glorified in human nature,
sits at the right hand of God, and appears in his presence, on the
behalf of his people; and indeed, the ends of his going there, were to
receive gifts for them, to be their advocate and intercessor, to take
possession of heaven in their name, and prepare that for them, and them
for that; and hither "he was carried by angels": these were the chariots
in which he rode; and these the guard that attended him, when he was
seen, looked upon, and gazed at by them with adoration, faith, and
wonder; which shows the ministration of angels to him, and seems to set
forth the glory and magnificence in which he ascended; and this agrees
with the notions of the Jews, that when good men die, their souls are
immediately received by angels, and taken under their care, and carried
to heaven. So one of their paraphrasts (t) having mentioned the garden
of Eden, which is but another name for heaven with them, adds,

"into which no man can enter but the righteous, whose souls are
"carried" thither, , "in the hand", or "by the means" of angels.''

And elsewhere they say (u),

"with the Shekinah come three ministering angels to receive the soul of
a righteous man.''

Particularly it is said of Moses, at the time of his death (w), that

"the holy blessed God descended from the highest heavens, to take the
soul of Moses, and three ministering angels with him.''

And sometimes they say (x), not only three angels, but three companies
of angels attend at such a time: their words are these;

"when a righteous man departs out of the world, three companies of
ministering angels meet him; one says to him, "come in peace"; and
another says, "walking in his uprightness" and the other says, "he shall
enter into peace", &c.''

No mention is made in this parable of the burial of this man, nor any
words used expressive of it, or that in the least hint it. The reason
is, because Christ lay so short a time in the grave, and he was not left
there, nor did he see corruption; but in a very little while was raised
from the dead, and delivered from the power of the grave; when, after
some stay on earth, he was attended by angels to the highest heavens:
for this is to be understood, not of his soul being had to paradise
immediately upon his separation from the body; but of his ascension to
heaven after his resurrection, when he was escorted by angels thither.

The rich man also died. This may be understood both of the natural death
of the Scribes and Pharisees; who, though they were dignified persons,
were as gods, yet were mortal, and died like men; see [Psa
82:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#006.md) compared with [Joh
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#034.md) and they died in their sins, in
their unbelief of the Messiah, and so were damned; in their impenitence
and hardness of heart, for as they thought they needed no repentance,
they were not called unto it; and in the sin against the Holy Ghost,
blaspheming the miracles of Christ done by him, and which was a sin unto
death; and under the power and guilt of all their other sins, and so
were lost and perished. And it may also be understood of the political
and ecclesiastical death of the Jewish people; which lay in the
destruction of the city of Jerusalem, and of the temple, and in the
abolition of the temple worship, and of the whole ceremonial law; a
"Lo-ammi" was written upon their church state, and the covenant between
God and them was broken; the Gospel was removed from them, which was as
death, as the return of it, and their call by it, will be as life from
the dead; as well as their place and nation, their civil power and
authority were taken away from them by the Romans: and a death of
afflictions, by captivity and calamities, of every kind, have attended
them ever since. And it is to be observed, that Lazarus died before the
rich man, as Christ died before the destruction of the Jewish polity and
church state: the city and sanctuary were not destroyed, nor the daily
sacrifice made to cease, nor the consummation, and that determined,
poured upon the desolate, until some time after the Messiah was cut off,
according to the prophecy in [Dan
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#026.md). Moreover, no mention is made of
the rich man being carried by angels, as Lazarus was; and if he was, he
was carried, not by the good, but by the evil angels, and not into
Abraham's bosom, but to hell. So the Jews (y) say,

"if a soul is worthy, how many holy troops, or companies, are ready to
join it, and bring it up into paradise? but if not worthy, how many
strange troops are ready to bring it in the way of hell? these are the
troops of the destroying angels.''

However, this is said of him, as is not of Lazarus,

and was buried: as wicked men are, when sometimes the saints are not;
see [Ecc 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc008.htm#010.md). The Scribes and
Pharisees, who were so diligent to build and garnish the sepulchres of
the prophets, among their other instances of pride and vanity, took
care, no doubt, to provide and erect stately monuments for themselves:
and who were buried in great pomp and splendour. Though this may respect
their church state, service, and ceremonies, which received their death
blow at the crucifixion of Christ, but remained for some time unburied,
it being with difficulty that these things were got under the feet of
the church; and may also refer to the political state of the Jews, who,
as a nation, are represented as in their graves, where they are to this
day, and will be until they shall be turned unto the Lord, when they
shall be brought out of their graves, and shall live and return to their
own land, [Eze 37:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#012.md). The Vulgate
Latin adds, "in hell"; but this belongs to the following verse.

\(p\) Echa Rabbati, fol. 49. 4. (q) In Sepher Emanah, c. 1. p. 20. (r)
T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 58. 1. (s) T. Bab. Kiddushin, fol. 72. 2.
Juchasin, fol. 75. 2. (t) Targum in Cant. iv. 12. (u) Midrash Haneelam
in Zohar in Gen. fol. 65. 1. (w) Debarim Rabba, sect. 11. fol. 245. 4.
(x) T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 104. 1. (y) Zohar in Exod. fol. 39. 3.

[Luke 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 16:23</span></span>

And in hell he lift up his eyes, being in torments,.... Which may design
the place of torment, and the miserable state the Scribes and Pharisees,
as all wicked men, enter immediately into upon death, [Psa
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017.md) who in their lifetime were blind,
and are called blind guides, blind watchmen, blind leaders of the blind,
and who were given up to judicial blindness and hardness of heart; but
in hell their eyes are opened, and they see their mistakes about the
Messiah, and find themselves in torments, under dreadful gnawings, and
remorse of conscience; and having a terrible sensation of divine wrath,
their worm dies not, and their fire is not quenched: or this may regard
the vengeance of God on the Jews, at the destruction of Jerusalem; when
a fire was kindled against their land, and burned to the lowest hell;
and consumed the earth with her increase, and set on fire the
foundations of the mountains; and the whole land became brimstone, salt,
and burning; and they were rooted out of it in anger, wrath, and great
indignation; see [Deu 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023.md) or rather,
the dreadful calamities which came upon them in the times of Adrian at
Bither; when their false Messiah Bar Cochab was taken and slain, and
such multitudes of them were destroyed in the most miserable manner (z),
when that people, who before had their eyes darkened, and a spirit of
slumber and stupidity fallen upon them, in those calamities began to be
under some convictions:

and seeth Abraham afar off: the covenant of circumcision given to him,
and to them his natural seed, now of no use to them; their descent from
him, of which they boasted, and in which they trusted, now of no avail;
and him in the kingdom of heaven, and themselves thrust out; see [Luk
13:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#028.md).

And Lazarus in his bosom; they now found the Messiah was come, and was
gone to heaven, whither they could not come, [Joh
7:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#033.md). The Jews are convinced that the
Messiah is born, though not revealed; and they sometimes confess, that
he was born the same day Jerusalem was destroyed; and sometimes they
say, he sits at the gates of Rome among the lepers, and at other times,
that he is in the walks of paradise (a). This is said in agreement with
the notions of the Jews, that wicked men will see the righteous in
happiness, and themselves in torment; by which the latter will be
aggravated, to which the allusion is; for they say (b),

"the gates of paradise are fixed over against the gates of hell, so that
they can see the righteous in rest, and themselves in distress.''

\(z\) Vid. Buxtorf. Lex. Talmud. col. 372. (a) Synagog. Jud. c. 50. T.
Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 98. 1. Aben Ezra in Cant. vii. 5. T. Hieros
Beracot, fol. 5. 1. (b) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 125. 3.

[Luke 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 16:24</span></span>

And he cried and said, father Abraham,.... The Jews used to call Abraham
their father, and were proud of their descent from him, [Mat
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#009.md) and so persons are after death
represented by them, as speaking to, and discoursing with him; as in the
passage cited in the note See Gill on [Luk
16:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#022.md) to which the following may be
added (c);

"says R. Jonathan, from whence does it appear that the dead discourse
with each other? it is said, [Deu 34:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#004.md)
"And the Lord said unto him, this is the land which I sware unto
Abraham, unto Isaac, and unto Jacob, saying", &c. what is the meaning of
the word "saying?" the holy blessed God said to Moses, "go say to
Abraham", &c.''

And here the Jews, in their distress, are represented as applying to
him, saying,

have mercy on me, and send Lazarus; which seems to have respect to the
mercy promised to Abraham, the covenant made with him, and the oath
swore unto him, to send the Messiah, [Luk
1:70](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#070.md) and which now, too late, these
wretched Jews plead, the Messiah being sent already:

that he may dip the tip of his finger in water; in allusion to the
washings and purifications among the Jews, and the sprinkling of blood
by the finger of the high priest; which were typical of cleansing,
pardon, comfort, and refreshment, by the grace and blood of Christ:

and cool my tongue; which had spoken so many scurrilous and blasphemous
things of Christ; saying that he was a sinner, a glutton, and a
winebibber, a Samaritan, and had a devil; that he cast out devils by
Beelzebub, the prince of devils; and that he was a seditious person, and
guilty of blasphemy: so the Jews represent persons in hell, desirous of
cooling water, and as sometimes favoured with it, and sometimes not:
they say (d), he that reads "Keriat Shema, (i.e. hear, O Israel", &c.)
and very accurately examines the letters of it, "they cool hell for
him", as it is said, [Psa 68:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#014.md). And
elsewhere (e), they speak of a disciple, or good man, that was seen
after death amidst gardens, and orchards, and fountains of water; and of
a publican, or wicked man, seen standing by the bank of a river, seeking
, "to come to the water, but could not come at it". So Mahomet (f) has a
passage that is somewhat like to this text;

"the inhabitants of hell fire, shall call to the inhabitants of
paradise, saying, pour upon us some water, or of those refreshments God
hath bestowed on you.''

This man could not so much as get a drop of water to cool his tongue,
not the least refreshment, nor mitigation of the anguish of his
conscience, for the sins of his tongue:

for I am tormented in this flame; in the destruction of Jerusalem, and
calamities at Bither, and other afflictions; together with the wrath of
God poured into the conscience, and the bitter remorses of that for
speaking against the Messiah; and which are still greater in hell, where
the worm dies not, and the fire is not quenched.

\(c\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 18. 2. (d) Ib. fol. 15. 2. (e) T. Hieros.
Sanhedrin, fol. 23. 3. & Chagiga, fol, 77. 4. (f) Koran, c. 7. p. 121.
(sura 7:50)

[Luke 16:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 16:25</span></span>

But Abraham said, son,.... He calls him "son", not in a spiritual sense;
he was not one of Abraham's spiritual seed, that trod in the steps of
his faith; but because he was so according to the flesh; and in return
to his calling him father: good men have not always good children, nor
is any trust to be put in birth and parentage:

remember, that thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good things; temporal
good things; a land flowing with milk and honey; all the outward
blessings of life that could be wished for, the Jews had, whilst they
were in their own land; and also ecclesiastical good things, as the
adoption, the glory, the covenants, the giving of the law, and the
service of God, and the promises, the fathers, and the Messiah according
to the flesh, even all external privileges and ordinances, [Rom
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#004.md).

And likewise Lazarus evil things; Christ was surrounded with the
infirmities of human nature, he assumed; was attended with much outward
meanness and poverty; was loaded with calumnies and reproaches; and
followed with the wrath, hatred, and persecution of men; and suffered
many evil things, as buffetings, scourging, spitting, and cruel
mockings, and at last death itself:

but now he is comforted; see [Psa 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009.md)
compared with [Act 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#025.md). Christ being
raised from the dead, and set in human nature at the right hand of God,
is comforted with the presence of God, which for a while he was deprived
of, when on the cross; and is delighted with the glory that it put upon
him as man; and with pleasure sees the travail of his soul continually,
his elect and redeemed ones, called and gathered by the grace of God,
who are his jewels, his portion, and goodly heritage:

and thou art tormented; as were many of the Jews, his implacable enemies
and persecutors in hell, and others in captivity, bondage, and distress.

[Luke 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 16:26</span></span>

And besides all this,.... The different circumstances of each, both past
and present, which should be observed and considered:

between us and you there is a great gulf fixed; as this may regard the
state of the Pharisees after death, it intends not the natural distance
between heaven and hell; though there may be an allusion to the notions
of the Jews concerning that, who on those words in [Ecc
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#014.md). "God hath set the one over
against the other", say (f),

"this is hell and paradise, what space is there between them? an hand's
breadth; R. Jochanan says a wall, but the Rabbans say, they are both of
them even, so that they may look out of one into another.''

Which passage is cited a little differently (g), thus;

"wherefore did the holy blessed God create hell and paradise? that they
might be one against another; what space is there between them? R.
Jochanan says, a wall, and R. Acha says an hand's breadth: but the
Rabbans say, two fingers.''

And elsewhere it (h) is said,

"know that hell and paradise are near to one another, and one house
separates between them; and paradise is on the north east side---and
hell on the north west.''

Mahomet seems to have borrowed this notion from them, who says (i),

"between the blessed and the damned, there shall be a vail; and men
shall stand on "Al Araf", (the name of the wall or partition, that shall
separate paradise from hell,) who shall know every one of them by their
mouths.''

But not this natural space, be it what it will, but the immutable decree
of God is intended here, which has unalterably fixed the state of the
damned, and of the blessed:

so that they which would pass from hence to you cannot, neither can they
pass to us that would come from thence; not that those in heaven can
desire to go to those in hell; though those in hell, may wish to be in
heaven; but the sense is, that by this irrevocable decree of God, the
saints in heaven are eternally happy, and the wicked in hell eternally
miserable: and this also agrees with the notions of the Jews (k), who
represent it impossible: for a man, after he has descended into hell, to
come up from thence any more: but as this may regard the Jews state of
captivity and affliction, since the destruction of their city and
temple, upon, and for their rejection of the Messiah; it may denote the
impossibility of Christ's coming again upon the same errand he came on
before, to be a Saviour of sinners, and a sacrifice for sin; and of the
Jews believing in him, so long as they lie under the spirit of slumber,
and are given up to judicial blindness and hardness of heart.

\(f\) Midrash Kohelet, fol 76. 1. (g) Nishmat Chayim Orat. 1. sect. 12.
fol. 31. 1. (h) Raziel, fol. 15. 1. (i) Koran, c. 7. p. 120. (k)
Caphtor, fol. 70. 2.

[Luke 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 16:27</span></span>

Then he said, I pray thee therefore father,.... The Cambridge, copy of
Beza's, and the Ethiopic version read, "father Abraham"; finding he
could have no redress of his misery, nor any relief for himself, he
applies for others:

that thou wouldst send him to my father's house; the house of Israel and
Jacob, the surviving Jews: and this agrees also with a notion of theirs,
that the dead seek for mercy for them (l). The Persic and Ethiopic
versions read, "that thou wouldst send Lazarus", &c. whom the one calls
Gazarus, and the other Eleazar.

\(l\) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 16. 1.

[Luke 16:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 16:28</span></span>

For I have five brethren,.... Meaning his brethren and countrymen,
according to the flesh; who when he was alive, stood in such a relation
to him; said to be "five", in allusion it may be to the children of
Israel coming out of Egypt, "by fives", or five in a rank, [Exo
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#018) as a learned man (m.md)
conjectures, to whom I am beholden for several hints, in the explanation
of this parable; and certain it is, that these five brethren were Jews,
since they had the writings of Moses and the prophets with them, [Luk
16:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#029.md). Wherefore I shall venture to
propose another conjecture, though it may be liable to exception, as all
conjectures usually are: it is plain that there were "six" brethren in
all; let it be observed then, that the Jewish nation were usually
divided into "three" parts, "priests, Levites, and Israelites"; of these
three the great sanhedrim usually consisted (n); and these read the law
every sabbath day; first a priest, then a Levite, and then "five
Israelites" (o); (let that number also be remarked;) now these were
again divided into "three" sects, "Pharisees, Sadducees", and "Essenes".
The former of these are represented in this parable; this I only
propose, I lay no stress on it: it may be, that the twice five, or ten
tribes of Israel, which were not known where they were, nor are they to
this day, may be designed by a "synechdoche", of a part for the whole;
whose return the Jews are yet expecting, and for whose welfare they are
greatly concerned.

That he may testify unto them: that is, preach unto them, as the word is
used in [Act 2:40](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#040.md). Christ, when here
on earth, did testify to that people of their sins, showed them the
heinousness of them, inveighed against them, and reproved for them; and
of their righteousness, and showed the hypocrisy, deficiency, and
insufficiency of it to justify them; of himself as the Messiah; of truth
in general; and of their ruin, temporal and eternal; but he had now
finished his testimony, and which, though faithful, was not heard nor
received by them; the reason of this request is,

lest they also come into this place of torment; as hell is, and which
these brethren of his, he left behind, were deserving of, and in danger
of coming into; and his concern for them did not arise from any regard
to Christ, and the enlargement of his interest; nor from any love to his
testimony, the Gospel; nor from any real notion or desire of converting
grace for his brethren; nor from true love to them; but from a selfish
principle, lest his own torments should be aggravated by their coming:
this, as it may regard the Jews in their affliction, and if the ten
tribes should be meant by the five brethren, may design the very
passionate concern the Jews had, and still have for them, who yet, to
this day, hope for the return of them; see Manasseh ben Israel's book,
called, "Spes Israelis".

\(m\) Teelmannus. (n) Maimon Hilchot Sanhedrin, c. 2. sect. 2. (o) Ib.
Hilchot Tephilla, c. 12. sect. 16.

[Luke 16:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 16:29</span></span>

Abraham said unto him..... In reply to this his request:

they have Moses and the prophets; that is, their writings; which shows
this man, and his five brethren, to be Jews; for to them were the
oracles of God committed; and these had the writings of Moses and the
prophets read to them every sabbath day; and is true, whether the
contemporaries and immediate successors of the Pharisees are meant, or
the ten tribes: and also shows, that one view of the parable, is to
establish the authority of these writings; see [Luk
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#016.md) and that it is a peculiar
privilege to have them; and that they ought to be attended to and
regarded;

let them hear them; for they testified concerning Christ, and concerning
the sins of the Jews, and the calamities, both temporal and eternal,
that should come upon them; and which, testimony was sufficient to leave
them without excuse: and indeed, the word of God, read, explained, and
heard, is the ordinary means of conversion, or of bringing men to faith
and repentance.

[Luke 16:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 16:30</span></span>

And he said, nay, father Abraham,.... He contradicts his father Abraham,
or at least desires it might not be so; this way he suggests, was not so
right, and would not succeed; for he knew his brethren were a
rebellious, and stiffnecked people, and would not hear Moses and the
prophets, notwithstanding all their outward boast of them, and
pretensions of regard to them:

but if one went unto them from the dead, they will repent; but alas!
repentance is not of man's will, but a gift of God's grace; nor could
these men repent, because in a judicial way their eyes were shut, their
ears were stopped, and their hearts were hardened; and though Christ
came in person to them, and preached, as never man did, with power and
authority, and confirmed his doctrine with miracles, yet they repented
not, nor did they when he arose from the dead.

[Luke 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 16:31</span></span>

And he said unto him..... That is, Abraham said unto him, as the Syriac,
Persic, and Ethiopic versions express it:

if they hear not Moses and the prophets; as they did not, nor regarded
what they said of Christ, but disbelieved both him and them:

neither will they be persuaded: or brought to repent and believe;

though one rose from the dead; as Christ did; whose resurrection, the
truth of it they endeavoured to baffle, stifle, and suppress: this was
the sign Christ gave them, of the truth of his Messiahship; and yet they
repented not of what they had done to him, that they might believe in
him; but remained still in their impenitence and infidelity, and so
died. This shows the regard that ought to be had to the written word, as
read, or preached; and that it is a sad sign of a desperate condition,
when men reject divine revelation. Beza's ancient copy adds, "and should
go unto them".

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 17](luk017.md)

</div>
