<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk018)  [Next](luk020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001)

[Luke 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 19:1</span></span>

And Jesus entered, and passed through Jericho. Though the word "Jesus"
is not in the original text it is rightly supplied in our version; as it
is also in the Syriac, Persic, Ethiopic versions; for of him the words
are manifestly spoken: after he had healed the blind man he met with
near to Jericho, he entered into it, but made no stay in it, passed
through it at once without stopping, though a very populous city; but
here he had no work, either to perform miracles, or to convert sinners;
though both, before he entered, and after he passed through it.

[Luke 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 19:2</span></span>

And behold there was a man named Zacchaeus,.... Or "Zaccai", a name in
use among the Jews; see [Ezr 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#009). We
often read of , "Rabbi Zaccai", or "Zacchaeus" (a), and very frequently
of R. Jochanan ben Zaccai, a famous doctor that lived in the times of
Christ, and even till after the destruction of Jerusalem. The Jews also
make mention of one R. Zaccai, a prince of the seed of David the king,
in later times (b). So that this man, as appears by his name, was a Jew,
though some have thought him to have been a Gentile (c), perhaps because
of his employment: but it does not follow from thence; for there were
Jews that were publicans, as Levi, or Matthew, afterwards one of
Christ's disciples; and also in Jewish writings, mention is made, as of
, "a stranger", or "a Gentile publican" (d), so likewise of , "an
Israelite publican" (e); and such an one was Zacchaeus, as follows:

which was chief among the publicans; the head of them in that place, to
whom the rest brought the tax, tribute, or toll; he was the receiver
general of the tax: at the toll booths, at bridges, for people's going
over the water, there was , "the greater publican", and , "the lesser
publican" (f), who was deputy to the other. What sort of tax Zacchaeus
was concerned in collecting, is not certain; however, he was a principal
man in this employ, and had got great riches by it.

And he was rich; was a person of figure among the publicans, and of
substance, which he had gained in his post. And though the instances of
rich men being called by grace are few, yet there have been some; and
the rather this circumstance is mentioned, because it had been observed
in the preceding chapter, how difficult, but not impossible, as this
instance proves, it was for rich men to enter into the kingdom of God.

\(a\) T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 27. 2. & Yebamot, fol. 77. 2. Nazir, fol.
38. 1. & Nidda, fol. 41. 2. & Juchasin, fol. 90. 2. (b) R. Benjamin
Itinerar. p. 61, 94. (c) Tertull. contr. Marcion. l. 4. c. 37. (d) T.
Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 113. 1. (e) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Bava Kama,
c. 10. sect. 1. (f) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 78. 2.

[Luke 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 19:3</span></span>

And he sought to see Jesus who he was,.... What sort of a person he was
for complexion, stature, and age: having heard much of him, he was very
desirous of indulging his curiosity with a sight of him; having, as yet,
nothing else that induced him to desire to see him: his desire to see
Jesus was not of the same kind with the kings and prophets, [Mat
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016) but rather like that of Herod,
[Luk 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#008)

and could not for the press; the multitude of people that were flocking
to meet Jesus, or who came before him, or were about him; for one part
of the multitude went before him, and the other followed after him; so
that he was in the crowd, and therefore could not easily be seen;

because he was little of stature. The Syriac and Persic versions read,
"because Zacchaeus was little of stature", lest it should be thought
that this is said of Jesus; for the reason why Zacchaeus could not see
him for the crowd, was not because Christ was little of stature, and was
hid among them, but because Zacchaeus was little of stature, and could
not see over their heads.

[Luke 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 19:4</span></span>

And he ran before,.... Jesus, and the company that was with him; so very
desirous was he of seeing him:

and climbed up into a sycamore tree to see him: which sort of trees were
very common about Jericho: hence we read of, , "beams of sycamore" in
Jericho, which those that were strong took up in their arms, and the
owners stood and devoted them to God (g); and among the things which the
men of Jericho did, this was one, that they permitted the branches of
trees devoted to sacred uses, and of the "charub" tree, and of the
"sycamore", to be cut down and used (h). This sort of trees used to grow
in plains and valleys, as appears from some passages of Scripture, [Kg1
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#027) and from Jewish writings (i);
and certain it is, that Jericho was in such a situation. Josephus (k)
says, it was seated in a plain; and Strabo says (l), that Jericho is a
plain surrounded with mountains; to which agrees the account that (m)
Justin gives of it. There is a valley, which is enclosed by mountains on
all sides, as with a wall, like a castle; the space of the place is two
hundred acres, and it is called Jericho. Hence we read of the plains and
valley of Jericho in Scripture, [Deu
34:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#003) so that it is very probable
sycamore trees grew there in great plenty; though the place was more
famous for palm trees: hence it is called the city of the palm trees,
[Deu 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#003) which the Targumist, in both
places, interprets, the city of Jericho: to which agree the accounts
given of it by Pliny (n), Strabo (o), and Justin (p), who all affirm,
that it abounded with palm trees; and the latter says also with balsam
trees, from the sweet smell of which it might have its name: so the Jews
say (q), the ointment of balsam is called the ointment of our land,
because it grows in Jericho, and because of the smell of it, it is
called Jericho; though some think it has its name from the plain, being
in the form of a half moon; the moon, in the Hebrew language, being
called (r). This tree seems to have been without the city: and indeed,
according to the Jewish canon, it ought to be, which runs thus (s);

"they set a tree at a distance from a city, twenty and five cubits, but
a "charub tree", and "sycamore", fifty cubits.''

The reason of the greater distance of the latter is, as one of their
commentators says (t), because their branches were large; and this is
the reason why Zacchaeus went up into one of these trees, because it was
large and able to bear him, and tall, from whence he could have a full
view of Christ:

for he was to pass that way; or rather, "pass by that"; for the word
"way" is not in the text; and the sense is, he was to pass by that tree;
or "under" it, as the Arabic version renders it. The tree stood by the
road side, in which Jesus came, for which reason Zacchaeus made choice
of it, as fit for his purpose.

\(g\) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 57. 1. & Juchashin, fol. 69. 1. (h) T. Bab.
Menachot, fol. 71. 1. & Pesachim, fol. 56. 1. (i) Misn. Sheviith, c. 9.
sect. 2. (k) De Bello Jud. l. 4. c. 27. (l) Geograph. l. 16. (m) Hist.
l. 36. c. 3. (n) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 14. (o) Ut supra. (Geograph. l.
16.) (p) Ib. (q) Gloss. in T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 43. 1. (r) Vid. Masium
in Josh. c. 2. p. 37. (s) Misna Bava Bathra, c. 2. sect. 7. (t)
Bartenora in ib.

[Luke 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 19:5</span></span>

And when Jesus came to the place,.... Where the tree stood, in which
Zacchaeus was. Christ knows where his people are, and where to find
them, where they commonly dwell, or where at any time they are, he being
God omniscient: besides, the bounds of their habitations are fixed by
the determination and appointment of God, and were foreknown by Christ,
who, before the world began, was "rejoicing in the habitable part of his
earth", where he knew his saints would dwell, who are "the sons of men",
with whom his delights were; and he knows where they are, when the time
is come to call them: he knew Zacchaeus was in the sycamore tree, as he
saw Nathanael under the fig tree, before Philip called him, [Joh
1:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048) and Christ comes to the very
place where his people are, either in person, as here; and so he came to
Galilee, and to the sea there, and walked by it, and on the very spot,
where he knew he should meet with Peter, and Andrew, and James, and
John, whom he called to follow him, [Mat
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#013). He came to his own city
Capernaum, and to the place of receipt of custom near unto it, where
Matthew was, and called him, [Mat 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#001)
and he came to Samaria, and to Jacob's well, where he knew the woman of
Samaria would be at such a time, in order to call her: or, though he
comes not in person to others, where they are, yet by his word, and by
his Spirit; and he comes to them before they come to him; and is found
of them, and finds them, who sought him not; and is made manifest to
them, who asked not for him; and in this he acts the part of the good
shepherd, that leaves the ninety nine in the wilderness, and goes after
that which is lost till he finds it; and agreeably to his character as a
Saviour, and to the end of his coming into the world, which was to call
sinners to repentance, and to seek, and save that which is lost, [Luk
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010).

He looked up and saw him; he knew him, he being one of those the Father
had given to him, and he had loved and undertook for, and was come into
the world to seek, and to save, and now, at this time, was come hither
to call by his grace. He had seen him before in the glass of his
Father's purposes and decrees, he being chosen in him to grace and
glory, and being a vessel of mercy, afore prepared for glory: he had
seen him when he was brought into the bond of the covenant; and passed
under the rod of him, that telleth all the covenant ones, as they were
put into it, and given to him the Mediator of it: he had seen him among
them that were lost in Adam, whom he came to recover out of the ruins of
their fall in him; and now he saw him in his state of nature and
unregeneracy; he saw him in his blood, and said unto him, live: this
look was a look of love, grace, and mercy; he looked upon him, and loved
him, and was gracious to him, and had compassion on him; and it was a
distinguishing look, he looked on him, and not on others. There was a
great crowd both before and behind him, and all about him; but he looked
not on these, but he looked up to Zacchaeus.

And he said unto him, Zacchaeus; he knew him, and could call him by his
name, as he did Saul, when he called him, and revealed himself to him.
His name was written in the Lamb's book of life, and so must be known to
Christ, who was present at the making of that book, and was concerned in
setting down the names in it, and has it in his keeping: he was one of
the sheep the Father had given him, he came to lay down his life for,
and of whom he had such perfect knowledge, as to call them by name, as
he does all the chosen and redeemed ones; see [Isa
43:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#001). It must be very surprising to
Zacchaeus to hear Christ call him by his name, who was an utter stranger
to him, and whom he had never seen before; and it is a very considerable
instance of the omniscience of Christ, as well as of the great
condescension and affectionate regard he has to his own, and the
familiar way in which he uses them.

Make haste, and come down; from the tree. The dangerous estate and
condition of a sinner requires haste; it is like that of Lot in Sodom,
when it was just going to be destroyed; and like that of the manslayer,
when pursued by the avenger of blood; both whom it became to escape for
their lives, and flee for refuge as fast as they could: and so it became
Zacchaeus to come down with all speed to Christ, who was come hither to
call and save him; and the enjoyment of Christ, and his grace, calls for
haste; see [Joh 11:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#028). Such who come
to Christ must quit all their exalted thoughts of themselves, of their
riches, fulness, and self-sufficiency, and come to him as poor and
needy, for such only he fills with his good things; and of their health
and soundness, and come to him the great physician, as sick and
diseased; and of their purity and goodness, holiness and righteousness,
and come to him as sinners: but it must be mighty grace to cast down
imaginations, and high things, that exalt themselves against Christ, and
the knowledge of him, and to humble a proud sinner, and bring him to the
feet of Jesus.

For this day I must abide at thy house; for a little while; not so much
for the sake of refreshment for himself, and his disciples, as for the
good of Zacchaeus; to make known the great salvation to him, and to
bestow his grace upon him, and converse with him in a spiritual way.

[Luke 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 19:6</span></span>

And he made haste,.... Such power went along with the words of Christ,
that they immediately reached his heart, awakened his conscience,
affected his mind, and drew his soul to Christ, and knit him to him,
that be made all imaginable haste to be with him. So souls sensible of
their dangerous state and condition by nature, and apprehensive of
impending ruin and destruction, and having some intimation of safety and
happiness in Christ, and being filled with love to him, and a liking of
him flee with all haste to him for refuge, for righteousness, peace,
pardon, life, and salvation:

and came down; from the tree he had climbed, merely to indulge his
curiosity, little thinking that he should be called by name by him; that
he should have him a guest at his house, and have such a knowledge of
him, and familiar acquaintance with him: so souls, when called by
Christ, and made sensible of their need of him, and the worth there is
in him, quit their former post and place, part with their carnal lusts
and sinful companions, and renounce their own righteousness and works,
and come as sinners, humble and lowly, and venture upon Christ:

and received him joyfully; not only into his house, but into his arms
and heart: Christ was a welcome guest to him, as he is to every sensible
sinner, who by faith receives him, as the Father's free gift; as the
alone Saviour and Redeemer; as the great Mediator, in all his offices,
of prophet, priest, and king; and in every relation and character he
bears; and embraces his doctrines, and submits to his ordinances, and
that with, the greatest joy; as there is reason for it, since with him,
he receives the free and full forgiveness of his sins, a justifying
righteousness, an abundance of grace, and a right unto, and meetness for
heaven.

[Luke 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 19:7</span></span>

And when they saw it,.... The Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions
read, "when they all saw this"; that is, as the Persic version, rather
paraphrasing than translating, says, "the men and the multitude that
were with him"; the "pharisaical" sort, the priests and Levites, of
which there were great numbers in Jericho; See Gill on [Luk
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#031).

They all murmured; as the Scribes and Pharisees did, at his eating with
publicans and sinners, [Luk 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk015.htm#002).

Saying, that he was gone to be guest with a man that is a sinner; a
notorious one, an abandoned profligate creature; one of the worst of
sinners, as being a publican, and the chief of them; who had amassed
vast riches to himself, by extortion and oppression; and they thought it
was not agreeable to the character of an holy man, and a venerable
prophet, which Christ bore, to go into such a man's house, eat at his
table; and have familiar conversation with him; see [Mat
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010).

[Luke 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 19:8</span></span>

And Zacchaeus stood,.... Before Christ, in respect to him, and reverence
of him; and in the presence of others, to make a public confession
before them, and that they might all hear it, when come to his own
house:

and said unto the Lord; that is, to "Jesus", as the Syriac and Persic
versions, and some copies read; he addressed himself to Christ, and made
his confession to him, as the Israelite, when he brought the basket of
the firstfruits to the priest, confessed before the Lord his God, [Deu
26:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu026.htm#004). And the rather Zacchaeus
directed his speech to Christ, being, as he was now convinced, the
discerner of the thoughts, and intents of the heart; who knew the
genuineness of his repentance, that it was hearty and real; and the
sincerity of his expressions and resolutions, and upon what principles
he acted, and proposed to do as follows:

behold, Lord, the half of my goods I give unto the poor; not to make
satisfaction for the sins he had committed, but to testify his sense of
them, and his repentance for them, and as willing to do good with what
he had gotten; which shows, that the disposition of his mind was
altered, and of a covetous oppressor, he was become tender, kind, and
liberal. According to an order made by the Jews in Usha, a man might not
give away more than a fifth part of his estate, unless in some
extraordinary cases (u); and we read of one, that gave a "third" part of
his goods to the poor (w); and of another, that gave, as here, half of
his mammon, or wealth (x); and another, half of his food to the poor
(y); and of another, that gave away all his goods to them (z); see [Co1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003); to give a tenth part, was
reckoned a medium (a):

and if I have taken any thing from any man by false accusation; or by
extorting any thing from him on any pretence, by making an unjust demand
upon him; or in any oppressive way, by defrauding and tricking, and by
doing him any injury, in any form or manner:

I restore him fourfold: the same that was done in case of sheep
stealing, [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001) but in such a case
as this, the law only required the principal, with the fifth part added
to it; see [Lev 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#005) but Zacchaeus
proposes as much as in the case of theft, and which was rarely used. The
Jews (b) say,

"that the manner of paying double, was more used than the manner of
paying fourfold, or fivefold; for the manner of paying double was used,
both in things animate and inanimate; but the manner of paying fourfold
and fivefold, was used but with respect to an ox, and a sheep only.''

This was done by Zacchaeus, to show the truth and reality of his
repentance; for with that nation,

"the repentance of shepherds, and of collectors, and of "publicans", is
said (c) to be very difficult:''

the reason given by the gloss is, because they rob many, and do not know
who to return to.

\(u\) T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 50. 1. & Maimon. in Misn. Peah, c. 1, sect
1. (w) T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 44. 1. (x) T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 67. 2.
(y) Juchasin, fol. 105. 2. (z) T. Hieros. Peah, fol. 15. 2. (a) Maimon.
Hilch. Mattanot Anayim, c. 7. sect. 5. (b) Misna Bava Kama, c. 7. sect.
1. (c) T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 94. 2.

[Luke 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 19:9</span></span>

And Jesus said unto him,.... The Persic version reads, "Jesus said to
the multitude, and to his disciples"; to which well enough agree the
following words:

this day is salvation come to this house: to the master of it, and it
may be to others in it; the Arabic version reads, "to the inhabitants of
this house". The Persic version reads, "great salvation"; by which may
be meant, the Gospel, as in [Heb 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#003)
so called, because it brings the account of salvation by Christ, which
is not discoverable by the light of nature, nor made known by the law of
Moses; but the Gospel publishes and proclaims it; the ministers of it
show unto men the way of salvation, and direct them, and encourage to go
to Christ for it; likewise the Gospel is the means of bringing near this
salvation, and of applying it to them; and when it comes with the
demonstration of the Spirit, it is the power of God unto salvation: and
this might be truly said to come to Zacchaeus's house; inasmuch as
Christ the great preacher of it, and by whom it first began to be
spoken, and was spoken by him, as it never was by any one besides, was
now in his house, preaching it; the sum and substance of which lie in
the words delivered by him in the following verse; and the Gospel came
to him to purpose, and was effectual: sometimes it comes to a people,
city, town, or family, and it is rejected, and becomes of no effect; but
here it came to Zacchaeus, and into him; and wrought effectually in him,
as his words in the preceding verse declare: moreover, the blessing of
salvation itself, which is wrought out by Christ, and published in the
Gospel, was brought home to him; he was not only made sensible that he
stood in need of salvation, but this was brought near unto him, and set
before him, and applied to him; he had not only hopes of it, but faith
of interest in it; it was made known unto him, that Christ was his
salvation; and it was revealed and applied to the rest of the family, as
well as to him: sometimes the Lord takes one of a city, and two of a
family; and sometimes whole families, as Lydia's and the jailor's, and
here Zacchaeus's, as seems probable; for by his house may be meant, his
family: though this may be understood of Christ, the author of
salvation; who came into his house in a literal sense, as well as in a
spiritual sense; and was made known to Zacchaeus, as his Saviour and
Redeemer. The Alexandrian copy reads, "in this house": it follows,

forasmuch as he also is the son of Abraham. These words are to be
considered, either as a reason, or evidence, of salvation being come to
his house; and therefore cannot be understood of him as a son of
Abraham, by natural descent: he was indeed a Jew, as appears by his
name, and by his knowledge of the Jewish law, concerning restoration;
and which may be confirmed by the silence of the Pharisees, who murmured
at Christ's going along with him; who, had he been a Gentile, would not
have failed to have mentioned it; but then, though this might be a
reason justifying Christ in going to his house, who did not exceed the
bounds of his office, as the minister of the circumcision, and as sent,
and that only to the lost sheep of the house of Israel; yet this could
be no reason of spiritual salvation coming to him, which was not
confined to Abraham's natural seed, nor was it necessary to them, more
than others, and much less general; and indeed, very few of them then in
being, partook of it; for though salvation was of them, and Christ the
Saviour came unto them, yet they rejected him, and died in their sins:
nor is this a reason of salvation coming to his family; for though by
virtue of the covenant of circumcision made with Abraham and his natural
seed, there were many outward privileges bestowed upon them, yet
spiritual salvation was not ensured by it to them; and with regard to
that, natural descent from Abraham, and circumcision, were of no avail:
but this is to be understood of him, as a son of Abraham in a spiritual
sense, he being now a believer in Christ, and so one that walked in the
steps of the faith of Abraham; and this was an evidence of his interest
in salvation by Christ, the blessing with which he was blessed, with
faithful Abraham: and also his being a son of Abraham, which is no other
than to be a child of the promise, [Rom
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#008) or in other words, one of God's
elect, a chosen vessel of salvation, was a reason why Christ, the author
of salvation, came to him, why the Gospel of salvation was made known to
him, and why the blessing of salvation was applied to him. The Jews use
this phrase, not only of one whose natural descent is from Abraham, but
whose knowledge in divine things is considerable: so when R. Eliezer ben
Arach taught the Mercava, (the mystery of Ezekiel's visions),

"R. Jochanan ben Zaccai stood and kissed his head, and said, blessed art
thou, O God of Israel, that has given , "a son to Abraham", who has
knowledge to understand, and to search out, and to explain the work of
Mercava (d).''

For Abraham is said (e) to be a father in this sort of knowledge, for
which reason, this man was genealogized a son of Abraham.

\(d\) T. Bab. Chagiga, fol. 14. 2. (e) Caphtor, fol. 69. 1.

[Luke 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 19:10</span></span>

For the son of man,.... Meaning himself, who was truly man, and the
Messiah, and which was one of his names in the Old Testament:

is come: from heaven, into this world, being sent by the Father, and
with the full consent and good will of his own:

to seek and save that which was lost: as all his elect were in Adam, and
by their own actual transgressions; and are considered as such, whilst
in a state of unregeneracy: and particularly the lost sheep of the house
of Israel are meant, one of which Zacchaeus was; and so the words are a
reason of Christ's looking him up, and calling him by his grace, and
making a discovery of himself, and an application of salvation to him;
see [Mat 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#011).

[Luke 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 19:11</span></span>

And as they heard these things,.... What Zacchaeus said to Christ, and
what Christ said to Zacchaeus; particularly, that salvation, or the
Saviour was then come to his house, and that he was come to save lost
persons:

he added, and spake a parable; that is, as the Syriac version renders
it, "he added a parable to the word", or to what he had said:

because he was nigh to Jerusalem: within ten "parsas", or large miles;
for at such a distance was Jerusalem from Jericho (f), where Christ now
was, according to the Jewish writers; but according to Josephus (g), it
was a hundred and fifty furlongs, which must be eighteen or twenty
miles, and this may be said to be nigh; and not long after this, we hear
of Christ at the Mount of Olives, which was about a mile from Jerusalem,
[Luk 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#029).

And because they thought that the kingdom of God should immediately
appear: or be revealed, or made manifest: the phrase is Jewish; so [Sol
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012) "the time of the singing of birds
is come", is interpreted (h), the time that the "kingdom of heaven",
"shall be revealed", is come, and elsewhere (i),

"say to the cities of the house of Judah, , "the kingdom of your God is
revealed;"''

meaning in both places, as here, the kingdom of the Messiah: what
induced the disciples of Christ, or the multitude, or both, to imagine
that the temporal kingdom of the Messiah, which they were expecting,
would quickly be set up, might be what he had said to Zacchaeus, that
salvation was that day come to his house, he being a son of Abraham;
which they understanding of a temporal salvation, took it as a hint,
that the outward prosperity of the seed of Abraham was at hand; as also
what he had said, concerning his coming to seek and save that which is
lost; which they were willing to interpret, of the civil state of Judea,
and that he was come to restore its lost liberties and privileges; and
partly, because he was now not a great way from Jerusalem, and was on
his journey thither, in order to make his entrance in a very public
manner; which was the metropolis of their nation, and the ancient seat
of their kings, David, Solomon, and others: now the scope and design of
the following parable, is to refute the notion of a temporal kingdom,
and its near approach; by showing, that his kingdom lay a great way off,
and was not of this world; and that his servants and disciples had a
great deal of business to transact for him, and must not think of pomp
and grandeur, but of labour and service; and that the Jews were so far
from receiving any advantages by his kingdom, that they would not submit
to his government, and would be treated as enemies, and utterly
destroyed; even their nation, city, and temple.

\(f\) Bartenora in Misn. Tamid, c. 3, sect. 8. (g) De Bello Jud. l. 4.
c. 27. (h) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 11. 4. (i) Targum in Isa. xl. 9.

[Luke 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 19:12</span></span>

He said therefore,.... The following parable, with the above said design
and view:

a certain nobleman; the son of a great family, as the Syriac version
renders it; of noble descent, of an illustrious extract; by whom is
meant Jesus Christ, who was a "man", as he agreed to be, and was
prophesied of as such; and who frequently appeared in an human form
before his incarnation; and was now actually become man, though not a
mere man: and he may truly be said to be "noble"; not only as the word
may signify, as it sometimes does, a person of great authority and
power, and of great generosity and goodness, but one of a noble birth;
for Christ, as man, descended from the kings of the house of Judah, and
was the son of David; and from the Jewish fathers and ancestors of the
greatest renown, as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob; and he may be so called
as man, because of the union of the human nature to the Son of God; or
because of his divine relation, as the Son of God: this illustrious
person,

went into a far country; by which, heaven is meant; so called, not only
because of its distance from the earth, but in comparison of the earth,
as a place of pilgrimage; and because that it is out of sight, and the
views which are had of it, are very distant ones: hither Christ went at
his ascension; he came from heaven at his incarnation, by the assumption
of human nature; he stayed here awhile, till he had done his work he
came about, and then went up to heaven; where he is received, and from
whence he is expected again: the end of his going there is,

to receive for himself a kingdom: by which is intended, not the kingdom
of nature and providence; for that he had, and did not receive from
another; it was his of right, and by nature; nor the kingdom of grace,
set up in the hearts of his people, and which was already within many of
them; nor the kingdom of glory, prepared for them from the foundation of
the world; though into this he entered at his ascension, and took
possession of it for himself and them: but a more visible display of his
mediatorial kingdom, he received from his Father; and which, upon his
ascension, became more manifest, by the dispossessing of Satan, and
casting him out of the Gentile world; by converting large numbers of his
people, both among Jews and Gentiles; and by ruling in their hearts,
subduing their enemies, and protecting and defending them; and by thus
reigning till he has gathered them all in, either in Judea, or in the
whole world, and then he will come again:

and return; either to destroy the Jews; the doing of which fully proved
he had received his kingdom, was vested with power and authority, and
was made, or declared Lord and Christ; or at the end of the world, to
judge both quick and dead: and this is said, to show that his personal
glorious kingdom on earth, or his kingdom in its greatest glory here,
will not be till he comes a second time; and to engage diligence in his
servants in the mean while; and to keep up the faith, hope, and
expectation of his coming again.

[Luke 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 19:13</span></span>

And he called his ten servants,.... By whom are meant, not all mankind;
for though these are all his servants of right, yet not in fact; nor the
elect of God, who are called by grace; for though these are the servants
of Christ, and are peculiarly his, yet all that received the pound were
not such, for one of them was a wicked man; but the ministers of the
Gospel, who are eminently, and in a special manner, the servants of the
most high God: but as for the number "ten", this cannot regard the
apostles, for they were twelve; and though they are sometimes called the
eleven, after the apostasy and death of Judas, yet not the ten; and
besides, there was another chose in his room; but this number being a
large and perfect one, a round number, it is sometimes made use of as a
certain number, for an uncertain one; see [Mat
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#001). The call of these by their Lord,
is not to be understood of the call of them by his grace, but of a call
of them to the office and work of the ministry:

and delivered them ten pounds; every one a pound: the "Maneh", or pound
of the Hebrews, if of gold, which contained an hundred drachmas, was of
the value of our money, "seventy five pounds"; if of silver, the old
"Maneh", or pound, which contained sixty shekels, [Eze
45:12](../../../bib/kjv/eze045.htm#012) amounted to "seven pounds ten
shillings"; but the "Maneh", or pound, mentioned in the Misna (k), and
which was in use in our Lord's time, contained an hundred pence, and was
of the value of our money, "three pounds two shillings and six pence":
and by these pounds are designed, not special grace; for they intend not
any thing wrought in these servants, but something delivered to them,
and what might be taken away again, which cannot be said of special
grace; and besides, it is certain, that one of these servants that had
the pound, was destitute of that: but gifts are meant, and these not
merely natural, or the gifts of providence, as health, riches, wisdom,
&c. nor only the outward means of grace, as the word and ordinances, but
ministerial gifts, which are the greatest in the church, and are
therefore signified by pounds; and are what may be improved or
neglected, and be lost or taken away; and for which those that have
them, are accountable: but though each of these servants are
represented, as having every man a pound delivered to him, this must not
be understood, as if the gifts of ministers were equal and alike, any
more than the inequality of their rewards proves degrees in glory; for
which sometimes this parable is produced:

and said unto him, occupy; negotiate, or trade, that is, with the
pounds; make use of the ministerial gifts, exercise them, lay them out,
and trade with them: the ministry is a trade and merchandise, to be
carried on, not in the name of the ministers of Christ, nor on their own
stock, nor for themselves, but for Christ, and for the good of souls;
which shows, that they must not be slothful, but laborious and diligent:

till I come: which suggests the certainty of Christ's coming, the
continuance of the Gospel ministry to that time; and that there is no
rest nor ease for Christ's ministers, but a continued series of labour
and service, until then; when, for their encouragement, they shall
receive their reward.

\(k\) Peah, c. 8. sect. 5. & Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Luke 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 19:14</span></span>

But his citizens hated him,.... Not those who are fellow citizens with
the saints, and of the household of God; whose citizenship is in heaven,
and who are seeking the better country, and heavenly city; but the Jews,
who were his own people and nation, among whom he was born, to whom he
was sent and came, and had an undoubted right to the government of them:
these hated him with a mortal hatred, as appeared by their traducing his
person in the most opprobrious manner; vilifying his doctrine as false;
ascribing his miracles to a diabolical influence; and by persecuting his
disciples and followers:

and sent a message after him; this seems to have respect to their
outrage against the disciples of Christ, after his ascension; when they
not only mocked them, as on the day of Pentecost, but laid hold on them,
and put them in hold, even in the common prison, and persecuted them
from place to place; and so virtually,

saying, we will not have this man to reign over us: they would neither
receive his Gospel, nor submit to his ordinances; but put them away from
them, and judged themselves unworthy of everlasting life: and this is
the language of every graceless soul; and is to be observed in their
opposition to, and neglect of the truths of Christ, and his divine
institutions; which are a yoke they do not care to take upon them,
though so mild and easy, and are cords which they cast away from them.

[Luke 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 19:15</span></span>

And it came to pass that when he was returned,.... Which return was
either in power to Jerusalem, in the destruction of that city; or which
will be in person to this earth, at the end of the world; and will be
local and visible, and in great glory, attended with the holy angels,
and with all the saints: the time is fixed and certain, though unknown,
and will be sudden and unexpected; but will not be till after the Gospel
has had a general spread all over the world, and the Jews are converted,
and the fulness of the Gentiles brought in, and then will Christ come:

having received the kingdom; not only having been set down at the right
hand of God, and crowned with glory and honour, and received gifts for
men, which he bestowed on them; and which proved him to be Lord and
Christ; all which was done at his ascension, after which his kingdom
came, or he returned in power and glory, to take vengeance on the Jews;
but also having received the kingdom of glory for all his saints, and
particularly having received the kingdom of priests, or all the elect of
God, these being all called by grace, and gathered to him, as they will
every one of them before his second coming; when this kingdom will be
delivered to the Father complete and perfect; and this will a reckoning
time, as follows:

then he commanded those servants to be called, to whom he had given the
money. The servants are the ministers of the word, who must all appear
before the judgment seat of Christ; and give an account of themselves to
God, the Judge of all; and of their gifts and talents, and
ministrations, and the souls under their care: the persons who are
"commanded" to call them are the angels, and who shall be employed in
gathering all the elect together; the thing that will be inquired about,
and must be accounted for, is the "money" given them; that is, the
Gospel they are intrusted with, and the gifts to preach it bestowed on
them: the end of this summons is,

that he might know how much every man had gained by trading; not but
that Christ, who is the omniscient God, the searcher of the heart, and a
discerner of the thoughts and intents of it, knows full well the use
that is made of every man's gift, and the benefits and advantages
arising from it, both for his own glory, and the good of souls; but
these summons will be given, this account taken, and inquiry made, that
these things which are known to him, might be made manifest to all, and
every man have praise of God; whose will it is that he should have it,
and sloth and negligence be justly punished.

[Luke 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 19:16</span></span>

Then came the first,.... Who were set in the first place in the church,
the apostles of Christ, and who had the greatest gifts, and laboured
more abundantly, and were eminently useful; such an one was the Apostle
Paul:

saying, Lord; acknowledging the sovereignty and dominion of Christ over
them, owning they were accountable to him, and that he had a right to
inquire, what use they had made of their gifts, and what advantages
these had produced;

thy pound hath gained ten pounds; it had been increased tenfold; or it
has turned to a tenfold account, in the conversion of sinners, in the
edification of the saints, and in the advancement of the kingdom, and
interest of Christ. This servant owns, that the gifts he had were
Christ's; he calls them, "thy pound"; and therefore did not glory in
them as his own attainments, or, as if he had received them not; and
ascribes the great increase, not to himself, but to the pound itself; to
the gifts of Christ, as they were his, and as used by his grace and
strength, and as blessed, and owned by him, to these purposes.

[Luke 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 19:17</span></span>

And he said unto him, well, thou good servant,.... Signifying he had
well done, and had approved himself to be an honest, diligent, and
laborious servant; who, having the grace of God, which made him a good
man, and gifts and abilities, which made him a good minister of Christ,
he made a good use them, freely communicated the good things of the
Gospel, and being employed in a good work, he performed it well:

because thou hast been faithful in a very little; had preached the pure
Gospel of Christ, and the whole of it, and sought not to please men, but
the Lord only; not his own glory, but Christ's; abode by him and his
interest, notwithstanding all reproaches and persecutions, and so acted
a faithful part to Christ: "in a very little"; not that the Gospel is in
itself little, or of small account; it is a treasure in earthen vessels;
and contains the unsearchable riches of Christ: nor are gifts to preach
it little things; they are instances of rich and amazing grace; but they
are little, or, rather, the use and exercise of them are little, in
comparison of the glory and happiness such faithful servants shall
enjoy: from whence it appears, that since there is no proportion between
what they do, and what they shall have, that therefore it is not of
merit but of grace; and which is expressed in the following clause:

have thou authority over ten cities; which is to be understood, not in a
literal sense, as if the apostles should have the jurisdiction over so
many cities, or churches in so many cities among the Gentiles, after the
destruction of Jerusalem, which were planted by their means and
ministry; for nothing of this kind appears in the word of God: and much
less after the second coming of Christ, shall faithful ministers of the
word have power over so many cities, literally taken; for both in the
kingdom state and in the ultimate glory, there will be but one beloved
city, the holy city, the new Jerusalem: nor is any thing in particular,
in a metaphorical sense, intended; only, in general, that the kingdom,
and dominion, and the greatness of it, will be given unto them; and they
shall reign with Christ on earth a thousand years; and shall also have a
crown of glory, life, and righteousness bestowed on them, and shall sit
on the throne with Christ; and besides all this, the persons they have
been instrumental to, will be their joy, and crown of rejoicing. A
learned writer (l) explains these ten cities, by the ten horns of the
dragon, and beast in [Rev 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#003) by
which are meant ten kings, or kingdoms, [Rev
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012). These indeed will be overcome
by Christ, and they that are with him, and will hate the Romish
antichrist, and destroy him; so that, it seems, there will be
revolutions in these kingdoms; and large conversions to the faith of
Christ, which seems to be what this writer means by authority over them.

\(l\) Teelmanni Specimen Explic. Parabol. p. 51.

[Luke 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 19:18</span></span>

And the second came,.... He who was next, though less useful, yet
equally diligent and active:

saying, Lord; acknowledging also the power and authority of Christ over
him:

thy pound hath gained five pounds; is increased fivefold, or is turned
to a fivefold account, to the interest of Christ, and good of immortal
souls: the usefulness of the ministers of the Gospel is not alike; as
they have gifts different one from another, so their improvements are
different, and their labours, though faithful, do not turn to the same
account,

[Luke 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 19:19</span></span>

And he said likewise to him,.... He commended him as a good and faithful
servant, though this is not expressed; and added,

be thou over five cities; which does not denote any inequality of glory
in Christ's ministers, who will all shine as the firmament, and as the
stars for ever and ever; at least, there will be no inequality in the
ultimate state of happiness, when all the saints shall shine as the sun
in the kingdom of their Father, whatever there may be in the kingdom
state, or in Christ's personal reign with his saints on earth. The above
learned writer would have this passage compared with [Isa
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa019.htm#018).

[Luke 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 19:20</span></span>

And another came,.... Who was one of the servants; had a gift, but did
not use, and improve it, nor did it turn to any account:

saying, Lord; owning also the lordship and dominion of Christ, as all
will confess at the last day, even those who have no interest in him,
and cannot call him their Lord;

behold, here is thy pound; he owns his gifts were the Lord's, and that
he had received them from him, and now returns them:

which I have kept; he had kept that which was committed to him, and that
even till his Lord came; he had not lost it, though it was not
increased, or was of any advantage to Christ, or the souls of men, it
being neglected by him; for it was

laid up in a napkin: the Greek word, here used for a napkin, is adopted
by the Jews into their language, and is used for a veil and for a linen
cloth: this puts me in mind of what the Jews call, "possession by a
napkin", or linen cloth: their custom is this; when they buy, or sell
any thing, to use a piece of cloth they call "sudar", the word in the
text, which the contractors lay hold upon, whereby they ratify and
confirm the bargain (m): but this man made no use of his "sudar", or
napkin, in buying and selling; he traded not at all; he wrapped up his
money in it, and both lay useless; his gift lay dormant and unexercised,
which was given him to profit withal.

\(m\) Elias in Tisbbi in voce

[Luke 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 19:21</span></span>

For I feared thee,.... Not with a right fear, with a fear of his
goodness, who had bestowed such an excellent gift on him; for this would
have taught him to have departed from evil, and have put him on doing
his master's will, and making use of his gift to his glory: his fear was
not of the right kind, and was ill grounded, as appears by what follows:

because thou art an austere man; cruel and uncompassionate to his
servants, and hard to be pleased; than which nothing is more false,
since it is evident, that Christ is compassionate both to the bodies and
souls of men; is a merciful high priest, and is one that has compassion
on the ignorant, and them that are out of the way, and cannot but be
touched with the feeling of his people's infirmities; and is mild and
gentle in his whole deportment, and in all his administrations:

thou takest up that thou layest not down, and reapest that thou didst
not sow; suggesting, that he was covetous of that which did not belong
to him, and withheld what was due to his servants, and rigorously
exacted service that could not be performed; a most iniquitous charge,
since none so liberal as he, giving gifts, grace and glory, freely;
imposing no grievous commands on men; his yoke being easy, and his
burden light; never sending a man to a warfare at his own charge; but
always giving grace and strength proportionable to the service he calls
to, and rewarding his servants in a most bountiful manner, infinitely
beyond their deserts.

[Luke 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 19:22</span></span>

And he saith unto him,.... By way of reply to his vile slander, and
unrighteous charge;

out of thine own mouth will I judge thee, thou wicked servant; as he
might be justly called: he was not only a wicked man, as all men are,
even enemies by wicked works, and lie in wickedness; and a wicked
professor of religion, as there be some; but a wicked minister, and that
not on account of his bad principles, and sinful life and conversation,
but for his sloth and negligence, and the wrong thoughts he entertained
of, and the false charges he brought against Christ; and Christ turns
his own argument upon him, and by his own words condemns him:

thou knewest that I was an austere man, taking up that I laid not down,
and reaping that I did not sow; not allowing this, but supposing it was
as he said; then Christ argues as follows, for his conviction.

[Luke 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 19:23</span></span>

Wherefore then gavest not thou my money into the bank,.... Or "on the
table", at which the bankers sat, and received and delivered money on
interest. The Complutensian edition reads, "to the tablers", or
"bankers": had Christ been such a person as he represents him, he ought
to have been the more diligent, and made the greater use of his gifts,
since he knew that he would, in a rigid manner, as he suggests, demand
an account of them:

that at my coming I might have required mine own with usury? not that
Christ approves of usury in an unlawful way, by extortion, but reproves
hereby the sloth of this man, and exposes his folly and wickedness upon
his own principles.

[Luke 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 19:24</span></span>

And he said unto them that stood by,.... The angels, it may be; though
this may not be strictly taken, as if any persons, angels, or men, will
be employed in what follows, only that it will be done, or may be
expected:

take from him the pound; which shows, that it was not special grace, for
that is a good part that shall never be taken away, but gifts which may
be taken away from men, or they from them:

and give it to him that hath ten pounds; not that, strictly speaking,
the gifts of some men are taken from them and bestowed on others; but
the design of the expression is to show, that to diligent and laborious
ministers, there is an increase of gifts; their knowledge enlarges, and
their light shines more and more to the perfect day, and they become
more useful; and they appear brighter, and more illustrious, through the
sloth of others, or when compared with indolent, negligent, and useless
ministers.

[Luke 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 19:25</span></span>

And they said unto him,.... The bystanders;

Lord, he hath ten pounds; which they say either through envy, at his
superior gifts, and usefulness; for it is generally the lot of the most
eminent and useful servants of Christ to be envied by others; or in
surprise, as wondering at the conduct of Christ in giving more to such,
who had so much already. The Ethiopic version reads the words by way of
interrogation, "hath he not ten pounds?" is not that enough? why should
he have more? This verse is left out in Beza's most ancient copy.
However, it is rightly put into a parenthesis in our version; for the
following verse is strictly connected with [Luk
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#024) and contains a reason of what is
there ordered.

[Luke 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 19:26</span></span>

For I say unto you,.... And it may be depended on as truth, and what
will be found matter of fact:

that unto every one that hath, shall be given; greater and larger gifts,
fitting him for greater usefulness: he that has gifts, and makes use of
them, increases in them; they enlarge with their use, and become
brighter, and he more useful. The Vulgate Latin version adds, "and he
shall abound, or shall have abundance", as in [Mat
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029)

and from him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken away from
him: that is, that which he seemed to have, or thought he had, as in
[Luk 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#018) for from him that has really
nothing, nothing can be taken away: though the sense may be, that he
that does not use the talent, or exercise the gift bestowed on him, but
lays it up in a napkin, which is all one as if he had it not, even the
gift itself shall be taken away from him; and as others receive no
benefit by it, he shall receive no honour from it; See Gill on [Mat
13:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#012) and See Gill on [Mat
25:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#029).

[Luke 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 19:27</span></span>

But those mine enemies,.... Meaning particularly the Jews, who were
enemies to the person of Christ, and hated and rejected him, as the King
Messiah; and rebelled against him, and would not submit to his
government; and were enemies to his people, and were exceeding mad
against them, and persecuted them; and to his Gospel, and the
distinguishing truths of it, and to his ordinances, which they rejected
against themselves:

which would not that I should reign over them; see [Luk
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#014)

bring hither, and slay them before me; which had its accomplishment in
the destruction of Jerusalem, when multitudes of them were slain with
the sword, both with their own, and with their enemies; and to this the
parable has a special respect, and of which Christ more largely
discourses in this chapter; see [Luk
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041) though it is true of all natural
men, that they are enemies to Christ; and so of all negligent and
slothful professors, and ministers of the word, who, when Christ shall
come a second time, of which his coming to destroy the Jewish nation was
an emblem and pledge, will be punished with everlasting destruction by
him; and then all other enemies will be slain and destroyed, sin, Satan,
the world, and death: of the first of these the Jews say (n),

"in the time to come the holy, blessed God, will bring forth the evil
imagination (or corruption of nature), "and slay it before" the
righteous, and the wicked.''

\(n\) T. Bab. Succa, fol. 52. 1.

[Luke 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 19:28</span></span>

And when he had thus spoken,.... When he had delivered the above
parable, in order to remove the prejudices of his disciples, and the
multitude, concerning a temporal kingdom, and to give them true notions
of his own kingdom, and the case of the Jewish nation:

he went before; his disciples: he was the foremost of them in the
journey; he proceeded at the head of them, with great cheerfulness and
eagerness:

ascending up to Jerusalem; through the lower lands of Judea, to the city
of Jerusalem, which was built on higher ground; where he was to eat his
last passover, and suffer, and die, in the room, and stead, of his
people; and this shows how willing, and greatly desirous he was to
finish the work of redemption he came about.

[Luke 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 19:29</span></span>

And it came to pass when he was come nigh,.... The other evangelists,
Matthew and Mark, add "unto Jerusalem"; but this Luke designs
afterwards, [Luk 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#037) and therefore
here means, as is expressed, that he was come nigh

to Bethphage and Bethany; two tracts of land which reached from Mount
Olivet to Jerusalem; so that when he was there, he was nigh unto the
city:

at the mount, called the Mount of Olives; or "Elaion", as the Ethiopic
version, which retains the Greek word for it; and which has its name
from the great number of olive trees that grew upon it:

he sent two of his disciples; their names are not mentioned by any of
the evangelists, but it is very probable they were Peter and John; of
the places here mentioned; See Gill on [Mat
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#001).

[Luke 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 19:30</span></span>

Saying, go ye into the village over against you,.... What village this
was, is not said by any of the evangelists; it seems to be either
Bethany, or Nob; and rather the latter, since the village of Bethany was
fifteen furlongs, or near two miles from Jerusalem, [Joh
11:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#018) and therefore must have been
passed by Christ; whereas the tract called Bethany, at the Mount of
Olives where Christ now was, was but a sabbath day's journey, or about a
mile, [Luk 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#050) compared with [Act
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#012). See Gill on [Mat
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#002).

in the which at your entering ye shall find a colt tied: in [Mat
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#002) it is said, an ass, and a colt
with her; which agrees with the prophecy in [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009) and which, no doubt, was matter of
fact: nor does Mark and Luke contradict it, though they do not express
it:

whereon yet never man sat, loose him, and bring him hither; for it seems
that Christ stayed at the above place, until the disciples went and
fetched it.

[Luke 19:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 19:31</span></span>

And if any man ask you, why do ye loose him?.... As our Lord, being God
omniscient, knew this question would be asked by the owners, and
therefore prepares his disciples with an answer to it:

thus shall ye say unto him, because the Lord hath need of him. The
Syriac and Persic versions read "our Lord", yours, and ours; probably
the owners of the colt might be such as knew the Lord Jesus Christ, and
by this way of speaking of him, knew, at once, who was meant, and so
made no scruple of sending him, as Christ told them they would not, and
so they found it; See Gill on [Mat 21:
3](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#003) and See Gill on [Mar
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#003)

[Luke 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 19:32</span></span>

And they that were sent went their way,.... The two disciples that were
sent by Christ, were obedient to him, and went, as he directed them, and
did as he ordered them;

and found, even as he had said unto them. The Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic
versions, and so some copies, add, "the colt standing"; that is, in the
place, and manner which he had described to them; See Gill on [Mar
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#004).

[Luke 19:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 19:33</span></span>

And as they were loosing the colt,.... In order to bring it away, as
Christ bid them:

the owners thereof said unto them, why loose ye the colt? Mark takes
notice of this, but does not tell us who they were, only that they were
persons that stood there; but this evangelist informs us who they were:
and it seems by this, that there were more owners of the colt than one,
which might have made the taking away of the colt the more difficult;
since, though one might agree to it, another might not; but Christ, who
is God, and has the hearts of all men in his hands, could, as he did,
dispose the minds of these men to let the colt go freely, and quietly,
with his disciples; See Gill on [Mar
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#005).

[Luke 19:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 19:34</span></span>

And they said, the Lord hath need of him. Or, our Lord, as the above
versions in verse 31 (Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic). They used the words
Christ directed them to, and it had the effect he said it would; for the
owners both let them go, and the colt with them directly; See Gill on
[Mat 21:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#006) and See Gill on [Mar
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar011.htm#006).

[Luke 19:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 19:35</span></span>

And they brought him to Jesus,.... That is, the colt:

and they cast their garments upon the colt; that is, the disciples, who
brought him to Jesus; the Persic version here, as in [Mat
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#007) renders it very wrongly, "Jesus
put his own garment on its back, and sat on it"; it follows,

and they set Jesus thereon; in order to ride upon him, as he did to
Jerusalem.

[Luke 19:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 19:36</span></span>

And as he went,.... Riding on the colt towards Jerusalem:

they spread their clothes in the way; not the disciples, for they had
put their garments upon the colt; but the multitude, which either came
with him from Jericho, and other parts, or that met him from Jerusalem,
or both; see [Mat 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#008) and so the
Persic version here; "men put off their clothes and cast them in the
way, that he might pass over then"; See Gill on [Mat
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#008).

[Luke 19:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 19:37</span></span>

And when he was come nigh,.... To the city of Jerusalem, and which was
then in sight,

even now at the descent of the Mount of Olives; being come to the foot
of that mount, which lay to the east of Jerusalem, and was about five
furlongs from it, or a little more than half a mile (o):

the whole multitude of the disciples: not only the twelve, but the large
company that followed Christ out of Galilee, and were joined by more in
Judea, as they came along, some going before him, and others behind him.
The Arabic and Persic versions divide these words, and read, "the
multitude, and the disciples"; not only the apostles, but the whole body
of the people that were with Christ:

began to rejoice, and praise God, with a loud voice, for all the mighty
works that they had seen; calling to mind the many miracles he had
wrought in Galilee, at Cana, Capernaum, and other places, and now, as he
passed through Judea, particularly about Jericho, where he had restored
sight to two or three blind men; and especially the miracle he had
lately wrought at Bethany, in raising Lazarus from the dead; from all
which they might strongly conclude, that he must be the Messiah; and
being filled with joy and gladness, at the remembrance of these things,
and with thankfulness to God, that he had raised up the glorious Saviour
and Redeemer, they lifted up their voices together, and exerted them to
the uttermost, and made the air ring with their shouts, and acclamations
of praise to God, on this occasion.

\(o\) Joseph. Antiqu l. 20. c. 6.

[Luke 19:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 19:38</span></span>

Saying, blessed be the King,.... The King Messiah, the King of Israel,
the son of David, the Christ of God; so the Ethiopic version adds,
"blessed be the King of Israel"; they sung their "Hosannas" to him, as
the other evangelists say:

that cometh in the name of the Lord; See Gill on [Mat
21:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#009).

peace in heaven; all heavenly peace and prosperity attend him; or let
peace be made with God in heaven, by the Prince of Peace on earth, for
sinful men:

and glory in the highest; glory be given to God for peace, life, and
salvation by his son; and that in the highest heavens, by the angels
there, as well as by men on earth, and in the highest notes and strains.

[Luke 19:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 19:39</span></span>

And some of the Pharisees from among the multitude,.... Who had placed
themselves there, to watch and observe what was said, and done, that
they might have something to reproach Christ with, expose him for, or
bring as a charge against him:

said unto him, master, rebuke thy disciples: not being able to bear such
high encomiums of Jesus, and such open and public declarations of his
being the Messiah; and would insinuate, that it was blasphemy in them to
say what they did, and pride and vanity in him to allow of it; and that
the consequence might be sedition, and tumult; and therefore it became
him to check such a disorderly, noisy, evil, and dangerous practice.

[Luke 19:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 19:40</span></span>

And he answered and said unto them, I tell you,.... As a truth, which
may be depended on, and you may be assured of; this he spake with great
earnestness, fervour, and courage:

that if these should hold their peace; be silent, and not sing the
praises of God, and ascribe glory to him, and profess the Messiah, and
make this public acknowledgment of him:

the stones would immediately cry out; either against them, or in a
declaration of the Messiah: by which expression our Lord means, that it
was impossible it should be otherwise; it would be intolerable if it was
not; and rather than it should not be, God, who is able out of stones to
raise up children to Abraham, would make the stones speak, or turn
stones into men, who should rise up and praise the Lord, and confess the
Messiah; hereby commending his disciples, and tacitly reflecting upon
the Pharisees, for their stupidity; and also giving a hint of the
conversion of the Gentiles, who might be compared to stones, especially
in the opinion of the Jews.

[Luke 19:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 19:41</span></span>

And when he was come near, he beheld city,.... Of Jerusalem; being now
nearer, and in a situation to take a full view of it, he lift up his
eyes, and looking wistfully on it, and beholding the grandeur and
magnificence of it, the number of the houses, and the stately structures
in it, and knowing what calamities, in a few years, would come upon it;
with which being affected, as man, he looked upon it,

and wept over it; touched with a tender concern for it, his natural
passions moved, and tears fell plentifully from his eyes. This must be
understood of Christ merely as man, and is a proof of the truth of his
human nature, which had all the natural properties, and even the
infirmities of it; and as affected with the temporal ruin of Jerusalem,
and as concerned for its temporal welfare; and is not to be improved
either against his proper deity, or the doctrines of distinguishing
grace, relating to the spiritual and eternal salvation of God's elect;
things that are foreign from the sense of this passage: some ancient
Christians, and orthodox too, thinking that this was not so agreeable to
Christ, but reflected some weakness and dishonour upon him, expunged
this clause concerning his weeping; but we have another instance besides
this; see [Joh 11:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#035) and even the Jews
themselves cannot think this to be unsuitable to the Messiah, when they
represent the Shekinah, and God himself weeping over the destruction of
the temple (p); and it is particularly (q) said by them of the Messiah,
that he shall weep over the wicked among the Jews, according to [Isa
53:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#005) and they encourage persons to
mourn over Jerusalem: they say (r) whoever does any business on the
ninth of Ab, (the day that city was destroyed,) and does not mourn over
Jerusalem, shall not see its joy; but whoever does mourn over it, shall
see its joy, according to [Isa 66:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#010)
(s).

\(p\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 114. 4. & in Exod. fol. 76. 1. T. Bab. Beracot,
fol. 3. 2. Prafat Echa Rabbati, fol. 89. 4. (q) Zohar in Exod. fol. 85.
2. (r) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 30. 2. (s) T. Bab Bathra, fol. 60. 2. &
Caphtor, fol. 118. 2.

[Luke 19:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 19:42</span></span>

Saying, if thou hadst, known, even thou,.... As well as other cities; or
who hast been so long a flourishing city, the metropolis of the nation,
the seat of the ancient kings of Judah; yea, the city of the great God,
the place of divine worship, whither the tribes came up, time after
time, to serve the Lord; a city so highly honoured of God and man: or,
who hast despised the messages of the servants of God, mocked and
misused the prophets in time past, beat one, killed another, and stoned
another: if such a city, after all this, had but known its true
interest,

at least in this thy day; the day of thy visitation, the last day thou
art to have, though it is so late:

the things which belong unto thy peace; meaning, not peace with God, and
the things belonging, or conducing to that, which are not men's works of
righteousness, nor tears of repentance, nor even faith itself, but the
obedience and righteousness, the blood, sacrifice and death of Christ;
nor spiritual peace, or internal peace of conscience, which comes in a
Gospel way, through believing, in a course of obedience, and all from
Christ, the peacemaker, and peace giver; nor eternal peace hereafter,
which the grace of God gives a meetness for, and the righteousness of
Christ a right unto; the knowledge of all which is not natural to men,
or to be obtained of themselves, but is the gift of God's grace, and the
operation of his Spirit: but supposing such a peace, and such things
relating to it, were intended, nothing more can be inferred from hence,
than that if the Jews had known these things, they had been happy; and
since they had the means of knowing them, they were, of all men,
inexcusable; and that Christ, as man, and one of their nation, and as a
minister of the circumcision, had a passionate concern for their
welfare: but not that these Jews, or any men, can of themselves, and
without the unfrustrable grace of God working upon their hearts, and
enlightening their understanding, know these things; or that Christ
acted any insincere part in wishing for these things for them, as man,
and a minister of the word, when he knew, as God, it was not consistent
with the will of God that they should have them; since Christ, as man,
sometimes earnestly prayed for that, which he, as God, knew could not
be, as in the case of his own sufferings and death; nor is this
irreconcilable to his dying intentionally only for those who are
actually saved: but after all, these words are, only spoken of
Jerusalem, and the inhabitants of that city, and not of all mankind, and
regard only their temporal peace and welfare, whose destruction Christ
knew was near at hand; and of which he afterwards speaks in the
following verses:

but now they are hid from thine eyes; their eyes were blinded; they were
given up to a judicial blindness, and hardness of heart; a spirit of
slumber and stupidity had seized them; they could not discern the signs
of the times and so disbelieved Jesus as the Messiah, and rejected him
as such; whom, had they received only in a notional way, though they had
not believed in him spiritually, to the saving of their souls, they
would have been secured from outward calamities, and would have enjoyed
peace and prosperity, and the things belonging to it our Lord speaks of.
Christ alludes to the name of Jerusalem, which signifies the vision of
peace; or they shall see peace; but her name and case now did not agree.
His wish is the same the Psalmist encourages in [Psa
122:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa122.htm#006) which, in the Septuagint
version, is rendered, "pray for the things" that belong "to the peace
Jerusalem".

[Luke 19:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 19:43</span></span>

For the days shall come upon thee,.... Suddenly, and very quickly, as
they did within forty years after this:

that thine enemies; the Romans, and such the Jews took them to be, and
might easily understand who our Lord meant:

shall cast a trench about thee, and compass thee round, and keep thee in
on every side: which was not only verified in the Roman armies closely
besieging them; but particularly in this, as Josephus relates (t) that
Titus built a wall about the city, of thirty nine furlongs long, and
thirteen forts in it which reached ten furlongs, and all done in three
days time; by which means they were pent up, starved, and famished, and
reduced to inexpressible distress.

\(t\) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 8.

[Luke 19:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">luk 19:44</span></span>

And shall lay thee even with the ground,.... Beat down all the houses in
it, the stately edifices, and even the temple itself; See Gill on [Mat
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002).

and thy children within thee; that is, the inhabitants of the place
should be slain with the sword of the enemy, and so fall to the ground,
and lie upon it;

and they shall not leave in thee one stone upon anther; such a
consummate, and entire desolation shall be made, as was foretold by
Daniel, [Dan 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027)

because thou knowest not the time of thy visitation; in which the
dayspring from on high had visited them with his personal presence,
preaching among them, and working miracles; and yet they knew him not,
but despised and rejected him; yea, after that they had put him to
death, and he was risen again, he ordered his disciples to begin their
ministry, and preach the Gospel, at Jerusalem; and they continued for
some time only preaching to them, or at least rarely elsewhere, till
they put away the Gospel from them. The time of the ministry of John the
Baptist, of Christ, and his apostles in Judea, was the time of
Jerusalem's visitation in a way of mercy; which not being taken notice
of, and observed, brought another kind of visitation upon them, even in
a way of wrath and vengeance. The Jews pretend to assign other causes of
Jerusalem's destruction; but the true cause was their rejection of
Jesus, as the Messiah.

"Says Abai, Jerusalem was not destroyed, but because they profaned the
sabbath, as it is said, [Eze 22:26](../../../bib/kjv/eze022.htm#026)
"and have hid their eyes from my sabbaths", &c. Says R. Abhu, Jerusalem
was not destroyed, but because they ceased reading the "Shema (hear, O
Israel", &c.) morning and evening, as it is said, [Isa
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#011) woe to them that rise up early",
&c. Says Rab. Hamenuna, Jerusalem was not destroyed, but because there
ceased in it the children of the school of Rabban, (children were not
put to school,) as it is said [Jer
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011) "I will pour it out upon the
children", &c. Says Ula, Jerusalem was not destroyed, but because there
was no shame among them, as it is said, [Jer
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#015) "were they ashamed", &c. Says R.
Isaac, Jerusalem was not destroyed, but because small and great were put
upon a level, as it is said, [Isa 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#002)
"as with the people, so with the priest", &c. Says R. Amram, the son of
R. Simeon bar Aba, R. Chanina said, Jerusalem was not destroyed, but
because they did not reprove one another, as it is said, [Lam
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/lam001.htm#006) "her princes are become like
harts", &c. Says R. Judah, Jerusalem was not destroyed, but because they
despised the disciples of the wise men, as it is said; [Ch2
36:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#016) but they mocked the messengers
of God", &c. (u).''

Thus they shifted off the true cause of their ruin, and ascribed it to
other things.

\(u\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 119. 2.

[Luke 19:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">luk 19:45</span></span>

And he went into the temple,.... Being come into the city, he alighted
from the colt he rode on, and having committed it to the care of a
proper person to return it to the owner, he went up directly to the
temple, of which he was the Lord and proprietor, and where he had some
work to do the few days he had to live.

And began to cast out them that sold therein, and them that bought; that
traded in sheep, and oxen, and doves; see [Joh
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#015). The Ethiopic version adds here,
as there, "and overthrew, the tables of the money changers, and the
seats of them that sold doves".

[Luke 19:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">luk 19:46</span></span>

Saying unto them, it is written,.... In [Isa
56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007)

my house is the house of prayer; built and devoted for that service:

but ye have made it a den of thieves; which clause is not written in the
above prophecy, but are the words of Christ referring to [Jer
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer007.htm#011). The Ethiopic version adds, "and
robbers"; and the Persic version adds, "and a place of cut-purses"; See
Gill on [Mat 21:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#013).

[Luke 19:47](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">luk 19:47</span></span>

And he taught daily in the temple,.... Every day till the passover came,
and only in the day; for at night he went out of the city to Bethany, or
to the Mount of Olives: some of his discourses in the temple, the
parables he delivered, and his disputations with the doctors, are
recorded in [Mat 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#027),

but the chief priests, and the Scribes, and the chief of the people; or
"the elders of the people", as the Syriac version renders it; that is,
the whole sanhedrim:

sought to destroy him; met and consulted together how to get him into
their hands, and what charges to bring against him, in order to put him
to death.

[Luke 19:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">luk 19:48</span></span>

And could not find what they might do,.... The Vulgate Latin, Syriac,
and Ethiopic versions, and so Beza's most ancient copy, add, "to him";
they could not find an opportunity of seizing him, nor any advantage
against him; they knew not what steps to take, nor how to bring about
their wicked design of destroying him.

For all the people were very attentive to hear him; there were great
crowds always about him, that hung upon him, as the word rendered
"attentive" signifies; they heard him with great eagerness and
diligence, and were ready to catch every word that dropped from his
lips; and were exceedingly taken with him, having never heard any man
speak like him: wherefore having so many followers, and being so high in
the opinion and affection of the people, the sanhedrim were at a loss
what method to make use of to gain their point; and they feared the
people, should they seize him publicly, lest they should rise and rescue
him, and cause a tumult and disturbance.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 20](luk020)

</div>
