<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](luk017)  [Next](luk019.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001.md)

[Luke 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 18:1</span></span>

And he spoke a parable unto them,.... To his own disciples, as the
Ethiopic version reads, in order to encourage them to prayer, with
perseverance in it; since such sore times of trial and affliction were
coming upon the Jews, of which he had spoken in the preceding chapter;
and such times more especially call for prayer; see [Psa
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015.md)

to this end, that men ought always to pray. This is opposed to them, who
pray not at all, or have left off prayer before God, or who pray only in
distress; and suggests, that a man should pray as often as he has an
opportunity; should be constant and assiduous at the throne of grace,
and continue putting up his requests to God, though he does not
presently return an answer:

and not to faint; by reason of afflictions, temptations, desertions, and
delays in answering prayer; and prayer itself is an admirable antidote
against fainting under afflictive providences: it is with the Jews an
affirmative precept that a man should pray, , "every day" (k); it was
usual with them to pray three times a day; see [Psa
55:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017.md) there is no set time fixed by
Christ; men should be always praying. This is not to be understood, that
a man should be always actually engaged in the work of prayer; that he
should be continually either in his closet, in private devotion to God,
or attending exercises of more public prayer, with the saints; for there
are other religious exercises to be performed, besides prayer; and
besides, there are many civil affairs of life, it is every man's
indispensable duty to regard: nor does our Lord mean in the least to
break in upon, or interrupt the natural and civil duties of life; but
his meaning is, that a man should persevere in prayer, and not leave
off, or be dejected, because he has not an immediate answer; and this is
clear from the following case.

\(k\) Maimon. Hilch. Tephilla, c. 1. sect. 1.

[Luke 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 18:2</span></span>

Saying, there was in a city a judge,.... In every city in the land of
Israel, there was a sanhedrim, or court of judicature; in Jerusalem was
the great sanhedrim, consisting of seventy one; and in every city where
there were an hundred and twenty men, or more, there was a lesser
sanhedrim, consisting of twenty three; and in a city in which there were
not an hundred and twenty men, were three judges; for there was no
sanhedrim, or court of judicature, that consisted of less than three
(l): but

"although there is no judicature less than three, "it is lawful for one
to judge", according to the law, as it is said, [Lev
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#015.md) "In righteousness shalt thou
judge thy neighbour"; but according to the words of the Scribes, (only,)
when there are three, and two that judge, their judgment is no judgment:
one who is publicly approved or authorized, or who has taken a licence
from the sanhedrim, it is lawful for him to judge alone, but it is not
accounted a judicature; and though it is lawful, it is the command of
the wise men, that he set others with him; for lo, they say, do not
judge alone, for there is none that judgeth alone, but one (m).''

It may be, this judge was, an authorized and approved one; however, we
have instances of single judges, or of persons that have judged alone,
at least by the consent of parties.

"R. Abhu was sitting judge, in a synagogue in Caesarea, by himself, his
disciples said to him, did not Rabbi so teach us, do not judge alone? he
replied to them, when ye see me sit judge by myself, and ye come to me,
as those that have taken upon themselves (or agreed to be judged by me);
for the tradition is, of things in which they do not take upon them; but
if they take upon them, (or agree to be judged,) one may judge, though
alone (n).''

And again, elsewhere (o);

"if he is publicly authorized or approved, he judges, though alone; says
R. Nachman, as I judge pecuniary causes alone; and so says R. Chijah, as
I judge pecuniary judgments alone. --Mar Zutra, the son of R. Nachman,
judged a cause, and erred; he came to R. Joseph, who said to him, if
they have received thee upon them (agreed to be judged by thee) thou
needst not finish; but if not, go and finish.''

The qualifications of one to be a judge, even of the bench of three,
were these (p);

"wisdom, meekness (or modesty), and fear, (i.e. of God,) and hatred of
mammon, (or money,) love of truth, and to have the love of men, and to
be masters of a good name (or to be of good report).''

But the judge in the text, came greatly short of these qualifications:
his character follows,

which feared not God, neither regarded man; and therefore, according to
the canon, was disqualified from being a judge, since he was destitute
of the fear of God; and seeing he regarded not men, he could neither
have any love to men, nor any share in the affections of men, and such
an one is very unfit to be a judge, for he cannot be thought to have any
regard to his conscience, or his credit, and so not to justice and
equity. The former of these characters, is what belongs to every man in
a state of unregeneracy; there is no true fear of God before the eyes,
or in the heart of any unconverted man; wherever it is, it is put there
by the grace of God: this is one of the first things which appears in
conversion, and shows itself in an hatred of sin, and in the performance
of duties; and is increased by the discoveries of the grace and goodness
of God; but the want of this is more visible in some than in others:
some, though they have not the grace of fear, yet are under some awe of
the Divine Being, and pay a regard to the word of God; and what through
the force of education, and the dictates of a natural conscience, dare
not go such lengths in sin, as some do: but there are others, who even
say there is no God, and at least live as if there was none; they
endeavour to work themselves, and others, into a disbelief of the being
of God; and set their mouths against heaven, deny his providence, and
despise his word; stretch out their hands, and strengthen themselves
against the Almighty; and in a fearless manner, run upon the thick
bosses of his bucklers; they declare their sin as Sodom, and hide it
not, yea, glory in it; they promise themselves impunity, and laugh at a
future judgment; and of such a cast was this judge, and therefore a very
improper person for such an office; for civil magistrates, and rulers of
every sort, ought to be just, ruling in the fear of God: and as for the
other part of his character, it is not to be wondered at; for such that
fear not God, will have little regard to men; no otherwise, or further,
than they are obliged to it: indeed, judges ought not to regard men in
judgment; that is, to respect the persons of men, and through affection,
or flattery, or bribes, wrest judgment: but this is not the sense of the
phrase here, since this agrees not with the other part of the character,
and since he is called an unjust judge; but the meaning is, that he had
no regard to the laws of men, any more than the laws of God; but made
his own will the rule of his actions, and had no regard to doing justice
between man and man; nor did he care what any man said of him; he had no
concern about his reputation and character, having none to lose.

\(l\) Maimon. Hilch. Sanhedrin, c. 1. sect. 3, 4. (m) lb. c. 2. sect.
10, 11. (n) T. Hieros, Sanhedrin, fol. 18. 1. (o) T. Bab. Sanhedrin,
fol. 5. 1. (p) Maimon. Hilch. Sanhedrin, c. 2. sect. 7.

[Luke 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 18:3</span></span>

And there was a widow in that city,.... Poor and helpless, and none
among men to counsel, direct, and assist her, and take her part: now as
in the accommodation of this parable, the elect of God answer to this
widow; such an one is rather pitched upon to represent the helpless,
desolate, and forlorn condition they are in among men in this world,
though they are espoused to one husband, Christ; and especially to
signify the state and condition of God's elect among the Jews in those
sad times, before the destruction of Jerusalem, this parable has respect
unto. Christ is the bridegroom of his church and people; he is their
husband, the Lord of hosts is his name; and they are espoused as a
chaste virgin to him; and whilst he was here on earth, his disciples,
who were the children of the bridegroom, could not fast and mourn, for
which they had no reason; but upon the death of Christ, when he was
removed from them, they had great sorrow of heart; they were left like
widows and orphans; hence those words of Christ, [Joh
14:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#018.md) and were persecuted by the Jews
in their own land; and wherever they went, they stirred up the Gentiles
against them; and so things continued till near the destruction of
Jerusalem; during which time many a request was made to God, the judge
of the widows and fatherless, to the following purport:

and she came unto him, saying, avenge me of my adversary; or do me
justice in the cause depending between me, and him that has wronged me;
hear the cause, and do right; vindicate, and deliver me. Many are the
adversaries of God's people, as the sins and corruptions of their own
hearts, Satan, and his angels, wicked oppressors, and persecutors; the
last seem, in the mystical sense, to be designed here: it is lawful to
pray for vengeance on them; it is right to apply to God, and leave it
with him, to whom it belongs; and it has been the suit and cry of the
best of men; see [Rev 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009.md). It does not
become the people of God to avenge themselves, even when it is in the
power of their hands; nor should they desire it for their own sakes, so
much as for the glory of God; they should ask it, not to gratify a
revengeful spirit in them, but for the honour or divine justice; and
this should be always with submission to the will of God, leaving it to
his own time and way, to whom vengeance belongs, and who has said it is
mine, and I will repay it; as he certainly will sooner or later: the
purity of his nature, his abhorrence of sin, and sinful men, and his
love to his own people engage him to it.

[Luke 18:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 18:4</span></span>

And he would not for a while,.... He would give no ear to her cries, nor
take her cause in hand, nor right her wrongs, and clear her of her
adversary:

but afterward he said within himself; as he was considering the matter
in his own mind, and reflecting on this woman's case and the frequent
application she had made to him:

though I fear not God, nor regard man; a monster in iniquity he was, to
say so of himself; for though the character belongs to many, there are
few that are so impudent in sin, as to take it to themselves, and glory
in it.

[Luke 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 18:5</span></span>

Yet because this widow troubleth me,.... By often knocking at his door,
by loud cries and earnest entreaties, with strong arguments, and floods
of tears, and could not easily be removed from his presence, or got out
of his house:

I will avenge her; I will hear her cause, do her justice, and deliver
her from her troublesome adversary:

lest by her continual coming she weary me: so that it was not from a
conscience of duty in him, as a judge, or from a commiseration of the
poor widow's case; but from a selfish end, for his own ease, in perfect
agreement to his character, that his house might not be disturbed, and
his ears stunned with her noise and cry, and he was pestered with her
company day after day. The character of this judge, his reasoning with
himself upon it, his principles from which he acted, and the ends he had
in view, are wholly to be left out in the accommodation of this parable;
and no farther to be considered than as the argument from the lesser to
the greater may be strengthened by them; the intention of the parable
being only to show the force, efficacy, and usefulness of importunity in
prayer, as appears by the application of it, by our Lord, in the verses
following.

[Luke 18:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 18:6</span></span>

And the Lord said,.... The Lord Jesus Christ, who delivered out this
parable to his disciples:

hear what the unjust judge saith; and take encouragement from hence to
be frequent and importunate in prayer with God; for if such a cruel,
merciless, and unjust judge is to be wrought upon by importunity to do
justice, who has no principle to influence him, how much more will not
God, who is a just judge, the judge of widows, and of the oppressed, a
God of great mercy and compassion, who delights in the prayers of his
people, knows their cases, and is able to help them, and who has an
interest in them, and they in him? how much more will not he regard
their importunate requests, and arise, and save them much such like
reasoning this is used by the Jews:

"says R. Simeon ben Chelphetha, an impudent man overcomes a good man, or
a modest man, (by his importunity,) how much more the goodness of the
world itself (q)?''

that is, how much more will a man, by his continual prayer, prevail with
God, who is goodness itself? And they have another saying (r), that
agrees with this:

"says R. Nachman, impudence (i.e. importunity) even against God is
profitable.''

The application of this parable follows:

\(q\) T. Hieros. Taaniot, fol. 65. 2. (r) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 105.
1.

[Luke 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 18:7</span></span>

And shall not God avenge his own elect,.... Who are a select number, a
special people, whom he has loved with an everlasting love, so as of his
own sovereign good will and pleasure to choose in his Son Jesus Christ
unto everlasting life and salvation, through certain ways and means of
his own appointing, hence they are peculiarly his: and these he will
avenge and vindicate, right their wrongs, do them justice, and deliver
them from their adversaries, and take vengeance on them; as may be
concluded from his hatred of sin, his justice, and his holiness, from
his promises, and from his power, and from the efficacy of prayer, and
the regard he has to it: for it follows,

which cry unto him day and night; whose prayers he always hears; whose
tears he puts up in his bottle; and whose importunity must surely be
thought to have more regard with him, than that of the poor widow with
the unjust judge:

though he bear long with them? either with their adversaries, their
oppressors, and persecutors, who are vessels of wrath, fitted for
destruction, whom he endures with much longsuffering, till the
sufferings of his people are accomplished, and the iniquities of these
men are full; or rather with the elect, for the words may be rendered,
"and is longsuffering towards them": delays his coming, and the
execution of vengeance, as on the Jewish nation, so upon the whole world
of the ungodly, till his elect are gathered in from among them; see [Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009.md).

[Luke 18:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 18:8</span></span>

I tell you that he will avenge them speedily,.... As he did in a few
years after the death of Christ, when God's elect among the Jews were
singled out, and gathered in from them, and were delivered from their
persecutors, and saved from temporal ruin and destruction, whilst the
Roman army made sad havoc of their enemies; and so will he do in the end
of the world.

Nevertheless, when the son of man cometh; either to destroy Jerusalem,
or to judge the world:

shall he find faith on the earth? either in the land of Judea, the
believers being removed from thence, and scattered among the Gentiles,
and not a man, at least in Jerusalem, that had any faith in Jesus, as
the Messiah; or in the world at the last day: there will then be little
of the doctrine of faith, and less of the grace of faith, and still less
of the exercise of faith, particularly in prayer, and especially about
the coming of Christ; it will be little thought of, and expected, or
faith little exercised about it. With this agree some expressions in the
Jewish writings (s):

"Says R. Jose, the holy, blessed God, will not be revealed to Israel,
but in the time, , "that faith is not found among them."''

And elsewhere (t), speaking of the times of the Messiah, and of a star
that shall then appear, it is said

"when that star shall be seen in the world at that time mighty wars
shall be stirred up in the world, on all the four sides, , "and faith
will not be found" among them.''

They seem to regard the first coming of the Messiah: and which was true
with respect to the majority of their nation; and the same holds good
with regard to his second coming; in the apocrypha it says:

"Nevertheless as coming the tokens, behold, the days shall come, that
they which dwell upon earth shall be taken in a great number, and the
way of truth shall be hidden, and the land shall be barren of faith.''
(2 Esdras 5:1)

\(s\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 118. 1. (t) Ib. in Num. fol. 86. 1.

[Luke 18:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 18:9</span></span>

And he spake this parable unto certain,.... Or with respect to certain
men; having a view to them, in order to expose their pride, vanity,
arrogance, and self confidence:

which trusted in themselves that they were righteous; or, as if they
were righteous; or because they were so in their own eyes, and in the
esteem of others: the ground of their trust and confidence were
themselves, their hearts, and the supposed goodness of them, their
outward holiness, their moral behaviour, their duties, and good works,
their almsdeeds, and religious exercises, their ceremonial observances,
and fleshly privileges; on account of which they thought themselves very
righteous persons, such as could not fail of being accepted with God,
and justified in his sight; whereas there are none righteous in, and of
themselves, no, not one. All the descendants of Adam, as such, are
sinners, destitute of a righteousness, and filled with all
unrighteousness, and are enemies to true righteousness: no man is
naturally righteous, nor is he capable of making himself so, by any
thing he can do: none are righteous by their obedience to the law of
works, for that is imperfect, and cannot justify before God, in whose
sight no flesh living can be justified on this account, however
righteous they may appear before men, or may be in their own eyes: for
this is contrary to God's way of making men righteous, and would
disannul the death of Christ, and encourage boasting in men. Such trust
and confidence must be very vain, and arise from ignorance; from
ignorance of God, of the perfection of his justice, and of the nature of
his righteous law; and of themselves, of the impurity of their hearts,
and the imperfection of their obedience. These were of the "pharisaical"
sort, and of which complexion were the generality of the Jews; and many
of these were now standing by Christ, and within the hearing of this
parable, and for whose sake it was delivered:

and despised others; or, "every man", as the Syriac and Persic versions
read; all the rest of mankind, all but themselves; they made nothing of
them, had them in no account; treated them as persons unworthy of the
regard of God, and not fit to stand near them, or to be named with them.

[Luke 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 18:10</span></span>

Two men went up into the temple to pray, Which is called an house of
prayer, [Isa 56:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#007.md) the Jews had a
mighty notion of praying in a place of religious worship, as in the
temple, or in a synagogue; imagining that their prayers were more
acceptable to God, and sooner heard by him in such a place than in
private:

"the prayers of the congregation, they say (u), are heard always; and
though there are sinners among them, the holy; blessed God, does not
despise the prayer of many; wherefore, a man ought to join himself with
the congregation, and not pray alone, whenever he can pray with that:
and let a man go always, morning and evening, to the synagogue; for
there is no prayer heard at all times but in the synagogue; and whoever
has a synagogue in his city, and does not pray in it with the
congregation, is called an ill neighbour. ---A divinity school is
greater than a synagogue; and the great wise men, though they had many
synagogues in their cities, did not pray but where they studied in the
law.''

And they say (w), that

"he that prays (in the synagogue) is as if he offered a pure offering.
---Says R. Abhu, in the name of R. Abhu, "seek the Lard where he may be
found"; where is he to be found? in the synagogues, and in the
schools.''

These two men had, doubtless, both of them a notion of the sanctity of
the place, and acted according to the prevailing sense of the people.
They went up hither, not by consultation, agreement, and appointment;
for they were of a different cast from each other; but so it happened.
Had they went by consent, there was a rule for them (x):

"two men that go to a synagogue to pray, and one has finished his prayer
before his neighbour, if he stays for him, his reward is double; and if
he does not stay for him, his prayer is not heard.''

And they had rules also for the manner of their going to, and from the
place of prayer: when they went thither, they were to go nimbly, in
haste, and even run; but when they came back, they were to go very
slowly and gently (y).

"The commandment (they say (z)) is to run to a synagogue; for it is
said, [Hos 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#003.md) "we shall know, we
shall follow on to know the Lord": but when a man comes out of the
synagogue, let him not take large steps; but let him walk, little by
little, or take short steps.''

How far these rules were complied with by these men, is of no great
moment to know; who they were follows:

the one a Pharisee; one of those that trusted in themselves, as
righteous, and despised all others, especially publicans and sinners; of
these See Gill on [Mat 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#007.md). This was
the strictest sect among the Jews; they were men that prayed, and fasted
much, and were great sticklers for the ceremonies of the law, and the
traditions of the elders, and did all they did to be seen of men:

and the other a publican; a gatherer of the Roman tax, though by nation
a Jew; and therefore such were had in great contempt by the Jews in
general; nor would they eat and drink and converse with them; See Gill
on [Mat 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#010.md) and See Gill on [Mat
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#011.md).

\(u\) Maimon. Hilch. Tephilla, c. 8. sect. 1, 3. Piske Harosh Beracot,
c. 1. art. 7. (w) T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 8. 4. (x) Piske Harosh, ib.
(y) Piske Harosh, & T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 9. 1. (z) Maimon. ib. sect.
2.

[Luke 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 18:11</span></span>

The Pharisee stood,.... Standing was a praying posture; See Gill on [Mat
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005.md) nor is this observed, as if it was
something amiss: but the sense is, either that he stood in some place of
eminence, that he might be seen of others; or he stood in a set, fixed
posture, in a very grave and solemn manner, showing great devotion and
seriousness; or he stood with great boldness and confidence:

and prayed thus with himself; the phrase, "with himself", may be read
either with the word "stood", as it is in the Syriac version; and then
the sense is that he stood alone, apart from the publican, at a distance
from him, as despising him; and lest he should be polluted by him; see
[Isa 65:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#004.md) or with the word "prayed",
and does not design internal prayer, which was what the Pharisees did
not use; for all they did was to be seen, and heard of men: but the
meaning is, that he prayed only with respect to himself; he was wholly
intent upon himself; his own self, and the commendation of himself, were
the subject of his prayer: his whole dependence in it was on himself;
and he was only seeking by it his own glory: he had no regard to the
people of God, to aid the saints, nor did he put up one petition for
them; nor had he any respect to Christ, the mediator, through whom
access is had to God, and acceptance with him; nor to the Holy Spirit
for his assistance; and though he addressed himself to God, yet in
praise of himself, saying,

God I thank thee: there is no petition in this prayer of his for
pardoning grace and mercy; nor larger measures of grace; nor for
strength to perform duties, and to hold on to the end; nor for any
favour whatever; nor is there any confession of sin in it. So that it
scarce deserves the name of a prayer, for in it is only a thanksgiving:
indeed, thanksgiving in prayer is right; and had he been a man that had
received the grace of God, it would have been right in him to have given
thanks to God for it, by which he was made to differ from others: nor
would he have been blameworthy, had he thanked God for the good things
which he had received from him, or which by his assistance he had done;
but nothing of this kind is said by him: he thanks God, in order to
exalt himself, and places his righteousness in his own works, and treats
all other men in a censorious and disdainful manner; thanking God, or
rather blessing himself, saying,

that I am not as other men are; and yet he was as other men, and no
better: he was a sinner in Adam, as other men; and a sinner by nature,
as others are; and had the same iniquities and corruptions in his heart,
as others; and had no more goodness in him than other men, and as far
from true real righteousness. Perhaps he means the Gentiles, whom the
Jews looked upon as sinners, and the worst of men; and yet they were in
no wise better than the Gentiles, as to their state and condition by
nature: it was usual to call the Gentiles "other men"; which phrase is
sometimes explained by "the nations of the world" (a); and sometimes by
the "Cuthites", or "Samaritans" (b); See Gill on [Luk
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk005.htm#029.md). ---He goes on,

extortioners, unjust, adulterers; and yet all these characters belonged
to the men of sect: the Pharisees were oppressors of the poor, devoured
widows' houses, and extorted money from them, under a pretence of long
prayers: they are aptly represented by the unjust steward, in [Luk
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#001.md) and they were au unclean,
unchaste, and an adulterous generation of men, [Mat
12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039.md)

or even as this publican; pointing to him at some distance, with great
scorn and disdain. This was his prayer, or thanksgiving. It may gratify
the curiosity of some to have some other prayers of the Pharisees; and
it may be worth while to compare them with this, between which there
will appear a pretty deal of likeness.

"R. Nechunia ben Hakkana used to pray, when he went into the school, and
when he came out, a short prayer: they said unto him, what is the
goodness (or the excellency) of this prayer? he replied to them, when I
go in, I pray, that no offence might come by means of me; and when I go
out, "I give thanks" for my portion: when I go in, this is what I say,
let it be thy good pleasure before thee, O Lord, my God, the God of my
fathers, that I may not be angry with my colleagues, nor my colleagues
be angry with me; that I may not pronounce that which is pure defiled,
and that which is defiled, pure; that I may not forbid that which is
lawful, nor pronounce lawful that which is forbidden; and that I may not
be found ashamed in this world, and in the world to come: and when I
come out, this is what I say; I confess before thee, (or I thank thee) O
Lord God, and the God of my fathers, that thou hast given me my portion
among those that sit in the schools, and synagogues, and hast not given
me my portion in the theatres and shows: for I labour, and they labour;
I watch, and they watch; I labour to inherit paradise, and they labour
for the pit of corruption (c).''

And these two prayers the Jews were obliged to recite at their going in,
and coming out of the synagogue.

"It is a tradition of R. Juda, saying, three things a man ought to say
every day; blessed be thou, , "that thou hast not made me a Gentile";
blessed art thou, that thou hast not made me an unlearned man (or one
that is vain and foolish, uncivil and uncultivated); blessed art thou,
that hast not made me a woman (d).''

In their prayer books (e), these thanksgivings stand thus:

"blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the King of the world, that thou hast
made me an Israelite; (in some books it is, as before, that thou hast
not made me a Gentile;) blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the King of
the world, that thou hast not made me a servant; blessed art thou, O
Lord our God, the King of the world, that thou hast not made me a
woman:''

when the women, instead of this last, say:

"blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the King of the world, who has made
me as he pleases.''

And very agreeable to one of these benedictions does the Ethiopic
version render the prayer of the Pharisee here; "I thank thee, O Lord
that thou hast not made me as other men".

\(a\) Gloss. in T. Bab. Bava Metzia, fol. 111. 2. (b) Gloss. in T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 52. 2. (c) T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 7. 4. Vid. Misna
Beracot, c. 4. sect. 2. & Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. (d) T. Hieros.
Beracot, fol. 13. 2. (e) Seder Tephillot, ed. Basil. fol. 2. 2. ed.
Amst. fol. 4. 1.

[Luke 18:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 18:12</span></span>

I fast twice in the week,.... Not "on the sabbath", as the words may be
literally rendered, and as they are in the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic
versions; for the sabbath was not a fasting, but a feasting day with the
Jews; for they were obliged to eat three meals, or feasts, on a sabbath
day, one in the morning, another at evening, and another at the time of
the meat offering: even the poorest man in Israel, who was maintained by
alms, was obliged to keep these three feasts (f). It was forbidden a man
to fast, until the sixth hour, on a sabbath day; that is, till noon (g):
wherefore, it is a great mistake in Justin (h) and Suetonius (i), that
the sabbath was kept by the Jews as a fast. But the word is rightly
rendered, "in the week"; the whole seven days, or week, were by the Jews
commonly called the sabbath; hence, , "the first of the sabbath", and
the second of the sabbath, and the third of the sabbath (k); that is,
the first, second, and third days of the week. Now the two days in the
week on which they fasted were Monday and Thursday, the second and fifth
days; on which days the law of Moses, and the book of Esther were read,
by the order of Ezra (l); and fasts for the congregation were appointed
on those days (m); and so a private person, or a single man, as in this
instance, took upon him, or chose to fast on the same (n): the reason of
this is, by some, said to be, because Moses went up to Mount Sinai on a
Thursday, and came down on a Monday (o). But though these men fasted so
often, they took care not to hurt themselves; for they allowed
themselves to eat in the night till break of day. It is asked (p),

"how long may a man eat and drink, i.e. on a fast day? until the pillar
of the morning ascends (day breaks); these are the words of Rabbi
(Judah): R. Eliezer ben Simeon says, until cock crowing.''

So that they had not so much reason to boast of these performances: he
adds,

I give tithes of all that I possess; not only of what was tithable by
the law of Moses, as the produce of his ground; and by the traditions of
the elders, as the herbs in his garden, [Mat
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#023.md) but of every thing he had, which
was not required by either of them; upon which he thought himself a very
righteous person, and more than a common man: it is asked (q),

"who is a plebeian? (one of the people of the earth, or the common
people) whoever does not eat his common food with purity with hands
washed; these are the words of R. Meir; but the wise men say, whoever
does not tithe his fruit.''

This man would not be thought to be such an one.

\(f\) Maimon. Hilch. Sabbat, c. 30. sect. 9. (g) T. Hieros. Nedarim,
fol. 40. 4. (h) L. 36. c. 2. (i) Octav. Aug. c. 76. (k) Maimon. Hilch.
Mechosre Caphara, c. 2. sect, 8. (l) T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 82. 1.
Megilla, 31. 1, 2. (m) Maimon. Hilchot Taaniot, c. 1. sect. 5. (n) T.
Bab. Taanith, fol. 12. 1. (o) Godwin Moses & Aaron, l. 1. c. 10. Vid. T.
Bab. Sabbat, fol. 88. 1. (p) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 12. 1. (q) T. Bab.
Gittin, fol. 61. 1.

[Luke 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 18:13</span></span>

And the publican standing afar off,.... Not at the outermost porch, or
at the door: for

"a man might not fix his place at the door of the synagogue, but, "he
must go afar off", the space of two doors, and then pray (r);''

it may be in the court of the Gentiles, when the Pharisee was in the
court of the Israelites; at least he was afar off from him: and indeed,
those who came to humble themselves before the Lord, and confess their
sins, were obliged to stand at the distance of four cubits one from
another, that one might not hear the prayers and confessions of the
other (s): and it might be, that this poor man might stand at a greater
distance than was required, that he might not displease the Pharisee,
who, he knew, would resent it, should he stand near him; or rather this
was done, to testify the sense he had of his state and condition, and of
his unworthiness; as that he was afar off from God, and unworthy to draw
nigh unto him, and deserved to be kept at a distance from him for ever.
So it is said (t) of the Israelites, that they trembled at Mount Sinai,
and "stood afar off", , "to show their humility": and under a work of
the law, and under such a like dispensation was this publican; and
therefore

would not so much as lift up his eyes unto heaven: and which, as it was
an humble posture he stood in, agrees with the rules the Jews give (u);

"the order (or posture) of the body, how is it? when a man stands in
prayer he ought to set his feet one by the side of the other, and fix
his eyes, "below", as if he looked to the earth; and his heart must be
open above, as if he stood in the heavens; and lay his hands upon his
heart, putting the right hand over the left; and must stand as a servant
before his master, with trembling, and fear, and dread, and may not put
his hands upon his loins.''

And agreeably to this, it is elsewhere (w) said,

"he that prays, ought to fix his eyes below, and his heart above.''

And the Jews used to look downward, or shut their eyes, for the sake of
attention in prayer; and it was even forbidden them to open their eyes
to look upon the wall (x). This showed in the publican, that the guilt
of his sins lay heavy on him; that he could not look up; that shame
filled him with blushing; that sorrow caused his countenance to fall;
and that fear of divine wrath, and displeasure, possessed him; and that
he looked upon himself as unworthy of the smiles of heaven,

but smote upon his breast: pointing at the fountain of his sin;
expressing by this action, his sorrow, and repentance for it; and an
aversion and abhorrence of himself on account of it, joined with
indignation and revenge; and he did this to arouse and stir up all the
powers and faculties of his soul, to call upon God. The Persic version
renders it, "he fell on his knees, and beat the earth with his head";
taking a sort of revenge on himself for sin:

saying, God be merciful to me a sinner. This is his prayer; a short, but
a very full one, and greatly different from that of the Pharisee: in
which is a confession that he was a sinner; a sinner in Adam, who had
derived a sinful nature from him, being conceived and born in sin; and a
sinner by practice, having committed many actual transgressions,
attended with aggravating circumstances; a guilty and filthy sinner, a
notorious one, deserving of the wrath of God, and the lowest hell: he
speaks of himself, as if he was the only sinner in the world; at least,
as if there was none like him: and there is in this prayer also a
petition; and the object it is put up to, is "God", against whom he had
sinned; with whom there is mercy and forgiveness; and who only can
forgive sin; and who has promised that he will: and has proclaimed his
name, a God, pardoning iniquity, transgression, and sin; and has given
instances of his forgiving grace and mercy; and therefore the publican
was right in addressing him by confession: the petition he makes to him
is, to be "merciful", or "propitious" to him; that is, to show mercy to
him, through the propitiary sacrifice of the Messiah, which was typified
by the sacrifices under the law: the first thing a sensible sinner
wants, is an application of pardoning grace and mercy; and forgiveness
springs from mercy; and because the mercy of God is free and abundant,
therefore pardon is so: but this is not to be expected from an absolute
God, or God out of Christ. God is only propitious in Christ: hence it
may be observed, that God pardons none but those to whom he is
propitious in his Son; and that he forgives sin upon the foot of a
reconciliation, and satisfaction made to his law, and justice, and so
pardon is an act of justice, as well as of mercy; and that there is no
pardoning mercy but through Christ. The Arabic version renders it,
"spare me, because I am a sinner"; see [Psa
25:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#011.md).

\(r\) Piske Harosh Beracot, c. 1. art. 7. Vid. T. Hieros. Beracot, fol.
9. 1. (s) Jarchi & Bartenora in Pirke Abot. c. 5. sect. 5. (t) Tzeror
Hammor, fol. 80. 1. (u) Maimon. Hilch. Tephilla, c. 5. sect. 4. & Moses
Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora, pr. affirm. 19. (w) T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 105.
2. (x) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 25. 3.

[Luke 18:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 18:14</span></span>

I tell you that this man,.... The publican that so freely owned himself
to be a sinner, and by his carriage acknowledged he was unworthy of any
favour; and who was treated with so much contempt by the Pharisee:

went down to his house; from the temple which was built on a mountain,

justified, rather than the other: accounted as a righteous person in the
sight of God; justified from all his sins, and accepted by him, when the
other was abhorred and neglected. The Syriac and Persic versions, and so
Beza's most ancient copy, read, "than the Pharisee", who had such an
high opinion of himself, and despised others: not that the Pharisee was
justified at all, when the publican really was; but the sense is, that
if judgment had been to have been made, and sentence passed according to
the then conduct and behaviour of both parties, the publican had greatly
the advantage, in the sight of God; an humble demeanour being well
pleasing and acceptable to him, when pride, and arrogance, boasting of,
and trusting in a man's own righteousness, are abhorred by him;

for every one that exalteth himself, shall be abased, and he that
humbleth himself, shall be exalted. This was a proverbial expression,
often mentioned by Christ on different occasions, and frequently used by
the Jews; See Gill on [Mat 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#012.md) to
which may be added the following passages;

"whoever is of a haughty spirit, at last shall be made low (y).''

And again,

"whosoever humbleth himself, the holy blessed God will lift him up
(z).''

\(y\) T. Bab. Sota, fol. 5. 1. (z) Zohar in Lev. fol. 39. 1.

[Luke 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 18:15</span></span>

And they brought unto him also infants,.... As well as grown persons,
that were sick, to be healed by him:

that he would touch them; in order, as some learned men think, to cure
them of diseases that attended them; for one of the ways by which Christ
healed persons, was by touching them; nor do we read of his touching in
common for any other purpose, or of persons desiring him to touch them,
or theirs, but for this end; in [Mat
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013.md) it is read, "that he should put
his hands on them"; and so the Arabic and Persic versions here read, in
order to pray over them, and bless them: but neither in one place, nor
the other, is any mention of their baptism, or of their being brought
for such a purpose; nor can it be concluded from hence;

but when his disciples saw it, they rebuked them; the persons that
brought the infants; See Gill on [Mat
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013.md).

[Luke 18:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 18:16</span></span>

But Jesus called them unto him,.... Not the disciples, as the Ethiopic
version reads, nor the persons that brought the children, but the
children themselves; for the antecedent to the relative "them", can be
no other; which shows, that these infants were not new born babes, or
children at the breast, but such as were more grown up, since they were
capable of being called to, and of coming to Christ:

and said; that is, to the disciples; so the Persic version expresses it:

suffer little children to come unto me, and forbid them not; See Gill on
[Mat 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014.md).

for of such is the kingdom of God; or "of heaven", as the Syriac version
reads, and as in [Mat 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014.md) that is,
the kingdom of God belongs to such, "who are as these"; or, "like to
these": as the Syriac, Arabic, and Persic versions render the words; (,
[Mat 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014)..md)

[Luke 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 18:17</span></span>

Verily I say unto you,...., Christ takes an occasion from hence to teach
his disciples humility, and guard them against pride and vanity:

whosoever shall not receive the kingdom of God; the King Messiah, the
doctrines of the Gospel, and the ordinances of it, even the whole Gospel
dispensation;

as a little child; without prejudice, pride, ambition, and vanity, with
meekness, and humility:

shall in no wise enter therein; a very unfit and improper person to be a
professor of the Gospel; or to be admitted to Gospel ordinances: or be a
member of a Gospel church; or be reckoned a subject of the Messiah's
kingdom, which is of a spiritual nature; and as he has not a meetness
for, and a right unto the kingdom of glory, he shall never see it, and
enjoy it.

[Luke 18:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 18:18</span></span>

And a certain ruler asked him,.... A young man, [Mat
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#020.md) a ruler among the Jews, a civil
magistrate, and a very rich man; he ran after Jesus, and overtook him in
the way, as he was going towards Jericho, [Mar
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#017.md)

saying, good master; "Rabbi"; or doctor,

what shall I do to inherit eternal life? See Gill on [Mat
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016.md).

[Luke 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 18:19</span></span>

And Jesus said unto him,.... In answer to his question, beginning with
the character he gave him:

why callest thou me good? it being unusual to address men, even their
Rabbins, under such a title:

none is good, save one, that is, God: or "but God alone"; as the Vulgate
Latin and Arabic versions render it; or, "but the one God", as read the
Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions; See Gill on [Mat
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017.md).

[Luke 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 18:20</span></span>

Thou knowest the commandments,.... The ten commandments given to Moses,
and delivered to people; and which they were careful to teach their
children; though five are only here mentioned, and not in the order in
which they stand: suggesting hereby that these must be kept, or the law
must he fulfilled, and satisfaction made for the violation of it, or
there can be no inheriting eternal life. The five commandments mentioned
are, the seventh, sixth, eighth, ninth, and fifth:

do not commit adultery; do not kill; do not steal; do not bear false
witness; honour father and thy mother; See Gill on [Mat
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017.md) and See Gill on [Mar
10:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#019.md).

[Luke 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 18:21</span></span>

And he said,.... That is, the ruler said to him, as the Syriac and
Ethiopic versions add; "to Jesus", as the Persic version expresses it;

all these have I kept from my youth up; See Gill on [Mat
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#020.md) where it is added, what lack I
yet?

[Luke 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 18:22</span></span>

Now when Jesus heard these things,.... That he had kept all these
commandments, and that ever since he was a child, and to that very time:

he said unto him, yet lackest thou one thing; not but that he lacked
many other things, and even every thing: for he had performed no one
thing as it should be: but Christ said, partly in answer to his pert
question, "what lack I yet?" and partly by an ironical concession,
granting he had kept them all, as he had said, yet one thing was
wanting; and chiefly with a view to mortify his pride and vanity:

sell all that thou hast, and distribute unto the poor, and thou shalt
have treasure in heaven, and come and follow me; See Gill on [Mat
19:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021.md).

[Luke 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 18:23</span></span>

And when he heard this,.... That one thing was wanting, and what that
was, which was to part with all his worldly substance, and follow
Christ;

he was very sorrowful, for he was very rich; See Gill on [Mat
19:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#022.md).

[Luke 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 18:24</span></span>

And when Jesus saw that he was very sorrowful,.... As he might, by his
looks and gestures; and perceived that he was determined not to part
with his possessions, and follow him:

he said to his disciples, how hardly shall they that have riches enter
into the kingdom of God! embrace the Gospel, and submit to the
ordinances of it; deny themselves, part with their worldly substance for
the cause of Christ, and interest of religion. Riches, which should be a
reason for, are often a bar unto a profession of Christ, and his Gospel.
This is delivered as an affirmation, or by way of assertion; see Gill on
[Mat 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023.md).

[Luke 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 18:25</span></span>

For it is easier for a camel,.... These words were spoken to the
disciples again, and were a second address to them, after they had shown
astonishment at the former; See Gill on [Mat
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#024.md) and See Gill on [Mar
10:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#024.md).

[Luke 18:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 18:26</span></span>

And they that heard it, said, who then can be saved? These were the
disciples of Christ, who so said; see [Mat
19:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#025.md).

[Luke 18:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 18:27</span></span>

And he said,.... That is, Jesus, as the Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic
versions express it:

the things which are impossible with men, are possible with God; See
Gill on [Mat 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#026.md).

[Luke 18:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 18:28</span></span>

Then Peter said,.... "To him", as the Syriac and Arabic versions add;
that is, to the Lord Jesus, as the Ethiopic version expresses it; who
was always the most forward to speak on any occasion: he observing what
was required of the young man, and how unwilling he was to comply with
it, and the difficulty in every rich man's way of entrance into the
kingdom of God, spoke as follows;

lo, we have left all: the Arabic version reads, "all ours"; all we had,
our friends, trades, and worldly substance;

and followed thee: in [Mat 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027.md) it is
added, "what shall we have therefore"; referring to the promise of
Christ, to the young man, that should he sell all he had, and give it to
the poor, he should have treasure in heaven; See Gill on [Mat
19:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027.md).

[Luke 18:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 18:29</span></span>

And he said unto them,.... To his disciples, as the Ethiopic version
reads; though the Syriac and Persic versions read, "and Jesus said to
him"; that is, to Peter; he particularly replied to him:

verily I say unto you, there is no man: not only you shall have peculiar
honour done you, as to sit on thrones, and judge the twelve tribes of
Israel; but there is not a single person of a more private character,

that hath left house, or "houses", as read the Syriac and Persic
versions;

or parents, or brethren, or wife, or children, for the kingdom of God's
sake: that is, for Christ's sake, and for the sake of his Gospel, as the
other evangelists have it; and which teaches us how to understand the
kingdom of God here, and elsewhere.

[Luke 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 18:30</span></span>

Who shall not receive manifold more in this present time,.... Not more
houses, parents, brethren, &c. but that which is abundantly preferable
to them; such comfort, peace, satisfaction, and pleasure, as are not to
be found in such enjoyments:

and in the world to come life everlasting; which was what the young man
was desirous of inheriting, [Luk
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#018.md).

[Luke 18:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 18:31</span></span>

Then he took unto him the twelve,.... His twelve disciples, as the
Ethiopic version expresses it; he took them aside from the rest of the
company, as they were travelling on the road, and privately delivered to
them, what follows; see [Mat 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017.md)

and said unto them, behold, we go up to Jerusalem; to the feast of the
passover, which was drawing near, and the last Christ was to eat with
his disciples, the time of his sufferings, and death, being now at hand;
and of which he thought fit to give his disciples notice: and therefore
he called them aside, and in a private manner, told them,

that all things that are written by the prophets, concerning the son of
man, shall be accomplished; particularly, [Psa
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001.md) [Psa
22:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#006.md) for to these the following things
have respect.

[Luke 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 18:32</span></span>

For he shall be delivered unto the Gentiles,.... As he was by the chief
priests, Scribes, and elders, to Pilate, the Roman governor, and by him
to the soldiers:

and shall be mocked; as he was by the latter, when they crowned him with
thorns, arrayed him in a purple robe, and put a reed into his hand, and
bowed the knee to him, saying, hail king of the Jews; and likewise by
the Jews when he hung upon the cross:

and spitefully entreated. The Syriac and Persic versions leave out this
clause here, and read it the next verse. It may regard the injuries done
him, the abuses and affronts he received, both by words and blows:

and spitted on; as he was both by officers in the high priest's palace,
and by the Roman soldiers in Pilate's hall; see [Isa
50:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#006.md).

[Luke 18:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 18:33</span></span>

And they shall scourge him,.... As he was by Pilate's order, before he
was crucified:

and put him to death; a shameful, and a painful one, the death of the
cross:

and the third day he shall rise again; as he accordingly did.

[Luke 18:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 18:34</span></span>

And they understood none of these things,.... "Not one of them", as the
Syriac and Persic versions render it; every article of his sufferings
and death were unintelligible by them; they knew not how to understand
him in any one point: or how to reconcile these things to the notions
they had entertained of the temporal grandeur, and glory, of the
Messiah, and his kingdom; and which shows their great ignorance of the
prophecies of the Old Testament concerning these things.

And this saying, or "thing"; for it answers to the Hebrew word which
signifies any affair, or matter, as well as a word, or saying: and so
here, the whole of this affair

was hid from them; unless it should have a peculiar regard to that part
of it, which expresses his resurrection from the dead; see [Mar
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#010.md) or the delivery of him to the
Gentiles, [Luk 9:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#044.md)

neither knew they the things which were spoken; the meaning of them. The
Ethiopic version leaves out this, and puts the former clause, by way of
question, "and he said unto them, and is this saying hid from you?"

[Luke 18:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 18:35</span></span>

And it came to pass that as he was come nigh unto Jericho,.... Which lay
in his way to Jerusalem;

a certain blind man sat by the way side begging: this was not blind
Bartimaeus, nor his companion, for they were cured by Christ as he went
out of Jericho; but this man before he came to it; for we afterwards
read of his entrance into, and passing through Jericho, [Luk
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#001.md) though much the same things are
related in this account, as in that of the other two blind men; See Gill
on [Mat 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030.md).

[Luke 18:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 18:36</span></span>

And hearing the multitude pass by,.... Their "voice", as the Syriac
version expresses it; the noise of their feet, and especially of their
tongues;

he asked what it meant? what was the meaning of this concourse of
people, and of this clamorous noise; or, as the Syriac version reads,
"who it should be?" what person of note was passing by, that there was
such a multitude after him? to which the answer best agrees.

[Luke 18:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 18:37</span></span>

And they told him, that Jesus of Nazareth passeth by. Some of the
company answered him, that Jesus, the prophet of Nazareth, so much
talked of, and said to be the Messiah, who was become so famous for his
doctrines and miracles, for healing diseases, and dispossessing devils,
was just "then" passing by; and this occasioned the noise and clamour.

[Luke 18:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 18:38</span></span>

And he cried, saying, Jesus thou son of David,.... Believing him, at
once, to be the Messiah; whence he calls him the son of David, which was
a character and title of the Messiah, well known to the Jews; See Gill
on [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md) and therefore immediately
called out unto him, being willing to take that opportunity as he
passed, and whilst he was within hearing, to make his suit to him for
his sight:

saying, have mercy on me: a poor, blind, and miserable creature, and
restore me to my sight, which will be an act of singular mercy, and
goodness, and will always be gratefully owned as such.

[Luke 18:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 18:39</span></span>

And they that went before,.... In the company that preceded Christ; for
he, as yet, was not come right over against the blind man:

rebuked him that he should hold his peace; being not well pleased that
he should call him the son of David, which was acknowledging him to be
the Messiah; or that he might not be troublesome to Christ, and retard
his journey:

but he cried so much the more, thou son of David, have mercy on me; he
neither dropped the character of Christ, nor his request to him; but
called out more loudly, and with greater vehemence, earnestness, and
importunity: so persons sensible of their need of Christ, and of his
worth, excellency, and ability, are not to be discouraged from an
application to him, by whatsoever they meet with from men, or devils.

[Luke 18:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 18:40</span></span>

And Jesus stood,.... He stood still; he made a full stop, and went no
further, when, it is very likely, he was just over against him:

and commanded him to be brought unto him; either by the disciples, or by
some of the multitude:

and when he was come near he asked him; the following question.

[Luke 18:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 18:41</span></span>

Saying, what wilt thou that I shall do unto thee?.... Is it alms thou
askest? or is it thy sight thou wouldst have restored?

and he said, Lord, that I may receive my sight; this he chose, this was
his request, and what he cried so vehemently for; and which he believed
Christ, the son of David, was able to do for him.

[Luke 18:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 18:42</span></span>

And Jesus said unto him, receive thy sight,.... Be it to thee as thou
desirest, look up and see: thus by a word speaking, and power going
along with it, without making use of any means, he fulfilled his desire.

Thy faith hath saved thee; or has obtained salvation for thee, a
temporal salvation; and it may be also a spiritual and an eternal one:
for that is the concern faith has in salvation; it is the means of
obtaining and enjoying it: Christ, the object of faith, is the author of
it.

[Luke 18:43](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">luk 18:43</span></span>

And immediately he received his sight,.... As soon as ever the word was
gone out of Christ's mouth, virtue went forth from him, and cured the
man of his blindness; his eyes were at once opened, and he saw as other
men;

and followed him; his kind benefactor, with a grateful sense of his
goodness, with strong affection for him, and faith in him;

glorifying God, who had sent such a Saviour to him; who had wrought such
a wonderful miracle for him: for he was sensible that none but God could
do this.

And all the people, when they saw it; what was done, how that the man
they just before saw was blind, and begging by the way side, now had his
sight restored to him, in an instant, and was following Jesus, in the
crowd, along with them:

gave praise unto God; or, as Beza's most ancient copy reads, "glory";
they ascribed the glory to God, and praised his name, that he had raised
up the Messiah among them; of which this was a clear proof, inasmuch as
the eyes of the blind were opened, according to [Isa
35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 19](luk019.md)

</div>
