<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Luke Index](luk)  
  [Previous](luk009)  [Next](luk011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)

[Luke 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">luk 10:1</span></span>

After these things,.... After the calling and mission of the twelve
apostles, and giving them their powers, commissions, and instructions,
with other things that followed thereon; [Luk
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk009.htm#001)

the Lord appointed other seventy also; not that he had appointed before
seventy, and now made an appointment of seventy more; but as the Syriac
version renders it, "Jesus separated out of his disciples, seventy
others" that is, besides the twelve, whom he chose and called out, from
among the multitude of the disciples, and ordained them apostles, he
selected and ordained seventy others, in allusion to the seventy elders
of Israel, [Num 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016). The Vulgate
Latin and Persic versions read, "seventy two", and so does Epiphanius
(x). The Jewish sanhedrim is sometimes said to consist of seventy one
(y), and sometimes of seventy two (z); though commonly said to be of the
round number seventy, as these disciples might be. The above mentioned
ancient writer gives the names of some of them, as the seven deacons;
Stephen, Philip, Prochorus, Nicanor, Timon, Parmenas, and Nicolas;
together with Matthias, Mark, Luke, Justus, Barnabas, Apelies, Rufus,
and Niger. The names of all these disciples, according to ancient
traditions, though not to be depended on, are given in an alphabetical
order, with the places where they afterwards presided as bishops, or
pastors, by a late learned writer (a), and are as follow, viz. Agabus,
the prophet; Amphias, of Odyssus, sometimes called Amphiatus; Ananias,
who baptized Paul, bishop of Damascus; Andronicus, of Pannonia, or
Spain; Apelies, of Smyrna, or, according to others, of Heraclea; Apollo,
of Caesarea; Aristarchus, of Apamea; Aristobulus, of Britain; Artemas,
of Lustra; Asyncritus, of Hyrcania; Barnabas, of Milgin; Barnabas, of
Heraclea; Caesar, of Dyrrachium; Caius, of Ephesus; Carpus, of Berytus,
in Thracia; Cephas, bishop of Konia; Clemens, of Sardinia; Cleophas, of
Jerusalem; Crescens, of Chalcedon, in Galatia; Demas, a priest of idols;
Epaenetus, of Carthage; Epaphroditus, of Andriace; Erastus, of Paneas,
or, according to others, of the Philippians; Evodus, of Antioch; Hermas,
of Philippi, or Philippolls; Hermes, of Dalmatia; Hermogenus and
Phygellus, who followed Simon Magus; Hermogenus, bishop of the
Megarenes; Herodion, of Tarsus; James, the brother of our Lord, of
Jerusalem; Jason, of Tarsus; Jesus Justus, bishop of Eleutheropolis:
Linus, of Rome; Luke, the evangelist: Lucius, of Laodicea, in Syria;
Mark, who is also John, of Biblopohs, or Byblus; Mark the evangelist,
bishop of Alexandna; Mark, the sister's son of Barnabas, bishop of
Apolloma; Matthias, added to the apostles; Narcissus, of Athens;
Nicanor, he died when Stephen suffered martyrdom; Nicolaus, of Samaria;
Olympius, a martyr at Rome; Onesiphorus, bishop of Corone; Parmenas, of
the Soli, Patrobulus, the same with Patrobas, in [Rom
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#014) of Puteoli, or as others, of
Naples; Philemon, of Gaza; Philemon (in the Acts he is called Philip),
by whom the eunuch of the queen of Ethiopia was baptized, of Trallium,
of Asia; Philologus, of Sinope; Phlegon, bishop of Marathon; Phygellus,
of Ephesus; Prochorus, of Nicomedia, in Bithynia; Pudens; Quartus, of
Berytus; Rhodion, a martyr at Rome; Rufus, of Thebes; Silas, of Corinth;
Sylvanus, of Thessalonica; Sosipater, of Iconium; Sosthenes, of
Colophon; Stachys, of Byzantium; Stephen, the first martyr; Tertius, of
Iconium; Thaddaeus, who carried the epistle of Jesus to Edessa, to
Abgarus; Timon, of Bostra, of the Arabians; Trophimus, who suffered
martyrdora with the Apostle Paul; Tychicus, bishop of Chalcedon, of
Bithynia; Tychicus, of Colophon; Urbanus, of Macedonm; and, Zenas, of
Diospolis. According both to this account, and Epiphanius, Luke was one
of these seventy, and he is the only evangelist that makes mention of
the appointment of them:

and sent them two and two before his face: as he did the twelve before,
to be his harbingers and forerunners:

into every city and place, whither he himself would come: which he
intended to visit: he sent them beforehand to acquaint the inhabitants
of it; and prepare them by their ministry, for the reception of him; as
John the Baptist, who was in a more eminent sense the harbinger and
forerunner of Christ, went before him in his ministry, and prepared the
way for him.

\(x\) Contr. Haeres. haeres. 20. (y) Maimon. Hilchot Sanhedrim, c. 1.
sect. 3. (z) Misn. Yadim, c. 3. sect. 5. Aben Ezra in Num 11. 25. (a)
Fabricii lux Evangelii, p. 115, 116, &c.

[Luke 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">luk 10:2</span></span>

Therefore said he unto them,.... That is, the "Lord Jesus", as the
Ethiopic version expresses it; he said to the seventy disciples, what he
had before said to the twelve apostles in [Mat
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#037) where are the same words as here:

the harvest truly is great, but the labourers are few, pray ye therefore
the Lord of the harvest that he would send forth labourers into his
harvest; for though there was such a number of disciples called to the
ministerial work, and sent out, there was still need of more; so great
was the harvest of souls, or number of hearers, that the labourers were
yet but few; and therefore the Lord of the harvest and whose all souls
are, was to be prayed unto to send forth more laborious preachers; See
Gill on [Mat 9:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#037). See Gill on [Mat
9:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#038).

[Luke 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">luk 10:3</span></span>

Go your ways,.... Into all the villages, towns, cities, and places,
where he directed them to go, to make ready for him.

Behold, I send you forth as lambs among wolves; as harmless, innocent,
profitable, and defenceless creatures, among spiteful, malicious,
cunning, and cruel men; See Gill on [Mat
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#016).

[Luke 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">luk 10:4</span></span>

Carry neither purse,.... The Syriac version reads, "purses, "to put
money, gold, silver, and brass in; and the prohibition regards the money
in the purse chiefly:

nor scrip; the Syriac version here also reads in the plural number,
"scrips", to put victuals in, provisions or any sort for their journey,
which they were not to carry with them, any more than money, to buy food
with

Nor shoes; any more than those they had upon their feet; See Gill on
[Mat 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#009), [Mat
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010) and salute no man by the way;
that they might not be retarded, and hindered in their journey by
tedious ceremonies, and long inquiries into the health of persons and
friends, and the business they were going about, and places where; and
by discourses and confabulations, drawn out to great length, as was
often the case at meeting on the road: and, for the same reason, a like
charge is given to Gehazi, [Kg2 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#029),
and which, as the Jewish commentators on the place observe (a), was,
that he might not multiply words with persons he met with, and might not
be stopped by the way; and that his intention might be in his work, and
his mind might not turn to any other thing, either by word or deed. So
our Lord's intention, by this order was, not to teach them incivility,
or to be morose and uncourteous; but that they might dispatch their
business with the utmost expedition, and rather forego some common
civilities and ceremonies, than to neglect, or, in the least, to hinder
a work of so much importance they were sent about: and this was the more
necessary, since, according to the Jewish maxim (b),

"prevent every man with a salutation;''

they saluted all that they met, which took up time, and hindered
business. Some sorts of persons indeed were excused, as those who were
mourners (c) for the dead, and such as kept fasts for rain (d): but such
were not these disciples; they neither mourned, nor fasted, nor could
they, so long as the bridegroom was with them.

\(a\) Jarchi, Kimchi, & R. Levi Ben Gersom in 2 Kings iv. 29. (b) Pirke
Abot. c. 4. sect. 15. (c) T. Bab. in Misn. Moed Katon, c. 3. sect. 6.
(d) Misn. Taanith, c. 1. sect. 7.

[Luke 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">luk 10:5</span></span>

And into whatsoever house ye enter,.... When ye come into any city,
town, or village,

first say, peace be to this house: salute the inhabitants in the usual
form, saying, peace be to you; wishing them all happiness and
prosperity, temporal, spiritual, and eternal. This shows our Lord did
not disapprove of civil salutations.

[Luke 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">luk 10:6</span></span>

And if the son of peace be there,.... If there be any elect person or
persons in the house, whom God has chosen to partake of peace by the
blood of Christ, and the benefits arising from it; and of a conscience
peace in their souls, upon the best foundation; and of eternal peace in
the world to come, though yet in a state of nature; and which may be
known by this sign;

your peace shall rest upon it: the salutation, or wish of peace, shall
be well taken, and gratefully received; and upon this you will be kindly
invited into the house, and used well by, those of the family;

if not, it shall turn to you again: if there are no sons of peace, no
elect persons there, your salutation, or wish of peace and prosperity to
the family, will be despised and rejected, and will return to you
without any good effect upon them.

[Luke 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">luk 10:7</span></span>

And in the same house remain,.... Where the sons of peace are, and the
peace rests, and into which you are invited, and kindly received and
used:

eating and drinking such things as they give; or rather, "such things as
are with them", as the Vulgate Latin renders it; or "of that which is
theirs", as the Syriac version; all one, and with as much freedom, as if
they were your own; the reason follows,

for the labourer is worthy of his hire; what you eat and drink is your
due; what you ought to have; your diet is a debt, and not a gratuity;
See Gill on [Mat 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#010).

go not from house to house; as if fickle and inconstant, as if not
satisfied with your lodging and entertainment, and as seeking out for
other and better, or as if burdensome where they were; See Gill on [Mat
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#011). The Jews have a proverb,
expressing the inconvenience and expensiveness, and the danger of moving
from place to place:

"he that goes, , "from house to house", (loses his) shirt, (i.e. comes
to distress and poverty,) from place to place (his) life (e);''

or he is in great danger of losing his life.

\(e\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 39. fol. 34. 3.

[Luke 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">luk 10:8</span></span>

And into whatsoever city ye enter,.... Into whatsoever house in it ye
go, and apply to for lodging and entertainment,

and they receive you, readily and cheerfully,

eat such things as are set before you; though ever so mean, accept of
them, and do not object to them on that account, lest it should be
thought you serve your own bellies, and seek to gratify your appetites;
nor, on the other hand, do not think anything too good for you, or that
you are burdensome and chargeable, but eat as if it were your own; nor
ask questions about the cleanness and uncleanness of it, or whether it
has been tithed or not; but feed upon it without any scruple.

[Luke 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">luk 10:9</span></span>

And heal the sick that are therein,.... Of all their bodily diseases,
which would not only show their power and warrant, theft mission and
commission, but also their goodness and beneficence to men; and would be
a sufficient return for what they ate and drank:

and say unto them; not only to the sick that are healed, and those in
the house in which they were, but to all the inhabitants of the city;

the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you: the Gospel dispensation, the
kingdom of the Messiah, and even the Messiah himself, as might be
concluded from the miracles they wrought; and thus by their ministry and
works, were they to go before Christ, and prepare his way.

[Luke 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">luk 10:10</span></span>

But into whatsoever city ye enter,.... On the other hand Christ here
directs how to behave towards other cities they should come to, and be
rejected:

and they receive you not; refuse to admit them into their houses, or
provide in any shape for them, nor hear their message:

go your ways out into the streets of the same. The Ethiopic version
reads, "cast the dust off your feet into the streets of it: and say";
aloud, in the most public manner, in the ears of all the people, as
follows.

[Luke 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">luk 10:11</span></span>

Even the very dust of your city, which cleaveth on us,.... The Syriac
version adds, "to our feet"; and so in Beza's most ancient copy, and the
Arabic and Persic versions read, "which cleaves to our feet"; which
agrees with [Mat 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014).

we do wipe against you: for a testimony against them, that they had been
with them, and were rejected by them; See Gill on [Mat
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#014), [Mar
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar006.htm#011).

notwithstanding be ye sure of this; they might assure themselves of
this, and which will be an aggravation of their guilt, and increase
their punishment another day:

that the kingdom of God is come nigh unto you; was at their very doors,
since the ministers of it, of the Gospel dispensation, the harbingers of
the Messiah, who were sent to publish his Gospel, to proclaim him as
king, and de clare that his kingdom was at hand, had been with them, and
they had despised them.

[Luke 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">luk 10:12</span></span>

But I say unto you,.... The same that he said to the twelve apostles,
when he sent them out, [Mat 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015),

that it shall be more tolerable in that day for Sodom than for that
city. By "that day" is meant, the famous day to come, the last day; the
day of judgment, as it is expressed in Matthew; and so the Ethiopic
version reads here, "it shall be better in the day of judgment". Sodom
was a very wicked city, and was destroyed by fire from heaven for its
iniquity, and its inhabitants suffer the vengeance of eternal fire: and
there was also Gomorrha, a neighbouring city, guilty of the same crimes,
and shared the same fate; and which is mentioned along with Sodom in
Matthew; and is here read in the Persic version. And the sense of the
whole is, that though the iniquities of Sodom and Gomorrha were very
great, and their punishment very exemplary; yet, as there will be
degrees of torment in hell, the case of such a city, which has been
favoured with the Gospel, and has despised and rejected it, will be much
worse than the case of those cities, which were devoured by fire from
heaven; and than that of the inhabitants of them in the future judgment,
and to all eternity; See Gill on [Mat
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#015).

[Luke 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">luk 10:13</span></span>

Woe unto thee Chorazin,.... See Gill on [Mat
11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021).

Woe unto thee Bethsaida; a city of Galilee, a fishing town, from whence
it has its name, and was the native place of those two fishermen, Peter
and Andrew: very likely Chorazin was near it, since they are here, and
in Matthew, mentioned together; and woe is pronounced upon them both for
their impenitence and unbelief, which were attended with aggravating
circumstances:

for if the mighty works had been done in Tyre and Sidon, which have been
done in you; meaning both the ministry of the word by Christ, which was
with power and authority, and the miracles of Christ, which were the
works of almighty power, and showed him to be the mighty God: these were
not done in Tyre and Sidon, cities in Phoenicia; for though our Lord was
on the borders of those places, yet not in them, they being Gentile
cities, to which he was not sent, and in which he did not preach, nor do
miracles; but he did both in Bethsaida and Chorazin, and they repented
not of their sins; nor did they embrace his doctrine, though confirmed
by miracles; whereas, in all likelihood, humanly speaking, had the
inhabitants of Tyre and Sidon had the like advantages,

they had a great while ago repented: they would have repented
immediately, it would have been soon visible in them, of which they
would have given proof, by

sitting in sackcloth and ashes; which was an outward token of
repentance, used by penitent sinners, as by the Ninevites, and others.
The same things are said at another time, and on another occasion, as
here; See Gill on [Mat 11:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#021), [Mat
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#022), [Mat
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023), [Mat
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#024)

[Luke 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">luk 10:14</span></span>

But it shall be more tolerable for Tyre and Sidon at the judgment,....
Or "in the day of judgment", as read the Syriac, Persic, Ethiopic, and
Gothic versions; and as it is in [Mat
11:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#022)

than for you; the inhabitants of Chorazin and Bethsaida, who will be
more severely punished than these Gentile cities; for by how much
greater were their light, privileges, and advantages against which they
sinned, by so much will be their severer punishment.

[Luke 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">luk 10:15</span></span>

And thou Capernaum, which art exalted to heaven,.... Referring either to
the situation of it, which was on a very high hill; or to its
privileges, through the ministry and miracles of Christ; or the phrase
may be expressive of the pride and loftiness of the inhabitants of it,
who were elated with the mercies they enjoyed, it being a most
delightful, pleasant, and comfortable place to live in, as its name
signifies. It was a famous port, commodiously situated by the sea of
Tiberias; and, as Josephus (f) says, was in an excellent temperament of
the air, and watered with a most choice fountain, called by the same
name.

Shalt be thrust down into hell; meaning either the low condition to
which it was to be, and has been reduced in a temporal sense, and
continues in to this day; there being nothing of it now remaining, as
travellers, who have been eyewitnesses of it, say (g), but a few little
houses and cottages; or else the sad and miserable condition of the
inhabitants of it hereafter: and so it is, that such who have lived in
great plenty and pleasure in this life, and have thought themselves to
be the favourites of heaven, and that they should enter there, shall be
thrust down to hell by the arm of vengeance, with the utmost indignation
in God, and shame to themselves: it follows in Matthew, "for if the
mighty works which have been done in thee, had been done in Sodom, it
would have remained until this day; but I say unto you, it shall be more
tolerable for the land of Sodom, in the day of judgment, than for thee".

\(f\) De Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 35. (g) Vid. L'Empereur, Not. in Benj.
Itinerar. p. 68.

[Luke 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">luk 10:16</span></span>

He that heareth you, heareth me,.... This is said for the encouragement
of the seventy disciples, that though they would be rejected by some,
they would be received by others, who would hear them, and embrace their
doctrine, as if the Messiah himself had been among them; they looking
upon them as representing him: and so Christ himself considers them as
ambassadors in his name, and as representing his person, taking what is
done to them, as done to himself; See Gill on [Mat
10:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#040).

and he that despiseth you, despiseth me: every degree of contempt cast
upon them by words or actions, Christ looked upon as cast on himself,
and will resent it another day, and punish for it. The despising of wise
men, or doctors, and their disciples or scholars, was accounted with the
Jews a very heinous crime, and was severely punished both by
excommunication and fines: for thus it is said (h),

"a great iniquity it is to despise the wise men, or to hate them.
Jerusalem was not destroyed until the disciples of the wise men were
despised in it, as it is said, [Ch2
36:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2036.htm#016) "but they mocked the messengers
of God, and despised his words, and misused his prophets": as if he
should say, they despised those that taught his words: and thus saith
the law, "if ye despise my statutes"; they that teach my statutes ye
will despise; and every one that despiseth the wise men, hath no part in
the world to come; and lo! this is included in that general rule, "for
he hath despised the word of the Lord". Although he that despiseth the
wise men hath no part in the world to come, if witnesses come (and
depose) that he hath despised them even in words, he is guilty of
excommunication: and the sanhedrim excommunicate him publicly, and fine
him a pound of gold in every place, and give it to the wise men: and he
that despiseth a wise man by words, even after his (the wise man's)
death, the sanhedrim excommunicate him; and they free him when he
returns by repentance: but if the wise man is alive, they do not free
him till he pleases.''

And he that despiseth me, despiseth him that sent me: this is said to
aggravate the sin of the despisers of Christ's ministers, and to deter
from it; since the contempt does not terminate in them, nor even in
Christ, but reaches his Father also. The Ethiopic version adds, "and he
that heareth me, heareth him that sent me": but is not supported by any
copy, or any other version.

\(h\) Maimon. Hilch. Talmud Tora, c. 6. sect. 11, 12.

[Luke 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">luk 10:17</span></span>

And the seventy returned again,.... The Syriac version adds, "whom he
had sent": these disciples having received orders and instructions from
Christ, went as he directed them; and when they had finished their
embassy, they returned again to him, and gave him an account of their
journey and success. The Vulgate Latin and Persic versions read here,
"the seventy two", as they do in [Luk
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001)

with joy; with great joy, as read the Syriac and Persic versions;
notwithstanding the difficulties that had attended them, reproaches cast
upon them, the ill treatment they might have met with in some places,
and the labours and fatigues of their journey, and the dangers they had
been exposed to:

saying, Lord, even the devils are subject unto us through thy name: they
found the miraculous power conferred on them was greater than they at
first imagined, or could collect from what Christ said to them, who only
bid them heal the sick, [Luk 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#009), but
when they came to make use of it they found they had a power of casting
out devils; not in their own name and strength, but in the name, and
through the power, and by the authority of Christ; and this had thrown
them into an ecstasy of joy, and in a sort of a rapture: they express
themselves as men astonished at the powers bestowed on them.

[Luke 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">luk 10:18</span></span>

And he said unto them,.... In order to abate their surprise, and reduce
their transport of mind:

I beheld Satan as lightning fall from heaven; meaning, that this was no
news to him, nor any surprising event, that devils should be cast out of
men, and be in a state of subjection; for as he existed as the eternal
Son of God before his incarnation, he was present, and saw him and his
angels fall from heaven, from their first estate, their habitation of
bliss and glory, down to hell, upon their sin and rebellion, as
violently, swiftly, and suddenly, as the lightning falls from heaven to
earth; and when he sent out these his disciples, as soon as they began
their work, and all along in it, he, by his divine omniscience, saw the
powers of darkness falling before their ministry and miracles; and he
also foresaw how Satan hereafter, in a more conspicuous manner, would
fall before the preaching of his Gospel by his apostles, not only in
Judea, but especially among the Gentiles, where he, the prince of this
world, would be cast down from his throne, and out of his kingdom; so
that what they related, as it was what he knew before, it was but little
in comparison of what he himself had seen long ago, and of what he
foresaw would be; and even he would give them power to do other
miraculous works besides these.

[Luke 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">luk 10:19</span></span>

Behold, I give you power to tread on serpents and scorpions,.... Which
may be literally understood, as in [Mar
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar016.htm#018), or figuratively of the devil,
and his principalities and powers, and all his emissaries, who, for
their craft and cunning, and for their poisonous and hurtful nature and
influence, may be compared to serpents and scorpions:

and over all the power of the enemy; of mankind in general, and of the
seed of the woman, Christ and his people in particular, Christ has a
power over all his power, his whole posse of devils, even the power of
the air, of which he is prince; and he communicated this power to his
disciples, even to the seventy: adding,

and nothing shall by any means, hurt you; not the most hurtful and
poisonous animals, nor the most malicious persecutors on earth, nor all
the devils in hell: as the former venomous creatures, when took up in
their hands, should not hurt, their bodies; so the other, whatever they
might be permitted to do with respect to their lives, and outward
estate, should never hurt their souls, and the eternal welfare of them;
nor even hinder the work of God prospering in their hands.

[Luke 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">luk 10:20</span></span>

Notwithstanding in this rejoice not,.... That their power was enlarged,
or that they had, the same as before:

that the spirits, evil spirits, devils, are subject unto you; and come
out of men at your command; rejoice not so much in this, or chiefly and
principally; not but that it was matter of joy both with respect to the
gift bestowed upon them, and the benefits men received by it, and the
glory that was brought to Christ through it;

but rather rejoice, because your names are written in heaven; in the
book of life, called the Lamb's book of life, written from the
foundation of the world: in divine predestination to everlasting glory
and happiness: which shows that God's election to eternal life is of
particular persons, of persons by name; that it is sure, and certain,
and immutable, being in opposition to what is written in earth, [Jer
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#013), that the knowledge of this may
be attained to, through the grace of God, the revelation of Christ, and
the witnessings of his Spirit; and that this is matter of the greatest
job, since it is the foundation and security of all the blessings of
grace and glory.

[Luke 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">luk 10:21</span></span>

In that hour Jesus rejoiced in Spirit,.... In his human soul: his heart
was filled with joy, not so much at the success of the seventy
disciples, and the subjection of the devils to them, as in the view he
had of the spread of the Gospel, and of the revelation and application
of the truths of it to multitudes of mean and despicable persons, while
it was rejected by the wise and learned; and particularly at the
sovereign and distinguishing grace of God towards the elect, whose names
are written in heaven; upon the mention of which his soul was so
affected, that he broke out in, an exulting strain, into thanksgivings
to God, in the following manner,

and said, I thank thee, O Father,.... In three ancient copies of Beza's,
and in the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic versions it is read, "in
the Holy Spirit"; and the Persic version reads, "he spake, or
confabulated with the Holy Spirit": but the former reading and sense are
best. See Gill on [Mat 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025), [Mat
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#026)

[Luke 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">luk 10:22</span></span>

All things are delivered to me of my Father,.... In some ancient copies,
and in the Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions, before these words,
are read, "and turning to his disciples he said, all things", &c.

and no man knoweth who the Son is; what is his name, his nature, his
perfections and glory; and how he is the Son of God, his only begotten
Son:

but the Father; who begat him, and whose own, and proper Son he is:

and who the Father is; what are his perfections, purposes, grace,
greatness, mind, and will:

but the Son; who is of him, and lay in his bosom:

and he to whom the Son will reveal him: in himself, by his Spirit; See
Gill on [Mat 11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027).

[Luke 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">luk 10:23</span></span>

And he turned him unto his disciples,.... Both to the twelve apostles,
and seventy disciples;

and said privately; or to them apart: the phrase "privately" is wanting
in the Vulgate Latin version:

blessed are the eyes that see the things that ye see; the person of the
Messiah, his kingdom setting up in the world, miracles wrought by him,
and Satan falling before him; See Gill on [Mat
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#016).

[Luke 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">luk 10:24</span></span>

For I tell you that many prophets and kings,.... As Abraham, Isaac,
Jacob, who were prophets, as well as patriarchs, and David, Solomon, and
others:

have desired to see those things which ye see, and have not seen them,
and to hear those things which ye hear, and have not heard them, meaning
himself, doctrines, and miracles; See Gill on [Mat
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#017).

[Luke 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">luk 10:25</span></span>

And behold a certain lawyer stood up,.... From his seat, having been
hearing Christ preach, very likely, in some synagogue; when and where
this was, is not certain. The Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions call
this man a Scribe; and a lawyer and a Scribe were the same, as appears
from [Mat 22:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#035) compared with [Mar
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028)

and tempted him; or tried him whether he understood the law, or whether
he would say any thing contrary to it, and see if he could gain any
advantage against him, and expose him, and get credit and applause to
himself:

saying, Master, what shall I do to inherit eternal life? the same
question as was put by the young ruler in [Mar
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#017) for they were both of the same
complexion, and upon the same foundation, seeking eternal life by their
own works: See Gill on [Mat 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016).

he said unto him; that is, Jesus, as all the Oriental versions express
it.

[Luke 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">luk 10:26</span></span>

What is written in the law?.... Christ, with great propriety, sends him
to the law, to see and observe what was written there, what are the
terms and conditions of life, as fixed there; partly, because this man,
by his office and character, was an interpreter of the law; and partly,
because his question was, what shall I do?

how readest thou? in the law, every day; referring to the "Keriat
Shema", the reading of the Shema, i.e. those words in [Deu
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004), &c, "Hear, O Israel, &c." morning
and evening (i) as appears by his answer

\(i\) Vid. Misn. Beracot, c. 1. sect. 1, 2.

[Luke 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">luk 10:27</span></span>

And he answering said, thou shalt love the Lord thy God,.... This was
part of their phylacteries, which they recited every day; See Gill on
[Mat 22:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#037), [Mat
22:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#039), [Mar
12:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#028), [Mar
12:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#029)

[Luke 10:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">luk 10:28</span></span>

And he said unto him, thou hast answered right,.... It is so written,
and read; and this, as if he should say, is the sum and substance of the
law, and what that requires men should do; wherefore,

do this, and thou shalt live; for the bare reading of it was not
sufficient; though these men placed great confidence in reading this
passage, or in reciting their phylacteries, of which this was a part,
morning and night. Our Lord intimates by this, that, according to the
tenor of the law, eternal life was not to be had without a complete and
perfect performance of the duties of love to God, and to the neighbour,
contained in these words; and this he suggests, in order to convict him
of the impossibility of obtaining life by the works of the law, since
such a performance cannot be made by man.

[Luke 10:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">luk 10:29</span></span>

But he willing to justify himself,.... Upon the foot of his own
righteousness, and to make himself appear to be righteous to others; for
this the Jews thought themselves able to do, both to justify themselves
before God by their own works, and make it out to men, that they were
truly righteous persons; and it is a maxim with them, that

"every one that justifies himself, below (on earth), they justify him
above (or in heaven) (k).''

No wonder then that this man was desirous of justifying himself; and in
order to which

he said, and who is my neighbour? he takes no notice of God, and love to
him, as coming into the account of his justification, only of his
neighbour; thinking when this question was answered, he should be very
able to make it out, that he was not wanting neither in doing justice
between himself and his neighbour, nor in showing kindness and
beneficence to him; for by his neighbour he meant only an Israelite; one
of the same nation and religion with him. So the Jews commonly interpret
the word neighbour, either of one that is related to them in nature,
that is, near akin to them in blood (l); or that professes the same
religion as they do, and whom they call a neighbour in the law; and so
they explain the passage now cited, "and thou shall love thy neighbour
as thyself", ; "that is, who is thy neighbour in the law" (m): for they
will not allow a Gentile, no, not even a proselyte of the gate to be a
neighbour: for thus they say (n),

"an Israelite that slays a proselyte of the gate, or the stranger that
dwells with him, is not slain for him by the sanhedrim; for it is said,
[Exo 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#014) but if a man comes
presumptuously upon his neighbour to slay him, &c. and there is no need
to say he is not slain for a Gentile.''

And again (o),

"when a man sees one of them (the Gentiles) fall into the sea, he need
not take him up; as it is said, [Lev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#016) "neither shalt thou stand
against the blood of thy neighbour", "but this is not thy neighbour."''

This notion Christ opposes and disproves in the following parable, which
is an answer to the lawyer's question.

\(k\) T. Bab. Tasnith, fol. 8. 1. (l) Kimchi in Psal. xv. 3. (m) Moses
Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora, pr. affirm. 9. (n) Maimon. Hilch. Rotzeach, c.
2. sect. 11. (o) Ib. c. 4. sect. 11.

[Luke 10:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">luk 10:30</span></span>

And Jesus answering, said,.... The following things; which may either be
considered as a narrative of matter of fact, or as a supposed case, and
delivered by way of parable; and in either way, though the general
design of it is in answer to the lawyer's question, to show who may be
called a neighbour; and that a man who is a stranger, and accounted an
enemy, yet doing acts of mercy, kindness, and beneficence, to one in
distress, ought to be accounted a neighbour: and has a much better title
to such a character, than one of the same nation and religion, who takes
no notice of a distressed object; yet it may be considered, as
representing the sad estate and condition of mankind by the fall, and
their recovery by Christ; whereby he shows himself to be their best
neighbour, and truest friend:

a certain man went down from Jerusalem to Jericho. The distance between
these two places, the Jews say (p), was ten "parsas", that is, forty
miles; for every "parsa" was four miles, and ten "parsas" are expressly
said (q) to be forty miles; which must be understood of the lesser
miles, otherwise a parsa itself was but a mile: the Jews had two sorts
of miles, the greater was 2000 cubits, the lesser 1000 cubits: the man
is said to go down from the one to the other, because Jerusalem stood on
high ground, and Jericho in a valley. This "certain man", may represent
mankind failing in Adam, from a state of happiness, into misery: human
nature was originally in one man, but one man was created at first, and
he had all human nature in him, and was the representative of mankind;
he was made upright, but sinned, and fell from his uprightness, and all
mankind in him: he may be said to go down, from Jerusalem, which
signifies peace, and the vision of it; and was a city compact together,
beautiful and well situated; where were the worship of God, and his
Shekinah, or divine presence; to Jericho, a city accursed by Joshua, and
a very wicked place in the days of Christ: since man by sinning against
God, departed from his happy and peaceful state, from a state of peace
and tranquillity with God, with the holy angels, and even with the
beasts of the field; and also from peace and serenity in his own
conscience, as well as from communion with God; and from his pure
worship and service, to a sensual, earthly, worldly, wicked, and
accursed state:

and fell among thieves: in the way to Jericho, was a place called
Adomim, which signifies "bloods", because much blood was shed there, by
the frequent incursions of thieves and robbers, as Jerom observes (r);
and was about four hours journey from Jericho (s): and by the man's
falling among thieves, may be expressed mankind coming into the hands of
sin and Satan, which are as robbers, that steal, kill, and destroy;
since these have robbed man of his honour, defaced the image of God in
him, and deprived him of the glory of God, and were murderers of him
from the beginning:

which stripped him of his raiment; as thieves and robbers are used to
do; signifying the loss of original righteousness, by sin, which was a
covering to man, in which he could appear before God; and was very
ornamental to him, being pure and perfect in its kind, though only a
creature's righteousness, and a created one; and which was natural and
loseable, as the event has shown: hence man is become a naked creature,
has nothing to cover himself with, but stands exposed to the law,
justice, and wrath of God; is destitute of a righteousness, nor can he
work out one that will stand him in any stead, or justify him before
God:

and wounded him: which is the common usage of such men; and may set
forth the morbid and diseased condition that sin has brought man into;
being from the crown of the head, to the sole of the foot, full of
wounds, bruises, and putrefying sores; and such as are in themselves
mortal, and incurable by any, but the great physician of souls, the Lord
Jesus Christ; and yet men are naturally insensible of them, and
unconcerned about there:

and departed, leaving him half dead; or "near death", as the Arabic
version renders it; which may be applied to death natural, spiritual,
and eternal: to death natural, which comes by sin, seeing it is but one
part, or half of the man that dies this death, namely, his body; and to
a spiritual death, or the death of the soul, which is dead in trespasses
and sins, whilst the body is alive; and to eternal death, to which men
are exposed for sin, and are under the sentence of it, though not
executed; and in each of these senses may be said to be "half dead": and
which is no ways to the advantage of the doctrine of man's freewill, and
the powers and abilities of; as if man was not in a spiritual sense so
dead, that he can do nothing in a spiritual manner; but the phrase is
used, to show the power of sin, and the malice of Satan, and yet that
man is still recoverable by the grace of God.

\(p\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 20. 2. & 39. 20. Bartenora in Misn. Tamid, c.
3. sect. 8. (q) T. Bab. Pesachim. fol. 93. 2. & Gloss. in ib. (r) Ad
Eustochium, Tom. I. fol. 59. I. K. (s) Masius in Josh. xv. 7.

[Luke 10:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">luk 10:31</span></span>

And by chance there came down a certain priest that way,.... Who had
been at Jerusalem, to take his turn in the courses, and was now
returning to Jericho, where the stationary men were, to which he
belonged: for it is said (t), that

"the former prophets appointed twenty and four courses; and for every
course there was a station at Jerusalem, of priests, and of Levites, and
of Israelites; and when the time of the course came to go up, the
priests and Levites went up to Jerusalem. The Rabbins teach, that there
were twenty four courses in the land of Israel, and there were twelve at
Jericho.''

And which is elsewhere (u) related thus;

"the former prophets appointed four and twenty courses, and for every
course there was a station at Jerusalem, of priests, of Levites, and of
Israelites; the tradition is, that four and twenty thousand were the
station from Jerusalem, and half a station from Jericho; though Jericho
was able to furnish out a perfect station itself; but for the sake of
dividing the glory to Jerusalem, it produced but half a station.''

So that it is no wonder to hear of priests and Levites passing to and
fro in this road. Nor was this a chance matter with respect to God, by
whose providence all things are ordered, directed, and governed; nor any
wonderful thing with respect to men, which fell out in an uncommon way,
beyond expectation; the phrase only signifies, that so it came to pass:

and when he saw him, he passed by on the other side: when he saw him
naked, and in such a bloody condition, he might take him for one really
dead, and therefore crossed the way on purpose, lest he should any ways
touch him, and be defiled by him, and so break the law, and incur the
penalty of it, mentioned in [Num 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#016)
or to shun so horrible a sight; or rather, through hardness of heart,
and want of compassion.

\(t\) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 27. 1. (u) T. Hieros. Pesachim, fol. 30. 3.
& Taanith, fol. 67. 4.

[Luke 10:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">luk 10:32</span></span>

And likewise a Levite, when he was at the place,.... Where the poor man
lay in this deplorable condition:

came and looked on him; and that was all; but neither spoke a
comfortable word, nor administered any relief to him, or in the least
assisted him:

and passed by on the other side; as the priest had done before him: by
the "priest" may be meant, the moral law, and by the Levite the
ceremonial law; and so by both, the whole law of Moses; and intimates,
that no mercy is to be expected from thence: the law makes no abatement
in its demands, nor any allowance for the fall and weakness of man: nor
is it become milder under the Gospel dispensation; nor will it accept of
an imperfect, though sincere obedience, in the room of a perfect one;
and is deaf to all repentings, cries, and tears: no relief is to be had
from thence, for a naked, wounded, and dead man; no robe of
righteousness to cover a naked soul; for by the law is the knowledge of
sin, but not a justifying righteousness by the deeds of it: for the
deeds of the law, performed by sinful men, are impure and imperfect; and
were they pure and perfect, they would be unprofitable, and could not
justify in the sight of God from former sins; for could they, they would
establish boasting, and disannul the death of Christ, and frustrate the
grace of God; and therefore righteousness cannot be by the law, that
leaves a man as naked as it finds him: nor is there any healing by it to
a wounded conscience; there is no pity from it, no justification by it,
no pardon through it, no expiation or atonement of sin, by obedience to
it; no word of comfort is spoken by it; so far from it, that when it
comes with power, it opens the wounds of sin, fills the conscience with
wrath and terror, destroys all the man's former hopes of happiness, and
leaves him where it found him; without healing him itself, or pointing
out a physician to him: much less can it give life to a dead sinner:
spiritual life is not communicated by it, nor can eternal life, or any
true hope of it, be attained through it; it is so far from it, that it
is the killing letter, and the ministration of condemnation and death.

[Luke 10:33](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">luk 10:33</span></span>

But a certain Samaritan,.... By whom Christ may be meant; not that he
was really so, for he was a Jew, a son of Abraham, and of David,
according to the flesh, but he was so called by the Jews, [Joh
8:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#048) and was treated as such by them:
and since it is the design of the parable in general to show, that he
that does acts of kindness and mercy to persons in distress, is a
neighbour in the truest sense, though he is not an Israelite, but even a
Samaritan, who was, above all men, hated by the Jews; why may it not be
thought to be the view of Christ in particular, to prove himself the
best neighbour and friend of men, though he was traduced by the Jews as
a Samaritan?

as he journeyed; which may design the assumption of human nature, which
is sometimes expressed, by his coming from his Father, by his descending
from heaven, and coming into this world; which phrases intend his
incarnation, and carry in them the idea of journeying: for as his ascent
to heaven is expressed by taking a journey, [Mat
25:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#015) so may his descent from heaven;
and while he was here on earth, he was as a stranger and pilgrim, as a
sojourner and traveller:

came where he was; put himself in the legal place, and stead of his
people, who fell with the rest of mankind in Adam; he became their
surety from eternity, and clothed himself with their nature in time; he
took upon him their sins, as their representative, and fulfilled the
righteousness of the law on their account, and bore the penalty of it in
their room:

and when he saw him; Christ saw the elect before the fall, as they were
chosen in him, and given unto him, in all the glory they were to be
brought into; when he loved them, and his delight was with them: and
when he came to redeem them, he saw them as follows; as lost, as weak
and strengthless, as wicked, and as the worst of sinners, as ungodly,
and enemies, as children of wrath by nature, as others; and he shed his
blood for them, and washed them from their sins, that he might present
them to himself a glorious church, without spot or wrinkle, or any such
thing; just such an one he had seen them to be, in the glass of his
Father's purposes, in his council and covenant; and he sees them in
their blood, and in the impurity of their nature, when he comes to call
them by his grace:

and he had compassion on him. The compassion of Christ on his elect, is
to be seen in his eternal covenant engagements; for his tender mercies
have been ever of old; and in his assumption of their nature, which was
through his own, as well as the tender mercy of his Father; and in the
redemption of them, which was in love and pity; and also in their
regeneration and conversion, for the great things there, and then done
for them by him, are owing to his compassion.

[Luke 10:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">luk 10:34</span></span>

And went to him, and bound up his wounds,.... Which sin had made; it
being part of the work of Christ, to bind up the broken-hearted, to heal
wounded sinners, and restore comforts to mourners; and which he does, by

pouring in oil and wine: by which, in general, may be designed, the
blood of Christ, applied to the conscience of a wounded sinner; which
cleanses from all sin, heals all the wounds and diseases of sin, cheers
and revives fainting spirits, gives ease, peace, and pleasure, and is
therefore exceeding valuable and precious: and in particular by "oil"
may be meant, the grace of the Spirit of God; compared unto it, for its
sweet smell, its cheering and refreshing virtue and efficacy, and its
cooling, softening, supplying, and healing nature: and by "wine", the
doctrines of the Gospel; such as free justification by Christ's
righteousness, and pardon through his blood; which when applied to
distressed minds, cause joy and gladness, and them to forget their
sorrow, and remember their misery no more: and the pouring in of these,
may denote the plentiful effusion of Christ's blood, and the riches of
his grace in the application of it; and the freeness and generousness of
this action, which is his own: for man cannot do it. It was usual with
the Jews, to mix oil and wine together, for the healing of wounds: hence
those rules and traditions (w);

"they anoint a linen cloth for a sick man on the sabbath; when? when
they mingle the oil and the wine on the sabbath eve, but if they do not
mingle it on the sabbath eve, it is forbidden; it is a tradition, says
R. Simeon ben Eleazer, R. Meir pronounced it lawful, to mingle wine and
oil, and to anoint the sick on the sabbath.''

So oil and wine were mingled together, and used to heal the sore
occasioned by circumcision (x).

and set him on his own beast; by which may be meant, either the red
horse of Christ's humanity, [Zac 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008)
to which he has united all his people; and in which he has bore their
persons, and has represented them, and still bears them on his heart: or
the white horse of the Gospel, [Rev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#002) compared to a horse for its
strength, swiftness, and usefulness in battle; and to a "white" one, for
the purity of its doctrines, the joy and peace it brings, and the
victory it obtains: and this is Christ's own, and on which he himself
rides, and shows his glory, and goes forth conquering and to conquer:
and on which he sets his people, and they are carried out of the reach
of men and devils to destroy them, and are caused to ride on the high
places of the earth:

and brought him to an inn; a church of Christ, where the Gospel guides,
directs, and carries souls: saints are not at home in their proper city
and country, they are travellers here, and need refreshment by the way;
and a church of Christ is as an inn, for the entertainment of such: it
is large, and has room enough for as many as come to it; and is well
stored with provisions of all sorts, signified by bread, and milk, and
wine, a feast of fat things, a furnished table, Zion's provisions, the
goodness and fatness of God's house; and has rivers of pleasure, and
very good lodgings, sure dwellings, and quiet habitations; all which is
agreeable to weary travellers: and hither Christ brings his people, whom
he saves and calls; it is his will that they should be in a church
state, and it is his own act to bring them there, and it is their great
privilege to be thither brought:

and took care of him; clothed him with his righteousness, fed him with
the choicest of provisions, gave him reviving cordials of love,
refreshing promises, exceeding great and precious ones; and larger
supplies of grace, with protection and preservation from all evils.

\(w\) T. Hieros. Sabbat, fol. 14. 3. & Beracot, fol. 3. 1. (x) Misn.
Sabbat, c. 19. sect. 2.

[Luke 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">luk 10:35</span></span>

And on the morrow when he departed,.... Having taken care of him all
night, and put him into a comfortable way, leaves him, though in good
hands; as Christ does his people, to learn to live by faith upon him:

and he took out two peace; two Roman denarii, or pence; which amount to
about fifteen pence of our money, and were equal to the half shekel,
paid for the redemption of an Israelite: by which may be meant, not the
law and Gospel; for though these both bear the image and superscription
of God, and are his current coin, and are both delivered by Christ, and
to be regarded and dispensed by the ministers of the word; yet they are
not of equal value and use, as these two pence seem to be: wherefore,
rather the two Testaments, Old ann New, may be designed, since they are
both inspired by God, and dictated by the same Spirit, and bear the same
impress; and are alike, and exactly agree, as two pence do; and are
given to the ministers of the Gospel to handle, and make use of for the
good of souls: unless the two ordinances of baptism, and the Lord's
supper, should rather be thought to be intended: these bear the same
stamp and authority, and are both jointly necessary to communion, and
church order; and are given by Christ to his ministers, to be
administered by them, for the good of his church; and are similar, as
two breasts are, they being both breasts of consolation, and agree in
setting forth the sufferings and death of Christ: or rather, the gifts
and graces of the Spirit of God, to qualify men for the work of the
ministry; which both come from the selfsame Spirit of God, and are
jointly necessary to fit a man for such service; and are given for the
benefit and advantage of the Lord's people, and in an eminent manner by
Christ, on his departure from hence, when he ascended on high, and
received gifts for men, and gave them to them:

and gave them to the host; or the keeper and master of the inn; by whom
are meant, the ministers of the Gospel; who are governors, in the
church, the masters of that spiritual inn; who have the provisions of
God's house under their care, and whose business it is to invite
travellers in, and to dress their food for them, and set it before them,
and bid them welcome:

and said unto him, take care of him: which is the work of Christ's
ministers to do, by feeding souls with the words of faith and sound
doctrine; by ministering the Gospel to them in a faithful manner; and by
a constant administration of the ordinances of it; and by keeping a
diligent watch over them, both with respect to principles and practice;
and by speaking a word in season to them:

and whatsoever thou spendest more: faithful ministers spend much, and
are at great expense in taking care of the souls of men; in fervent and
frequent prayer to God; in diligent searching the Scriptures; in the
laborious ministry of the word and ordinances; and in the constant
exercise and improvement of their spiritual gifts; and in the loss of
reputation and credit, and of health, and sometimes of life itself:

when I come again, I will repay thee: Christ will certainly come again a
second time, to judge both quick and dead; and then he will recompense
his ministers, for all their toil and labour, care and expense; he will
then bid them, as good and faithful servants, enter into the joy of
their Lord; and when they shall every one receive the reward of his own
work, in a way of grace, and shall shine as the stars in the firmament,
for ever and ever.

[Luke 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">luk 10:36</span></span>

Which now of these three,.... The priest, the Levite, and the Samaritan,

thinkest thou, was neighbour to him that fell among the thieves? the
priest and Levite that passed by, and took no notice of him, and gave
him no relief, neither by words nor actions; or the Samaritan, that did
all the above kind and generous things to him?

[Luke 10:37](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">luk 10:37</span></span>

And he said, he that showed mercy to him,.... Meaning the Samaritan;
which he was obliged to declare, though of another country and religion,
and accounted as an enemy; yet the case was so plain, as put by Christ,
that he could not with any honour or conscience, say otherwise:

then said Jesus unto him, go and do thou likewise; such like acts of
beneficence and kindness, though to a person of a different nation and
religion, and though even an enemy; and by so doing, thou wilt not only
appear to be a good neighbour thyself, but to love thy neighbour as
thyself.

[Luke 10:38](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">luk 10:38</span></span>

Now it came to pass as they went,.... As Christ and his disciples went
from Jerusalem, having been at the feast of tabernacles, [Joh
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#002) or at the feast of dedication,
[Joh 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh010.htm#022) to some other parts of
Judea:

that he entered into a certain village; called Bethany, which was about
fifteen furlongs, or two miles from Jerusalem, [Joh
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#001)

and a certain woman named Martha. This is a common name with the Jews;
hence we read of Samuel bar Martha (y), and of Abba bar Martha (z), and
of Isaac bar Martha (a); and of Martha, the daughter of Baithus (b), who
is said to be a rich widow; and this Martha here, is thought by Grotins
to be a widow also, with whom her brother Lazarus, and sister Mary
lived: though sometimes, this name was given to men; so we read of
Martha, (c) the uncle of Rab, who had five brethren; and the same writer
observes (d), that it is not known whether Martha is, a man or a woman,
but this is determined here:

received him into her house; in a very kind and courteous manner, she
being mistress of it; and having known Christ before, or at least had
heard much of him, and believed in him, as the true Messiah.

\(y\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 13. 2. & 25. 2. & Pesachim, fol. 106. 2.
Yoma, fol. 19. 2. Juchuin, fol. 76. 2. (z) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 121. 2.
Juchasin, fol. 72. 2. (a) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 33. 2. Juchasin, fol.
91. 1. (b) Misn. Yebamot, c. 6. sect. 4. T. Bob. Yoma, fol. 18. 1.
Succa, fol. 52. 2. Cetubot, fol. 104. 1. Gittin, fol. 56. 1. Juchasin,
fol. 57. 1. (c) Juchasin, fol. 99. 1. (d) lb. fol. 105. 1.

[Luke 10:39](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">luk 10:39</span></span>

And she had a sister called Mary,.... Which also was a common name with
the Jews, and is the same with Miriam; so we read of Mary, the daughter
of Nicodemon, the same perhaps with Nicodemus; and the same person that
is before called Martha, the daughter of Baithus, is sometimes called
Mary, the daughter of Baithus (e), though these two names are certainly
distinct:

which also sat at Jesus' feet; was a disciple of his, as well as Martha;
for it was usual for disciples, or the scholars of the wise men, to sit
at the feet of their masters, to which the allusion is in [Deu
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#003); see Gill on [Act
22:3](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#003) The Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and
Coptic versions, read "at the Lord's feet": so Beza's ancient copy, and
one of Stephens's; and the Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions read,
"at our Lord's feet". The phrase is expressive of her great affection
for Christ, her humble deportment, and close attention:

and heard his word; or discourse; for as soon as he entered into the
house, he began to preach to those that were in it, and that came along
with him, improving every opportunity for the good of souls; and Mary
heard him with great eagerness and diligence, affection, pleasure, and
profit.

\(e\) Echa Rabbati, fol. 49. 2.

[Luke 10:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">luk 10:40</span></span>

But Martha was cumbered about much serving,.... "Or was drawn off", from
hearing the word, from attending on Christ; being taken up in providing
for him, and those that came with him; in dressing food, or in ordering
her servants, how she would have every thing done, and in overlooking
them, that every thing was done in proper order; so that she had a great
deal of business upon her head and hands, which distracted her thoughts,
or took them off of divine things, and put her in great hurry and
concern. The Ethiopic version renders it, "Martha laboured in preparing
many things for him"; making a large and sumptuous entertainment: and
the Persic version, which is rather a comment than a translation,
renders it, "Martha was busied in preparing food, and making a feast":
sparing no cost nor pains, thinking nothing too good, nor too grand, for
such a guest she had in her house:

and she came to him and said, Lord, dost thou not care that my sister
hath left me to serve alone? she came to him; that is, to Jesus, as the
Persic version expresses it: she came out of the room where she was
getting ready the entertainment, into the room where Christ was
preaching; and, as the Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions
read, "she stood and said": she did not sit down at his feet, as Mary
did, to hear his word, but stood as about to go away again, after she
had said what she came about: she did not think fit to speak to Mary
herself, though perhaps she might do that first; who, showing an
unwillingness to go with her, she therefore applies to Christ, as
believing that he would, with her, look upon it as a very reasonable
thing that she should take her part with her; and that a word from him
would go a great way with her sister. And she seems to speak, not only
by way of complaint of Mary, who had left her to prepare and serve up
this entertainment alone; but even of Christ himself, in some sort, as
if he had not showed that care and concern in this matter, which she
thought was necessary. However, she was willing to have his sense of her
sister's conduct, and hoped, and even doubted not, but that he would be
of the same mind with herself:

bid her therefore that she help me; that she join, assist, and put an
helping hand in this service; speak but a word to her, give her orders,
and she will observe and obey.

[Luke 10:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">luk 10:41</span></span>

And Jesus answered and said unto her,.... Calling her by her name, and
repeating it, Martha, Martha, which expresses great intimacy and
friendship, and much earnestness, and, as it were, pitying her present
situation and circumstances:

thou art careful and troubled about many things; intimating, that she
was over anxious, and too solicitous, and more thoughtful and careful
than she need be: he did not require such preparations for him, and so
much attendance; she gave herself an unnecessary trouble in providing so
many things for his entertainment, when less would have sufficed; so
that instead of joining with her in her request, he reproves her for her
over anxious care and solicitude, to have a nice and plentiful feast.
The Persic version gives a sense quite contrary to the design of the
text, rendering the words thus, "thou art adorned in all things, and
hast the preference above many women".

[Luke 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">luk 10:42</span></span>

But one thing is needful,.... Meaning not that one dish of meat was
sufficient, and there was no need of any more, in opposition to Martha's
carefulness in preparing many; for this is too low a sense of the words;
which yet some ancient writers have given into: but rather the hearing
of the word, the Gospel of Christ, which Mary was engaged in; and which,
ordinarily speaking, is necessary to the knowledge of Christ, and
salvation by him, and to faith in him, [Rom
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014) not that this is the only
needful thing; nor does Christ say there is but one thing needful, but
that there is one thing needful; for there are other things that are
also needful, and useful, as meditation and prayer, and attendance on,
and submission to the ordinances of baptism, and the Lord's supper, and
all the duties of religion: but Christ's meaning seems plainly to be,
that Mary hearing the word from his mouth, and at his feet, was one
necessary thing, in opposition to Martha's many unnecessary ones, about
which she was cumbered:

and Mary hath chosen that good part; or "the good part", or "portion";
Christ, the sum and substance of the word she heard, and eternal life
and salvation by him. God himself is said to be the portion of his
people, and a good one he is, and a portion that lasts for ever; and so
is Christ; see [Psa 73:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#026) where the
Septuagint use the same word as here. The heavenly inheritance also,
eternal glory and happiness, is the saints' portion; it is called in
[Col 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#012) the part, or portion of the
inheritance with the saints in light. The word answers to the Hebrew
word, as in that saying of the Misnic doctors (f),

"all Israel have, "a part", or "portion" in the world to come.''

All the Oriental versions add, "for herself", and this choice she made,
not from the natural power of her own freewill, but as directed,
influenced, and assisted by the Spirit and grace of God, and in
consequence of God's eternal choice of her unto salvation by Jesus
Christ: and the part she chose is, that

which shall not be taken away from her; by men or devils: faith which
comes by hearing of the word, and so every other grace of the Spirit is
what can never be lost; nor an interest in God, as a covenant God, or in
Christ as a Saviour, nor a right and title to, nor meetness for eternal
life, nor that itself, can be taken away, or the believer ever be
deprived thereof.

\(f\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 11. sect. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 11](luk011)

</div>
