<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Luke Index](luk.md)  
  [Previous](mar016)  [Next](luk001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Luke Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

[Luke](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">luk 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO LUKE

The writer of this Gospel, Luke, has been, by some, thought, as Origen
(a) relates, to be the same with Lucius, mentioned in [Rom
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#021.md), but he seems rather to be, and
without doubt is, Luke the beloved physician, who was a companion of the
Apostle Paul in great part of his travels in the Gentile world: he came
with him to Jerusalem, and from thence accompanied him to Rome, and
continued with him when in prison, and was with him to the last; see
[Act 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#010.md), &c. [Col
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#014). Jerom (b.md), and others, say, he
was a physician of Antioch in Syria; where it may be the Apostle Paul
met with him, and might be the happy instrument of his conversion; so
that he seems to be, by nation, a Syrian, as Jerom (c) calls him.
Grotius thinks his name is Roman, and that it is the contraction of
Lucilius. It is not an Hebrew name, but might be in common use in Syria;
for though the Jews reckon owqwl, "Lukus", among foreign names, yet say
(d) a it was a very illustrious one, and well known to them, as it may
well be thought to be if Syriac, the language being spoke by them: and
many Jews lived in Syria, and particularly in Antioch. Some say that
this Gospel was written by the advice, and assistance, and under the
direction of the Apostle Paul, as the Gospel according to Mark was by
that of Peter; though the following preface does not seem so well to
accord with this. Eusebius says (e) that it was the sense of the
ancients, that whenever the Apostle Paul makes mention of his Gospel, he
intends this according to Luke. The time of the writing of it is not
certain; some say it was written in the fifteenth year after the
ascension of our Lord; others in the twenty second; and others in the
twenty seventh. It is commonly thought to have been written after the
Gospels of Matthew and Mark, according to the order in which it stands;
but this is rejected by some learned men, who rather think that Luke
wrote first of all: and indeed, there are some things in his preface
which look as if there had not, as yet, been any authentic account
published, at least which was come to the knowledge of this evangelist.
The place where he wrote it is also uncertain. Jerom says (f), he wrote
it in the parts of Achaia, perhaps at Corinth: according to the titles
prefixed to the Syriac and Persic versions, he wrote it in Alexandria:
the former of these runs thus;

"the Gospel of Luke, the Evangelist, which he spake and published in
Greek in Alexandria the great.''

And the latter thus;

"the Gospel of Luke, which he wrote in the Greek tongue in Alexandria of
Egypt.''

However, it is agreed on all hands, that it is genuine, and of divine
inspiration. Eusebius (g) relates, that it was affirmed by some, that
this Gospel, together with those of Matthew and Mark, were brought to
the Apostle John, who approved of them, and bore witness to the truth in
them.

\(a\) In Rom. xvi. 21. (b) Catalog. Script. Eccles. sect. 17. fol. 91.
Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 4. (c) Praefat in Luc. (d) T. Bab. Gittin,
fol. 11. 2. & Gloss. in ib. (e) Ubi supra. (Hist. Eccl. l. 3. c. 39.)
(f) Praefat in Luc. (g) Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 24.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Luke Chapter 1](luk001.md)

</div>
