<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Malachi Index](mal)  
  [Previous](zac014)  [Next](mal001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

[Malachi](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mal 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO MALACHI

This book, in the Hebrew copies, is called "Sepher Malachi", the Book of
Malachi; in the Vulgate Latin version, "the Prophecy of Malachi"; in the
Syriac and Arabic versions, "the Prophecy of the Prophet Malachi";
According to Lactantius (a), Zechariah was the last of the prophets; but
the more commonly received opinion, and the truest, is, that Malachi was
the last; hence Aben Ezra calls him Myaybnh Pwo, "the end of the
prophets"; and by Kimchi he is said to be, Mbv Nwrxa "the last of them";
and sometimes, by the Rabbins, Myaybnh Mtwx, "the seal of the prophets"
(b); by whom they are all sealed up, concluded, and finished. His name
signifies "my angel", as is commonly said; though Hillerus (c) makes it
to signify "the angel of the Lord"; hence some have thought that he was
not a man, but an angel; and so the Septuagint render ykalm dyb, in the
first verse [Mal 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001), "by the hand of
his angel"; and others have thought that the book takes its name, not
from the author of it, but from the mention that is made of the
messenger or angel of the Lord, John the Baptist, in [Mal
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001) but the more prevailing opinion
is, that Malachi is the name of a man, the writer of the book, about
whom the Jews have been divided. Rab Nachman says Malachi was Mordecai;
and that he was so called because he was second to the king. R. Joshua
ben Korcha contradicts him, and affirms Malachi is Ezra; and to him
agrees the Chaldee paraphrase on [Mal
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001) which says, that Malachi, his name
is called Ezra the scribe; but, as Kimchi observes, Ezra is never called
a prophet, as Malachi is, only a scribe; wherefore in the Talmud (d),
where this matter is debated, it is concluded thus; but the wise men
say, Malachi is his name; that is, it is the proper name of a man; there
was a man of this name, that wrote this prophecy; not Mordecai, nor
Ezra, nor Zerubbabel, nor Nehemiah, as some have thought; but Malachi:
and if the accounts of Epiphanius (e) and Isidore (f) are to be
credited, this prophet was born at Sapho, in the tribe of Zebulun; and
had his name from his beautiful form, and unblemished life; and that he
died very young, and was buried in his own field. The time of his
prophesying is not agreed on: the Jews commonly make him contemporary
with Haggai and Zechariah; they say (g) that Haggai, Zechariah, and
Malachi, all of them prophesied in the second year of Darius; and Ganz,
their chronologer (h), places the death of these prophets together in
one year; but he seems to be later than they: Haggai prophesied before
the building of the temple; Zechariah about the time of it; and Malachi
after it, when the temple was rebuilt, and the worship of God restored
and settled; and when both priests and people were become very corrupt
and degenerate, of which he complains; so that it is possible that he
might live a century after the other prophets, and about four centuries
before the coming of Christ, during which time prophecy ceased; though
some think he lived not long before the times of Christ, which is not
probable. Bishop Usher (i) makes him contemporary with Nehemiah, and
places him in the year 416 B.C.; and Mr. Whiston (k) in the year 400
B.C.; Mr. Bedford (l) in the year 424 B.C.: however, this book has been
always accounted authentic, and a part of the canon of the Scripture;
and is confirmed by the passages cited out of it, and the references
made unto it, in the New Testament, [Mat
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#010). The general design of it is to
reprove the Jews for their ingratitude to the Lord, their neglect and
contempt of his worship, and breach of his laws; and to raise in the
minds of the truly godly an expectation of the Messiah, and his
forerunner, John the Baptist.

\(a\) De vera Sapientia, l. 4. c. 5. p. 279. (b) Nizzachon, p. 200. apud
Hottinger. Thes. Phil. p. 489. (c) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 147, 359, 541.
(d) T. Bab. Megillah, fol. 15. 1. (e) De Prophet. Vita & Interitu, c.
22. (f) De Vita & Morte Sanct. c. 51. (g) T. Bab. Megillah, fol. 15. 1.
Seder Olam Rabba, c. 20. p. 55. (h) Ganz, Tzemach David, par. 1. fol.
18. 1. (i) Annales Vet. Test. A. M. 3589. (k) Chronological Tables,
cent. 12. (l) Scripture Chronology, p. 725.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 1](mal001)

</div>
