<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Malachi Index](mal.md)  
  [Previous](mal000)  [Next](mal002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Malachi Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001.md)

INTRODUCTION TO MALACHI 1

In this chapter the Lord declares his love to the people of Israel, and
proves it; and complains that the honour due unto him was not given him;
which he demonstrates by various instances. The inscription is in [Mal
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001.md) showing the name and nature of the
prophecy; the author of it; the people to whom it was sent; and the name
of the person by whom. In [Mal 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002.md) the
Lord affirms his love to the people of Israel, which they called in
question; and proves it to be real, special, and distinguishing, by the
instance of Jacob and Esau, two brothers; yet one, their ancestor, was
loved, and the other hated; which latter is proved by the desolations
made in his country, and by the fruitless attempts made to repair and
rebuild; which was so clear a proof of the Lord's indignation against
him, that the Israelites could not but see it, and would be obliged to
confess it, to the glory of God, [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003.md) hence he passes on to observe the
honour and fear that were due to him as a Father and master, which were
not shown him; but, instead thereof, he was despised, and even by the
priests themselves, with which they are charged, [Mal
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006.md) and which being objected to by
them, is proved by offering polluted bread on his altar; and by
polluting him, in saying his table was contemptible; and by sacrificing
the blind, the lame, and the sick, unto him; things which would be
justly resented, if offered to a temporal prince and governor, [Mal
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007.md) wherefore they are called upon by
the prophet to pray to the Lord for grace and mercy for the people,
seeing it was by their means (the priests) that these things were done;
though it was questionable whether the Lord would have any regard to
them, [Mal 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#009.md) their sins being so
dreadfully aggravated; and particularly, inasmuch as they did not serve
in the temple, not so much as shut a door, or kindle a fire on the
altar, for nothing, without being paid for it; hence the Lord declares
he had no pleasure in them, nor would he accept their offerings; but
would call the Gentiles by his grace, among whom his name would be great
from one end of the earth to the other; and incense and pure offerings
would be offered by them to him, [Mal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010.md) and then he renews the charge
against them, that they had profaned his name, by saying that his table,
and the fruit thereof, were polluted, and his meat contemptible; by
expressing a weariness in his worship, and a contempt of it; and by
bringing the torn, the lame, and sick, as an offering to him, [Mal
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012.md) upon which such sacrificers are
declared deceivers, and pronounced accursed, which they might assure
themselves was and would be their case; since he was a great King, and
his name dreadful among the Heathen, [Mal
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014.md).

[Malachi 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mal 1:1</span></span>

The burden of the word of the Lord,.... By which is meant the prophecy
of this book, so called, not because heavy, burdensome, and distressing,
either for the prophet to carry, or the people to bear; for some part of
it, which respects Christ, and his forerunner, was matter of joy to the
people of God; but because it was a message sent by the Lord, and
carried by the prophet to the people; See Gill on [Zac
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#001.md), [Zac
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac012.htm#001.md) and this was not the word of man,
but of God, a part of Scripture, by divine inspiration. The Syriac
version is, "the vision of the words of the Lord": and the Arabic
version, "the revelation of the word of the Lord"; and the Septuagint
version, "the assumption of the word of the Lord"; it was what was
revealed, made known, and delivered by the Lord to the prophet, and
taken up by him, and carried to Israel, which was the general name of
all the twelve tribes, when under one prince; but when the kingdom was
divided, in Rehoboam's time, it was peculiar to the ten tribes, as Judah
was to the two tribes of Benjamin and Judah; but after the return of
these two from the Babylonish captivity, in which they were joined by
some of the other tribes, it was given unto them as here:

by Malachi; or, "by the hand of Malachi" (m); he was the instrument the
Lord made use of; the person whom he sent, and by whom he delivered the
following prophecy.

\(m\) "in manu", V. L. Cocceius; "per manum", Pagninus, Montanus,
Piscator.

[Malachi 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mal 1:2</span></span>

I have loved you, saith the Lord,.... Which appeared of old, by choosing
them, above all people upon the face of the earth, to be his special and
peculiar people; by bestowing peculiar favours and blessings upon them,
both temporal and spiritual; by continuing them a people, through a
variety of changes and revolutions; and by lately bringing them out of
the Babylonish captivity, restoring their land unto them, and the pure
worship of God among them:

Yet ye say, wherein hast thou loved us? the Targum renders it, "and if
ye should say"; and so Kimchi and Ben Melech; which intimates, that
though they might not have expressed themselves in so many words, yet
they seemed disposed to say so; they thought it, if they said it not;
and therefore, to prevent such an objection, as well as to show their
ingratitude, it is put in this form; and an instance of his love is
demanded, which is very surprising, when they had so many; and shows
great stupidity and unthankfulness. Abarbinel renders the words,
"wherefore hast thou loved us?" that is, is there not a reason to be
given for loving us? which he supposes was the love of Abraham to God;
and therefore his love to them was not free, but by way of reward to
Abraham's love; and consequently they were not so much obliged to him
for it: to which is replied,

was not Esau Jacob's brother? saith the Lord; Jacob and Esau were
brethren; they had one and the same father and mother, Isaac and
Rebekah, and equally descended from Abraham; so that if one was loved
for the sake of Abraham, as suggested, according to Abarbinel's sense,
the other had an equal claim to it; they lay in the same womb together;
they were twins; and if any could be thought to have the advantage by
birth, Esau had it, being born first: but before they were born, and
before they had done good or evil, what is afterwards said of them was
in the heart of God towards them; which shows that the love of God to
his people is free, sovereign, and distinguishing, [Gen
25:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen025.htm#023.md),

yet I loved Jacob; personally considered; not only by giving him the
temporal birthright and blessing, and the advantages arising from
thence; but by choosing him to everlasting life, bestowing his grace
upon him, revealing Christ unto him, and making him a partaker of
eternal happiness; and also his posterity, as appears by the above
instances mentioned; and likewise mystically considered, for all the
elect, redeemed, and called, go by the name of Jacob and Israel in
Scripture frequently; for what is here said of Jacob is true of all the
individuals of God's people; for which purpose the apostle refers to
this passage in [Rom 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#013.md), to prove
the sovereignty and distinction of the love of God in their election and
salvation: and this is indeed a clear proof that the love of God to his
people is entirely free from all motives and conditions in them, being
before they had done either good or evil; and therefore did not arise
from any goodness in them, nor from their love to him nor from any good
works done by them: the choice of persons to everlasting life, the fruit
of this love, is denied to be of works, and is ascribed to grace; it
passed before any were wrought; and what are done by the best of men are
the effects of it; and the persons chosen or passed by were in an equal
state when both were done; which appears by this instance: and by which
also it is manifest that the love of God to men is distinguishing; it is
not alike to all men; there is a peculiar favour he bears to own people;
which is evident by the choice of some, and not others; by the
redemption of them out of every kindred, tongue, people, and nation; by
the effectual calling of them out of the world; by the application of
the blessings of grace unto them; and by bestowing eternal life on them:
and it may be further observed, that the objects of God's love have not
always the knowledge of it; indeed they have no knowledge of it before
conversion, which is the open time of love; and after conversion they
have not always distinct and appropriating views of it; only when God is
pleased to come and manifest it unto them.

[Malachi 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mal 1:3</span></span>

And I hated Esau,.... Or, "rejected" him, as the Targum; did not love
him as Jacob: this was a negative, not positive hatred; it is true of
him, personally considered; not only by taking away the birthright and
blessing from him, which he despised; but by denying him his special
grace, leaving him in his sins, and to his lusts, so that he became a
profane person; shared not in the grace of God here, and had no part in
the eternal inheritance with the saints in light; and likewise it is
true of his posterity, as the following instances show:

and laid his mountains and his heritage waste; which, according to
Grotius, was done by Nebuchadnezzar, five years after the captivity of
the Jews, in fulfilment of the prophecy of Jeremiah, [Jer
49:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer049.htm#007.md) but this was done by the
Nabatheans (n): Mount Seir was the famous mountain that Esau dwelt in,
[Gen 36:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#008.md) there might be more in his
country; or this might have many tops, and therefore called "mountains";
and to this account of the waste and desolate state of this country
agrees what is at present related of it, by a late traveller (o) in
those parts:

"if (says he) we leave Palestine and Egypt behind us, and pursue our
physical observations into the land of Edom, we shall be presented with
a variety of prospects, quite different from those we have lately met
with in the land of Canaan, or in the field of Zoan; for we cannot here
be entertained with pastures clothed with flocks, or with valleys
standing thick with corn, or with brooks of water, or fountains, or
depths that spring out of valleys and hills, [Deu
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007.md) here is no place of seed, or of
figs, or of vines, or pomegranates, [Num
20:5](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#005.md) but the whole is an "evil place",
a lonesome desolate wilderness; no otherwise diversified than by plains
covered with sand, and by mountains made up of naked rocks and
precipices, [Mal 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003.md) neither is this
country ever (unless sometimes at the equinoxes) refreshed with rain;
but the few hardy vegetables it produces are stunted by a perpetual
drought; and the nourishment which the dews contribute to them in the
night, is sufficiently impaired by the powerful heat of the sun in the
day:''

Though this country seems to have been originally more fruitful, and
better cultivated, as may be concluded from [Gen
27:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen027.htm#039.md) but is become so through the
judgments of God upon it:

for the dragons of the wilderness; so called to distinguish them from
sea dragons, or the dragon fish; such as whales and crocodiles, which
are sometimes expressed by the same word here used, [Gen
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#021.md) and these land dragons are no
other than serpents of an enormous size. In the Indies they used to be
distinguished into three sorts; such as were found in the mountains;
such as were bred in caves, or in the flat country; and such as were
found in fens and marshes. The first is the largest of all, and are
covered with scales as resplendent as polished gold; these have a kind
of beard hanging from their lower jaw; their eyebrows large, and very
exactly arched; their aspect the most frightful that can be imagined;
and their cry loud and shrill; their crest of a bright yellow; and a
protuberance on their heads of the colour of a burning coal. Those of
the flat country differ from the former in nothing but having their
scales of a silver colour, and in their frequenting rivers, to which the
former never come. Those that live in marshes and fens are of a dark
colour, approaching to a black, move slowly, have no crest, or any
rising on their heads (p); these creatures commonly inhabit desert
places. So Diodorus Siculus (q), speaking of Ethiopia, says, it is
reported that various kinds of serpents, and of an incredible size, are
seen near the desert, had in places inhabited by wild beasts; and
Aelianus (r) describes the dragon as dwelling in woods, and living on
poisonous herbs; and preferring a desolate place to cities, and the
habitations of men; and when in Scripture it is predicted of countries
and cities that they shall become desolate, it is usually observed, that
they shall be the dwelling places of dragons, as in [Isa
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022.md) so here it is foretold that it
should be the case of Edom, as it has been, and still continues to be,
as appears from the above traveller (s); who, passing through some part
of this country, says of it,

"vipers, especially in the wilderness of Sin, which might be very
properly called "the inheritance of dragons", were very dangerous and
troublesome; not only our camels, but the Arabs who attended them,
running every moment the risk of being bitten;''

so that, according to the prediction, it is now a place for such
creatures. A learned Jew (t) is of opinion, that not serpents, but
jackals, are here meant, which are a sort of wild howling beasts, that
live abroad in desolate places; See Gill on [Mic
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008.md) but whether they be the one, or
the other, it makes for the same purpose, to denote what a desert place
Edom would become; since it should be inhabited by such creatures to
dwell in, which denotes the utter desolation made. So the Targum renders
it, "into the wasteness of the desert"; or into a waste desert, where
none but such sort of animals inhabit. The Septuagint and Syriac
versions render it, "into the houses", or "cottages, of the desert": and
now, though this was the case of Judea, that it was left desolate, yet
it was but for a while; at the end of seventy years the Jews returned to
their own land, and dwelt in it; but so did not the Edomites, as appears
by the following words; which shows the regard God had to the posterity
of Jacob, and not to the posterity of Esau.

\(n\) See Prideanx's Connexion, par. 2. B. 3. p. 199. (o) Dr. Shaw's
Travels, p. 438. Ed. 2. (p) Harris's Voyages and Travels, vol. 1. p.
474. (q) Bibliothec. l. 3. p. 169. (r) De Animal. l. 6. c. 63. (s) Dr.
Shaw Travels, p. 448. Ed. 2. (t) Tanchum apud Pocock in loc.

[Malachi 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mal 1:4</span></span>

Whereas Edom saith, We are impoverished,.... Or the Idumeans, as the
Targum; the posterity of Esau, who acknowledge themselves greatly
reduced by the desolations made in their country, cities, towns, and
houses, being plundered of all their valuable things. Kimchi interprets
it, if the congregation of Edom should say, though we are become poor
and low, and our land is laid waste:

but we will return; being now become rich, as the Targum adds; that is,
as Jarchi explains it, with the spoils of Jerusalem:

and build the desolate places: as Israel did, as Kimchi observes, when
they returned from their captivity; and so the Edomites hoped to do the
same:

thus saith the Lord of hosts, They shall build, but I will throw down;
they attempted to build again their cities and towns, but could not
succeed, God was against them:

and they shall call them; or, "they shall be called" (u); this shall be
the name they, shall go by among men, by way of proverb and reproach:

The border of wickedness; a wicked kingdom and nation, from one end to
the other; this shall be said of them, as the reason of their utter and
perpetual desolation:

and, The people against whom the Lord hath indignation for ever; not for
seventy years only, as against the Jews, [Zac
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012.md), but forever; and these are now
no more a people; they are utterly extinct; their name and nation are
lost; there is not the least appearance of them; when the Jews, though
they are scattered about in the world, yet they are still a people, and
distinct from all others.

\(u\) "et vocabuntur", V. L. Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius,
Grotius.

[Malachi 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mal 1:5</span></span>

And your eyes shall see,.... The destruction of the Edomites, and their
fruitless attempts to rebuild their desolate places; and the difference
between them and the Israelites, who were returned to their own land,
and inherited it, when they could not; and the love of God to the one,
and his hatred of the other:

and ye shall say, The Lord will be magnified from the border of Israel;
Aben Ezra interprets it, ye that dwelt in the border of Israel shall
say, the Lord shall be magnified, or let him be magnified; let greatness
and glory be ascribed to him for what he has done: or, as Kimchi, give
him praise and greatness because you are dwelling in your border, and
their border is desolate; and your border is called the border of
Israel, but theirs the border of wickedness; and so the Targum,

"let the glory of the Lord be multiplied, because he hath enlarged the
border of Israel;''

and, according to Jarchi, the sense is, he shall show his greatness from
our border, to make it known that we are his people: all show and own
that God had loved them more than others, and therefore they ought to
have honoured and obeyed him, in which they were deficient, and so
ungrateful.

[Malachi 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mal 1:6</span></span>

A son honoureth his father, and a servant his master,.... Or, "will
honour", or "should honour"; it is their duty to do so, both according
to the laws of God and man; and so the Targum,

"lo concerning a son it is said (or commanded) that be should honour his
father; and of a servant, that he should fear (or show reverence) before
his master;''

see [Exo 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#012.md),

if then I be a Father; as he was the Father of his divine and eternal
Son; the Father of spirits, angels, and the souls of men; the Father of
all men by creation; and the Father of all mercies to them in
providence, as he was to Israel; and, besides, was their Father by
national adoption, as he was not to other people; and to many of them
stood in this relation by special adopting grace:

where is mine honour? there is an honour due to God on account of this
relation; which should be shown by loving him, trusting in him, calling
upon him, imitating and obeying him, and by making use of what he has
given for his glory; he is to be honoured in heart and life, by words
and actions, and with our substance. This question suggests, that he had
not the honour given him, which belonged unto him:

and if I be a master; the word is in the plural number, and may be
understood of Jehovah, Father, Son, and Spirit; though the first Person
seems rather designed, who stands in this relation to Christ, as
Mediator; to the angels, his ministering spirits; to the ministers of
the Gospel, and to all the saints; and indeed to all men, and
particularly to the Israelites; as appeared by the special laws and
commands he enjoined them, and by his special government, protection,
and care of them:

where is my fear? fear and reverence are due to the Lord from his
people, considered in such a relation to them; not a slavish fear of
wrath and punishment; but a godly filial fear, which is influenced by
the goodness of God, and appears in a carefulness not to offend him, and
by the performance of all religious worship, both private and public;
and in this not only natural men, but professors of religion, and even
God's own people, are wanting; yea, those that should set examples to
others, as men in public office, and of a public character, as follows:

saith the Lord of hosts unto you, O priests, that despise my name; for
what is before said is not only said to the people in general; but to
the priests in particular, who ought to have honoured and feared the
Lord; and yet they despised his name, or made it contemptible; by not
paying that regard to his authority, as a Father and master, they ought;
by neglecting his worship, and not taking that care of offerings and
sacrifices as became them:

and ye say, Wherein have we despised thy name? as if they were entirely
innocent and guiltless.

[Malachi 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mal 1:7</span></span>

Ye offer polluted bread upon mine altar,.... Which some understand of
the shewbread, mention being afterwards made of a "table", as Jerom; who
observes that it was made of wheat, which the priests themselves sowed,
reaped, ground, and baked, and so could take what they would out of it:
as for their sowing it, it does not seem likely that they should be
employed in such service, whatever may be said for their reaping; since
the sheaf of the first fruits was reaped by persons deputed from the
sanhedrim (w); though of the reaping of that for the shewbread, I find
no mention made; but as for grinding, sifting, kneading, and making it
into loaves, and baking it, and taking it out of the oven, and putting
it upon the table of shewbread, all this was the work of the priests
(x); and those of the house of Garmu (y) were appointed over that work:
now, this bread might be said to be polluted, when they set upon the
table such as was not made of fine wheat flour, and had not pure
frankincense put upon or by each row, as the law required, [Lev
24:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#005.md) nor is it any material objection
to this sense, that it is an altar, and not a table, on which this bread
was offered; since, as the altar is called a table, [Eze
41:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#022.md), as this is in a following
clause, the table may be called an altar; though it may be observed,
that the shewbread is never said to be offered, but to be set, or put
upon the table: indeed the burning of the frankincense set by it is
called an offering made by fire unto the Lord, [Lev
24:7](../../../bib/kjv/lev024.htm#007.md) wherefore others interpret this
of the daily meat offering, which went along with the daily sacrifice of
the lambs, and part of which was burnt on the altar, [Exo
29:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#040.md) or rather this designs sacrifice
in general, sometimes called "bread", [Lev
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#011.md) and so the Targum here,

"ye offer upon my altar an abominable offering;''

such as had blemishes in them, were blind or lame, as after mentioned;
and had not the requisites of a sacrifice in them; or were offered not
in a right manner, or by bad men, and with a wicked mind:

and ye say, Wherein have we polluted thee? thy bread offering or altar;
as if their offerings were pure, and they themselves, and their
consciences pure from sin. The answer is,

In that ye say, The table of the Lord is contemptible; either the
shewbread table, which yet was covered with gold, and all the vessels of
it made of gold; or the altar, as in [Eze
41:22](../../../bib/kjv/eze041.htm#022.md) their actions spoke so loud, and
declared that the table or altar of the Lord was a contemptible thing,
since they cared not what was offered upon it: or the reason why it was
had in contempt, as some think, was because there was not that holiness
in the second temple as in the first: or, as Abarbinel and Kimchi say,
because of the fat and the blood which were offered on the altar, which
they esteemed contemptible things; not observing the end for which the
Lord commanded them to be offered.

\(w\) Misn. Menachot, c. 10. sect. 3. (x) Maimon. Hilchot Tamidin, c. 5.
sect. 6. (y) Misn. Shekalim, c. 5. sect. 1.

[Malachi 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mal 1:8</span></span>

And if ye offer the blind for sacrifice, is it not evil?.... Certainly
it is, according to the law in [Lev
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#022.md) or, as Kimchi interprets it,
when they bring to you a lamb that is blind for sacrifice to offer it
up, ye say, this is not evil; but it is good to offer it up, because the
table is contemptible. The sense is, that, however evil this may be in
itself, according to them it was good enough to be offered up upon the
altar; which proves that they despised the name of the Lord, offered
polluted bread or sacrifice on his altar, and had his table in contempt:

and if ye offer the lame and sick, is it not evil? verily it is, by the
law of God, which forbids the offering of such things, [Lev
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#021.md) this was always observed, in all
sacrifices under the law, that they were perfect, and without any
blemish, whether of the flock, or of the herd; and this was strictly
observed, even by the Heathens themselves: so Achilles, in Homer (a),
speaks of the perfect lambs and goats they offered in sacrifice; and
particularly they were not to be lame, or to halt; such were reckoned
choice and excellent sacrifices, which were larger and better fed than
others; and which were not lame, nor diseased, nor sickly; for things
future could not be known, they say, but from a sound victim (b); for
they pretended to have knowledge of them, by the entrails of the
sacrifices. So Pliny (c) observes, that this is to be remarked, that
calves brought to the altar on men's shoulders are not to be sacrificed;
nor are the gods appeased by one that halts; in short, it is said (d),
whatever is not perfect and sound is not to be offered to them; and,
besides these here mentioned in the text, there were many others, which
the Jews especially observed, which rendered creatures unfit for
sacrifice. Maimonides (e) reckons up no less than fifty blemishes, by
reason of which the priests under the law might not offer a creature for
sacrifice: no doubt but the laws of Moses concerning this matter had a
respect to the pure, perfect, and spotless sacrifice of Christ, which
the legal ones were typical of; and teach us this lesson, that, without
a complete sacrifice, no atonement or satisfaction for sin could be
made: or, it is not evil in your eyes, as Aben Ezra glosses it; which is
the same as before:

offer it now unto thy governor; to Zerubbabel, who was governor of Judea
at this time, [Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001.md) for they had no
king. The meaning is, offer a lamb or any other creature that is blind,
sick, and lame; make a present of it to him that had the government of
them; make trial this way, and see how acceptable it would be to him:

will he be pleased with thee, or accept thy person? saith the Lord of
hosts; will he thank thee for it, or have any respect to thee on account
of it? but, on the contrary, will he not resent it as an affront to him?
and if so it would be with an earthly prince, how can it be thought that
to offer the blind, lame, and sick, should be acceptable to the King of
kings, and Lord of lords?

\(a\) Iliad. I. 1. 66. (b) Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 3. c. 12. (c)
Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 45. (d) Scholia in Aristoph. Acharn. Act 3. Scen. 3.
p. 409. (e) Hilchot Biath Hamikdash, c. 7. sect. 1. &c.

[Malachi 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mal 1:9</span></span>

And now, I pray you, beseech God that he will be gracious unto us,....
These are the words of the prophet to the priests; and are spoken either
seriously, exhorting them to that part of their office which lay in
interceding for the people that God would be gracious to them, and
forgive their sins; and the rather, inasmuch as they had been the means
of their sin, and accessary to it, who ought to have reproved them for
bringing such offerings, and should have refused to offer them for them;
or otherwise, if they did not do this, they could not expect that God
would accept their persons, and their offerings: or else ironically, now
you have offered such sacrifices to the Lord, as the blind, the lame,
and sick, go and intercede for the people; pray that their sins may be
forgiven them, and that the curse may be removed from them, and see how
you will succeed:

this hath been by your means; that such sacrifices were offered up; they
indulged the people in such practices, and encouraged them; the fault
was theirs; or this curse, as Kimchi explains it, from [Mal
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014.md),

will he regard your persons? saith the Lord of hosts; can you ever
imagine that God will have any respect to your persons or prayers, when
you have acted so vile a part, and been the cause of so much sin and
evil? no, he will not, as is asserted in the following verse [Mal
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010.md).

[Malachi 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mal 1:10</span></span>

Who is there even among you that would shut the doors for nought?....
Either of the temple, as the Targum and Jarchi; for at each of the gates
of the temple there were porters appointed in David's time, [Ch1
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1026.htm#001.md) and who were paid for their
service: or of the court, as Kimchi; the court of the priests where the
offerings were brought. The words "for nought" are not, in the original
text, at the end of this clause, but at the end of the next; and are by
some referred to both; and by others restrained to the latter; and who
give this as the sense of the words, "who is there", or "would there
were any among you?" (f) any good man that would shut the doors of the
temple, that so a man might not bring an abominable offering;
intimating, that the priests or Levites however, who were porters, ought
to shut the doors against such persons; and this way go Jarchi, Kimchi,
and Abarbinel; to which the Chaldee paraphrase inclines; which is,

"who is there among you that will shut the door of the house of my
sanctuary, that ye may not offer on mine altar an abominable
sacrifice?''

but the same writers, out of an ancient book called Torath Cohanim,
observe a sense that agrees with ours,

"a man says to his friend, shut this door for me, he desires nothing for
it; light me this candle, he asks no reward for it; but as for you, who
is there among you that will shut my doors for nought? or kindle a fire
on mine altar for nought? and how much less will ye do freely those
things which used to be done for reward? therefore I have no pleasure in
you.''

There were four and twenty porters to open and shut the doors of the
mountain of the house, or the temple, and the court of women in the
daytime; six on the east side; four on the north; four on the south; at
Asuppim two and two, four in all; four on the west, and two at Parbar
(g): here they attended in the daytime, to keep the place pure and
peaceable; and there seems to have been one over all the rest, whose
business was to see that the doors at evening were shut by them: in the
Misnah (h) we are told that Ben Geber was appointed over the shutting of
the gates, i.e. of the temple; and at night there were four and twenty
guards also that kept watch; the priests kept guard in three places; in
the room "abtines", in the room "nitsots", and in the fire room; and one
and twenty Levites; five at the five gates of the mountain of the house,
or the compass of the temple; four at the four corners within; five at
the five gates of the court; and four at its four corners without; one
at the chamber "Corban"; one at the chamber over against the vail; and
another behind the most holy place; and there was one that was called
the man of the mountain of the house, who every night went through every
ward with torches burning before him; and he had power to beat those he
found asleep in their watch, and to burn their garments (i), to which
the allusion is, [Rev 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#015.md), and these
guards, as Bartenora (k) observes, were not on account of thieves and
robbers, but for the honour of the house; and these, neither the one by
day, nor the other by night, did their work for nought, but had a
maintenance allowed them for it:

neither do ye kindle fire upon mine altar for nought: and this was done
every morning, for though, as one of the Jewish writers says (l), fire
came down, from heaven, it was ordered that they should bring of common
fire; and there were three piles or rows of fire made every day upon the
altar; the first was a large one, on which they offered the daily
sacrifice, with the rest of the offerings; the second was on the side of
it, a little one, from whence they took fire in the censer to burn
incense every day; the third had no other use for it but to confirm the
command concerning fire; as it is said, "the fire shall ever be
burning", [Lev 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#013) (m.md) and this fire
was kindled to burn the sacrifices, the daily sacrifice, and other burnt
offerings, for which they were paid out of the tithes, and other
oblations; see [Co1 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#013.md) this was an
aggravation of their negligence and carelessness about what offerings
were brought and sacrificed; seeing they were so well taken care of, and
such a sufficient maintenance provided for them; so that they did not
the least piece of service in the temple but they were fully rewarded
for it; even not so much as to shut a door, or kindle a fire; and
therefore it is no wonder their conduct should be resented, as follows:

I have no pleasure in you, saith the Lord of hosts; neither in your
persons, nor in your offerings:

neither will I accept an offering at your hand: the "minchah" or meat
offering, any meat offering, particularly that which was offered morning
and evening with the daily sacrifice, [Exo
29:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#040.md) and it is sometimes used
particularly for the evening meat offering, [Kg2
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#015.md) or rather, "a wheat" or "bread
offering"; since this offering was made of fine flour, with oil poured
upon it, and frankincense put upon that, [Lev
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#001.md) hence mention is made of "incense"
in the next verse [Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011.md); and it
was either baked in an oven, or fried in a pan; and either way, when it
was brought to the priest, it was burnt on the altar, and was an
offering by fire to the Lord, and of a sweet savour to him, when rightly
performed; and was a figure of the sacrifice of Christ, which is of a
sweet smelling savour to God; and this passage respects Gospel times, as
appears from the following verse [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011.md), when Christ's sacrifice would be
offered up, and so the oblation or meat offering made to cease, [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027.md) hence God would not accept of it
any more; or else because not rightly offered, as it was not when any
leaven was mixed with it, or that and honey were burnt with it;
signifying it should be offered with sincerity, and without hypocrisy,
and other carnal lusts; and indeed no legal sacrifices were acceptable
to God but such as were offered up in the faith of Christ, and with a
view to his sacrifice, without trusting to, and depending upon, the
outward offering, as hypocrites and carnal persons did: wherefore to
this is opposed a pure "minchah" or meat offering in the next verse [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011.md); which designs spiritual
sacrifices, such as are now offered up under the Gospel dispensation;
when offering and sacrifice of a ceremonial kind God desires not; he
will have no more offered up; he takes no pleasure in them; they are not
acceptable to him, being superseded by the sacrifice of his Son, they
were types of; see [Psa 40:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#006.md) and
agreeably to which passages the words may be understood, as expressing
the Lord's rejection of legal sacrifices in general among the Jews,
which he would have no longer continued than till the Messiah came; by
whose sufferings and death the daily sacrifice was caused to cease, [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027.md) when sacrifices of another kind
should be offered up in the Gentile world, through every part of it, as
in the following verse [Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011.md).

\(f\) "utinam vestrum aliquis", Gataker, Drusius. (g) Kimchi in 1 Chron.
xxvi. 1. (h) Shekalim, c. 5. sect. 1. (i) Misn. Middot, c. 1. sect. 1,
2. (k) In Misn. ib. (l) Baal Hatturim in Lev. vi. 13. (m) Maimon.
Hilchot Tamidin, c. 2. sect. 4.

[Malachi 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mal 1:11</span></span>

For from the rising of the sun even unto the going down of the same,....
From east to west, which is all habitable; not so north and south, as
Kimchi observes, the extremes of which are not habitable. Abarbinel
thinks that in is causal; and that the sense is, because of the motion
of the sun in rising and setting, the Gentiles acknowledge God to be the
first mover and cause of all things; and who, though they worship the
host of heaven, yet ultimately direct their worship to the supreme
Being, the Cause of causes; and supposes this to be a reproof of the
priests, who might have learnt better even of the very Heathens; but the
former is to the true sense, which declares the large extent of true
spiritual worship in the Gentile world:

my name shall be great among the Gentiles; through the preaching of the
Gospel, attended with the spirit and power of God to the conversion of
many; whereby he himself is made known, and the perfections of his
nature, and his several names, and particularly that of the God and
Father of our Lord Jesus; who, as such, is called upon, and greatness
and glory are ascribed unto him for the gift of his Son, and the mission
of him into the world, to be the Saviour of Gentiles as well as of Jews:

and in every place incense shall be offered unto my name; some Jewish
writers understand this of Israelites, the disciples of the wise men,
studying in the law, and putting up their evening prayers to God, in
every place where they live among the Gentiles; which are as acceptable
to God as if they offered incense, and a pure offering; this way goes
Jarchi, to which agrees the Targum; and this sense is given in the
Talmud (n), and other writings of theirs; but Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and
Abarbinel, interpret it of the Gentiles, though in different ways, and
foreign from the sense of the text; which is, that not in Jerusalem the
worship of God should be as formerly, but in all places in the Gentile
world, and where particularly prayer should be made to God; see [Joh
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#020.md) comparable to incense for its
fervency, fragrancy, and gratefulness, [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002.md),

and a pure offering; meaning either the Gentiles themselves, their souls
and bodies, [Isa 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020.md) or their
sacrifices of praise, good works, and alms deeds [Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015.md) which, though imperfect, and not
free from sin, may be said to be "pure", proceeding from a pure heart,
sprinkled by the blood of Christ, and offered in a pure and spiritual
manner, and through the pure incense of Christ's mediation:

for my name shall be great among; the heathen, saith the Lord of hosts;
which is repeated for the certainty of it.

\(n\) T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 110. 1. Tanchuma apud Abarbinel in loc.

[Malachi 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mal 1:12</span></span>

But ye have profaned it,.... That is, the name of the Lord, which they
are said to despise, [Mal 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#006.md) and
pollute, [Mal 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007.md) and is a reason why
they and their offerings were rejected: and that they profaned the name
of the Lord appears by this,

in that ye say, The table of the Lord is polluted: the same with
"contemptible", [Mal 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007.md) as Kimchi
observes; See Gill on [Mal 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#007.md),

and the fruit thereof, even his meat is contemptible; the word for fruit
(o) sometimes is used for speech, the fruit of the lips, [Isa
57:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#019.md) and taken in this sense here, as
it is by some, may be understood either of the word of God, which
commanded such and such sacrifices to be offered up upon the altar, and
was despised, so Abarbinel: or the word of the priests, who were
continually saying that what was offered up on the altar was
contemptible, even the food which they ate of; so Jarchi and Kimchi.
"Fruit" and "meat" seem to signify one and the same thing, and design
the fruit and meat of the altar; either that which belonged to the Lord,
the fat and the blood, which were offered to him, and were reckoned
contemptible; or that which fell to the share of the priests, which they
thought mean and worthless. Cocceius interprets this of Christ the
Branch of the Lord, and fruit of the earth, [Isa
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002.md) whose meat it was to do the will
of him that sent him, and was despised and rejected by the Jews; and
which was the reason of God's casting them off, and taking in the
Gentiles.

\(o\) "et verbum ejus", Pagninus, Munster; "sermo ejus, vel eorum",
Vatablus; so Ben Melech.

[Malachi 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mal 1:13</span></span>

Ye said also, Behold, what a weariness is it?.... These are either the
words of the priests, saying what a wearisome and fatiguing business the
temple service was to them, for which they thought they were poorly
paid; such as slaying the sacrifices; removing the ashes from the altar;
putting the wood in order; kindling the fire, and laying the sacrifice
on it: or of the people that brought the sacrifice, who, when they
brought a lamb upon their shoulders, and laid it down, said, how weary
are we with bringing it, suggesting it was so fat and fleshy; so Kimchi
and Abarbinel, to which sense the Targum seems to agree; which
paraphrases it,

"but if ye say, lo, what we have brought is from our labour;''

and so the Syriac version, "and ye say, this is from our labour"; and
the Vulgate Latin version, "and ye say, lo, from labour"; and the
Septuagint version, "and ye say, these are from affliction"; meaning
that what they brought was with great toil and labour, out of great
poverty, misery, and affliction:

and ye have snuffed at it, saith the Lord of hosts; or, "blown it" (p);
filled it with wind, that it might seem fat and fleshy, when it was poor
and lean; so Abarbinel and Abendana: or ye have puffed, and panted, and
blown, as persons weary with bringing such a heavy lamb, when it was so
poor and light, that, if it was blown at, it would fall to the ground;
so R. Joseph Kimchi: or ye have puffed at it, thrown it upon the ground
by way of contempt; so David Kimchi: or, "ye have grieved him" (q); the
owner of the lamb, from whom they stole it; which sense is mentioned by
Kimchi and Ben Melech; taking the word rendered "torn", in the next
clause, for that which was "stolen". Jarchi says this is one of the
eighteen words corrected by the scribes; and that instead of "it", it
should be read "me": and the whole rendered, "and ye have grieved me";
the Lord, by bringing such sacrifices, and complaining of weariness, and
by their hypocrisy and deceitfulness. Cocceius renders the words, "ye
have made him to expire"; meaning the Messiah, whom the Jews put to
death:

and ye have brought that which was torn, and the lame, and the sick; See
Gill on [Mal 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008.md) and if the first word
is rendered "stolen", as it may, this offering was an abomination to the
Lord, [Isa 61:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#008.md),

thus ye brought an offering; such an one as it was: or a "minchah", a
meat offering, along with these abominable ones:

should I accept this of your hands? saith the Lord; which, when offered
to a civil governor, would not be acceptable, [Mal
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#008.md) and when contrary to the express
law of God.

\(p\) "et efflastis illam", Montanus; "anheli isto estis", Tigurine
version; "exsufflare possetis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
"difflatis", Drusius; "sufflavistis illud", Burkius. (q) "Et
contristastis illum"; so some in Vatablus.

[Malachi 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mal 1:14</span></span>

But cursed be the deceiver,.... A cunning, crafty, subtle man, who
thinks and contrives, speaks and acts, in a very artful and deceiving
manner; though some derive the word from "to be able"; and so the
Septuagint and Arabic versions render it, "who is able"; to bring a
proper offering, a perfect lamb, as it follows:

which hath in his flock a male; without spot and blemish, as the law
requires:

and voweth and sacrificeth to the Lord a corrupt thing; that was a
female, or had blemishes in it; for the law required what was perfect
and without a blemish for a vow; what was superfluous or deficient in
its parts might do for a freewill offering, but not for a vow, [Lev
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#018.md) wherefore such a man must be
accursed, and such conduct must be highly resented by the Lord; had he
it not in his power to do better, it might be excusable; but then it
would be better not to have vowed at all; but to vow a sacrifice to the
Lord, and deal deceitfully with him, when he could have brought an
offering agreeable to his vow, and to the law, this is aggravated
wickedness:

for I am a great King, saith the Lord of hosts; the King of the whole
world, the King of kings, and Lord of lords; and therefore to be
honoured and reverenced suitable to his dignity and greatness:

and my name is dreadful among the heathen; because of his judgments
executed among them; or rather because of his Gospel preached unto them;
for this may be considered as a prophecy of what would be when the
Gospel should be spread in the Gentile world; and therefore if they,
when he was made known to them, would fear and reverence him; then the
Israelites, to whom he had given such instances and proofs of his love,
ought to have shown a greater regard unto him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Malachi Chapter 2](mal002.md)

</div>
