<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Mark Index](mar.md)  
  [Previous](mar014)  [Next](mar016.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Mark Chapter 15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001.md)

[Mark 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mar 15:1</span></span>

And straightway in the morning,.... As soon as it was break of day, or
daylight appeared:

the chief priests held a consultation with the elders and Scribes; who
were the principal men in the sanhedrim:

and the whole council; which, on this extraordinary occasion, was
convened; the result of which was, to bind Jesus, and deliver him up to
the Roman governor, to be put to death by him, as a seditious person,
and an enemy to Caesar, and accordingly they did so:

and bound Jesus, and carried him away, and delivered him to Pilate. The
Syriac and Persic versions add, "the governor"; See Gill on [Mat
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#001.md), [Mat
27:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#002.md).

[Mark 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mar 15:2</span></span>

And Pilate asked him, art thou the king of the Jews?.... Which either he
had heard before that it was said by him, and his followers; or was what
the Jews now suggested to him as his crime, which they desired sentence
of death might pass upon him:

and he answering, said unto him, thou sayest it; which is all one as if
he had said, I am; See Gill on [Mat
26:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#025.md); for so he was in a sense, in
which he explained himself to Pilate's satisfaction, [Joh
18:36](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#036.md); See Gill on [Mat
27:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#011.md).

[Mark 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mar 15:3</span></span>

And the chief priests accused him of many things,.... As that he was a
magician, and a blasphemer, and gave out that he was the Son of God; and
that he made himself a king, and even forbad the people to give tribute
to Caesar, and moved discord, sedition, and rebellion throughout the
land;

but he answered nothing. This clause is wanting in the Vulgate Latin,
Syriac, Arabic, and Persic versions; but is in the Greek text of the
Complutensian edition, and in the Ethiopic version, and agrees with [Mat
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#012.md); see Gill on [Mat
27:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#012.md).

[Mark 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mar 15:4</span></span>

And Pilate asked him again,.... In the presence of the chief priests,
who laid so many things to his charge; for the former question was put,
when Jesus and he were alone in the judgment hall, whither the Jews
would not enter for fear of being defiled; see ;

saying, answerest thou nothing behold how many things they witness
against thee? The charges were many, and very heinous, and which Pilate
thought called for self-defence; See Gill on [Mat
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#013.md).

[Mark 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mar 15:5</span></span>

But Jesus yet answered nothing,.... He still continued silent, and made
no defence for himself, which the governor was willing to give him an
opportunity to make, and, as his friend, urged him to it:

so that Pilate marvelled; what should be the meaning of his silence,
when he was so capable of defending himself, and was so innocent, as
Pilate himself was ready to believe; and yet the things he was charged
with were of, the highest nature, and by persons of the greatest figure
in the nation; so that his silence exposed him to a great deal of
danger, which Pilate thought might easily be avoided by answering for
himself; See Gill on [Mat 27:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#014.md).

[Mark 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mar 15:6</span></span>

Now at that feast,.... The feast of the passover, which was at that
instant; see [Joh 18:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#039.md). The Syriac,
Arabic, Persic, and Ethiopic versions read, "at every feast"; as if the
following custom was used at every feast in the year, at the feasts of
pentecost and tabernacles, as well as at the passover; whereas it was
only at the latter:

he released unto them one prisoner, whomsoever they desired; of this
custom See Gill on [Mat 27:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#015.md).

[Mark 15:7](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mar 15:7</span></span>

And there was one named Barabbas,.... A prisoner of that name at
Jerusalem;

which lay bound with them that had made insurrection with him: he had
been at the head of a seditious mob, and he and his accomplices were
taken and put in prison:

who had committed murder in the insurrection; which may be connected
either with Barabbas, and read in the singular number, as it is in the
Vulgate Latin version, "he had committed"; or with the seditious persons
he lay bound with, and be read in the plural number, "they had committed
murder", as it is in the Syriac, Arabic, and Persic versions; and so in
the ancient copies; and the Ethiopic renders it, "he was bound with
seditious persons and murderers"; though, no doubt, he was guilty of
murder as well as they; and so Peter calls him a murderer, [Act
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#014.md). About this time murders were
very frequently committed: the Jews say (r) that

"from the time that murderers increased, the slaying of the red heifer
ceased; (the reason the commentators (s) give, is, because they were
known who were accustomed to commit murder;) and that was from the time
that Eleazar ben Dinai came, and Techinah ben Perishah he was called;
and they called him again the son of a murderer;''

See Gill on [Mat 27:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#016.md).

\(r\) Misn. Sota, c. 9. sect. 9. Maimon. Hilch. Rotzeach. c. 9. sect.
12. (s) Jarchi & Bartienora in ib.

[Mark 15:8](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mar 15:8</span></span>

And the multitude crying aloud,.... The Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic
versions read, and when the "multitude", or "people went up", to the
place called the pavement, where the judgment seat was; and so it is
read in Beza's most ancient copy; but the former reading is to be
preferred:

began to desire him to do as he had ever done to them: that is, release
a prisoner to them, as he had done at every passover, since he had been
a governor over them.

[Mark 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mar 15:9</span></span>

But Pilate answered them; saying,.... Being satisfied of the innocence
of Jesus, and being willing to dismiss him:

will ye that I release unto you the king of the Jews? he who is called
so; and which he either said by way of derision both of Christ, and
them; or else in order to prevail upon them to ask his release, it being
scandalous and reproachful to put their king to death.

[Mark 15:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mar 15:10</span></span>

For he knew that the chief priests,.... The Persic version reads in the
singular, "the chief of the priests", or the high priest, Caiaphas,

had delivered him for envy; at his popularity through his doctrine and
miracles, and not from any principle of equity and justice, or from any
regard to Caesar; See Gill on [Mat
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#018.md).

[Mark 15:11](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mar 15:11</span></span>

But the chief priests moved the people,.... Greatly solicited and
persuaded them, both in person, and by their officers they employed, and
dispersed among them, to make use of arguments with them to prevail upon
them:

that he should rather release Barabbas unto them; than Jesus of
Nazareth; choosing rather to have a murderer granted unto them, than the
holy and just one. The Persic version, as before, reads, "the chief of
the priests"; but they were all concerned, and were the most active men
in bringing about the death of Christ; though Caiaphas was behind none
of them in envy, rage, and malice; See Gill on [Mat
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#020.md).

[Mark 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mar 15:12</span></span>

And Pilate answered and said again unto them,.... Being astonished that
they should ask the release of such an infamous person; and being very
desirous of saving Jesus:

what will ye then that I shall do unto him, whom ye call the king of the
Jews? at least many of you; would you have me put him to death? surely
this can never be desired; or would you have me inflict some slight
punishment on him, as scourging him, and so dismiss him? See Gill on
[Mat 27:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#022.md).

[Mark 15:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mar 15:13</span></span>

And they cried out again, crucify him. For they had cried so once
before, though Matthew and Mark relate it not, yet Luke does, [Luk
23:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#021.md).

[Mark 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mar 15:14</span></span>

Then Pilate said unto them,.... The third time, [Luk
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#022.md);

why, what evil hath he done? worthy of death. They had charged him with
many things, but proved nothing against him. Pilate could find no fault
in him, and judged him an innocent person, and therefore was loth to
condemn him:

and they cried out the more exceedingly; with louder voices, and greater
vehemency, the more they found he was inclined to save him:

crucify him; nothing short of death would satisfy them, and no other
death but that of the cross; See Gill on [Mat
27:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#022.md), [Mat
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#023.md).

[Mark 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mar 15:15</span></span>

And so Pilate, willing to content the people,.... To satisfy and make
them easy, who were become very noisy and tumultuous, and fearing the
consequences of their resentment, should he not comply, of which he had
formerly had experience; therefore to humour them, and keep in their
favour, after he had washed his hands, to testify his innocence in the
matter,

he released Barabbas unto them; the seditious person, robber, and
murderer, as they desired:

and delivered Jesus when he had scourged him; or having scourged him;
for this he had done before, hoping the Jews would have been satisfied
with that, and not have insisted on any further punishment. The Arabic
version very wrongly renders the words, "and delivered unto them Jesus,
that he might be scourged": as if this was afterwards to be done by the
Jews, or Roman soldiers; whereas he had scourged him before, and now
delivered him

to be crucified, as they desired; in which he acted contrary to law and
justice, to the violation of his own conscience, and merely to gratify
the humour of the people; See Gill on [Mat
27:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#026.md).

[Mark 15:16](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mar 15:16</span></span>

And the soldiers led him away into the hall,.... From the place called
the pavement, where was the judge's bench, from which he passed sentence
on Christ, to a large room,

called the praetorium, or judgment hall; being the hall, or room, where
the praetor, or Roman magistrate, kept his court of judicature; and is
the same place the Jews would not go into, lest they should be defiled,
and become unmeet to eat the Chagigah that day; and into which Pilate
had Jesus more than once alone, [Joh
18:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#028.md), but now he had a large company
with him:

and they call together the whole band; very likely the soldiers, into
whose custody Jesus was put, and who led him away, were the four
soldiers that attended his crucifixion, and parted his garments; but for
greater diversion they got together the whole band to which they
belonged; See Gill on [Mat 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027.md).

[Mark 15:17](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mar 15:17</span></span>

And they clothed him with purple,.... Matthew calls it a "scarlet" robe;
and the Persic version here renders it a "red garment": it was of a
colour resembling purple; it was pretty near it, and therefore so
called; which is what kings were used to wear; and so in derision of
him, as a king, clothed him with this mock purple robe; and which was
very likely one of the soldiers' old coats:

and platted a crown of thorns, and put it about his head; for a crown,
and also a reed in his hand, instead of a sceptre, as Matthew relates;
See Gill on [Mat 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#028.md), [Mat
26:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#029.md).

[Mark 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mar 15:18</span></span>

And began to salute him, hail, king of the Jews! In a mock way, wishing
him long life and prosperity, as if he was a king just come to his
throne, and this was his coronation day.

[Mark 15:19](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mar 15:19</span></span>

And they smote him on the head with a reed,.... Or cane, a walking stick
which they had put into his hands for a sceptre: this they took out
again, and struck him on the head with it, which drove the sharp pointed
thorns into his temples:

and did spit upon him; "upon his face", as the Syriac, Arabic, and
Persic versions read:

and bowing their knees, as to a sovereign prince,

worshipped him; saying the above words, hail, king of the Jews? See Gill
on [Mat 27:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#029.md), [Mat
27:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#030.md).

[Mark 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mar 15:20</span></span>

And when they had mocked him,.... To their satisfaction, and had had
enough of this sort of diversion:

they took off the purple from him; and so, in their way, unkinged him;

and put his own clothes on him: both that he might be known to be the
same person; and that the four soldiers, who had the charge of him,
might have the perquisites of his clothes at his execution:

and led him out to crucify him: they led him out of the "praetorium", or
judgment hall, and through the city, without the gates of it, to the
usual place of crucifixion; he bearing his own cross, when first led
out.

[Mark 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mar 15:21</span></span>

And they compel one Simon a Cyrenian,.... See Gill on [Mat
27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032.md);

who passed by; as they were leading Jesus to be crucified:

coming out of the country; from some country village hard by, according
to the Syriac, and Vulgate Latin versions; or out of the field, as the
Persic and Ethiopic: he might have been in the field, about some rural
business; or, as Dr. Lightfoot conjectures, to fetch wood from thence,
which was lawful to be done on a feast day, with some provisos,
according to the Jewish canon, which runs thus (t);

"they may bring wood out of the field, (i.e. on a feast day, as this
was,) of that which is gathered together, and out of a place that is
fenced about, and even of that which is scattered abroad: what is a
fenced place? whatever is near to a city, the words of R. Judah. R. Jose
says, whatever they go into by a door, and even within the border of the
sabbath.''

And according to the commentators (u), it must be wood that is gathered
together, and that lies not in an open field, but in a fenced place, and
this near the city; at least with in two thousand cubits, a sabbath
day's journey.

The father of Alexander and Rufus; who were men well known when Mark
wrote his Gospel, and very likely men of eminence among Christians:
mention is made of Alexander in [Act
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#033.md) and of Rufus, in [Rom
16:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#013.md), which some have thought the
same as here; but whether they are or not, is not certain: however, they
obliged "Simon"

to bear his cross: the cross of Christ, after him; See Gill on [Mat
27:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#032.md).

\(t\) Misn. Betza, c. 4. sect. 2. (u) Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. Vid.
Maimon. Hilch. Yom Tob, c. 2. sect. 14.

[Mark 15:22](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mar 15:22</span></span>

And they bring him unto the place, Golgotha,.... A famous, or rather an
infamous one, well known, and much noted for the many executions there:

which is, being interpreted, the place of a skull; because the skulls of
men that had been executed and buried there, being dug up again, lay
scattered about; See Gill on [Mat
27:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#033.md).

[Mark 15:23](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mar 15:23</span></span>

And they gave him to drink wine mingled with myrrh,.... Wine mingled
with frankincense was what was usually given by the Jews to persons
going to die (w):

"he that goes to be executed they mix for him, , "a grain of
frankincense in a cup of wine", that his mind may be disturbed, or not
sensible; as it is said, [Pro 31:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#006.md),
"give strong drink to him that is ready to perish, and wine to the
bitter in soul": and the tradition is, that the honourable women in
Jerusalem gave this freely, and brought it them; and if they did not, it
was provided by the congregation,''

at the public expense; the design of it was to intoxicate, that they
might not feel their pain and misery: but neither the rich women in
general, nor were the public so disposed towards Christ, as to provide
such a potion for him: it is most likely therefore that this was
prepared by his friends, as Mary Magdalene, Martha, and others, in order
to cheer and refresh his spirits; and was different from what the
soldiers gave him, which was vinegar mixed with gall, though the Persic
version so reads here:

but he received it not; nor would he so much as taste of it, as he did
of the other, to show that he needed no such outward means to support
his spirits, nor desired any allay of his sorrows, and was not afraid to
meet death in all its terrors; and besides, he had said he would drink
no more of the fruit of the vine till he drank it new in his Father's
kingdom, [Mat 26:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#029.md); See Gill on [Mat
27:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#034.md).

\(w\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 43. 1. Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 10. fol. 193.
4. Maimon. Hilch. Sanhedrin, c. 13. sect. 2, 3. Moses Kotsensis Mitzvot
Tora, pr. affirm. 98.

[Mark 15:24](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mar 15:24</span></span>

And when they had crucified him,.... Had fastened him to the cross, and
reared it up, and he was hanging upon it:

they parted his garments, casting lots upon them, what every man should
take. This last clause, "what every man should take", is left out in the
Arabic version. His garments they divided into four parts; and each
soldier, as there were four of them, took a part; and upon his vesture,
or seamless coat, because they would not rend it, they cast lots who
should have it, and so fulfilled a prophecy in [Psa
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#018.md); See Gill on [Mat
27:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#035.md).

[Mark 15:25](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mar 15:25</span></span>

And it was the third hour, and they crucified him. The time of the daily
sacrifice of the morning, at which the priests ought to have been; and
the time when the sanhedrim usually began to sit (x); for

"the grand sanhedrim sat from the daily sacrifice of the morning, to the
daily sacrifice of the evening:''

but this being an extraordinary case, and they in a hurry to put Jesus
to death, had been sitting up all night; and early in the morning had
procured the sentence of death on him, which they were going to execute
by the time they used to sit: this was about nine o'clock in the
morning, and takes in the time between that and twelve at noon. The
Ethiopic version reads, "and it was the sixth hour", to make it agree
with [Joh 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014.md); and for the
reconciling of these two places; see Gill on [Joh
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#014.md).

\(x\) Maimon. Hilch. Sanhedrin, c. 3, sect. 1.

[Mark 15:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mar 15:26</span></span>

And the superscription of his accusation,.... Or "the cause of his
death", as the Syriac and Persic versions read; the crime for which he
suffered:

was written; over his head, upon the cross, to which it was fastened;
the sum of which was,

the king of the Jews; See Gill on [Mat
27:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#037.md).

[Mark 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mar 15:27</span></span>

And with him they crucified two thieves,.... For his greater reproach;

the one on his right hand, and the other on his left; as if he had been
one of them, and a principal among them; See Gill on [Mat
27:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#038.md).

[Mark 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mar 15:28</span></span>

And the Scripture was fulfilled, which saith,.... In [Isa
53:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#012.md);

and he was numbered with the transgressors: he was no transgressor of
the law of God himself, but was perfectly conformable to it in his holy
nature, harmless conversation, and complete obedience: he knew no sin,
nor committed any in thought, word, or deed, nor could any be found in
him by men or devils; and yet he was traduced as a sinner, and charged
with many foul things, none of which could be proved upon him: but
inasmuch as he stood in the room, and stead of sinners, and had all the
sins of his people imputed to him, and laid upon him, with his own
consent, he was treated by the justice of God as if he had been a
transgressor, and was reckoned as such; of which his being placed
between two thieves, was a symbol and representation: hence he was
stricken, and wounded, and died, for the sins of those in whose place he
stood. The fifty third chapter of Isaiah, where this passage stands, is
a manifest prophecy of the Messiah, as several of the Jewish writers
themselves, both ancient and modern, acknowledge; though some would
apply it to some other persons (y).

\(y\) See my Book of the Prophecies of the Old Testament, &c. p. 160,
161, &c.

[Mark 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mar 15:29</span></span>

And they that passed by,.... In the road, and went by the cross. The
Arabic version adds, "before him", Christ, as he hung on the cross:

railed on him, wagging their heads; gave him opprobrious language, and
used indecent gestures;

and saying, ah! thou that destroyest the temple; the Vulgate Latin
version adds, "of God":

and buildest it in three days; thou poor vain miserable creature, that
boasted of thy power, where art thou now? and what dost thou think of
thyself?

[Mark 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mar 15:30</span></span>

Save thyself, and come down from the cross. Suggesting that if he was
what he had pretended to be, and could do what he gave out he could, he
might easily free himself from the cross, and make his escape; See Gill
on [Mat 27:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#039.md), [Mat
27:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#040.md).

[Mark 15:31](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mar 15:31</span></span>

Likewise also the chief priests mocking,.... Or "laughed at one
another", as the Syriac version renders it, having gained their point,
and satiated their revenge on him:

said among themselves with the Scribes; who were likewise his implacable
enemies;

he saved others, himself he cannot save; See Gill on [Mat
27:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#041.md), [Mat
27:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#042.md).

[Mark 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mar 15:32</span></span>

Let Christ the king of Israel,.... Who sets up for the Messiah, and
whose followers call him the king of Israel, whom the nation expected:
and if he is so, let him

descend now from the cross, that we may see; see him come down, and be
eyewitnesses of his power:

and believe; that he is the Messiah that was prophesied of, and has been
waiting for:

and they that were crucified with him reviled him; that is, the thieves,
at least one of them; See Gill on [Mat
27:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#044.md).

[Mark 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mar 15:33</span></span>

And when the sixth hour was come,.... Or twelve o'clock at noon, having
hung upon the cross from about the third hour, or nine in the morning:

there was darkness over the, whole land until the ninth hour; or three
o'clock in the afternoon. The Ethiopic version renders the whole thus,
"and when it was noon, the sun was darkened, and the whole world was
darkened until the ninth hour"; See Gill on [Mat
27:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#045.md).

[Mark 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mar 15:34</span></span>

And at the ninth hour Jesus cried with a loud voice,.... See Gill on
[Mat 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046.md);

saying, Eloi, Eloi, lama sabachthani? in Matthew it is, "Eli, Eli", Both
"Eli" and "Eloi", are Hebrew words, and signify the same; and are both
used in [Psa 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001.md), from whence the
whole is taken:

which is, being interpreted, my God, my God, why hast thou forsaken me?
See Gill on [Mat 27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046.md).

[Mark 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mar 15:35</span></span>

And some of them that stood by,.... The cross:

when they heard it; the loud voice of Jesus, and the words he uttered:

said, behold he calleth Elias; whom they ignorantly, or wilfully took
for Eloi; See Gill on [Mat 27:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#047.md).

[Mark 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mar 15:36</span></span>

And one ran and filled a sponge full of vinegar,.... Christ at the same
time saying, I thirst; see [Joh 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#028.md);

and put it on a reed; an hyssop stalk, [Joh
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#029.md);

and gave him to drink; and so fulfilled a prophecy in [Psa
69:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#021.md);

saying, or "they said", as the Syriac version reads it; not he that
fetched the sponge, but the others that were with him, and which agrees
with [Mat 27:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#027.md);

let alone; as forbidding him to go near him, and offer him any thing to
drink:

let us see whether Elias will come and take him down; from the cross;
See Gill on [Mat 27:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#049.md).

[Mark 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mar 15:37</span></span>

And Jesus cried with a loud voice,.... A second time, and said the words
which are in [Luk 23:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk023.htm#046.md) and in [Joh
19:30](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#030.md)

and gave up the ghost. The Syriac version renders it, "and finished":
his life, his days, his race, his ministry, and the work which was given
him to do; See Gill on [Mat 27:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#050.md).

[Mark 15:38](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mar 15:38</span></span>

And the vail of the temple was rent in twain, from the top to the
bottom. At which time also there was an earthquake, and the rocks were
rent, and graves were opened, as Matthew relates; see Gill on [Mat
27:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#051.md), [Mat
27:52](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#052.md).

[Mark 15:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mar 15:39</span></span>

And when the centurion, which stood over against him,.... To watch him,
that nobody released him, and that he did not come down from the cross
himself;

saw that he so cried out, and gave up the ghost; that he cried with so
loud and strong a voice, and the next moment expired:

he said, truly this man was the Son of God; and so said the rest of the
soldiers that were with them, as appears from [Mat
27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054.md); see Gill on [Mat
27:54](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#054.md).

[Mark 15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mar 15:40</span></span>

There were also women looking on afar off,.... At some distance from the
cross, observing what was said and done;

among whom was Mary Magdalene; who had received great favours from
Christ:

and Mary the mother of James the less; or "little", so called to
distinguish him from James the son of Zebedee, and because he might be
little of stature: nor was it unusual with the Jews to distinguish
persons after this manner: so we read (z) of R. Jesa, "the little", and
of Samuel, "the little" (a), which some have thought to be the Apostle
Paul, so called from the littleness of his stature:

and of Joses; or "Joseph", as the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions
read;

and Salome; the mother of Zebedee's children, James and John; See Gill
on [Mat 27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056.md). This was a common name
among the Jews; Herod had a sister and a daughter of this name; and the
daughter of Herodias, who demanded the head of John, the Baptist, was of
this name; and it is the same with Shalom: we read (b) of one Imme
Shalom, or mother Shalom, wife of R. Eliezer, and sister to Rabban
Gamaliel. Salome, with the Ethiopians (c), is said to be Mary's midwife,
and to accompany Christ, with Mary, and Joseph, when they fled into
Egypt.

\(z\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 63. 2. & passim. (a) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 28.
2. & 29. 1. (b) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 116. 1. (c) Ludolph. Lex. Ethiop.
p. 525, & Castell. Lex. Polyglot, col. 3767.

[Mark 15:41](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mar 15:41</span></span>

Who also, when he was in Galilee, followed him,.... Wherever he went in
Galilee, and from thence to Jerusalem:

and ministered unto him; of their worldly substance, [Luk
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#003.md),

and many other women which came up with him into Jerusalem; from the
same parts; see [Mat 27:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#055.md).

[Mark 15:42](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mar 15:42</span></span>

And now when the even was come,.... "Of the preparation", as the Syriac
version reads; or "the night of the sixth day":, as the Persic version
renders it, "Friday" night:

because it was the preparation; of the passover, and of the sabbath,
when they prepared their food, and got it ready for the ensuing sabbath,
on which it was not lawful to dress any;

that is, the day before the sabbath; that is, Friday; on which day, it
is clear, Christ suffered, died, and was buried.

[Mark 15:43](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mar 15:43</span></span>

Joseph of Arimathea, an honourable counsellor,.... A man of a good
aspect, well dressed, and that behaved well and honourably in his
office, as a counsellor: he seems to have been a priest, and one of the
bench of priests that sat in the high priest's chamber, which is called,
, "the chamber of the counsellors" (d); with whom he advised there, in
matters of moment:

which also waited for the kingdom of God; for the coming and kingdom of
the Messiah, for the Gospel dispensation, the world to come, the Jews
were so much in expectation of.

Came and went in boldly unto Pilate; not now ashamed of Christ, or
afraid openly to appear in his cause, and declare himself a lover of
him, a believer in him, and a disciple of his, though he formerly was:

and craved the body of Jesus; desired leave to take it down from the
cross, and bury it; See Gill on [Mat
27:58](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#058.md).

\(d\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 3. 2. & Hieros. Yoma, fol. 38. 3.

[Mark 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#044.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mar 15:44</span></span>

And Pilate marvelled if he were already dead,.... For death, by
crucifixion, was a slow lingering death; persons that were in their full
strength hung a great while before they expired; and the two thieves,
which were crucified with Christ, were not dead when he was:

and calling unto him the centurion; who was set to watch him:

he asked him, whether he had been any while dead; he inquired of him,
whether he was dead, and how long he had been dead.

[Mark 15:45](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#045.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mar 15:45</span></span>

And when he knew it of the centurion,.... Who might inform him of his
giving up the ghost after he had cried with a loud voice, which so much
affected him; and how he was found to be really dead when they came to
break the legs of the malefactors; and how that one of the soldiers
pierced his side with a spear, from whence flowed blood and water; so
that there was no room to doubt of his being really dead; with which
Pilate being satisfied,

he gave the body to Joseph; ordered it to be given to him; gave him
leave to take it down from the cross, and inter it.

[Mark 15:46](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#046.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mar 15:46</span></span>

And he bought fine linen,.... That is, Joseph, as is expressed in the
Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Persic versions; which, when he had done, as
is highly probable, in the city of Jerusalem, he went to Mount Calvary,

and took him down; took the body of Christ down from the cross; though,
no doubt, with the assistance of others, or by others, and not he
himself, at least not alone:

and wrapped him in the linen; wound him up in it, as was the manner of
the Jews; See Gill on [Mat 27:59](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#059.md);

and laid him in a sepulchre, which was hewn out of a rock, and rolled a
stone unto the door of the sepulchre; See Gill on [Mat
27:60](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#060.md).

[Mark 15:47](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#047.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mar 15:47</span></span>

And Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Joses,.... Or Joseph, as the
Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions read:

beheld where he was laid: very likely they saw Joseph, and his men, take
him down from the cross, and they followed him, and observed where he
laid him; or, as the Ethiopic version reads, "where they buried him";
placing themselves, as Matthew suggests, right "over against the
sepulchre", [Mat 27:61](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#061.md); so that they
were witnesses of his death, and of his burial, as they afterwards were
of his resurrection from the dead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Mark Chapter 16](mar016.md)

</div>
