<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat018)  [Next](mat020.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001.md)

[Matthew 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 19:1</span></span>

And it came to pass, that when Jesus had finished these sayings,....
Concerning humility, avoiding offences, the methods to be taken in
reproving offenders, and the forgiveness that is to be exercised towards
them:

he departed from Galilee; where he had chiefly preached and wrought his
miracles, no more to return thither till after his resurrection:

and came into the coasts of Judea beyond Jordan; that is, to that
country which was called "beyond Jordan", and bordered on Judea; coming
still nearer and nearer to Jerusalem, where he had told his disciples, a
little while ago, he must come, and suffer, and die. Rather, it should
be rendered, "on this side Jordan", as also in [Joh
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028.md) for the coasts of Judea were on
this side; so , is rendered in

[Matthew 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 19:2</span></span>

And great multitudes followed him,.... The Persic version adds, "of the
sick and diseased"; but all that followed him were not such, though some
were: these came not only from Galilee, but from the adjacent parts,
from the country beyond Jordan, and the coasts of Judea, where he had
been formerly; and who resort to him again, as Mark observes; and whom,
according to his usual manner, he taught and instructed in the knowledge
of divine things, and confirmed his doctrines by miracles:

and he healed them there; in the above mentioned places, even as many of
them as were sick and diseased.

[Matthew 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 19:3</span></span>

The Pharisees also came unto him,.... Either from the places round
about, or from Jerusalem: these came unto him, not for the sake of
learning, or to be instructed by him; but as spies upon him, to observe
what he said and did, and watch every opportunity to expose him to the
contempt and hatred of the people;

tempting him with a question about divorces, in order to ensnare him:

and saying to him, is it lawful for a man to put away his wife for every
cause? be it ever so trivial, as said the school of Hillell: for there
was a difference between the school of Shammai and the school of Hillell
about this matter; the former insisted that a man might not put away his
wife but in case of uncleanness; but the latter allowed putting away for
very trifling things; as if she spoiled her husband's food by over
roasting, or over salting it; and, as one of the doctors say, if he
found another woman that was more beautiful than her; see Gill on [Mat
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032.md). This question being now agitated
in the schools, they artfully put to Christ; not for information, but
with a view to reproach him in some way or other; and that he might
incur the resentment of one party or another, as he should answer. They
might argue thus with themselves, and hope to succeed in this manner;
should he be on the side of the school of Shammai, which was the weakest
side, and less popular, as they had reason to believe he would, he would
then expose himself to the resentment of the school of Hillell, and all
on that side the question; should he take the part of Hillell, he would
make the school of Shammai his enemies; should he forbid putting away of
wives, which Moses allowed, they would then traduce him as contrary to
Moses, and his law, which could not fail of setting the people against
him; and should he consent to it, they would charge him with
contradicting himself, or with inconstancy in his doctrine, since he had
before asserted the unlawfulness of it, but in case of adultery; and
should he abide by this, they might hope to irritate the men against
him, who would think their liberty granted by Moses was entrenched on;
as, on the other hand, should he, according to the question, admit of
putting away for every cause, the women would be provoked at him, who
would be left to the uncertain humour and caprice of their husbands; so
that either way they hoped to get an advantage of him.

[Matthew 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 19:4</span></span>

And he answered and said unto them,.... Not by replying directly to the
question, but by referring them to the original creation of man, and to
the first institution of marriage, previous to the law of Moses;

have ye not read, that he which made them at the beginning, made them
male and female? This may be read in [Gen
1:27](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#027.md) and from thence this sense of
things collected; that God, who in the beginning of time, or of the
creation, as Mark expresses it, made all things, the heavens, and the
earth, and all that is therein, and particularly "man", as the Vulgate
Latin, and Munster's Hebrew Gospel supply it here, made the first
parents of mankind, male and female; not male and females, but one male,
and one female; first, one male, and then, of him one female, who, upon
her creation, was brought and married to him; so that in this original
constitution, no provision was made for divorce, or polygamy. Adam could
not marry more wives than one, nor could he put away Eve for every
cause, and marry another: now either the Pharisees had read this
account, or they had not; if they had not, they were guilty of great
negligence and sloth; if they had, they either understood it or not; if
they did not understand it, it was greatly to their reproach, who
pretended to great knowledge of the Scriptures, and to be able to
explain them to others; and if they did understand it, there was no need
for this question, which therefore must be put with an evil design.

[Matthew 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 19:5</span></span>

And said,.... [Gen 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#024.md) where they
seem to be the words of Adam, though here they are ascribed to God, who
made Adam and Eve; and as if they were spoken by him, when he brought
them together; and which is easily reconciled by observing, that these
words were spoken by Adam, under the direction of a divine revelation;
showing, that there would be fathers, and mothers, and children; and
that the latter, when grown up, would enter into a marriage state, and
leave their parents, and cleave to their proper yoke fellows, which
relations then were not in being: this therefore being the effect of a
pure revelation from God, may be truly affirmed to be said by him. Some
think they are the words of Moses the historian; and if they were, as
they were delivered by divine inspiration, they may be rightly called
the word of God. A note by Jarchi on this text exactly agrees herewith,
which is "the holy Spirit says thus: for this cause shall a man leave
father and mother, and shall cleave to his wife"; and not wives: and the
phrase denotes that close union between a man and his wife, which is not
to be dissolved for every cause, it being stricter than that which is
between parents and children; for the wife must be cleaved unto, and
father and mother forsaken: not that upon this new relation between man
and wife, the former relation between parents and children ceases; nor
does this phrase denote an entire separation from them, so as to have
the affection alienated from them, or to be disengaged from all duty and
obedience to them, and care and regard for them, for the future; but a
relinquishing the "house of his father and the bed of his mother", as
all the three Targums on the place explain it: that is, he shall quit
the house of his father, and not bed and board there, and live with him
as before; but having taken a wife to himself, shall live and cohabit
with her:

and they twain shall be one flesh; the word "twain" is: not in the
Hebrew text in Genesis, but in the Septuagint version compiled by Jews,
in the Samaritan Pentateuch, and version, and in the Targum of Jonathan
ben Uzziel, who renders, it as here, "and they two shall be one flesh".
This is the true sense, for neither more nor less can possibly be meant;
and denotes that near conjunction, and strict union, between a man and
his wife, the wife being a part of himself, and both as one flesh, and
one body, and therefore not to be parted on every slight occasion; and
has a particular respect to the act of carnal copulation, which only
ought to be between one man and one woman, lawfully married to each
other; See Gill on [Co1 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1006.htm#016.md).

[Matthew 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 19:6</span></span>

Wherefore they are no more twain,.... They were two before marriage, but
now no more so; not but that they remain two distinct persons,

but one flesh; or, as the Syriac, Arabic, Persic, and Ethiopic versions
read, "one body": hence the wife is to beloved by the husband as his own
body, as himself, as his own flesh, [Eph
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#028.md).

what therefore God hath joined together; or, by the first institution of
marriage, has declared to be so closely united together, as to be, as it
were, one flesh, and one body, as husband and wife are;

let no man put asunder; break the bond of union, dissolve the relation,
and separate them from each other, for every trivial thing, upon any
slight occasion, or for anything; but what is hereafter mentioned. The
sense is, that the bond of marriage being made by God himself, is so
sacred and inviolable, as that it ought not to be dissolved by any man;
not by the husband himself, or any other for him; nor by any state or
government, by any prince or potentate, by any legislator whatever; no,
not by Moses himself, who is, at least, included, if not chiefly
designed here, though not named, to avoid offence: and God and man being
opposed in this passage, shows, that marriage is an institution and
appointment of God, and therefore not to be changed and altered by man
at his pleasure; this not merely a civil, but a sacred affair, in which
God is concerned.

[Matthew 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 19:7</span></span>

They say unto him,.... That is the Pharisees, who object the law of
Moses to him, hoping hereby to ensnare him, and expose him to the
resentment of the people, should he reject that, as they supposed he
would;

why did Moses then command to give a writing of divorcement, and put her
away? referring to [Deu 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001.md) which
they thought to be a contradiction, and what they knew not how to
reconcile to the doctrine Christ had delivered, concerning the original
institution of marriage, and the close union there is between a man and
his wife, by virtue of it, and which is not to be dissolved by men.
Concerning a writing of divorcement and the form, and manner of it; see
Gill on [Mat 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031.md)

[Matthew 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 19:8</span></span>

He saith unto them,.... In answer to their objection;

Moses, because of the hardness of your hearts, suffered you to put away
your wives: in which may be observed, that, though it was by direction
that Moses, in his system of laws, allowed of divorces; yet not God, but
he is said to do it, because it was a branch of the political and
judicial laws, by which the people of the Jews were governed under
Moses, and whilst the Mosaic economy continued, and did not concern
other people, and other times; and therefore it is said "you" and "your"
wives, you Jews, and you only, and not the Gentiles. And so the Jews say
(m), that the Gentiles have no divorces: for thus they represent God,
saying;

"in Israel I have granted divorces, I have not granted divorces among
the nations of the world. R. Chananiah, in the name of R. Phineas,
observed, that in every other section it is written, the Lord of hosts,
but here it is written, the God of Israel; to teach thee, that the holy,
blessed God does not join his name to divorces, but in Israel only. R.
Chayah Rabbah says, , "the Gentiles have no divorces."''

Besides, this was a direct positive command to the Jews, as the
Pharisees suggest in their objection; it was only a sufferance, a
permission in some cases, and not in everyone; and that because of the
hardness of their hearts; they being such a stubborn and inflexible
people, that when they were once displeased there was no reconciling
them; and so malicious and revengeful, that if this had not been
granted, would have used their wives, that displeased them, in a most
cruel, and barbarous manner, if not have murdered them: so that this
grant was made, not to indulge their lusts, but to prevent greater
evils; and not so much as a privilege and liberty to the men, as in
favour of the women; who, when they could not live peaceably and
comfortably with a man, might be dismissed and marry another:

but from the beginning it was not so; from the beginning of time, or of
the creation, or of the world, or at the first institution of marriage,
and in the first ages of the world, there was no such permission, nor
any such practice. This was not the declared will of God at first, nor
was it ever done by any good men before the times of Moses; we never
read that Adam, or Seth, or Noah, or Abraham, put away their wives, upon
any consideration; though in the latter there might have been some
appearance of reason for so doing, on account of sterility, but this he
did not; nor Isaac, nor Jacob, nor any of the "patriarchs".

\(m\) T. Hieros. Kiddushin, fol. 58. 3.

[Matthew 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 19:9</span></span>

And I say unto you,.... To his disciples, when they were with him alone
in the house, and asked him more particularly about the subject,
concerning which he had been discoursing with the Pharisees, as Mark
observes, [Mar 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#010.md) when he said to
them much the same things, he had delivered before in [Mat
5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032.md)

whosoever shall put away in his wife; separate her from his person,
house and bed, and dismiss her as his wife, no more to be considered in
that relation to him,

except it be for fornication; or whoredom, for defiling his bed: for
this is not to be understood of fornication committed before, but of
uncleanness after marriage, which destroys their being one flesh:

and shall marry another woman, committeth adultery; Marks adds, "against
her"; which may be understood either of the woman he marries, which not
being lawfully done, she lives in adultery with the husband of another
woman; or of his former wife, and who is still his wife, and to whose
injury he has married another; and he not only commits adultery himself,
but, as in [Mat 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032.md) "causeth her to
commit adultery also", by being the occasion of marrying another man,
when she is still his lawful wife:

and whoso marrieth her which is put away, for any other cause than
adultery,

doth commit adultery also; since he cohabits with the wife of another
man; see Gill on [Mat 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032.md)

[Matthew 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 19:10</span></span>

His disciples say unto him,.... Being surprised at this account of
things, it being quite contrary to what they had been taught, and very
different from the general practice and usage of their nation:

if the case of a man be so with his wife; if they are so closely joined
together in marriage; if they are, as it were, one flesh, or one body,
that a man's wife is himself: that the bond between them is so
inviolable, that it is not to be dissolved, but in case of adultery;
that if a separation be made by a bill of divorce, in any other case,
and either party marry again, they are guilty of adultery; if a man
cannot part with his wife lawfully, provided she be chaste, and is
faithful to his bed, let her be what she will otherwise, though ever so
disagreeable in her person, and troublesome in her behaviour; though she
may be passionate, and a brawler; though she may be drunken, luxurious,
and extravagant, and mind not the affairs of her family, yet if she is
not an adulteress, must not be put away:

it is not good to marry; it would be more expedient and advisable for a
man to live always a single life, than to run the risk of marrying a
woman, that may prove very disagreeable and uncomfortable; to whom he
must be bound all the days of his or her life, and, in such a case, not
to be able to relieve and extricate himself. This they said under the
prejudice of a national law and custom, which greatly prevailed, and
under the influence of a carnal heart.

[Matthew 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 19:11</span></span>

But he said unto them,.... With respect to the inference or conclusion,
the disciples formed from what he had asserted:

all men cannot receive this saying; of their's, that it is not good to
marry, but it is more proper and expedient to live a single life! every
man, as the Syriac version renders it, is not , "sufficient", or "fit",
for this thing; everyone has not the gift of continency, and indeed very
few; and therefore it is expedient for such to marry; for what the
disciples said, though it might be true in part, yet not in the whole;
and though the saying might be proper and pertinent enough to some
persons, yet not to all, and indeed to none,

save they to whom it is given; to receive such a saying, to live
unmarried with content, having the gift of chastity; for this is not of
nature, but of grace: it is the gift of God.

[Matthew 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 19:12</span></span>

For there are some eunuchs,.... Our Lord here distinguishes the various
sorts of persons, that can and do live in a single state with content:
some by nature, and others by violence offered to them, are rendered
incapable of entering into a marriage state; and others, through the
gift of God, and under the influence of his grace, abstain from marriage
cheerfully and contentedly, in order to be more useful in the interest
of religion; but the number of either of these is but few, in comparison
of such who choose a conjugal state, and with whom it is right to enter
into it, notwithstanding all the difficulties that may attend it. Some
men are eunuchs, and of these there are different sorts; there are some,

which were so born from their mother's womb; meaning, not such who,
through a natural temper and inclination of mind, could easily abstain
from marriage, and chose to live single; but such who had such defects
in nature that they were impotent, unfit for, and unable to perform the
duties of a marriage state; who, as some are born without hands or feet,
these were born without proper and perfect organs of generation; and
such an one was, by the Jews, frequently called, , "an eunuch of the sun
(n)": that is, as their doctors (o) explain it, one that from his
mother's womb never saw the sun but as an eunuch; that is, one that is
born so; and that such an one is here intended, ought not to be doubted.
The signs of such an eunuch, are given by the Jewish (p) writers, which
may be consulted by those, that have ability and leisure. This sort is
sometimes (q) called "an eunuch by the hands of heaven", or God, in
distinction from those who are so by the hands, or means of men, and are
next mentioned:

and there are some eunuchs, which were made eunuchs of men: as among the
Romans formerly, and which Domitian the emperor forbid by a law (r); and
more especially in the eastern countries, and to this day among the
Turks, that they may the more safely be entrusted with the custody of
their women; and this sort the Jews call , "an eunuch of men", or , "by
the hands of men". The distinction between an "eunuch of the sun", and
an "eunuch of men", is so frequent with the Jews (s), and so well known
to them, that a question need not be made of our Lord's referring to it:

and there be eunuchs which have made themselves eunuchs; not in a
literal sense, in which the words are not to be taken, as they were by
Origen; who though otherwise too much pursued the allegorical way of
interpreting Scripture, here took it literally, and castrated himself
(t); as did also a sort of heretics, called Valesians (u), from one
Valens an Arabian; and which practice is recommended by Philo the Jew
(w), and by Heathen philosophers (x), for the sake of chastity. But here
it means such, who having the gift of continency without mutilating
their bodies, or indulging any unnatural lusts, can live chastely
without the use of women, and choose celibacy:

for the kingdom of heaven's sake; not in order, by their chaste and
single life, to merit and obtain the kingdom of glory; but that they
might be more at leisure, being free from the incumbrances of a marriage
state, to attend the worship and service of God, the ordinances of the
Gospel church state, to minister in, and preach the Gospel of Christ,
and be a means of spreading it in the world, and of enlarging his
kingdom and interest.

He that is able to receive it, let him receive it: whoever is able to
receive cordially, and embrace heartily, the above saying concerning the
expediency and goodness of a single life, and having the gift of
continency, can live according to it; let him take it, and hold it fast,
and act up to it; he may have less of worldly trouble, and be more
useful for God in the Gospel of Christ, and to the interest of religion;
but this should be a voluntary thing: no man should be forced into it;
and he that goes into it, ought to consider well whether he is able to
contain, or not.

\(n\) T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 75. 1. 79. 2. & 80. 1. Maimon. Hilch. Ishot,
c. 2. sect. 14. (o) Maimon & Bartenora in Misn. Yebamot, c. 8. sect. 4.
(p) Bartenora, ibid. & Maimon. Hilch. Ishot, ut supra. (q) T. Bab.
Yebamot, fol. 80. 2. (r) Philostrat. vit. Apollon. l. 6. c. 17. (s)
Misn. Yebamot, c. 8. sect. 4. Zabim, c. 2. sect. 1. T. Hieros. Yebamot,
fol. 9. 4. Maimon. Hilch. Ishot, c. 2. sect. 26. & 4. 18. Mechosre
Caphara, c. 3. sect. 6. Mishcabumoshab, c. l. sect. 5. (t) Euseb. Ecel.
Hist. l. 6. c. 8. (u) Augustin de Haeres. c. 37. & Danaeus in ib. (w)
Lib. quod deterius, p. 186. (x) Sexti Pythag. Sent. p. 8.

[Matthew 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 19:13</span></span>

Then were there brought unto him little children,.... It does not appear
that they were new born babes; the words used by either of the
evangelists do not always signify such, but are sometimes used of such
as are capable of going alone; yea, of receiving instructions, of
understanding the Scriptures, and even of one of twelve years of age,
[Mat 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat018.htm#002.md) nor is it probable that
infants just born, or within a month, should be had abroad. Moreover,
these were such as Christ called unto him, [Luk
18:16](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#016.md) and were capable of coming to
him of themselves, as his words following suppose; nor does their being
brought to him, or his taking them in his arms, contradict this; since
the same things are said of such as could walk of themselves, [Mat
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#022.md) [Mar
9:36](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#036.md). Nor is it known whose children
they were, whether their parents were believers or unbelievers, nor by
whom they were brought: but the end for which they were brought is
expressed,

that he should put his hands on them, and pray; not that he should
baptize them, nor did he; which may be concluded from the entire silence
of all the evangelists; and from an express declaration that Christ
baptized none; and from the mention of other ends for which they were
brought, as that Christ should "touch" them, [Mar
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#013.md) as he sometimes used to do
persons, when he healed them of diseases; and probably some of those
infants, if not all of them, were diseased, and brought to be cured;
otherwise, it is not easy to conceive what they should be touched by him
for: or as here, that he might put his hands on them, and pray over
them, and bless them, as was usual with the Jews to do; see [Gen
48:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen048.htm#014.md) and it was common with them to
bring their children to venerable persons, men of note for religion and
piety, to have their blessing and prayers (y):

and the disciples rebuked them; not the children, as the Persic version
reads, but those that brought them, Mark observes; either because they
came in a rude and disorderly manner, and were very noisy and clamorous;
or they might think it would be too troublesome to Christ, to go through
such a ceremony with so many of them; or that it was too mean for him,
and below him to take notice of them; or for fear he should take fresh
occasion, on the sight of these children, to rebuke them again for their
pride and ambition. However, from this rebuke and prohibition of the
disciples, it looks plainly as if it had never been the practice of the
Jews, nor of John the Baptist, nor of Christ and his disciples, to
baptize infants; for had this been then in use, they would scarcely have
forbid and rebuked those that brought them, since they might have
thought they brought them to be baptized; but knowing of no such usage
that ever obtained in that nation, neither among those that did, or did
not believe in Christ, they forbad them.

\(y\) Massechet Sopherim, c. 18. sect. 5. see the note on Luke ii. 42.

[Matthew 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 19:14</span></span>

But Jesus said, suffer little children.... This he said to show his
humility, that he was not above taking notice of any; and to teach his
disciples to regard the weakest believers, and such as were but children
in knowledge; and to inform them what all ought to be, who expect the
kingdom of heaven; for it follows;

and forbid them not to come unto me, now, or at any other time;

for of such is the kingdom of heaven; that is, as the Syriac renders it,
"who are as these" or as the Persic version, rather paraphrasing than
translating, renders it, "who have been humble as these little
children": and it is as if our Lord should say, do not drive away these
children from my person and presence; they are lively emblems of the
proper subjects of a Gospel church state, and of such that shall enter
into the kingdom of heaven: by these I may instruct and point out to
you, what converted persons should be, who have a place in my church
below, and expect to enter into my kingdom and glory above; that they
are, or ought to be, like such children, harmless and inoffensive; free
from rancour and malice, meek, modest, and humble; without pride,
self-conceit, and ambitious views, and desires of grandeur and
superiority. Christ's entire silence about the baptism of infants at
this time, when he had such an opportunity of speaking of it to his
disciples, had it been his will, has no favourable aspect on such a
practice. It is not denied that little children, whether born of
believers or unbelievers, which matters not, may be chosen of God,
redeemed by the blood of Christ, and have the passive work of the Spirit
on their souls, and so enter into heaven; but this is not the sense of
this text. It was indeed a controversy among the Jews, whether the
little children of the wicked of Israel, , "go into the world to come":
some affirmed, and others denied; but all agreed, that the little
children of the wicked of the nations of the world, do not. They dispute
about the time of entrance of a child into the world to come; some say,
as soon as it is born, according to [Psa
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031.md) others, as soon as it can speak,
or count, according to [Psa 22:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#030.md)
others as soon as it is sown, as the gloss says, as soon as the seed is
received in its mother's womb, though it becomes an abortion; according
to the same words, "a seed shall serve thee": others, as soon as he is
circumcised, according to [Psa 88:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#015.md)
others, as soon as he can say "Amen", according (z) to [Isa
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#002.md) All weak, frivolous, and
impertinent.

\(z\) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 110. 2.

[Matthew 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 19:15</span></span>

And he laid his hands on them,.... "And blessed them", as Mark says; he
put his hands upon them, according to the custom of the country, and
wished all kind of prosperity to them:

and departed thence, out of the house where he had been, and his
disciples with him: the Ethiopic version renders it, "and they went from
thence", from those parts, towards Jerusalem.

[Matthew 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 19:16</span></span>

And behold, one came,.... The Persic version reads, "a rich man"; and so
he was, as appears from what follows: Luke calls him, "a certain ruler";
not of a synagogue, an ecclesiastical ruler, but a civil magistrate:
perhaps he might be one of the sanhedrim, which consisted of "twenty
one" persons; or of that which consisted only of "three", as in some
small towns and villages Mark represents him as "running"; for Christ
was departed out of the house, and was gone into the way, the high road,
and was on his journey to some other place, when this man ran after him
with great eagerness; and, as the same evangelist adds, "kneeled to
him"; thereby paying him civil respect, and honour; believing him to be
a worthy good man, and deserving of esteem and veneration:

and said unto him, good master: some say, that this was a title which
the Jewish doctors were fond of, and gave to each other, but I have not
observed it; he seems by this to intimate, that he thought him not only
to be a good man, but a good teacher; that he was one that came from
God, and taught good doctrine, which induced him to run after him, and
put the following question to him:

what good thing shall I do, that I may have eternal life? Or, as in the
other evangelists, "inherit eternal life"; a phrase much in use with the
Jewish Rabbins (a):

"Judah confessed, and was not ashamed, and what is his end? , "he
inherits the life of the world to come" (i.e. eternal life); Reuben
confessed, and was not ashamed, and what is his end? "he inherits the
life of the world to come".''

This man was no Sadducee, he believed a future state; was a serious man,
thoughtful about another world, and concerned how he should enjoy
everlasting life; but was entirely upon a legal bottom, and under a
covenant of works; and speaks in the language and strain of the nation
of Israel, who were seeking for righteousness and life by the works of
the law: he expected eternal life by doing some good thing, or things;
and hoped, as the sequel shows, that he had done every good thing
necessary to the obtaining it.

\(a\) T. Bab. Sota, fol. 7. 2.

[Matthew 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 19:17</span></span>

And he said unto him,.... By way of reply, first taking notice of, and
questioning him about, the epithet he gave him:

why callest thou me good? not that he denied that he was so; for he was
good, both as God and man, in his divine and human natures; in all his
offices, and the execution of them; he was goodness itself, and did
good, and nothing else but good. But the reason of the question is,
because this young man considered him only as a mere man, and gave him
this character as such; and which, in comparison of God, the fountain of
all goodness, agrees with no mere man: wherefore our Lord's view is, by
his own language; and from his own words, to instruct him in the
knowledge of his proper deity. Some copies read, "why dost thou ask me
concerning good". And so the Vulgate Latin, and the Ethiopic versions,
and Munster's Hebrew Gospel read; but the Syriac, Arabic, and Persic
versions, read as we do, and this the answer of Christ requires.

There is none good but one, that is God; who is originally, essentially,
independently, infinitely, and immutably good, and the author and source
of all goodness; which cannot be said of any mere creature. This is to
be understood of God considered essentially, and not personally; or it
is to be understood, not of the person of the Father, to the exclusion
of the Son, or Spirit: who are one God with the Father, and equally good
in nature as he. Nor does this contradict and deny that there are good
angels, who have continued in that goodness in which they were created;
or that there are good men, made so by the grace of God; but that none
are absolutely and perfectly good, but God. What Christ here says of
God, the (b) Jews say of the law of Moses, whose praise they can never
enough extol; "there is nothing good but the law". The law is good
indeed; but the author of it must be allowed to be infinitely more so.
Christ next directly answers to the question,

but if thou wilt enter into life: eternal life, which is in the
question, and which being sometimes expressed by a house, a city, and
kingdom, by mansions, and everlasting habitations, enjoyment of it is
fitly signified by entering into it; which, if our Lord suggests, he had
a desire of having a right to by doing any good thing himself, he must

keep the commandments; that is, perfectly: he must do not only one good
thing, but all the good things the law requires; he must not be
deficient in any single action, in anyone work of the law, either as to
matter, or manner of performance; everything must be done, and that just
as the Lord in his law has commanded it. Our Lord answers according to
the tenor of the covenant of works, under which this man was; and
according to the law of God, which requires perfect obedience to it, as
a righteousness, and a title to life; and in case of the least failure,
curses and condemns to everlasting death; see [Deu
6:25](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#025.md). This Christ said, in order to
show, that it is impossible to enter into, or obtain eternal life by the
works of the law, since no man can perfectly keep it; and to unhinge
this man from off the legal foundation on which he was, that he might
drop all his dependencies on doing good things, and come to him for
righteousness and life.

\(b\) T. Hieroa. Roshhashanah, fol. 59. 1. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 151. 2.

[Matthew 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 19:18</span></span>

He saith unto him, which?.... Whether those commandments of a moral, or
of a ceremonial kind; whether the commands of the written, or of the
oral law; of God, or of the elders, or both; or whether he did not mean
some new commandments of his own, which he delivered as a teacher sent
from God:

Jesus said; according to the other evangelists, "thou knowest the
commandments"; not the true nature, spirituality, and use of them, but
the letter and number of them; being trained up from a child by his
parents, in the reading them, committing them to memory, and the outward
observance of them, particularly those of the second table:

thou shalt do no murder, thou shalt not commit adultery, thou shalt not
steal, thou shalt not bear false witness. Christ takes no notice of the
ceremonial law, nor of the traditions of the elders, only moral
precepts; and these only such as refer to the second, and not the first
table of the law, which respect duty to the neighbour, and not to God:
and this he does, because these commandments were more known, and were
in common use; and he chose to instance in these, partly to show, that
if men are under obligation to regard these, much more such as concern
God more immediately; and partly, to observe, that if men are deficient
in their duty to one another, they are much more so in their worship of
God; and consequently, eternal life is never to be got and enjoyed by
the performance of these things.

[Matthew 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 19:19</span></span>

Honour thy father and thy mother:.... This, as it is the first
commandment with promise, so the first of the second table, and yet is
here mentioned last; which inversion of order is of no consequence: so
the "seventh" command is put before the "sixth", and the "fifth"
omitted, in [Rom 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md) and with the
Jews it is a common (c) saying, , "there is neither first nor last in
the law": that is, it is of no consequence which commandment is recited
first, or which last. Moreover, it looks as if it was usual to recite
these commands in this order, since they are placed exactly in the same
method, by a very noted Jewish (d) writer.

And thou shalt love thy neighbour as thyself; which is not a particular
distinct command from the rest, or an explication of the tenth and last,
not mentioned; but a recapitulation, or compendium, and abridgment of
the whole, and is said to be a complement and fulfilling of the law; see
[Rom 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#009.md).

\(c\) T. Bab. Pesach. fol. 6. 2. Zohar in Num. fol. 61. 4. (d) R.
Sangari, Sepher Cosri, par. 3. sect. 11, fol. 146. 2.

[Matthew 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 19:20</span></span>

The young man saith unto him,.... For though he was so very rich and in
such an exalted station in life, as to be a ruler, it seems he was but a
young man; and to be so early serious and religious, amidst so much
riches and grandeur, though it was but externally, was both remarkable
and commendable: upon hearing the answer of Christ, with which he was
highly pleased and greatly elated, he very pertly replies,

all these things have I kept from my youth up: as soon as he was capable
of learning, his parents taught him these precepts; and ever since he
had the use of his reason, and understood the letter, and outward
meaning of them, he had been careful to observe them; nor could he
charge himself with any open and flagrant transgression of them; not
understanding the internal sense, extensive compass, and spirituality of
them; and therefore asks,

what lack I yet? In what am I deficient hitherto? in what have I come
short of doing these things? what remains at last to be performed? what
other precepts are to be obeyed? if there are any other commands, I am
ready to observe them, which may be thought necessary to obtain eternal
life.

[Matthew 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 19:21</span></span>

Jesus said unto him, if thou wilt be perfect,.... Wanting nothing,
completely righteous, according to the tenor of the covenant of works,
having no evil, concupiscence, or worldly lusts: our Lord signifies it
was not enough to be possessed of negative holiness, and do no hurt to
his neighbour, to his person, property, and estate, but he must love
him, and do him good; and therefore, though so far as he had complied
with the law, it was right and commendable; wherefore it is said by
Mark, "that Jesus beholding him loved him"; had an affectionate regard
to him as man, and approved of his intentions, seriousness, and actions,
so far as agreeable; yet tells him,

one thing thou lackest: not but that he lacked many more, but he was
only willing to observe one thing to him, as a trial of his love to his
neighbour, which is the fulfilling of the law:

go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou shalt have
treasure in heaven: not that either the law of God, or Gospel of Christ,
require this to be done of all men, and at all times; for though it is a
duty binding upon all, and always, to relieve the poor and the needy,
yet a man is not obliged to give all that he has to them; see [Co2
8:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#011.md) nor does either legal or
Christian perfection lie in doing this: a man may give all his goods to
the poor and yet be destitute of the grace of God, [Co1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#003.md) much less can such an action
merit the heavenly treasure of eternal life. Nevertheless of some
persons, and in some cases, it has been required, that they part with
all their worldly substance, for the sake of Christ and his Gospel; as
the apostles were called to leave all and follow Christ, as this man was
also; for it is added,

and come and follow me: between these two, Mark puts, "take up the
cross"; all which to do, was much more than to sell what he had, and
give to the poor; and indeed, in this branch lies Gospel perfection, or
to be really and truly a Christian: for to "come" to Christ, is to
believe in him, lay hold on him, receive and embrace him as a Saviour
and Redeemer; and to "follow" him, is to be obedient to his will, to be
observant of his commands, to submit to his ordinances, and to imitate
him in the exercise of grace, and discharge of duty; neither of which
can be done, without "taking up the cross"; bearing reproach and
persecution with patience; undergoing hardships and difficulties, of one
sort or another, which attend faith in Christ, a profession of his name,
and following him the Lamb, whithersoever he goes. The consequence of
this now, not by way of merit, but by way of grace, is the enjoyment of
the rich treasures of eternal glory: but this man was so far from
complying with the latter, with coming to Christ, taking up the cross,
and following him, that he could by no means agree to the former,
parting with his worldly substance; and which is mentioned, as a test of
his love to God and his neighbour, and to discover his sinful love of
the world, and the things of it; and consequently, that he was far from
being in a state of perfection. Moreover, it should be observed, that
Christ is here speaking, not the pure language of the law, or according
to the principles of the Gospel, when he seems to place perfection in
alms deeds, and as if they were meritorious of eternal life; but
according to the doctrine of the Pharisees, and which was of this man;
and so upon the plan of his own notions, moves him to seek for
perfection, and convicts him of the want of it, in a way he knew would
be disagreeable to him; and yet he would not be able to disprove the
method, on the foot of his own tenets: for this is their doctrine (e);

"It is a tradition, he that says this "sela", or shekel, is for alms,
that my son may live, or I may be a son of the world to come, lo! ,
"this man is a perfect righteous man".''

The gloss adds,

"In this thing; and he does not say that he does not do it for the sake
of it, but he fulfils the command of his Creator, who has commanded him
to do alms; and he also intends profit to himself, that thereby he may
be worthy of the world to come, or that his children may live.''

And so in answer to a question much like this, the young man put to
Christ (f);

"How shall we come at the life of the world to come?''

It is replied,

"take thy riches, and give to the fatherless and the poor, and I will
give thee a better portion in the law.''

\(e\) T. Bab. Pesach. fol. 8. 1, 2. & Roshhashanah, fol. 4. 1. (f) Zohar
in Gen. fol. 60. 4.

[Matthew 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 19:22</span></span>

But when the young man heard that saying..... That he must sell his
estates, and all his worldly substance, and the money made of them, give
away to the poor; and become a follower of Christ, deny himself, and
submit to hardships very disagreeable to the flesh:

he went away sorrowful; not with a godly sorrow for his sin and
imperfections, but with the sorrow of the world, which worketh death: he
was ashamed and confounded, that he could not perform what he had just
now so briskly promised, at least tacitly, that whatever else was proper
he would do; as also grieved, that he had not arrived to perfection,
which he had hoped he had, but now began to despair of, and of obtaining
eternal life; and most of all troubled, that he must part with his
worldly substance, his heart was so much set upon, or not enjoy it:

for he had great possessions; which were very dear to him; and he chose
rather to turn his back on Christ, and drop his pursuits of the
happiness of the other world, than part with the present enjoyments of
this.

[Matthew 19:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 19:23</span></span>

Then said Jesus unto his disciples..... When the young man was gone;
taking this opportunity to make some proper observations for the use and
instruction of his disciples, after, as Mark observes, he had "looked
round about"; with concern, and in order to affect their minds with this
incident, and to raise their attention to what he was about to say:

verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the
kingdom of heaven: either into the Gospel dispensation, and receive the
truths, and submit to the ordinances of it, or into the kingdom of glory
hereafter; not but that there have been, are, and will be, some that are
rich, called by grace, brought into a Gospel church state, and are heirs
of the kingdom of heaven; though these are but comparatively few: nor is
it riches themselves that make the entrance so difficult, and clog the
way, either into grace or glory, but putting trust and confidence in
them; and therefore in Mark, they "that have riches", are by Christ
explained of such, that "trust in riches"; and which rich men in common
are very apt to do, as this young man did, against which the apostle
cautions,

[Matthew 19:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 19:24</span></span>

And again I say unto you,.... After the apostles had discovered their
astonishment at the above expression, about the difficulty of a rich man
entering into the kingdom of heaven; when they expected that, in a short
time, all the rich and great men of the nation would espouse the
interest of the Messiah, and acknowledge him as a temporal king, and add
to the grandeur of his state and kingdom; and after he had in a mild and
gentle manner, calling them "children", explained himself of such, that
trusted in uncertain riches, served mammon, made these their gods, and
placed their hope and happiness in them; in order to strengthen and
confirm what he had before asserted, and to assure, in the strongest
manner, the very great difficulty, and seeming impossibility, of rich
men becoming followers of Christ here, or companions with him hereafter,
he expresses himself in this proverbial way:

it is easier for a camel to go through the eye of a needle, than for a
rich man to enter into the kingdom of God: thus, when the Jews would
express anything that was rare and unusual, difficult and impossible,
they used a like saying with this. So speaking of showing persons the
interpretation of their dreams (g);

"Says Rabba, you know they do not show to a man a golden palm tree i.e.
the interpretation of a dream about one, which, as the gloss says, is a
thing he is not used to see, and of which he never thought, , "nor an
elephant going through the eye of a needle".''

Again, to one that had delivered something as was thought very absurd,
it is said (h);

"perhaps thou art one of Pombeditha (a school of the Jews in Babylon) ,
"who make an elephant pass through the eye of a needle".''

That is, who teach such things as are equally as monstrous and absurd,
and difficult of belief. So the authors of an edition of the book of
Zohar, to set forth the difficulty of the work they engaged in, express
themselves in this manner (i):

"In the name of our God, we have seen fit, , "to bring an elephant
through the eye of a needle".''

And not only among the Jews, but in other eastern nations, this
proverbial way of speaking was used, to signify difficulties or
impossibilities. Mahomet has it in his Alcoran (k);

"Verily, says he, they who shall charge our signs with falsehood, and
shall proudly reject them, the gates of heaven shall not be opened to
them, neither shall they enter into paradise, "until a camel pass
through the eye of a needle".''

All which show, that there is no need to suppose, that by a camel is
meant, not the creature so called, but a cable rope, as some have
thought; since these common proverbs manifestly make it appear, that a
creature is intended, and which aggravates the difficulty: the reason
why instead of an elephant, as used in most of the above sayings, Christ
makes mention of a camel, may be, because that might be more known in
Judea, than the other; and because the hump on its back would serve to
make the thing still more impracticable.

\(g\) T. Bab. Beracot fol. 55. 2. (h) T. Bab Bava Metzia, fol. 38. 2.
(i) Prefat. ad Zohar, Ed. Sultzbach. (k) Chap. 7. p. 120. Ed. Sale.

[Matthew 19:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 19:25</span></span>

When his disciples heard it..... That is, the difficulty of a rich man's
entering into the kingdom of heaven, aggravated by the above proverbial
expression,

they were exceedingly amazed. They were surprised at his first words;
but when he confirmed them by the proverb of a camel's passing through
the eye of a needle, they were, as Mark says, "astonished out of
measure": they did not imagine there was any difficulty of rich men
coming into the kingdom of the Messiah, which they took to be a worldly
one, and would be filled with rich men; for so they understood Christ;
though he meant by the kingdom of heaven a spiritual kingdom, a Gospel
church state here, or the heavenly glory, or both; but when he
expressed, by the proverb, the impracticableness of such men becoming
the subjects thereof, their amazement increased;

saying, as in Mark, "among themselves", privately to one another,

who then can be saved? meaning, not with a spiritual and everlasting
salvation, but a temporal one: for upon Christ's so saying, they might
reason with themselves, that if rich men did not come into the kingdom
of the Messiah, they would oppose him and his kingdom, with all their
force and strength; and then what would become of such poor men as
themselves, who would not be able to stand against them? nor could they
hope to be safe long, or enjoy any continued happiness in the expected
kingdom, should this be the case.

[Matthew 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 19:26</span></span>

But Jesus beheld them,.... Looking wishfully and earnestly at them;
signifying thereby, that he knew their reasonings among themselves,
though they did not speak out so as to be heard by him; and that there
was no reason why they should be in so much concern, as their
countenances showed, or possess themselves with such fears:

and said unto them, with men this is impossible. Mark adds, "but not
with God; for with God all things are possible"; to be done by him, if
he will, which are consistent with the glory and perfections of his
nature: for as he could, by his almighty power, if he would, reduce a
camel to so small a size, as to be able to go through the eye of a
needle, which, with men, is an impossible thing; so by the mighty power
of his grace he can work upon a rich man's heart, in such a manner, as
to take off his affections from his worldly substance, and cause him to
drop his trust and confidence in it: he can so influence and dispose his
mind, as to distribute his riches cheerfully among the poor, and
largely, and liberally supply their wants, and even part with all, when
necessity requires it: he can change his heart, and cause the desires of
his soul to be after true riches of grace and glory; and bring him to
see his own spiritual poverty, his need of Christ, and salvation by him;
and to deny himself, take up the cross, and follow him, by submitting to
his most despised ordinances, and by suffering the loss of all things
for his sake; and he can carry him through a thousand snares safe to his
kingdom and glory, which is Christ's sense; though the thing is
impossible upon the foot of human nature, and strength, which can never
effect anything of this kind: and as to what the apostles suggested
concerning the safety of persons in the Messiah's kingdom, if no rich
man could enter there, but should be in opposition to it; our Lord's
answer implies, that though, humanly speaking, it was not possible and
practicable that they, a company of poor, mean, and despicable men,
should be able to stand against the united force of the great and mighty
men of the earth; yet God was able to support, and uphold them, succeed,
and keep them, and make them both useful and comfortable, amidst all the
opposition and persecution they should meet with, until he had finished
his whole will and work by them.

[Matthew 19:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 19:27</span></span>

Then answered Peter and said unto him,.... Peter observing what Christ
said to the young man, bidding him sell all that he had, and give to the
poor, and he should have treasure in heaven, and come and follow him,
lays hold on it, and addresses him in the following manner,

behold, we have forsaken all, and followed thee. Though their worldly
substance was not so large as the young man's, they had not such estates
to sell, nor that to give to the poor, he had; yet all that they had
they left for Christ's sake, their parents, wives, children, houses, and
worldly employments, by which they supported themselves and families;
and became the disciples and followers of Christ, embraced his
doctrines, submitted to his commands, imitated him in the exercise of
grace, and discharge of duty, denying themselves, and suffering many
hardships on his account: wherefore it is asked,

what shall we have therefore? what reward for all this? what part in the
Messiah's kingdom? or what treasure in heaven?

[Matthew 19:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 19:28</span></span>

And Jesus said unto them,.... To all the disciples whom Peter
represented;

verily I say unto you: the thing being something very considerable, and
of great moment, Christ uses the asseveration he sometimes does in such
cases:

that ye which have followed me. Christ does not deny that they had
forsaken all for his sake, nor does he despise it, because it was but
little they left, though he does not repeat it; but only takes notice of
their following him, which, including their faith in him, their
profession of him, and subjection to him, was a much greater action, and
of more importance that the other, and therefore is only mentioned, and
which our Lord confirms:

in the regeneration. This clause is so placed, that it may be read in
connection with the preceding words, and be understood of the disciples
following Christ in the regeneration; meaning, not the grace of
regeneration, in which they could not be said, with propriety, to follow
Christ; and one of them was never a partaker of it: but the new state of
things, in the church of God, which was foretold, and is called the time
of reformation, or setting all things right, which began upon the
sealing up the law, and the prophets, and the ministry of John the
Baptist, and of Christ; who both, when they began to preach, declared,
that this time, which they call the kingdom of heaven, was at hand, just
ushering in. Now the twelve apostles followed Christ herein: they
believed, and professed him to be the Messiah; they received, what the
Jews called, his new doctrine, and preached it to others; they submitted
to the new ordinance of baptism, and followed Christ, and attended him
wherever he went, working miracles, preaching the Gospel, and reforming
the minds and manners of men. Now this new dispensation is called the
regeneration, and which more manifestly took place after our Lord's
resurrection, and ascension, and the pouring down of the Spirit;
wherefore the phrase may be connected with the following words,

when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory in the
regeneration; not in the resurrection of the dead, or at the last
judgment, but in this new state of things, which now began to appear
with another face: for the apostles having a new commission to preach
the Gospel to all the world; and being endued with power from on high
for such service, in a short time went every where preaching the word,
with great success. Gentiles were converted, as well as Jews, and both
brought into a Gospel church state; the ceremonies of the old law being
abolished, were disused; and the ordinances of baptism, and the Lord's
supper, every where practised; old things passed away, and all things
became new: agreeably to this the Syriac version renders the phrase, ,
"in the new world"; and so the Persic. The Arabic reads it, "in the
generation", or "age to come"; which the Jews so often call the world,
or age to come, the kingdom of the Messiah, the Gospel dispensation.

When the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, or glorious
throne; as he did when he ascended into heaven, and sat down at the
right hand of God; and was then exalted as a prince, and made, or
declared to be Lord and Christ; and was crowned in human nature, with
honour, and glory, and angels, principalities, and powers, made subject
to him:

ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones: for though Judas fell from his
apostleship, yet Matthias was chosen in his room, and took his place,
and made up the number twelve; a metaphorical phrase, setting forth the
honour, dignity, and authority of their office and ministry, by which
they should be

judging the twelve tribes of Israel; doctrinally and practically; by
charging them with the sin of crucifying Christ, condemning them for
their unbelief, and rejection of him, denouncing the wrath of God, and
the heaviest judgments that should fall upon them, as a nation, for
their sin; and by turning from them to the Gentiles, under which
judgment they continue to this day. So the doctors among the Jews are
represented as sitting and judging others: of "the potters", in [Ch1
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#023) they say (l.md),

"these are the disciples of the law, or the lawyers, for whose sake the
world is created, "who sit in judgment", and establish the world; and
build, and perfect the ruins of the house of Israel.''

\(l\) Targuru in 1 Chron. iv. 23.

[Matthew 19:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 19:29</span></span>

And everyone that hath forsaken houses,.... Not only the then disciples
of Christ, but any other believer in him, whether at that time, or in
any age, that should be called to quit their habitations, or leave their
dearest relations, friends, and substance: as

brethren or sisters, or father or mother, or wife or children, lands,
for my name's sake; or, as in Luke, "for the kingdom of God's sake";
that is, for the sake of the Gospel, and a profession of it. Not that
believing in Christ, and professing his name, do necessarily require a
parting with all worldly substance, and natural relations, but when
these things stand in competition with Christ, he is to be loved and
preferred before them; and believers are always to be ready to part with
them for his sake, when persecution arises, because of the word. All
these things are to be relinquished, rather than Christ, and his Gospel;
and such who shall be enabled, through divine grace, to do so,

shall receive an hundred fold: Mark adds, "now in this time"; and Luke
likewise, "in this present time", in this world; which may be understood
either in spiritual things, the love of God, the presence of Christ, the
comforts of the Holy Ghost, the communion of saints, and the joys and
pleasures felt in the enjoyment of these things, being an hundred times
more and better to them, than all they have left or lost for Christ's
sake; or in temporal things, so in Mark it seems to be explained, that
such shall now receive an hundred fold,

even houses and brethren, and sisters and mothers, and children and
lands; not that they should receive, for the leaving of one house, an
hundred houses; or for forsaking one brother, an hundred brethren, &c.
which last indeed might be true, as to a spiritual relation; but that
the small pittance of this world's goods, and the few friends they
should have "with persecutions" along with them, and amidst them, should
be so sweetened to them, with the love and presence of God, that these
should be more and better to them than an hundred houses, fields, and
friends, without them:

and shall inherit everlasting life. The other evangelists add, "in the
world to come", which is infinitely best of all; for this is an
inheritance incorruptible, undefiled, which fades not away, reserved in
the heavens, when all other inheritances are corruptible, defiled,
fading and perishing; houses fall, relations die, friends fail, and
lands and estates do not continue for ever: they then have the best of
it, who being called, in providence, to quit all terrene enjoyments for
Christ's sake, are favoured with his presence here, and shall enjoy
eternal glory and happiness with him in another world.

[Matthew 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 19:30</span></span>

But many that are first shall be last,.... This may refer unto, or be
occasioned by, either the young ruler; signifying that he, and others
like him, who were superior in riches and honour, were first in this
world, of the first rank and figure, should be the last in the world to
come:

and the last shall be first; the apostles, who were last in this world,
being poor, mean, and abject, should be the first in the other: or to
the Scribes and Pharisees, who were in the chief place, and highest
esteem, in the Jewish church, and yet least in the kingdom of heaven;
when, on the other hand, the publicans and sinners, who were in the
lowest class, and in least esteem, went first into it: or to the case of
persecution, when some, who seem most forward to endure it at a
distance, when it comes nearer, are most backward to it; whilst others,
who were most fearful of it, and ready to shrink at the thoughts of it,
most cheerfully bear it: or to the apostles themselves, one of which,
who was now first, Judas, should be last; and the apostle Paul, who was
last of all, as one born out of due time, should be first: or to Jews
and Gentiles, intimating, that the Jews, who were first in outward
privileges, would be rejected of God for their unbelief, and contempt of
the Messiah; and the Gentiles, who were last called, should be first, or
chief, in embracing the Messiah, professing his Gospel, and supporting
his interest. This sentence is confirmed, and illustrated, by a parable,
in the following chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 20](mat020.md)

</div>
