<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat001)  [Next](mat003) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)

[Matthew 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 2:1</span></span>

Now when Jesus was born,.... Several things are here related respecting
the birth of Christ, as the place where he was born,

in Bethlehem of Judea; so called to distinguish it from another
Bethlehem in the tribe of Zabulon, [Jos
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015). Here Christ was to be born
according to a prophecy hereafter mentioned, and accordingly the Jews
expected he would be born here, [Mat
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004) and so Jesus was born here, [Luk
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004) and this the Jews themselves
acknowledge;

"Such a year, says a noted (l) chronologer of theirs, Jesus of Nazareth
was born in Bethlehem Juda, which is a "parsa" and a half, i.e. six
miles, from Jerusalem.''

Benjamin (m) Tudelensis says it is two parsas, i.e. eight miles, from
it; and according to Justin Martyr (n) it was thirty five furlongs
distant from it. Yea even they own this, that Jesus was born there, in
that vile and blasphemous book (o) of theirs, written on purpose to
defame him; nay, even the ancient Jews have owned that the Messiah is
already born, and that he was born at Bethlehem; as appears from their
Talmud (p), where we meet with such a passage.

"It happened to a certain Jew, that as he was ploughing, one of his oxen
bellowed; a certain Arabian passed by and heard it, who said, O Jew,
Jew, loose thy oxen, and loose thy ploughshare, for lo, the house of the
sanctuary is destroyed: it bellowed a second time; he said unto him, O
Jew, Jew, bind thy oxen, and bind thy ploughshare, for lo "the king
Messiah is born". He said to him, what is his name? Menachem (the
comforter); he asked again, what is his father's name? Hezekiah; once
more he says, from whence is he? He replies "from the palace of the king
of Bethlehem Judah"; he went and sold his oxen and his ploughshares, and
became a seller of swaddling clothes for infants; and he went from city
to city till he came to that city, (Bethlehem,) and all the women bought
of him, but the mother of Menachem bought nothing.''

Afterwards they tell you, he was snatched away by winds and tempests.
This story is told in much the same manner in another (q) of their
writings. Bethlehem signifies "the house of bread", and in it was born,
as an ancient writer (r) observes, the bread which comes down from
heaven: and it may also signify "the house of flesh", and to it the
allusion may be in [Ti1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#016) "God
manifest in the flesh". The time of Christ's birth is here expressed,

in the days of Herod the king. This was Herod the great, the first of
that name: the Jewish chronologer (s) gives an account of him in the
following manner.

"Herod the first, called Herod the Ascalonite, was the son of Antipater,
a friend of king Hyrcanus and his deputy; him the senate of Rome made
king in the room of Hyrcanus his master. This Herod whilst he was a
servant of king Hyrcanus (so in the (t) Talmud Herod is said to be a
servant of the family of the Asmonaeans) king Hyrcanus saved from death,
to which he was sentenced by the sanhedrim of Shammai; that they might
not slay him for the murder of one Hezekiah, as is related by Josephus,
l. 6. c. 44. and Herod took to him for wife Miriam, the daughter of
Alexander the son of Aristobulus, who was the daughter's daughter of
king Hyrcanus.''

This writer tacitly owns afterwards (u) that Jesus was born in the days
of this king; for he says, that in the days of Hillell and Shammai (who
lived in those times) there was one of their disciples, who was called
R. Joshua ben Perachiah, and he was, adds he, "the master of the
Nazarene", or of Jesus of Nazareth. Herod reigned, as this same author
observes, thirty seven years; and according to Dr. Lightfoot's
calculation, Christ was born in the thirty fifth year of his reign, and
in the thirty first of Augustus Caesar, and in the year of the world
three thousand nine hundred and twenty eight, and the month Tisri, which
answers to part of our September, about the feast of tabernacles; which
indeed was typical of Christ's incarnation, and then it may reasonably
be thought that "the word was made flesh", and "tabernacled among us",
[Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014). Another circumstance
relating to the birth of Christ is, that

when Jesus was born--behold, there came wise men from the East to
Jerusalem; these wise men in the Greek text are called "Magi", a word
which is always used in a bad sense in the sacred writings; hence they
are thought by some to be magicians, sorcerers, wizards, such as Simon
Magus, [Act 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#009) and Elymas, [Act
13:8](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#008) and so the Jewish writers (w)
interpret the word a wizard, an enchanter, a blasphemer of God, and one
that entices others to idolatry; and in the Hebrew Gospel of Munster
these men are called "wizards". Some have thought this to be their
national name. Epiphanius (x) supposes that these men were of the
posterity of Abraham by Keturah, who inhabited a country in some part of
Arabia, called Magodia: but could this be thought to be the name of
their country, one might rather be induced to suppose that they were of
the "Magi", a nation of the Medes mentioned by Herodotus (y); since both
the name and country better agree with these persons; but the word seems
to be rather a name of character and office, and to design the wise men,
and priests of the Persians. An Eastern (z) writer says the word is of
Persic original, and is compounded of two words, "Mije Gush", which
signifies "a man with short ears"; for such was the first founder of the
sect, and from whom they were so called. But in the Arabic Persic
Nomenclator (a) it is rendered "a worshipper of fire", and such the
Persian priests were; and to this agrees what Apuleius (b) says, that
"Magus", in the Persian language, is the same as "priest" with us: and
Xenophon (c) says, that the Magi were first appointed by Cyrus, to sing
hymns to the gods, as soon as it was day, and to sacrifice to them. The
account given of them by Porphyry (d) is, that

"among the Persians they that were wise concerning God, and worshipped
him, were called "Magi", for so "Magus" signifies in their country
dialect; and so august and venerable were this sort of men accounted
with the Persians, that Darius, the son of Hystaspis, ordered this,
among other things, to be inscribed on his monument, that he was the
master of the Magi.''

From whence we may learn in some measure who these men were, and why the
word is by our translators rendered "wise men"; since the Magi, as
Cicero (e) says, were reckoned a sort of wise men, and doctors among the
Persians: who further observes, that no man could be a king of the
Persians before he understood the discipline and knowledge of the Magi:
and the wisdom of the Persian Magi, as Aelianus (f) writes, among other
things, lay in foretelling things to come. These came

from the east, not from Chaldea, as some have thought, led hereunto by
the multitude of astrologers, magicians, and soothsayers, which were
among that people; see [Dan 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#002) for
Chaldea was not east, but north of Judea, as appears from [Jer
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer001.htm#014) [Jer
6:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#022). Others have thought they came
from Arabia, and particularly Sheba, induced hereunto by [Psa
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010). But though some part of Arabia
lay east, yet Sheba was south of the land of Israel, as is evident from
the queen of that place being called the "queen of the south", [Mat
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#042). The more generally received
opinion seems to be most right, that they came from Persia, which as it
lies east of Judea, so was famous for this sort of men, and besides the
name, as has been seen, is of Persic original. The place whither they
came was Jerusalem, the "metropolis" of Judea, where they might suppose
the king of the Jews was born, or where, at least, they might persuade
themselves they should hear of him; since here Herod the king lived, to
whom it seems they applied themselves in the first place. The time of
their coming was, "when Jesus was born"; not as soon as he was born, or
on the "thirteenth" day after his birth, the sixth of January, as it
stands in our Calendar; or within the forty days before Mary's
Purification; since this space of time does not seem to be sufficient
for so long a journey, and which must require a considerable preparation
for it; nor is it probable if they came so soon as this, that after such
a stir at Jerusalem, after Herod's diligent search and inquiry
concerning this matter, and his wrath and anger at being disappointed
and deluded by the wise men, that Joseph and Mary should so soon bring
the child into the temple, where, it was declared to be the Messiah by
Simeon and Anna. Besides, immediately after the departure of the wise
men, Joseph with his wife and child were ordered into Egypt, which could
not be done before Mary's Purification. But rather this their coming was
near upon two years after the birth of Christ; since it is afterwards
observed, that "Herod sent and slew all the children that were in
Bethlehem, and in all the coasts thereof, from two years old and under,
according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the wise men",
[Mat 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016). This was the opinion of
Epiphanius (g) formerly, and is embraced by Dr. Lightfoot (h), to whom I
refer the reader for further proof of this matter.

\(l\) R. David Ganz. Zemach David, pars 2. fol. 14. 2. (m) Itinerarium,
p. 48. (n) Apolog. 2. p. 75. (o) Toldos, p. 7. (p) Hieros. Beracot. fol.
5. 1. (q) Echa Rabbati, fol. 50. 1. (r) Hieron. Epitaph. Paulae. fol.
59. E. Tom. 1. (s) R. David Ganz. Zemach David, pars 1. fol. 24. 1. (t)
T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 3. 2. Juchasin. fol. 17. 1. & 18. 1. & Seder
Olam Zuta, p. 111. (u) Ib. col. 2. (w) T. Bab. Sabbat. fol. 75. 1.
Gloss. in ib. & Sota, fol. 22. 1. & Sanhedrim, fol. 39. 1. (x) Contr.
Haeres. l. 3. Haeres. 30. (y) Clio sive l. 1. c. 101. (z)
Alfiranzabadius in Pocock. Specim. Hist. Arab. p. 146. (a) In Ibid. (b)
Apolog. p. 204. (c) Cyropaedia, l. 8. sect. 6. (d) De Abstinentia, l. 4.
sect. 16. (e) De Divinatione, l. i. (f) Hist. Var. l. 2. c. 17. (g)
Contr. Haeres. l. 1. Haeres. 30. and l. 2. Haeres. 51. (h) Harmony, Vol.
I. p. 205, 432, &c.

[Matthew 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 2:2</span></span>

Saying, where is he that is born king of the Jews?.... These words were
spoken to the Jews, or rather to Herod the king, or his ministers and
courtiers, or to each of them, as the wise men had the opportunity of
speaking to them; who make no scruple of his being born, of this they
were fully assured; nor did they in the least hesitate about his being
king of the Jews, who was born; but only inquire where he was, in what
city, town, village, house, or family. The reason of their asking this
question is,

for we have seen his star in the east. By the star they saw, some
understand an angel, which is not likely. The learned Lightfoot (i) is
of opinion that it was the light or glory of the Lord, which shone about
the shepherds, when the angel brought them the news of Christ's birth,
and which at so great a distance appeared as a star to these wise men;
others, that it was a comet, such as has been thought to portend the
birth or death of some illustrious person: but it seems to be properly a
star, a new and an unusual one, such as had never been seen, nor
observed before; and is called his star, the star of the king born,
because it appeared on his account, and was the sign of his birth, who
is "the root and offspring of David, and the bright and morning star",
[Rev 22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016). This they saw "in the
east"; not in the eastern part of the heavens, but they saw it when they
were in the east, that is, in their own country; and according to the
best observations they were able to make, it was in that part of the
heavens right over the land of Judea; from whence they concluded that
the king of the Jews was born; but the question is how they should
hereby know and be assured that such a person was born? To this it maybe
replied, that there is a prophecy of Balaam's which is thus expressed,
"there shall come a star out of Jacob, and a sceptre shall rise out of
Israel", [Num 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017) which is owned by
some Jewish writers (k) to be a prophecy of the Messiah; though the star
there mentioned is considered by them as one of the Messiah's titles;
hence one who set up himself, and for a while was by some received as
the Messiah, was called by them "the son of a star"; but when he was
discovered to be an impostor, they called him "the son of a lie": but I
rather take it to be a sign of the Messiah's coming, and the meaning is,
when a star shall "walk" or steer its course from Jacob, or above, or
over the land of Israel, then a sceptre, or sceptre bearer, that is, a
king, shall rise out of Israel. Now this prophecy of Balaam, who lived
in the east, might be traditionally handed down to this time, and be
well known by these men; and who, observing such a star appear over the
land of Judea, might conclude that now the sceptre bearer or king was
born (l). Besides, Zerdusht or Zoroastres, the author of the sect of the
Magi or wise men, and who appears to be a Jew by birth, and to be
acquainted with the writings of the Old Testament, and with this
prophecy, spoke of the birth of Christ to his followers; and told them
when he should be born, a star would appear, and shine in the day, and
ordered them to go where that directed, and offer gifts, and worship
him. An Eastern writer, who affirms (m) what I have now mentioned,
relates (n) the following speech as spoke by the wise men to Herod, when
in conversation with him, about this matter:

"A certain person, say they, of great note with us, in a book which he
composed, warned us in it, mentioning these things; a child that shall
descend from heaven, will be born in Palestine, whom the greatest part
of the world shall serve, and the sign of his appearance shall be this;
ye shall see a strange star, which shall direct you where he is; when ye
shall see this, take gold, myrrh and frankincense, and go and offer them
to him, and worship him, and then return, lest a great calamity befall
you. Now the star has appeared unto us, and we are come to perform what
was commanded us.''

If this be true, we are not at a loss how they come by their knowledge,
nor for a reason of their conduct. That the Jews have expected that a
star should appear at the time of the Messiah's coming, is certain, from
some passages in a book of theirs of great value and esteem among them,
in which are the following things: in one place it is said (o).

"The king Messiah shall be revealed in the land of Galilee, and lo a
star in the east shall swallow up seven stars in the north, and a flame
of red fire shall be in the firmament six days;''

and in another place, (p).

"When the Messiah shall be revealed, there shall rise up in the east a
certain Star, flaming with all sorts of colours--and all men shall see
it:''

once more it is affirmed as a tradition (q) that

"The holy blessed God hath determined to build Jerusalem, and to make a
certain (fixed) star appear sparkling with seven blazing tails shining
from it in the midst of the firmament--and then shall the king Messiah
be revealed in all the world.''

Now this expectation of the appearing of such a star at the coming of
the Messiah takes its rise from and is founded upon the above mentioned
prophecy. It is said (r) that Seth the son of Adam gave out a prophecy,
that a star should appear at the birth of the Messiah; and that a star
did appear at the birth of Christ is certain from the testimony of the
Evangelist, and seems to have some confirmation from the writings of the
Heathens themselves. Some have thought that the star which Virgil speaks
of, and calls (s) "Caesaris Astrum", "Caesar's star", is this very star,
which he in complaisance to that monarch ascribes to him. Pliny (t)
makes mention

"of a bright comet with a silver beard, which was so refulgent that it
could scarce be looked upon, showing in itself the effigies of God in
human form.''

If the testimony of Chalcidius, a Platonic philosopher, taken notice of
by many learned men, is genuine, and he not a Christian, (u) it is much
to the purpose, and is as follows:

"There is also a more venerable and sacred history, which speaks of the
rising of a certain unusual star; not foretelling diseases and deaths,
but the descent of a venerable God, born for the sake of human
conversation, and the affairs of mortals; which star truly, when the
wise men of the Chaldeans saw in their journey by night, and being very
expert in the consideration of celestial things, are said to inquire
after the birth of the new Deity, and having found the infant majesty,
to worship him, and pay their vows worthy of such a God.''

The end proposed by them in taking such a journey is expressed,

and are come to worship him; that is, either to pay adoration to him as
God, of which they might be convinced by the extraordinary appearance of
the star, or be assured of by divine revelation or rather to give him
civil homage and respect, as an illustrious person, as being king of the
Jews.

\(i\) Harmony, p. 205, 437, 438, Vol. I. Hor. Heb. p. 109. Vol. II. (k)
Targum Onk. Jon. & Aben Ezra in loc. Zohar. in Exod. fol. 4. 1.
Abarbinel Mashmia Jeshua, fol. 4. 3. Tzeror Hamor, fol. 126. 3. (l) See
my book of the "Prophecies of the Messiah", c. 7. p. 119, &c. (m)
Abulpharag. Hist. Dynast. p. 54. (n) lb. p. 70. (o) Zohar. in Gen. fol.
74. 3. (p) Zohar. in Exod. fol. 3. 3, 4. (q) lb. in Numb. fol 85. 4. and
86. 1. (r) Vid. Wolf. Bibl. Heb. p. 1156. (s) Eclog. 9. v. 47. (t) Nat.
Hist. l. 2. c. 25. (u) Vid. Fabricii Bibliothec. Latin. p. 142-146.

[Matthew 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 2:3</span></span>

When Herod the king had heard these things,.... That is, the report made
by the wise men of the appearance of an unusual star, and of the birth
of the king of the Jews, which they affirmed with all certainty, without
any hesitation,

he was troubled, and all Jerusalem with him. Herod was troubled, his
mind was disturbed and made uneasy, fearing he should be deposed, and
lose his kingdom, to which he knew he had no just right and claim, being
a foreigner; and "all Jerusalem", i.e. all the inhabitants of Jerusalem,
who heard of this, were also troubled, and showed a concern at it with
him; either feignedly, as knowing his jealousy, suspicion and cruelty;
or in reality, because of tumults, commotions and wars, they might fear
would arise upon this, having lost the true notion of the Messiah, as a
spiritual king, saviour and redeemer. And hereby was fulfilled, in part,
the famous prophecy in [Gen 49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010)
according to the sense of one (w) of the Targumists on it, who
paraphrases it after this manner;

"Kings and governors shall not cease from the house of Judah, nor
scribes, who teach the law, from his seed, until the time that the king
Messiah, the least of his sons, comes, "and because of him", , "the
people shall melt."''

that is, they shall be distressed and troubled, their hearts shall melt
like wax within them; which was their present case, though perhaps the
paraphrast may design the Gentiles.

\(w\) Jonathan ben Uzziel in loc.

[Matthew 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 2:4</span></span>

And when he had gathered all the chief priests,.... Here we have an
account of Herod's conduct at this juncture; he calls a council,
assembles the sanhedrim, gathers together the more learned persons in
the city to consult with them upon this matter,

the chief priests, all of which he gathered together, and which seem to
be many; and were not only the then present high priest and his
substitutes, but all the principal persons of the priesthood, who were
chosen from the rest, into the great sanhedrim, or council: and by

the scribes of the people are meant a sort of letter learned men, whose
business it was to keep and write out copies of the law, and other
things, for "the people"; they were the fathers of the traditions, and
interpreters of the law to them; and therefore are called "the scribes
of the people": as well also, because they were chosen from among the
people, from any other tribe, and not from the tribe of Levi, from whom
the priests were; so that one seems to design the "clergy", and the
other the laity, in this assembly. The Septuagint render "the officers
of the people", by this same word the scribes, and scribes of the
people, in [Num 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#016) [Jos
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#010). The learned Dr. Lightfoot (x)
conjectures, that the persons of note, who were present at this time,
were Hillell the president of the council, Shammai the vice president,
the sons of Betira, Judah and Joshua, Bava ben Buta, Jonathan ben
Uzziel, the Chaldee paraphrast, and Simeon the son of Hillell.

He demanded of them, or asked them with authority, as the chief captain
did, [Act 21:33](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#033) "where Christ", , the
Christ, the Messiah

should be born? that is, where was the place of his birth as fixed in
their prophecies, where, accordingly, they believed and expected he
would be born. Herod's pretence, no doubt, in putting this question was,
that he might be able to satisfy the wise men of the East about this
matter; though the true reason within himself was, that he might know
where this new born king was, in order to destroy him.

\(x\) Vol. II. p. 111.

[Matthew 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 2:5</span></span>

And they said unto him,.... They answer without any hesitation, it being
a generally received notion, and a thing well known among them,

in Bethlehem of Judea; and give their reason for it; for

thus it is written by the prophet, that is, the prophet Micah, in whose
prophecy, [Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002) it stands, and is
as follows:

[Matthew 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 2:6</span></span>

And thou Bethlehem in the land of Juda,.... This prophecy, which the
chief priests and scribes produced, as pointing at the place of Christ's
birth, is owned by both ancient and later Jews (y) to be a prophecy of
the Messiah. The difference between Micah and Matthew is easily
reconciled. Bethlehem is called by Micah, Bethlehem Ephratah, and by
Matthew, Bethlehem in the land of Judah, and both were one and the same
place. Bethlehem Ephratah was in the land of Juda, as appears from the
prophecy of Micah itself, from [Rut
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#002) and the Septuagint version of [Jos
15:60](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#060) and is described in this manner
by Matthew, partly to distinguish it from another Bethlehem in the land
of Zebulun, [Jos 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015) and partly
because its other name Ephratah was now disused, and so unknown to
Herod, who was unacquainted with the books and prophecies of the Old
Testament. Micah says this place was

little among the thousands of Judah. Matthew says, "not the least". But
in this is no apparent contradiction, it might be "little" and yet "not
the least"; besides, it might be "little" and "not little", or "not the
least" in different respects, and at different times; it might be
little, mean, and contemptible as to worldly splendour, riches, number
of inhabitants, pompous buildings, &c. and yet not be little or mean,
when considered as the place of the birth of many great persons, such as
Booz, Jesse, David, &c. and especially Christ. It might be little in
Micah's time, and yet not in Matthew's; especially since it had received
a considerable additional honour by Christ's being born there. Moreover,
the words in Micah may be rendered, by way of interrogation, "art thou
little, or the least?" To which the answer in Matthew is, "no, thou art
not the least", &c. or else the word may be understood, and the text be
translated thus; "it is a small thing that thou art among the thousands
of Judah, for out of thee", &c. a great honour shall be conferred on
thee, the Messiah shall spring from thee. Again, what Micah calls
"thousands", are in Matthew called "princes"; the reason of this is,
because the tribes of Israel were divided into thousands, and every
thousand had its prince; so that though here is a difference in words,
yet none in sense. What Micah styles "a ruler in Israel", Matthew
expresses by "a governor that shall rule or feed my people Israel"; but
in this there is no contradiction. Add to all this, that it should be
observed, that the Evangelist is not giving a version of his own, but of
the chief priests and scribes; and therefore was it ever so faulty,
they, and not he, must be chargeable with it; for he has acted the part
of a faithful historian in giving it in the words in which they cited it
(z).

\(y\) Targum Jon. Jarchi, Aben Ezra, Kimchi & Abendana in loc. Abarbinel
Mashmia Jeshua, fol. 62. 2. R. Isaac Chizuk Emuna, p. 279. (z) See my
book of the "Prophecies of the Messiah", &c. ch. 6. p. 104-116.

[Matthew 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 2:7</span></span>

Then Herod, when he had privately called the wise men,.... As soon as he
had got the intelligence of the place of the Messiah's birth, he called,
or ordered the wise men to be brought into his presence, and that in a
very private manner; lest the Jews, who knew his hypocrisy and deceit,
should perceive his views, and enter into his designs, and so give the
wise men some instructions, which would be prejudicial to the scheme he
was forming in his own mind to destroy the young king; and having called
them to him, he

inquired of them diligently what time the star appeared. He took a good
deal of pains in examining them, he sifted them, and inquired of them
with much accuracy, and exactness, the precise time of the star's
appearing to them, how long ago it was when it was first observed by
them; that hereby he might exactly know the age of Christ, and the
better execute the bloody design he had formed, should the wise men
disappoint him; and the better detect an impostor, should another
afterwards arise, and set up himself for the king of the Jews.

[Matthew 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 2:8</span></span>

And he sent them to Bethlehem,.... Having got out of them all that he
could, and was for his purpose, he informs them of the place where they
might find the person they came to inquire after, according to the
account of it which the chief priests and scribes had given him; and
then sends them away to Bethlehem, where Christ, according to prophecy,
was to be born, and now was born. It may seem strange that neither any
of the Jews, nor Herod, or any of his ministers and courtiers, should go
along with these men to Bethlehem; since it was but a little way off,
not above five or six miles from Jerusalem; and since the birth of such
a person was no trivial thing, but an affair of great concern and
importance. The Jews might not care to go, lest Herod should suspect
that they were going to revolt from him, and set up this new born king
against him; and it might be a piece of policy in Herod and his
courtiers not to accompany them, for they might imagine that the parents
of the child would be jealous and afraid of them, and would therefore
conceal it, when they would be in no fear of strangers: and no doubt but
the wise providence of God overruled and directed this matter, that so
the young child Jesus might be preserved from the bloody designs of this
tyrant; who often takes the wise in their own craftiness, and carries
the counsel of the froward headlong. When he dismissed them he gave them
this charge and these orders,

go and search diligently for the young child; go to Bethlehem, the place
of his birth I have told you of, and there inquire and search in every
house and family, omit none till you have found him;

and when you have found him bring me word again; give me a particular
account of him, who are his parents, and where he dwells,

that I may come and worship him also: for they had declared, that the
reason of their coming was to worship him; this he said hypocritically,
in order to hide and cover his bloody intentions.

[Matthew 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 2:9</span></span>

When they had heard the king,.... With great care and attention, what he
had told them of the birth place of the young child; the strict charge
he had given them to search diligently for him, and then return to him
with an account of the whole affair; and his expressions of respect to
the new born prince, which they took to be said in great sincerity,

they departed; took their leave of Herod and his court, and set forward
on their journey from Jerusalem to Bethlehem:

and lo, to their great surprise and joy,

the star, which they saw in the east, then appeared; for, it seems, it
had for some time disappeared: it looks as if it had been only seen at
the time of Christ's birth, and when they were in their own country; for
both here, and in [Mat 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#002) they are
only said to have seen it "in the east", that is, when they were in the
east country; so that it seems from that time they had had no sight of
it, not while they were on their journey, nor at Jerusalem; nor was it
necessary they should. When they saw it in their own country, according
to their best observation, it was over the land of Judea, and they were
persuaded of it, that it was a certain sign that the king of the Jews
was born: they therefore determine upon and prepare for a journey to
Jerusalem, the metropolis of the nation, and where the king kept his
court, to inquire for him; nor needed they the guidance of the star to
direct them to a place so well known; but being in quest of him in an
obscure place, and without any guide, this star appears to them; and,
which is something very extraordinary,

went before them, till it came, and stood over, where the young child
was. This star had a motion, kept pace with them, and was a guide unto
them, till it and they came to the place where Christ was; and then it
stood directly over the house, so that they had no need to inquire of
any person for him. It is certain from hence, that this star was indeed
a very unusual one; its being seen in the daytime, its motion and
standing still, its situation, which must be very low, and its use to
point out the very house where Christ was, show it to be so; but though
it was an unusual appearance, it should not be thought incredible. (a)
Varro relates, that

"from the time Aeneas went from Troy, he saw the star Venus in the
daytime, day after day, till he came to the field of Laurentum, where he
saw it no more, by which he knew that those lands were fatal.''

The appearing of this star, and then its disappearing for a time, agree,
in some measure, with the account the Jews give of the star which they
expect will be seen at the coming of the Messiah; for they (b) say,

"after seven days that star shall be hid, and the Messiah shall be hid
for twelve months--when he shall descend, the pillar of fire shall be
seen as before, in sight, and afterwards the Messiah shall be revealed,
and many people shall be gathered to him.''

\(a\) Apud Servium in Virgil Aeneid. l. 1. p. 471. Ed. Basil. 1586. (b)
Zohar in Exod. fol. 3, 4. & 71. 1.

[Matthew 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 2:10</span></span>

When they saw the star,.... Which by its appearance, size, brightness,
&c. they knew to be the same with that which they had seen, when in
their own country;

they rejoiced with exceeding great joy; a "pleonasm" or a redundancy of
expression frequently used by the Hebrews, see [Joh
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#006) and the Septuagint there; setting
forth the rapture, the excess of joy they were in upon the sight of the
star. Very probably before this, their hearts were sad, their
countenances dejected, and they greatly discouraged, having taken so
great a journey, and as yet to so little purpose. They had been at
Jerusalem, where they expected to have found him that was born king of
the Jews; they had been at court, and conversed with men of the greatest
figure and intelligence, and could get no tidings of him; people of all
ranks and degrees seemed to be troubled at the account they brought; no
body cared to go along with them to Bethlehem: all these circumstances
no doubt were discouraging to them; but as soon as they saw the star
their spirits revived, joy filled their hearts, cheerfulness appeared in
their countenances; and they pursued their journey with inexpressible
delight, till they came to the place where the illustrious person was
they were seeking after.

[Matthew 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 2:11</span></span>

And when they were come into the house,.... Which they entered without
making any inquiry, being fully assured by the star's standing right
over it, that this was the house, and here was the king of the Jews,
whom they were come to worship; and having entered in "they saw" some
copies read

they found the young child, with Mary his mother; in her lap, or arms,
or in the house with her, for by this time he might go alone. Joseph
perhaps was not at home, but about his business; and which might be so
ordered by the providence of God, that so these men might only see the
mother of Christ, who had no real father as man; who had they seen
Joseph, might have took him to be his proper father. Upon the sight of
the young child,

they fell down on their knees or faces to the ground, agreeably to the
custom of their country,

and worshipped him as a king; giving him the same civil honour and
respect, as they were wont to do to their own kings and princes; which
custom began with Cyrus: for so Xenophon (c) says, that

"when the people saw him, , they all worshipped him; either because some
were ordered to begin this custom; or else being amazed at the
apparatus; or because he seemed to appear so great and beautiful; for
before that time none of the Persians worshipped Cyrus.''

And when they had opened their treasures, that is, their purses, bags or
boxes, in which they put those things they brought with them necessary
for their journey;

they presented, or offered to him

gifts, gold, frankincense and myrrh: such things as they had; it being
usual, not only with the Persians, but other eastern nations, to make
presents to kings and great persons, when they made any addresses to
them; which generally, among other things, consisted of gold, spices,
myrrh, and the like, see [Gen 43:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen043.htm#011).
Which last passage referred to, being a prophecy of the Messiah, has
been thought by some now to have had its accomplishment, together with
[Isa 60:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#006) where frankincense as well
as gold is mentioned, "they shall bring gold and incense" or
frankincense; upon which a noted Jewish writer (d) observes, that gold
and frankincense shall be brought privately as a present to the king
Messiah. According to the Ethiopians, these wise men were three, whose
names they give us; the name of him that offered the gold, was Annoson;
he that offered the frankincense, was Allytar; and he that offered the
myrrh, Kyssad (e). The Papists call them the three kings of Colen, and
say they lie buried in that place.

\(c\) Cyropaedia, l. 8. sect. 23. (d) R. David Kimchi. (e) Ludolph. Lex.
Ethiop. p. 539, 542, 543.

[Matthew 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 2:12</span></span>

Being warned of God in a dream,.... It is likely they made a short stay
at Bethlehem, might lodge there a night; at least laid themselves down a
while to take some refreshment in sleep, after they had paid their
respects to him that was born king of the Jews, and performed the whole
business they came about; when in a dream they received a divine oracle,
were admonished and counselled by God,

that they should not return to Herod: which would have been going back
again, and out of their way; there being a nearer one from Bethlehem to
their own country, than to go by Jerusalem, though Herod had charged
them to return to him. Whether they had promised him they would, is not
certain; it is probable they might; however, they thought it most
advisable to hearken to the divine oracle; wherefore,

they departed into their own country another way. What became of these
persons afterwards, and whether they were spiritually and savingly
enlightened into the knowledge of Christ; what a report they made of him
when they came into their own country, and the success thereof, we have
no account of, either in sacred or profane history.

[Matthew 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 2:13</span></span>

And when they were departed,.... That is immediately, or as soon as they
were gone, or in a very little time after, probably the same night,

behold, the Angel of the Lord appeareth to Joseph in a dream; it is very
likely the same angel who appeared to him in such sort, [Mat
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#020) "saying arise", awake out of
sleep, and rise from thy bed directly,

and take the young child and his mother. The angel does not say take thy
wife and son; for though Mary was properly his wife, yet Christ was not
properly his son. The child is also mentioned before the mother, not
only because of his divine nature and office, in respect to which he was
her God and Saviour; but because it was the preservation of the child
that was chiefly regarded, and for which the providence of God was
particularly concerned; wherefore Joseph is ordered to take them in
proper carriages, and

flee into Egypt, which was near to Judea, and so a fit place to flee to;
for a long and tedious journey would not have been suitable to the
mother and her young child. Moreover, Egypt was out of Herod's
jurisdiction; here he could not come at them, or have any power over
them; besides, hereby a prophecy after mentioned was to have its
accomplishment. Hence it appears to be lawful to flee from danger, from
tyrants and persecutors, when the providence of God opens a way for
escape. The angel goes on with his charge,

and be thou there until I bring thee word: continue there, do not remove
elsewhere, or return back, till I speak with thee, or order and command
thee otherwise; and gives the reason for his appearing to him in such a
manner, and giving such a charge;

for Herod will seek the young child to destroy him: no less a person
than Herod the king, a bloody minded man, revengeful, desperate, and
resolute in whatsoever he undertakes, "will seek", diligently search and
inquire for, not his parents, Joseph and Mary, who might have been safe,
but "the young child", who was born king of the Jews, and which gave him
a great deal of uneasiness; and that not to worship him, as he told the
wise men, but

to destroy him, to take away his life; to prevent which the angel was
sent with this charge to Joseph: for though he was born to die for the
sins of his people, his time was not yet come; he was to grow up to
years of maturity, he was to be a preacher of the Gospel, to do many
miracles and at last to lay down his life of himself, voluntarily, and
not to be taken away from him without his knowledge and will.

[Matthew 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 2:14</span></span>

When he arose, he took the young child and his mother,.... That is, as
soon as he awoke out of sleep, and rose from his bed, he did as he was
commanded, he prepared for his journey; and very opportunely had the
wise men presented their gifts; the gold they brought served to defray
the expense of this journey, and which no doubt was so ordered by divine
providence for this purpose. Joseph was very punctual and expeditious in
obeying the command of God; he took the young child and his mother,

by night, the very selfsame night in which he had this notice; and which
season was the most fitting to depart in for secrecy, and most
commodious and agreeable to travel in, in those hot countries: hence it
appears very manifest, that the coming of the wise men, and the
departure of Joseph with Mary and Jesus into Egypt, could not be within
a fortnight after the birth of Christ, nor any time before Mary's
Purification; since such a journey must have been very improper and
unsuitable, at any time within that period; but rather Jesus must be
about two years of age, whether something under, or over, it matters
not, when Joseph with him

departed into Egypt: what part of Egypt he went into is not certain. The
Jews say that Jesus went to Alexandria in Egypt, and which is probable
enough; since this was a place greatly resorted to at this time by Jews,
and where provision was made for their sustenance; though they greatly
mistake the person with whom he went; for they say (f) that R. Joshua
ben Perachiah, whom they pretend was his master, went to Alexandria in
Egypt, and Jesus with him. However, this is an acknowledgment of the
truth of this part of Christ's history, that he was in Egypt; as also
when they blasphemously and maliciously say (g), did not Ben Stada, by
whom they mean Jesus, bring enchantments or magic, , "out of Egypt", in
a cutting in the flesh? To which wicked accusation Arnobius seems to
refer (h), when he says,

"perhaps we may meet with many other of these reproachful and childish
sayings; as that he was a magician, that he performed all these things
by secret arts, and that he stole strange sciences, and the names of
mighty angels, out of the temples of the Egyptians.''

\(f\) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 107. 2. Cabala R. Abraham. Juchasin, fol.
16. 2. (g) T. Hieros. Sabbat. fol. 13. 1. Bab. Sabbat. fol. 104. 2. (h)
Adv. Gentes, l. 1. p. 36.

[Matthew 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 2:15</span></span>

And was there until the death of Herod,.... Which was in a very short
time; for Eusebius (i) says, that immediately, in a very little time
after the slaughter of the children at Bethlehem, the divine vengeance
inflicted diseases on him, which quickly brought him to his end; so
that, according to the learned Dr. Lightfoot (k), Jesus was not above
three or four months in Egypt. Now all this was brought about,

that it might be fulfilled; not by way of accommodation of phrases to a
like event; or by way of type, which has a fresh completion in the
antitype; or as a proverbial sentence which might be adapted to any
remarkable deliverance out of hardship, misery and destruction; but
literally, properly, and in the obvious sense thereof;

which was spoken of the Lord by the prophet, not Balaam, in [Num
23:22](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#022) or [Num
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#008) but in [Hos
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#001) "when Israel was a child, then I
loved him, and called my son out of Egypt": the meaning of which passage
is, either in connection with the last clause of the foregoing chapter
thus; "in a morning shall the king of Israel be cut off", "because
Israel is a child", a rebellious and disobedient one, acting a very weak
and wicked part; "yet I have loved him, or do love him", and "have
called", or "will call", (the past tense for the future, frequent in the
Hebrew language, especially in the prophetic writings,) "my son out of
Egypt"; who will be obliged to retire there for some time; I will make
him king, set him upon the throne, who shall execute justice, and reign
for ever and ever; or thus, "because Israel is a child", helpless and
imprudent, and "I love him", though he is so, "therefore l will call",
or I have determined to call

my son out of Egypt: who through a tyrant's rage and malice will be
obliged to abide there a while; yet I will bring him from thence into
the land of Judea, where he shall live and "help" my "servant", (l),
"child Israel"; shall instruct him in his duty, teach him the doctrines
of the Gospel, and at last, by his sufferings and death, procure for him
the pardon of all his transgressions; of which there is a particular
enumeration in [Mat 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#003). This is the
natural and unconstrained sense of these words, which justifies the
Evangelist in his citation and application of them to Christ's going to
Egypt, and his return from thence, as I have elsewhere (m) shown.

\(i\) Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 8. p. 25, 26. (k) Harmony of the New
Testament, p. 6. (l) Luke i. 54. (m) Prophecies of the Messiah, &c. p.
123, &c.

[Matthew 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 2:16</span></span>

Then Herod, when he saw that he was mocked,.... Herod, having waited a
proper time for the return of the wise men, and they not coming,
concluded he was tricked by them; though, no doubt, when they promised
to return, and bring him word how things were, they seriously meant and
designed a performance; but having met with a divine oracle, which
ordered them another way, they thought it most advisable to obey God
rather than man. Upon this,

Herod was exceeding wroth; partly at the usage he met with from the wise
men, who according to his apprehension had put a trick upon him; and
chiefly because his scheme was broke, which was by them to come at the
knowledge and sight of the young child, and privately dispatch him: and
now he might fear, which increased his wrath, that the child would
escape his hands, and in time be set up for king, to the prejudice of
him and his family; wherefore, to prevent this, if possible, he

sent forth his officers and soldiers, of his own will, without any show
of law or justice, acting herein as an absolute and tyrannical prince,

and slew all the children that were in Bethlehem, and in all the coasts
thereof, from two years old and under. A most cruel and barbarous
action, and agrees with the character given of him, that he was in the
beginning of his reign, and it seems too in the latter end of it, , "a
bloody and deceitful man" (n): he slew, or ordered to be slain,
"children", infants who had done him no injury, nor were capable of
doing any, and whose parents also had not disobliged him; he slew the
infants at Bethlehem, because this was the place of the Messiah's birth,
the knowledge of which he had got from the chief priests and scribes; he
slew all of them, that there might be no possibility of the young
child's escaping: and lest it should by any means escape to a
neighbouring town or village, he slew all the children

in all the coasts thereof, in all the territories of Bethlehem, in all
the towns and villages around it, as many as were

from two years old and under: for of such an age he supposed the newborn
king to be; he knew he must be near that age, but could not exceed it,

according to the time which he had diligently inquired of the wise men;
of the appearing of the star to them, and when they concluded this great
and famous prince was born. This cruel murder of the infants seems to be
hinted at by Josephus (o), where he says, that "many slaughters followed
the prediction of a new king"; and is more manifestly referred to by
Macrobins, a Heathen author, though the story is mixed and confounded
with other things; who reports (p), that

"when Augustus heard, that among the children under two years of age,
whom Herod king of the Jews ordered to be slain in Syria, that his son
was also killed, said, it was better to be Herod's hog than his son.''

Killing of infants as soon as born, or while in their cradles, is by the
Jews ascribed to one Lilith, which, R. Elias (q) says, is the name of a
devil, which kills children; and indeed such an action is truly a
diabolical one.

\(n\) Ganz. Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 25. 1. (o) Antiq. l. 17. c. 3.
(p) Saturnal. l. 2. c. 4. (q) Methurgemau in voce Vid. Buxtorf. Lexicon
Rab. in cadem voce & Synagog. Jud. c. 4. p. 80.

[Matthew 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 2:17</span></span>

Then was fulfilled that which was spoken,.... By the slaughter of the
infants at Bethlehem was literally accomplished what had been predicted
by

Jeremy the prophet, in [Jer 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#015).

in Rama was there a voice heard, &c. That this prophecy belongs not to
the Babylonish captivity, but the times of the Messiah, appears from the
whole context; which manifestly speaks of the miraculous conception of
Christ, of the blessings of his kingdom to be enjoyed by his people, and
of the new covenant to be made with them, as I have shown in another
place (r). Rama was not in Arabia, as Justin Martyr says (s), but a town
in the tribe of Benjamin, [Jos 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025)
and very near to Bethlehem in the tribe of Juda: between these two
places, and near to both of them, was the grave of Rachel, [Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019) for which reason, and also
because Rama belonged to Benjamin, a son of hers, and where, no doubt,
many children were destroyed in this massacre, as well as at Bethlehem,
Rachel is introduced in the prophecy representing the sorrowful mothers
of those parts,

weeping for their children; whose distress and grief are signified by
several words, "lamentation, weeping and great mourning", to express the
excessiveness thereof, for they

would not be comforted; they refused to hear anything that might be
suggested to them for their relief, because their children

were not, i.e. were dead, were not in the land of the living, and no
more to be enjoyed by them in this world. I cannot forbear transcribing
a remark made by a noted Jew (t) upon that passage in [Gen
35:20](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#020). "And Jacob set a pillar upon
her grave"; to show, says he, that Jacob saw that this thing was of the
Lord, and that it would be an help to her children, as it is written, "a
voice was heard in Rama", &c. wherefore he set a pillar upon her; and to
show that the affair of her grave, that this "belonged to the time to
come", he says, "that is the pillar of Rachel's grave unto this day": he
means, , "the day of redemption". And Rachel, in the passage of Jeremy,
the Jews (u) themselves own, means the congregation of Israel.

\(r\) Prophecies of the Messiah, &c. p. 126, &c. (s) Dialog. cum Tryph.
p. 304. (t) R. Abraham Seba Tzeror Hammor, fol. 47. 1. (u) Zohar in
Exod. fol. 13. 1. & in Lev. fol. 8. 4.

[Matthew 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 2:19</span></span>

But when Herod was dead,.... Who died, as before observed, a few months
after this tragedy was acted; and, according to the (w) Jewish writers,
on the seventh day of the month Cisleu, and which answers to the twenty
fifth of our November: and was afterwards observed as a day of rejoicing
by the Jews. The account which Josephus (x), and from him Eusebius (y),
gives of his miserable death, is as follows; a burning fever seized him,
with an intolerable itching all over his body, and continual pains of
the colic; his feet swelled with a dropsy; he had an inflammation in the
lower part of his belly: a putrefaction in his privy parts, which bred
worms; a frequency and difficulty of breathing, and convulsions in all
his members; he had a voracious appetite, a stinking breath, and his
intestines abounded with ulcers; when he found that all means made use
of were ineffectual, and that he must die, he attempted to lay violent
hands upon himself, but was prevented, and soon after expired in a very
miserable manner. Now some time after his death,

behold an angel of the Lord appeareth in a dream to Joseph in Egypt. It
may be the same angel who appeared in the same manner, and ordered him
to go into Egypt, with the young child and his mother; and who now
brings him news of the death of Herod, and bids him return to the land
of Israel; which shows the watchful providence of God, and the useful
ministry of angels, concerned in the preservation of the infant Jesus.

\(w\) Megillah Taanith apud Van Till. de anno, &c. Christ. Nat. p. 122.
(x) De Bello Judaic. l. 1. c. 33. sect. 5. 7. & Antiq. l. 17. c. 9. (y)
Eccl. Hist. l. 1. c. 8. p. 25, 26.

[Matthew 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 2:20</span></span>

Saying, arise, and take the young child and his mother,.... Joseph
strictly observed and obeyed the divine command of the angel, who had
ordered him to continue in Egypt, till he brought him word what he
should do, and where he should go: here he was with Mary and Jesus, when
the angel bid him arise, and take them with him,

and go into the land of Israel. He does not bid him go to Bethlehem or
Nazareth, or any particular place, but the land of Israel, where he
might go even into any part of it, without fear; and gives this reason
for it,

for they are dead which sought the young child's life; meaning either
Herod only, the plural number being put for the singular; or including
Antipater his son with him, who might be equally concerned in seeking
the life of Christ; since he was next heir, and whom Herod (z) ordered
to be slain about five days before his death; or else designing with him
many of the executioners of the infants at Bethlehem, and thereabout;
who might have been, as well as he, miserable instances of divine
vengeance, for their concern in that barbarous tragedy.

\(z\) Joseph. de Bello Judaico, l. 1. c. 33. sect. 8, 9.

[Matthew 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 2:21</span></span>

And he arose and took the young child and his mother,.... He exactly
conformed in every circumstance to the orders given him, with respect to
the persons he took, the place he went to, and the expeditiousness of
doing it; and is an example of ready and cheerful obedience to the
commands of God, worthy of imitation. We may learn from hence, as well
as from some other instances already met with, a reason among others,
why, though Mary was a virgin, and even if she was to continue so, yet
she must be espoused to Joseph as her husband; that she might have one
to take care of her and her young child, and be a means, under God, of
preserving, protecting, and providing for them.

[Matthew 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 2:22</span></span>

But when he heard that Archelaus,.... This Archelaus was a son of Herod
the great by Malthace Samaritan, and was appointed by him for his
successor a little before his death, and was upon it declared king by
the populace, the soldiers, and those that were in power; all which is
affirmed by Josephus (a), and confirms the account given by the
Evangelist; with whose account agrees what the Jewish chronologer says
(b), that

"Archelaus, the second king of the family of Herod, reigned after his
father's death: and a little after he says, Caesar Augustus caused
Archelaus to reign "in the room of Herod his father"'';

which is the very phrase used by Matthew. Now this man was like his
father, a very cruel wicked man; and, as the above chronologer says (c),
he ordered his troops, and slew at the feast of the passover, in the
temple of the Lord, "nine thousand persons": though perhaps Josephus's
account is truest, who says (d), that he sent in his whole army upon the
people, who had raised a sedition, and slew, whilst they were
sacrificing, about "three thousand"; and this happened at the beginning
of his reign, and indeed before he had scarce mounted the throne. And
now the news of this might have reached the ears of Joseph, and be the
reason why he

was afraid to go thither, into Judea, where Archelaus reigned.

Notwithstanding being warned of God in a dream, who never failed to
advise him when in difficulty and distress, he did not go back again to
Egypt, but

turned aside into the parts of Galilee; where Herod Antipas, another of
Herod's sons, was tetrarch or governor; who was a milder person, and not
so cruel and tyrannical as Archelaus: besides, Galilee was an obscure
place, where, Joseph might reasonably think, he should live with Mary
and Jesus unobserved, and free from danger.

\(a\) Ib. c. 28. sect. 7. &c. 33. sect. 1. & l. 2. c. 1. sect. 1. (b)
Ganz. Tzemach David, par. 1. fol 25. 1. (c) Ib. (d) De Bello Jud. l. 2.
c. 1. sect. 5.

[Matthew 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 2:23</span></span>

And he came and dwelt in a city called Nazareth,.... Which was a city of
Galilee, and where Joseph and Mary had both dwelt before, [Luk
1:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#026) here they came and fixed their
habitation,

that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by the prophet. This affair
of going into Galilee, and settling at Nazareth, was brought about with
this view, to accomplish what had been foretold by the prophets, or
prophet, the plural number being used for the singular, as in [Joh
6:45](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#045). And indeed it is so rendered
here in the Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions; and designs the
prophet Isaiah, and respects that prophecy of his in [Isa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001) "and there shall come forth a rod
out of the stem of Jesse, and "a branch shall grow out of his roots"; a
prophecy owned by the Jews (e) themselves to belong to the Messiah, and
which was now fulfilled in Jesus; who as he was descended from Jesse's
family, so by dwelling at Nazareth, he would appear to be, and would be
"called a Nazarene, or Netzer, the branch"; being an inhabitant of
Natzareth, or Netzer, so called from the multitude of plants and trees
that grew there.

A Nazarene, as David de Pomis says (f),

"is one that is born in the city Netzer, which is said to be in the land
of Galilee, three days journey distant from Jerusalem.''

Now though Christ was not born, yet because he dwelt at Nazareth, and
was educated there; hence the Jews frequently call him , "Jesus, the
Nazarene (g)"; and sometimes only "the Nazarene" (h). They also design
him by , "Ben Netzer" (i), of whom they say a great many evil things:
and that Christ is often called Jesus of Nazareth, or the Nazarene, and
his followers Nazarenes, from the place of his habitation, is known to
everyone. One of Christ's disciples is called Netzer in the Talmud (k),
and made to plead for his life, because his name signified a branch,
according to [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001). Surenhusius
observes (l), that the form "to fulfil what is said", used by the
Talmudists, and which he takes to be the same with this here, is used by
them, when they allege not the very words of Moses, or the prophets, but
their sense, which is deduced as a certain axiom from them; and thinks
it is applicable to the present case.

\(e\) Targum, Jarchi, Aben Ezra & Kimchi in loc. (f) Lexic Heb. fol.
141. 2. (g) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 17. 1. Ganz. par. 2. fol. 14. 2.
Abarbinel in Dan. fol. 44. 1. (h) Ganz. par. 1. fol. 24. 2. (i) T. Bab.
Cetuboth, fol. 51. 2. & Gloss. in ib. Bereshith Rabba, fol. 67. 2.
Abarbinel in Dau. fol. 44. 1. (k) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 43. 1. (l)
Biblos Katallages, p, 2, 3, 4, 197, &c.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 3](mat003)

</div>
