<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat004)  [Next](mat006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)

[Matthew 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 5:1</span></span>

And seeing the multitudes,.... The great concourse of people that
followed him from the places before mentioned,

he went up into a mountain; either to pray alone, which was sometimes
his custom to do, or to shun the multitude; or rather, because it was a
commodious place for teaching the people:

and when he was set: not for rest, but in order to teach; for sitting
was the posture of masters, or teachers, see [Mat
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#002) [Luk
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#020). The form in which the master and
his disciples sat is thus described by Maimonides (z).

"The master sits at the head, or in the chief place, and the disciples
before him in a circuit, like a crown; so that they all see the master,
and hear his words; and the master may not sit upon a seat, and the
scholars upon the ground; but either all upon the earth, or upon seats:
indeed from the beginning, or formerly, "the master used to sit", and
the disciples stand; but before the destruction of the second temple,
all used to teach their disciples as they were sitting.''

With respect to this latter custom, the Talmudists say (a), that

"from the days of Moses, to Rabban Gamaliel (the master of the Apostle
Paul), they did not learn the law, unless standing; after Rabban
Gamaliel died, sickness came into the world, and they learnt the law
sitting: hence it is a tradition, that after Rabban Gamaliel died, the
glory of the law ceased.''

His disciples came unto him; not only the twelve, but the company, or
multitude, of his disciples, [Luk 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#017)
which he made in the several places, where he had been preaching; for
the number of his disciples was larger than John's.

\(z\) Hilch. Talmud Torah, c. 4. sect. 2. (a) T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 21.
1. Vid. Misn. Sota, c. 9. sect. 15. & Jarchi, Maimon, & Bartenora in ib.

[Matthew 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 5:2</span></span>

And he opened his mouth,.... He spoke with a clear and strong voice,
that all the people might hear him; and with great freedom, utterance,
and cheerfulness, and things of the greatest moment and importance;

and taught them; not his disciples only, but the whole multitude, who
heard him with astonishment; see [Mat
7:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#028). Some things in the following
discourse are directed to the disciples in particular, and others regard
the multitude in general.

[Matthew 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 5:3</span></span>

Blessed are the poor in spirit,.... Not the poor in purse, or who are so
with respect to things temporal: for though God has chosen and called
many, who are in such a condition of life, yet not all; the kingdom of
heaven cannot be said to belong to them all, or only; but such as are
poor in a spiritual sense. All mankind are spiritually poor; they have
nothing to eat that is fit and proper; nor any clothes to wear, but
rags; nor are they able to purchase either; they have no money to buy
with; they are in debt, owe ten thousand talents, and have nothing to
pay; and in such a condition, that they are not able to help themselves.
The greater part of mankind are insensible of this their condition; but
think themselves rich, and increased with goods: there are some who are
sensible of it, who see their poverty and want, freely acknowledge it,
bewail it, and mourn over it; are humbled for it, and are broken under a
sense of it; entertain low and mean thoughts of themselves; seek after
the true riches, both of grace and glory; and frankly acknowledge, that
all they have, or hope to have, is owing to the free grace of God. Now
these are the persons intended in this place; who are not only "poor",
but are poor "in spirit"; in their own spirits, in their own sense,
apprehension, and judgment: and may even be called "beggars", as the
word may be rendered; for being sensible of their poverty, they place
themselves at the door of mercy, and knock there; their language is,
"God be merciful"; their posture is standing, watching, and waiting, at
wisdom's gates, and at the posts of her door; they are importunate, will
have no denial, yet receive the least favour with thankfulness. Now
these are pronounced "blessed", for this reason,

for theirs is the kingdom of heaven; not only the Gospel, and the
ministration of it, which belongs to them. "The poor have the Gospel
preached": it not only reaches their ears, but their hearts; it enters
into them, is applied unto them, they receive and embrace it with the
utmost joy and gladness; but eternal glory, this is prepared for them,
and given to them; they are born heirs of it, have a right unto it, are
making meet for it, and shall enjoy it.

[Matthew 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 5:4</span></span>

Blessed are they that mourn,.... For sin, for their own sins; the sin of
their nature, indwelling sin, which is always working in them, and is a
continual grief of mind to them; the unbelief of their hearts,
notwithstanding the many instances, declarations, promises, and
discoveries of grace made unto them; their daily infirmities, and many
sins of life, because they are committed against a God of love, grace,
and mercy, grieve the Spirit, and dishonour the Gospel of Christ: who
mourn also for the sins of others, for the sins of the world, the
profaneness and wickedness that abound in it; and more especially for
the sins of professors, by reason of which, the name of God, and ways of
Christ, are evil spoken of: who likewise mourn under afflictions,
spiritual ones, temptations, desertions, and declensions; temporal ones,
their own, which they receive, either more immediately from the hand of
God, or from men; such as they endure for the sake of Christ, and the
profession of his Gospel; and who sympathize with others in their
afflictions. These, how sorrowful and distressed soever they may appear,
are blessed

for they shall be comforted: here in this life, by the God of all
comfort, by Christ the comforter; by the Spirit of God, whose work and
office it is to comfort; by the Scriptures of truth, which are written
for their consolation; by the promises of the Gospel, through which the
heirs of promise have strong consolation; by the ordinances of it, which
are breasts of consolation; and by the ministers of the word, who have a
commission from the Lord to speak comfortably to them; and then are they
comforted, when they have the discoveries of the love of God,
manifestations of pardoning grace, through the blood of Christ, and
enjoy the divine presence: and they shall be comforted hereafter; when
freed from all the troubles of this life, they shall be blessed with
uninterrupted communion with Father, Son, and Spirit, and with the happy
society of angels and glorified saints. [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001) seems to be referred to, both in
this, and in the preceding verse.

[Matthew 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 5:5</span></span>

Blessed are the meek,.... Who are not easily provoked to anger; who
patiently bear, and put up with injuries and affronts; carry themselves
courteously, and affably to all; have the meanest thoughts of
themselves, and the best of others; do not envy the gifts and graces of
other men; are willing to be instructed and admonished, by the meanest
of the saints; quietly submit to the will of God, in adverse
dispensations of providence; and ascribe all they have, and are, to the
grace of God. Meekness, or humility, is very valuable and commendable.
The Jews, though a proud, haughty, and wrathful people, cannot but speak
in its praise:

"Wisdom, fear, and meekness, say (b) they, are of high esteem; but
"meekness", is greater than them all.''

They had two very considerable doctors in the time of Christ, Hillell
and Shammai; the one was of a meek, the other of an angry disposition:
hence, say they (c),

"Let a man be always meek as Hillell, and let him not be angry as
Shammai.''

Here meekness is to be considered, not as a moral virtue, but as a
Christian grace, a fruit of the Spirit of God; which was eminently in
Christ, and is very ornamental to believers; and of great advantage and
use to them, in hearing and receiving the word; in giving an account of
the reason of the hope that is in them; in instructing and restoring
such, who have backslidden, either in principle or practice; and in the
whole of their lives and conversations; and serves greatly to recommend
religion to others: such who are possessed of it, and exercise it, are
well pleasing to God; when disconsolate, he comforts them; when hungry,
he satisfies them; when they want direction, he gives it to them; when
wronged, he will do them right; he gives them more grace here, and glory
hereafter. The blessing instanced, in which they shall partake of, is,

they shall inherit the earth; not the land of Canaan, though that may be
alluded to; nor this world, at least in its present situation; for this
is not the saints' rest and inheritance: but rather, the "new earth",
which will be after this is burnt up; in which only such persons as are
here described shall dwell; and who shall inherit it, by virtue of their
being heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ; whose is the earth, and
the fulness thereof. Though some think heaven is here designed, and is
so called, partly for the sake of variety of expression, from [Mat
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003) and partly in allusion to the land
of Canaan, a type of it; and may be called an earth, or country, that is
an heavenly one, in opposition to this earthly one; as the heavenly
Jerusalem is opposed to the earthly one, and which will be a glorious
inheritance. The passage, referred to is [Psa
37:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#011).

\(b\) Piske Tosaphot Yebamot, art. 196. (c) T. Bab. Sabbat. fol. 30. 2.

[Matthew 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 5:6</span></span>

Blessed are they which do hunger and thirst,.... Not after the riches,
honours, and pleasures of this world, but

after righteousness; by which is meant, not justice and equity, as
persons oppressed and injured; nor a moral, legal righteousness, which
the generality of the Jewish nation were eagerly pursuing; but the
justifying righteousness of Christ, which is imputed by God the Father,
and received by faith. To "hunger and thirst" after this, supposes a
want of righteousness, which is the case of all men; a sense of want of
it, which is only perceived by persons spiritually enlightened; a
discovery of the righteousness of Christ to them, which is made in the
Gospel, and by the Spirit of God; a value for it, and a preference of it
to all other righteousness; and an earnest desire after it, to be
possessed of it, and found in it; and that nothing can be more grateful
than that, because of its perfection, purity, suitableness, and use:
happy souls are these,

for they shall be filled: with that righteousness, and with all other
good things, in consequence of it; and particularly with joy and peace,
which are the certain effects of it: or, "they shall be satisfied", that
they have an interest in it; and so satisfied with it, that they shall
never seek for any other righteousness, as a justifying one, in the
sight of God; this being full, perfect, sufficient, and entirely
complete.

[Matthew 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 5:7</span></span>

Blessed are the merciful,.... Who show mercy to the bodies of men, to
those that are poor, indigent, and miserable, in their outward
circumstances; by both sympathizing with them, and distributing unto
them; not only making use of expressions of pity and concern; but
communicating with readiness and cheerfulness, with affection and
tenderness, and with a view to the glory of God: who also show mercy to
the souls of men, by instructing such as are ignorant, giving them good
counsel and advice: reproving them for sin, praying for them, forgiving
injuries done by them, and by comforting those that are cast down. To
show mercy is very delightful to, and desirable by God; it is what he
requires, and is one of the weightier matters of the law; it is very
ornamental to a child of God, and what makes him more like to his
heavenly Father. The happiness of such persons is this, that

they shall obtain mercy; from man, whenever they are attended with any
uncomfortable circumstances of life; , "whoever is merciful", men show
mercy to him (d): and from God, through Christ; which is free,
sovereign, abundant, and eternal. Men are said to obtain this, when they
are regenerated, and called by grace; and when they have a discovery,
and an application, of the forgiveness of their sins: but here, it seems
to design those supplies of grace and mercy, which merciful persons may
expect to find and obtain, at the throne of grace, to help them in time
of need; and who shall not only obtain mercy of God in this life, but in
the world to come, in the great day of the Lord; for which the Apostle
prayed for Onesiphorus, [Ti2 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#018).

\(d\) Maimon. Hilch. Mattanot Anayim. c. 10. sect. 2.

[Matthew 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 5:8</span></span>

Blessed are the pure in heart,.... Not in the head; for men may have
pure notions and impure hearts; not in the hand, or action, or in
outward conversation only; so the Pharisees were outwardly righteous
before men, but inwardly full of impurity; but "in heart". The heart of
man is naturally unclean; nor is it in the power of man to make it
clean, or to be pure from his sin; nor is any man in this life, in such
sense, so pure in heart, as to be entirely free from sin. This is only
true of Christ, angels, and glorified saints: but such may be said to be
so, who, though they have sin dwelling in them, are justified from all
sin, by the righteousness of Christ, and are "clean through the word",
or sentence of justification pronounced upon them, on the account of
that righteousness; whose iniquities are all of them forgiven, and whose
hearts are sprinkled with the blood of Jesus, which cleanses from all
sin; and who have the grace of God wrought in their hearts, which,
though as yet imperfect, it is entirely pure; there is not the least
spot or stain of sin in it: and such souls as they are in love with, so
they most earnestly desire after more purity of heart, lip, life, and
conversation. And happy they are,

for they shall see God; in this life, enjoying communion with him, both
in private and public, in the several duties of religion, in the house
and ordinances of God; where they often behold his beauty, see his power
and his glory, and taste, and know, that he is good and gracious: and in
the other world, where they shall see God in Christ, with the eyes of
their understanding; and God incarnate, with the eyes of their bodies,
after the resurrection; which sight of Christ, and God in Christ, will
be unspeakably glorious, desirable, delightful, and satisfying; it will
be free from all darkness and error, and from all interruption; it will
be an appropriating and transforming one, and will last for ever.

[Matthew 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 5:9</span></span>

Blessed are the peace makers,.... Not between God and man, for no man
can make his own peace with God; nor can any mere creature, angels, or
men, make it for him; Christ, in this sense, is the only peace maker:
but between men and men; and such are they, who are of peaceable
dispositions themselves; live peaceably with all men, and with one
another, as their relation obliges to, and their mutual comfort
requires; and with the men of the world; and who are ready, willing, and
very serviceable, in composing differences, and making peace between
their fellow creatures and fellow Christians. The Jews speak very
highly, and much, in the commendation of peace making; they reckon this
among the things which shall be of use to a man, both in this, and the
other world.

"These are the things, (say they (e),) the fruit of which a man enjoys
in this world, and his lot or portion remains for him in the world to
come; honouring father and mother, liberality, , "and making peace
between a man and his neighhour."''

This, they say (f), Aaron was much disposed to.

"Moses used to say, let justice break through the mountain; but Aaron
loved peace, and pursued it, and made peace between a man and his
neighhour, as is said, [Mal 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#006)''

Hence that saying of Hillell (g),

"be thou one of the disciples of Aaron, who loved peace, and followed
after it; he loved men, and brought them to the law.''

Now of such persons it is said, that

they shall be called the children of God; that is, they are the children
of God by adopting grace, which is made manifest in their regeneration;
and that is evidenced by the fruits of it, of which this is one; they
not only shall be, and more manifestly appear to be, the sons of God
hereafter; but they are, and are known to be so now, by their peaceable
disposition, which is wrought in them by the Spirit of God; whereby they
become like to the God of peace, and to Christ, the great and only
peacemaker, and so are truly sons of peace.

\(e\) Misn. Peah. c. 1. sect. 1. T. Bab. Sabbat. fol. 127. 1. &
Kiddushin. fol. 40. 1. (f) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 6. 2. Vid. Abot. R.
Nathan, c. 12. fol. 4. 2. (g) Pirke Abot. c. 1. sect. 12.

[Matthew 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 5:10</span></span>

Blessed are they which are persecuted,.... Not for any crimes they have
done, for unrighteousness and iniquity, as murderers, thieves, and
evildoers, but

for righteousness sake: on account of their righteous and godly
conversation, which brings upon them the hatred and enmity of the men of
the world: for saints, by living righteously, separate themselves from
them, and profess themselves not to belong to them; their religious life
sets a brand upon, and distinguishes other persons; yea, it reproves and
condemns their wicked lives and practices; and this fills them with
wrath against them, and puts them on persecuting them: or by
"righteousness" may be meant, a righteous cause, the cause of Christ and
his Gospel; for by making a profession of Christ, showing a concern for
his interest, and by engaging in a vindication of his person and truths,
saints expose themselves to the rage and persecution of men: and
particularly, they are persecuted for preaching, maintaining, or
embracing, the doctrine of justification by the righteousness of Christ;
because it is not of man, nor agreeable to the carnal reason of man; it
is opposite to the way of justification, which men naturally receive; it
excludes boasting, and is contrary to their carnal and selfish
principles: persecution is either verbal with the tongue, by cruel
mockings and reproachful language; or real, by deeds, such as
confiscation of goods, banishment, imprisonment of body, and innumerable
sorts of death: the latter seems here more especially designed, and both
are expressed in the following verse; and yet the saints, though thus
used, or rather abused, are happy;

for theirs is the kingdom of heaven: the same blessedness is predicated
of these as of the poor in spirit, ver. 3.

[Matthew 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 5:11</span></span>

Blessed are ye when men shall revile you,.... These words are
particularly directed to the disciples of Christ, and are designed to
inform them, that they should not be exempted from reproach and
persecution, and to animate and fortify them against it; and are
prophetical of what they, and the first Christians particularly, were to
endure for Christ's sake. Men should "revile" them, speak very
reproachfully of them, brand them with infamy, and load them with
disgrace; and

persecute you from place to place, by ill usage of all sorts;

and shall say all manner of evil against you: the worst things they
could think of and invent, and all of them; such as that they were
seditious persons, enemies to the commonwealth, and the public good,
guilty of sacrilege, incest, and murder but what would serve to relieve
them under these heavy charges is, that they were "falsely" laid; there
was not a word of truth in them; wherefore their own hearts would not
reproach them; but all were the malicious lies of men, invented on
purpose to bring them and Christianity into disgrace: and that they were
brought against "them for Christ's sake", for his name's sake, for the
sake of his Gospel and interest: the treatment they meet with is on his
account, and the same that he himself met with; the like reproaches fell
on him, which will be all wiped off from him and them another day; when
they will appear to be the blessed persons, and their revilers and
persecutors the unhappy ones. The Jews have some sayings not unlike
these, and which may serve to illustrate them:

"ajal aht alw ajwl aht, "be thou cursed", or bearing curses, but do not
curse (g). The gloss upon it is, it is better to be one of them that are
cursed, than to be of them that curse; for, at the end, the curse
causeless returns to him that curseth.''

Again (h),

"for ever let a man be of them that are persecuted, and not of them that
persecute; of them that suffer injury, and not of them that do it.''

Once more (i),

"they that suffer injury, and do it not; who hear reproach, and do not
return it; who act from love, and rejoice in chastisements, of them the
Scripture says, "let them that love him", &c. [Jdg
5:31](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#031).''

\(g\) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 49. 1. (h) T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 93. 1.
Maimon. Hilch. Deyot. c. 5. sect. 13. (i) T. Bab. Sabbat. fol. 88. 2.
Yoma, fol. 23. 1. & Gittin, fol. 36. 2.

[Matthew 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 5:12</span></span>

Rejoice and be exceeding glad,.... Because of the honour put upon them,
the glory they bring to Christ and his cause, by cheerfully suffering
for it; and because of the glory and happiness that shall follow upon
their sufferings:

for great is your reward in heaven; not of debt, but of grace; for there
is no proportion or comparison between what the saints suffer for
Christ, and the glory that shall be revealed in them by him; not in
earth, but in heaven. Saints must not expect their reward here, but
hereafter, when God himself will be their reward; he will be all in all;
Christ and all his glory, glory and all the riches of it will be the
reward of the inheritance, and which must needs be a "great" one. And
the more to animate them to suffer with joyfulness, and to support them
under all their reproaches and persecutions, it is added;

for so persecuted they the prophets which were before you; as Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Zechariah, and others; which shows, that what should befall
them was no new and strange thing, but what had been the lot of the most
eminent servants of God in former ages.

[Matthew 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 5:13</span></span>

Ye are the salt of the earth,.... This is to be understood of the
disciples and apostles of Christ; who might be compared to "salt",
because of the savoury doctrines they preached; as all such are, which
are agreeable to the Scriptures, and are of the evangelic kind, which
are full of Christ, serve to exalt him, and to magnify the grace of God;
and are suitable to the experiences of the saints, and are according to
godliness, and tend to promote it: also because of their savoury lives
and conversations; whereby they recommended, and gave sanction to the
doctrines they preached, were examples to the saints, and checks upon
wicked men. These were the salt "of the earth"; that is, of the
inhabitants of the earth, not of the land of Judea only, where they
first lived and preached, but of the whole world, into which they were
afterwards sent to preach the Gospel.

But if the salt have lost its savour, wherewith shall it be salted? The
"savour" here supposed that it may be lost, cannot mean the savour of
grace, or true grace itself, which cannot be lost, being an
incorruptible seed; but either gifts qualifying men for the ministry,
which may cease; or the savoury doctrines of the Gospel, which may be
departed from; or a seeming savoury conversation, which may be
neglected; or that seeming savour, zeal, and affection, with which the
Gospel is preached, which may be dropped: and particular respect seems
to be had to Judas, whom Christ had chosen to the apostleship, and was a
devil; and who he knew would lose his usefulness and place, and become
an unprofitable wretch, and at last be rejected of God and men; and this
case is proposed to them all, in order to engage them to take heed to
themselves, their doctrine and ministry. Moreover, this is but a
supposition;

if the salt, &c. and proves no matter of fact; and the Jews have a
saying (k), that all that season lose their savour "hmej hgypm hnya but
salt does not lose its savour". Should it do so,

it is thenceforth good for nothing, but to be cast out and to be trodden
under foot. Salt is good for nothing, but to make things savoury, and
preserve from putrefacation; and when it has lost its savour, it is of
no use, neither to men nor beasts, as some things are when corrupted;
nor is it of any use to the land, or dunghill, for it makes barren, and
not fruitful: so ministers of the word, when they have dropped the
savoury doctrines of the Gospel, or have quitted their former seeming
savoury and exemplary conversations; as their usefulness is gone, so,
generally speaking, it is never retrieved; they are cast out of the
churches of Christ, and are treated with contempt by everyone.

\(k\) T. Bab. Betzah, fol. 14. 1.

[Matthew 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 5:14</span></span>

Ye are the light of the world,.... What the luminaries, the sun and
moon, are in the heavens, with respect to corporal light, that the
apostles were in the world with regard to spiritual light; carrying and
spreading the light of the Gospel not only in Judea, but all over the
world, which was in great darkness of ignorance and error; and through a
divine blessing attending their ministry, many were turned from the
darkness of Judaism and Gentilism, of sin and infidelity, to the
marvellous light of divine grace. The Jews were wont to say, that of the
Israelites in general, and particularly of their sanhedrim, and of their
learned doctors, what Christ more truly applies here to his apostles;
they observe (l), that

"on the fourth day it was said, "let there be light": which was done
with respect to the Israelites, because they are they , "which give
light to the world", as it is written, [Dan
12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003)'

And in another place (m), say they,

"how beautiful are the great ones of the congregation, and the wise men,
who sit in the sanhedrim! for they are they , "that enlighten the
world", the people of the house of Israel.''

So. R. Meir, R. Akiba his disciple, and R. Judah the prince, are each of
them called (n) , "the light of the world"; as R. Jochanan ben Zaccai is
by his disciples, , "the lamp of the world" (o): and it was usual for
the head of a school, or of an university to be styled (p) , "the light
of the world"; but this title much better agrees and suits with the
persons Christ gives it to, who, no question, had a view to those
exalted characters the Jews gave to their celebrated Rabbins. A city
that

is set on an hill cannot be hid; alluding either to Nazareth, where he
was educated, and had lately preached, which was built on an hill, from
the brow of which the inhabitants sought to have cast him headlong, [Luk
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#029) or to Capernaum, which, on
account of its height, is said to be

exalted unto heaven, [Mat 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#023) or to
the city of Jerusalem, which was situated on a very considerable
eminence. The land of Israel, the Jews say (q), was higher than all
other lands; and the temple at Jerusalem was higher than any other part
of the land of Israel. And as a city cannot be hid which is built on a
high place, so neither could, nor ought the doctrines which the apostles
were commissioned to preach, be hid, or concealed from men: they were
not to shun to declare the whole counsel of God, nor study to avoid the
reproaches and persecutions of men; for they were to be "made a
spectacle"; to be set as in a public theatre, to be seen by "the world,
angels, and men".

\(l\) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 1. 3. (m) Targum in Cant. iv. 1. (n) Juchasin,
fol. 63. 2. (o) Abot R. Nathan, c. 25. fol. 6. 3. (p) Juchasin. fol.
121. 1. (q) T. Bab. Kiddushin, fol. 69. 1. Sanhedrim, fol. 87. 1.
Zebachim, fol. 54. 2.

[Matthew 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 5:15</span></span>

Neither do men light a candle,.... Which may be read impersonally, "a
candle is not lighted": and by it may be meant the Gospel, and gifts
qualifying men to preach it; which, like a candle, was lighted in the
evening of the Jewish dispensation, though not confined to the land of
Judea; but has shone throughout the world, being as a candle to be
removed, and has been removed from place to place: wherever it is set,
it gives light, more or less, and dispels darkness; it is useful both to
work by and walk with; it does not always burn alike clearly, it needs
looking after; it has its thieves, as candles sometimes have; and will
give the greatest light towards the close of the world, as they usually
do, when ready to go out. Now when a candle is lighted by men, they do
not

put it under a bushel, or anything which may hide and cover it, and so
hinder its light and usefulness. The Greek word rendered a "bushel",
answers to the Hebrew "seah", which is the very word used in Munster's
Hebrew Gospel; and this was a dry measure that held about a gallon and a
half; and accordingly is rendered here by the Syriac The design of the
expression is, that Christ has lighted the candle of the everlasting
Gospel, and given gifts to men for the ministration of it, not to be
concealed and neglected, or to be used as the servant did his lord's
money, wrap it up in a napkin, and hide it in the earth. Ministers are
not, through slothfulness, to neglect the gift that is in them; nor,
through fear, to hide their talents, or keep back any part of the
Gospel, or cover anything out of sight, which may be profitable to
souls: "but" men, when they light a candle, put it

on a candlestick, and it giveth light to all that are in the house; as
on the candlestick in the temple, a type of the church; where Christ has
set the light of the Gospel, where it is held forth particularly by the
ministers of the word, to illuminate the whole house and family of God;
by the light of which poor sinners, the lost pieces of silver, are
looked up; straggling souls are brought home; hypocrites and formalists
are detected; and saints are enlightened, directed, and comforted. Much
such a proverbial saying is used by the Jews (r):

"do not leave a vessel of balsam in a dunghill, but move it from its
place, that its smell may spread, and men may receive profit from it.''

\(r\) Vid. Joh. Isaac. Praefat. ad Eliae Levit. Methurgeman.

[Matthew 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 5:16</span></span>

Let your light so shine before men,.... Here Christ applies the
foregoing simile to his disciples, and more fully opens the meaning and
design of it. His sense is this; that the light of the Gospel, which he
had communicated to them, the spiritual knowledge of the mysteries of
grace, which he had favoured them with, were to be openly declared, and
made manifest before men. Light was not given merely for their own
private use, but for the public good of mankind; and therefore, as they
were placed as lights in the world, they were to hold forth, in the most
open and conspicuous manner, the word of light and life:

that they may see your good works: meaning their zeal and fervency;
their plainness and openness; their sincerity, faithfulness, and
integrity; their courage and intrepidity; their diligence, industry, and
indefatigableness in preaching the Gospel; their strict regard to truth,
the honour of Christ, and the good of souls; as also their very great
care and concern to recommend the doctrines of grace, by their example
in their lives and conversations:

and glorify your Father which is in heaven; that is, that when the
ministration of the Gospel has been blessed, for the illumination of the
minds of men, to a thorough conviction of their state; and for their
regeneration, conversion, sanctification, and comfort; they may give
praise to God, and bless his name for qualifying and sending such Gospel
ministers to show unto them the way of salvation; and that the word has
been made useful to them for communicating spiritual light, life, joy,
and comfort, , "Our and your Father which is in heaven", is a name,
appellation, or periphrasis of God, frequently used by Jewish writers
(s); and is often expressed by Christ in these his sermons on the mount.

\(s\) Vid. Misn. Sota, c. 9. sect. 15. & Yoma, c. 8. sect. 9.

[Matthew 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 5:17</span></span>

Think not that I am come to destroy the law or the prophets,.... From
verse 3 to the 10th inclusive, our Lord seems chiefly to respect the
whole body of his true disciples and followers; from thence, to the 16th
inclusive, he addresses the disciples, whom he had called to be
ministers of the word; and in this "verse", to the end of his discourse,
he applies himself to the whole multitude in general; many of whom might
be ready to imagine, that by the light of the Gospel, he was giving his
disciples instructions to spread in the world, he was going to set
aside, as useless, the law of Moses, or the prophets, the interpreters
of it, and commentators upon it. Christ knew the thoughts of their
hearts, that they had taken up such prejudices in their minds against
him; wherefore he says, "think not"; he was sensible what objections
they were forming, and what an improvement they would make of them
against his being the Messiah, and therefore prevents them, saying,

I am not come to destroy, but to fulfil. By "the law" is meant the moral
law, as appears from the whole discourse following: this he came not to
"destroy", or loose men's obligations to, as a rule of walk and
conversation, but "to fulfil" it; which he did doctrinally, by setting
it forth fully, and giving the true sense and meaning of it; and
practically, by yielding perfect obedience to all its commands, whereby
he became "the end", the fulfilling end of it. By "the prophets" are
meant the writings of the prophets, in which they illustrated and
explained the law of Moses; urged the duties of it; encouraged men
thereunto by promises; and directed the people to the Messiah, and to an
expectation of the blessings of grace by him: all which explanations,
promises, and prophecies, were so far from being made void by Christ,
that they receive their full accomplishment in him. The Jews (t) pretend
that these words of Christ are contrary to the religion and faith of his
followers, who assert, that the law of Moses is abolished; which is
easily refuted, by observing the exact agreement between Christ and the
Apostle Paul, [Rom 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#031) and whenever
he, or any other of the apostles, speaks of the abrogation of the law,
it is to be understood of the ceremonial law, which in course ceased by
being fulfilled; or if of the moral law, not of the matter, but of the
ministry of it. This passage of Christ is cited in the Talmud (u), after
this manner:

"it is written in it, i.e. in the Gospel, "I Aven", neither to diminish
from the law of Moses am I come, "but", or "nor" (for in the Amsterdam
edition they have inserted between two hooks), to add to the law of
Moses am I come.''

Which, with their last correction, though not a just citation, yet
tolerably well expresses the sense; but a most blasphemous character is
affixed to Christ, when they call him "Aven"; which signifies "iniquity"
itself, and seems to be a wilful corruption of the word "Amen", which
begins the next "verse".

\(t\) R. Isaac Chizuk Emuna, par. 2. c. 10. p. 401. (u) T. Bab. Sabbat.
fol. 116. 2.

[Matthew 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 5:18</span></span>

For verily I say unto you,.... Or "I Amen say unto you", which is one of
the names of Christ; see [Rev 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#014) or
the word "Amen" is only used by Christ as an asseveration of what he was
about to say; and which, for greater confirmation, is usually doubled in
the Evangelist John, "Amen, Amen", or "verily, verily". The word is used
by the Jews (w) for an oath; they swore by it; and it is a rule with
them, that whoever answers "Amen" after an oath, it is all one as if he
had pronounced the oath itself. The thing so strongly affirmed in this
solemn manner is,

till heaven and earth pass, one jot or one tittle shall in no wise pass
from the law, till all be fulfilled. The "or jot", in the Greek
language, answers to "jod" in the Hebrew, the least of all the letters
in the alphabet; hence a little city is called by this name, and this
reason is given for it, (x) , "because that jod is the least among
letters". We read also of Rabbi Jod (y), perhaps so called because , he
was little, as the author of Juchasin observes (z). This shows in what
language the law was written; not in the Samaritan language, for the jod
in that is a large letter, but in the Hebrew, in which it is very small;
and particularly is written in a very diminutive character, in [Deu
32:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#018) "by one tittle" some think is
meant one of those ducts, dashes, or corners of letters, which
distinguish one letter from another, that are much alike; others have
thought that one of the pricks or vowel points is intended; others, one
of those little strokes in the tops of letters, which the Jews call (a)
"crowns" and "spikes", is here meant, in which they imagined great
mysteries were contained; and there were some persons among them, who
made it their business to search into the meaning of every letter, and
of everyone of these little horns, or pricks, that were upon the top of
them. So says R. Meir (b),

"in the time of the prophets there were such who very diligently
searched every letter in the law, and explained every letter by itself;
and do not wonder at this that they should expound every letter by
itself, for they commented , upon everyone of the tops of each letter.''

Such an expounder was Akiba ben Joseph (c). To which custom Christ is
here supposed to have respect: however, certain it is that he speaks
very much in the language, and agreeably to the mind of the Jewish
doctors; and some things in their writings will serve to illustrate this
passage,

"If, (say they (d),) all the nations of the world were gathered
together, "to root one word out of the law", they could not do it; which
you may learn from Solomon, who sought to root "one letter out of the
law", the letter "jod", in [Deu 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#016)
but the holy blessed God said, Solomon shall cease, and an hundred such
as he (in the Talmud (e) it is a thousand such as he) , "but, jod shall
not cease from thee (the law) for ever".''

And elsewhere the same expression is used (f), and it is added,

"ljbm ynya Kmm huwqw, "but a tittle from thee shall not perish."''

The design of Christ, in conformity to the language of the Jews, is to
declare, that no part of the law, not one of the least commandments in
it, as he explains himself in the next verse, should be unaccomplished;
but all should be fulfilled before "heaven and earth pass" away, as they
will, with a great noise and fervent heat, as to their present form and
condition; or sooner shall they pass away, than the least part of the
law shall: which expresses the perpetuity of the law, and the
impossibility of its passing away, and the superior excellency of it to
the heavens and the earth. It is a saying of one of the Jewish doctors
(g), that

"the whole world is not equal even to one word out of the law,''

in which it is said, there is not one letter deficient or superfluous.

\(w\) T. Hieros. Kiddushin, fol. 60. 4. Misn. Bava Kama, c. 9. sect. 7,
8. T. Bab. Shebuot, fol. 36. 1. Debarim Rabba, fol. 242. 2. Maimon
Hilch. Shebuot, c. 2. sect. 1. (x) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 21. 2. & Gloss.
in ib. (y) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 22. 2. (z) Fol. 93. 2. (a) T. Bab.
Menachot, fol. 29. 2. (b) In Semitis fidei, fol. 104. 4. & 105. 1. apud
Capell. in loc. (c) T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 29. 2. (d) Vajikra Rabba,
fol. 160. 3. Shirhashirim Rabba, fol 20. 2. (e) T. Hieros. Sanhedrim,
fol. 20. 3. (f) Shemot Rabba, fol. 96. 1. (g) T. Hieros. Peah, fol. 15.
4.

[Matthew 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 5:19</span></span>

Whosoever therefore shall break one of these least commandments,....
Which are to be understood not of the beatitudes in the preceding
verses, for these were not delivered by Christ under the form of
commandments; nor of any of the peculiar commands of Christ under the
Gospel dispensation; but of the precepts of the law, of which some were
comparatively lesser than others; and might be said to be broke, loosed,
or dissolved, as the word here used signifies, when men acted contrary
to them.

And shall teach men so; not only teach them by their example to break
the commandments, but by express orders: for however gross and absurd
this may seem to be, that there should be any such teachers, and they
should have any hearers, yet such there were among the Jews; and our
Lord here manifestly strikes at them: for notwithstanding the great and
excellent things they say of the law, yet they tell us, that the doctors
of the sanhedrim had power to root anything out of the law; to loose or
make void any of its commands, for a time, excepting in the case of
idolatry; and so might any true prophet, or wise man; which they pretend
is sometimes necessary for the glory of God, and the good of men; and
they are to be heard and obeyed, when they say, transgress anyone of all
the commands which are in the law (h). Maimonides says (i), that the
sanhedrim had power, when it was convenient, for the time present, to
make void an affirmative command, and to transgress a negative one, in
order to return many to their religion; or to deliver many of the
Israelites from stumbling at other things, they may do whatsoever the
present time makes necessary: for so, adds he, the former wise men say,
a man may profane one sabbath, in order to keep many sabbaths. And
elsewhere (k) he affirms,

"if a prophet, whom we know to be a prophet, should order us , "to
transgress anyone of the commands", which are mentioned in the law, or
many commands, whether light or heavy, for a time, we are ordered to
hearken to him; and so we learn from the former wise men, by tradition,
that in everything a prophet shall say to thee , "transgress the words
of the law", as Elias on Mount Carmel, hear him, except in the case of
idolatry.''

And another of their writers says (l),

"it is lawful sometimes to make void the law, and to do that which
appears to be forbidden.''

Nay, they even (m) say, that if a Gentile should bid an Israelite
transgress anyone of the commands mentioned in the law, excepting
idolatry, adultery, and murder, he may transgress with impunity,
provided it is done privately. You see what reason Christ had to express
himself in the manner he does, and that with resentment, saying,

he shall be called, or be

the least in the kingdom of heaven; meaning either the church of God,
where he shall have neither a name, nor place; he shall not be in the
least esteemed, but shall be cast out as a worthless man; or the
ultimate state of happiness and glory, in the other world, where he
shall not enter, as is said in the next verse; but, on the other hand,

whosoever shall do and teach; whose doctrine and conversation,
principles and practices agree together; who both teach obedience to the
law, and perform it themselves: where again he glances at the masters in
Israel, and tacitly reproves them who said, but did not; taught the
people what they themselves did not practise; and so were unworthy of
the honour, which he that both teaches and does shall have: for

the same shall be called great in the kingdom of heaven; he shall be
highly esteemed of in the church here, and be honoured hereafter in the
world to come. The Jews have a saying somewhat like this;

"he that lessens himself for the words of the law in this world, , "he
shall become great" in the world to come (n),''

or days of the Messiah.

\(h\) T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 79. 1. & 89. 2. & 90. 2. (i) Hilch. Memarim,
c. 2. sect. 4. (k) Hilch. Yesode Hattorah, c. 9. sect. 3. (l) Bartenora
in, Misn. Beracot, c. 9. sect. 5. (m) T. Hicros. Sheviith, fol. 35. 1.
(n) T. Bab. Bava Metzia, fol. 85. 2.

[Matthew 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 5:20</span></span>

For I say unto you,.... These words are directed, not to the true
disciples of Christ in general, or to his apostles in particular, but to
the whole multitude of the people; who had in great esteem and
admiration the Scribes and Pharisees, for their seeming righteousness
and holiness; concerning which Christ says,

that except your righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes
and Pharisees, ye shall in no wise enter into the kingdom of heaven. He
mentions the Scribes, because they were the more learned part of the
people, who were employed in writing out, and expounding the law; and
the Pharisees, because they were the strictest sect among the Jews for
outward religion and righteousness; and yet, it seems, their
righteousness was very defective; it lay only in an external observance
of the law; did not arise from a purified heart, or the principles of
grace; nor was it performed sincerely, and with a view to the glory of
God; but for their own applause, and in order to obtain eternal life:
besides, they neglected the weightier matters of the law, and contented
themselves with the lesser ones; and as they were deficient in their
practice, so they were very lax in their doctrines, as appears from the
foregoing verse. Wherefore Christ informs his hearers, that they must
have a better righteousness than these men had, if ever they expected to
enter into the kingdom of heaven. There will be no admission into heaven
without a righteousness: it was the loss of righteousness which removed
Adam out of his earthly paradise; and it is not agreeable to the justice
of God, to admit man into his heavenly paradise without one; yea, it is
contrary to his nature, and would be destructive to the comfort of
saints, to receive an unrighteous person into his kingdom and glory. A
"pharisaical" righteousness will never bring a person thither; nor will
any righteousness of man's, be it what it will, because the best is
imperfect; it must be a righteousness exceeding that of the Scribes and
Pharisees; and such is the righteousness of the saints: indeed their
inherent righteousness, or the sanctification of the Spirit, is
preferable to any righteousness of a natural man; it exceeds it in its
author, nature, effects, and usefulness; yea, even works of
righteousness done by believers are greatly preferable to any done by
such men as are here mentioned: but, above all, the righteousness of
Christ, which is imputed to them, and received by faith, is infinitely
more excellent in its author, perfection, purity, and use; and which is
their only right and title to eternal glory; and without which no man
will be admitted into that glorious state.

[Matthew 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 5:21</span></span>

Ye have heard,.... That is, from the Scriptures being read to them, and
the explanations of the ancients, which were called "hearing", being
read in the schools, and heard by the scholars (o); so that to "hear",
was along with the recital of the text, to receive by tradition, the
sense the elders had given of it: of this kind is the instance produced
by Christ. Thus Onkelos, and Jonathan ben Uzziel, render the phrase,
"him shall ye hear", in [Deu 18:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#015) by
, "from him shall ye receive"; so those phrases (p), , "they learn from
hearing", or by report from others; and "they speak from hearing", or
from what they have heard, are often used for receiving and reporting
things as they have them by tradition. That "it was said", or "it hath
been said"; this is also a Talmudic form of expression; often is this
phrase to be met with in the Talmud, "it has been said" (q); that is, by
the ancient doctors, as here, "by them of old time", or "to the
ancients", so in Munster's Hebrew Gospel; not to the Israelites in the
time of Moses, but to the ancestors of the Jews, since the times of
Ezra; by the elders, who were contemporary with them; and who by their
false glosses corrupted the law, when they recited any part of it to the
people; or "by the ancients", the ancient doctors and commentators,
which preceded the times of Christ, whom the Jews often call "our
ancients" (r). Now, upon that law, "thou shalt not kill", they put this
gloss, or added this by way of interpretation,

and whosoever shall kill, shall be in danger of the judgment; which they
understood only of actual murder, either committed in their own persons,
or by the means of others. Their rules for the judgment of such persons
were these;

"everyone that kills his neighbour with his hand; as if he strikes him
with a sword, or with a stone that kills him; or strangles him till he
die; or burns him in fire; seeing he kills him in any manner, in his own
person, lo! such an one must be put to death , "by the house of
judgment", or the sanhedrim (s).''

Not that which consisted of three persons only, but either that which
consisted of twenty three, or the supreme one, which was made up of
seventy one; which two last had only power of judging capital offences.
Again,

"if a man hires a murderer to kill his neighbour, or sends his servants,
and they kill him, or binds him, and leaves him before a lion, or the
like, and the beast kills him, everyone of these is a shedder of blood;
and the sin of slaughter is in his hand; and he is guilty of death by
the hand of heaven, i.e. God; but he is not to be put to death by the
house of judgment, or the sanhedrim (t).''

A little after, it is said, "their judgment" is delivered to heaven,
i.e. to God; and this seems to be the sense of the word "judgment" here,
namely, the judgment of God, or death by the hand of God; since it is
manifestly distinguished from the council, or sanhedrim, in the next
"verse". The phrase,

in danger of judgment, is the same with (u) , "guilty of judgment", or
deserves condemnation.

\(o\) Vid. Buxtorf. Lex. Rabbin, fol. 2453. (p) Maimon. Hilch. Issure
Mizbeach, c. 1. sect. 2, 4, 5, 7, 10. & passim, & T. Bab. Sanhedrim,
fol. 88. 1. (q) Vid. Edzardi Not. in Avoda Zara, c. 2. p. 284. (r) Vid.
R. Aben Ezra in Exod. xxi. 17. & in Isa. lii. 13. & lxvi. 24. (s)
Maimon. Hilch. Rotseach, c. 2. sect. 1. (t) Maimon. Hilch. Rotseach, c.
2. sect. 2. (u) In Targ. in 2 Chron. xix. 10.

[Matthew 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 5:22</span></span>

But I say unto you,.... This is a Rabbinical way of speaking, used when
a question is determined, and a false notion is refuted; it is a
magisterial form of expression, and well suits with Christ, the great
teacher and master in Israel; who spake as one having authority,
opposing himself, not to the law of "Moses, thou shalt not kill"; but to
the false gloss the ancient doctors had put upon it, with which their
later ones agreed. You say, that if one man kills another himself, he is
to be put to death by the sanhedrim; and if he does it by proxy, he is
to be left to the judgment of God, so wholly restraining the law to
actual murder; but I affirm, that

whosoever is angry with his brother without a cause, shall be in danger
of judgment. By "brother" is meant, not in a religious sense, one that
is of the same faith, or in the same church state; nor, in a strict
natural sense, one that is so in the bonds of consanguinity; but in a
large sense, any man, of whatsoever country or nation: for we are to be
angry with no man; that is, as is rightly added,

without a cause: for otherwise there is an anger which is not sinful, is
in God, in Christ, in the holy angels; and is commendable in the people
of God, when it arises from a true zeal for religion, the glory of God,
and the interest of Christ; and is kindled against sin, their own, or
others, all manner of vice, false doctrine, and false worship: but it is
causeless anger which is here condemned by Christ, as a breach of the
law, "thou shalt not kill"; and such persons are

in danger of judgment; not of any of the courts of judicature among the
Jews, as the sanhedrim of three, or of twenty three, or of seventy one,
which took no notice of anger, as a passion in the mind, only of facts
committed; but of the judgment of God, as in the preceding "verse", it
being distinguished from the sanhedrim, or council, in the next clause.

And whosoever shall say to his brother Raca, shall be in danger of the
council, or "sanhedrim". The word Raca is expressive of indignation and
contempt; it was used as a term of reproach. Some derive it from to
"spit upon"; as if the person that used it thought the man he spoke to
deserved to be spit upon, and treated in the most contemptuous manner:
but rather the word signifies "empty" and "vain", and denotes a
worthless, empty headed man; a man of no brains; a foolish, witless,
fellow: so it is often used in Jewish writings. Take a few instances, as
follow:

"a certain person said to R. Jochanan (w), Rabbi, expound, for it
becomes thee to expound; for as thou hast said, so have I seen: he
replied to him, Reka, if thou hadst not seen, thou wouldst not have
believed.''

Again (x), it happened to R. Simeon ben Eliezer of Migdal Edar, who went
from the house of Rabbi; and he met with a certain man very much
deformed; he says unto him, Reka, how many are the deformed sons of
"Abraham our father?" Many more instances might be given (y). Now I do
not find that the use of this reproachful word was cognizable by the
Jewish sanhedrim, or great council; nor is it our Lord's meaning that it
was, only that it ought to have been taken notice of in a proper manner,
as well as actual murder. He adds,

but whosoever shall say thou fool, shall be danger of hell fire. The
word "fool" does not signify a man of weak parts, one that is very
ignorant in things natural; this the word Raca imports; but a wicked
reprobate man; in which sense Solomon often uses the word. The Persic
version renders it here "wicked". There is a manifest gradation in the
text from causeless anger in the breast, or reproachful words; and from
thence to a censorious judging of a man's spiritual and eternal estate,
which is what is here condemned. "Thou fool", is, thou wicked man, thou
ungodly wretch, thou graceless creature, whose portion will be eternal
damnation. Calling a man by such names was not allowed of by the Jews
themselves, whose rules are:

"he that calls his neighbour a servant, let him be excommunicated; a
bastard, let him be beaten with forty stripes; "a wicked man", let him
descend with him into his life or livelihood (z).''

The gloss upon it is,

"as if he should say, to this the sanhedrim is not obliged, but it is
lawful to hate him, yea to lessen his sustenance, and exercise his
trade,''

which was done to bring him to poverty and distress. So, it seems, the
sanhedrim were not obliged to take notice of him. Again, they say,

"it is forbidden a man to call his neighbour by a name of reproach (a)
everyone that calls his neighbour "a wicked man", shall be brought down
to hell;''

which is pretty much what Christ here says,

shall be in danger of hell fire; or deserving of hell fire; or liable
to, and in danger of punishment, even "unto hell fire". An expression
much like this may be observed in Jarchi, on [Isa
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#023) where he speaks of some persons
, "who are guilty", deserving, or in danger of "hell unto hell". The
word here used, and which is often used in the New Testament for "hell",
is but the Hebrew , "Ge-Hinnom", the valley of Hinnom, where the
children were caused to pass through the fire to Mo. This place, the
Jewish writers (b) say,

"Was a place well known, near to Jerusalem, a valley, whose fire was
never quenched; and in which they burned the bones of anything that was
unclean, and dead carcasses, and other pollutions.''

Hence the word came to be used among them, as might be shown in
innumerable instances, to express the place and state of the damned; and
very fitly describes it.

\(w\) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 100. 1. T. Bava Bathra, fol. 75. 1. (x)
Massechet Derach Eretz, c. 4. fol. 18. 1. (y) Vid. T. Bab. Beracot, fol.
32. 2. Zohar in Exod. fol. 50. 2. (z) T. Bab. Kiddushin, fol. 28. 1.
Bava Metzia, fol. 71. 1. (a) Zohar in Exod. fol. 50. 3. (b) Sepher
Cosri, fol. 57. 2. Vid. Kimchi in Psal. xxvii. 13.

[Matthew 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 5:23</span></span>

Therefore, if thou bring thy gift to the altar,.... The Jews obliged
such who had done any damage to their neighbours, by stealing from them,
to make satisfaction before they brought their offering; concerning
which they say (c),

"he that brings what he has stolen, before he brings his trespass
offering, is right; he that brings his trespass offering, before he
brings that which he has stolen, is not right.''

Again (d),

"they do not bring the trespass offering before the sum of what is
stolen is returned, either to the owners, or to the priests.''

Some have thought Christ refers to this; only what they restrained to
pecuniary damages, he extends to all sorts of offences. But not a
trespass offering, but a freewill offering, seems to be designed by "the
gift": which, when a man either intended to bring, or was going to
bring, or had already brought, as a voluntary sacrifice to be offered
unto God; and it came into his mind, that he had offended any man by
showing any undue passion, or by any reproachful words, then he was to
do what is advised in the following verse: "and there", whilst going, or
when at the altar,

rememberest that thy brother hath ought against thee: hath anything to
charge thee with; any just ground of complaint against thee; if thou
hast done him any injury, or given him any offence: particularly, if he
had at any time said Raca to him, or called him "fool" for those words
have reference to what goes before, and are a corollary, or conclusion
from them, as appears from the causal particle "therefore".

\(c\) Misn. Bava Kama, c. 9. sect. 12. (d) Maimon. Hilch. Gezela, c. 8.
sect. 13.

[Matthew 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 5:24</span></span>

Leave there thy gift before the altar,.... This might easily be done,
and the business soon dispatched, at some seasons; particularly, at
their public feasts, as the passover, pentecost, and feast of
tabernacles, when all the Israelites were together:

and go thy way; make what haste thou canst,

first be reconciled to thy brother: use all means to reconcile him;
acknowledge the offence; ask his pardon; assure him that thou wishest
well to him, and not ill;

and then come and offer thy gift, by putting it on the altar, before
which it was left. This shows, that acts of love and friendship are
preferable to sacrifices; and that sacrifices offered up in wrath, and
whilst unreconciled to others, are unacceptable to God, and of no avail:
and so much the Jews themselves seem to acknowledge; when they say (e):

"that transgressions, which are between a man and God, the day of
atonement expiates; the transgressions which are between a man and his
neighbour, the day of atonement does not expiate, , "until he hath
reconciled his neighbour."''

Which is enlarged upon, and explained by Maimonides (f), after this
manner:

"the day of atonement does not expiate any transgressions, but those
that are between a man and God, as when one eats anything that is
forbidden, and lies with anything that is forbidden, or the like; but
transgressions which are between a man and his neighbour, as he that
hurts his neighbour, or curses his neighbour, or steals from him, and
the like, are never forgiven, until he has given his neighbour what he
owed him, and has "reconciled" him; yea, though he has returned to him
the money he owed him, he ought to "reconcile" him, and desire him to
forgive him; yea, even though "he has only provoked him by words",
(which is the very case in the text before us,) , "he ought to reconcile
him", and to meet him until he forgives him: if his neighbour will not
forgive, he must bring with him three of his friends, and meet him, and
entreat him; and if he will not be reconciled by them, he must bring
them a second, and a third time.''

So that he was to use all means to obtain a reconciliation.

\(e\) Misn. Yoma, c. 8. sect. 9. (f) Hilchot Teshuba, c. 2. sect. 9.
Vid. T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 87. 1.

[Matthew 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 5:25</span></span>

Agree with thine adversary quickly,.... These words are not to be
understood in an allegorical sense, as if "the adversary" was the
justice of God, demanding payment of debts; "the way", this present
life; "the judge", God himself; "the officer", the devil; "the prison",
the pit of hell; and "the uttermost farthing", the least sin, which will
never be remitted without satisfaction: but the design of them is to
prevent lawsuits about debts, which may be in dispute; it being much
better for debtor and creditor, especially the former, to compose such
differences among themselves, than to litigate the matter in a court of
judicature. By "the adversary" is meant not an enemy, one that bears
hatred and ill will, but a brother that has ought against a man; a
creditor, who demands and insists upon payment of what is owing to him;
and for this purpose has taken methods towards bringing the debtor
before a proper magistrate, in order to oblige him to payment: wherefore
it is better for him to make up and agree the matter directly, as soon
as possible,

whilst thou art in the way with him; that is, whilst the creditor and
debtor are going together to some inferior magistrate, or lesser court,
as the sanhedrim, which consisted of three persons only, before whom
such causes might be tried: for , pecuniary causes, or causes relating
to money matters, were tried "by the bench of three" (g): and the
selfsame advice is given in the Talmud (h), as here, where it seems to
be a common proverb; for it is said,

"there are men that say, or men usually say, , "whilst thou art in the
way with thine adversary, be obedient".''

Lest at any time the adversary should deliver thee to the judge, a
superior magistrate in a higher court; for if the creditor would, he
could oblige the debtor to go with him to the supreme court of
judicature, and try the cause there; for so say the Jewish (i); canons:

"if the creditor says we will go to the great sanhedrim, they compel the
debtor, and he goes up with them, as it is said, "the borrower is
servant to the lender",''

where it might go harder with the poor debtor; and therefore it was
advisable to prevent it by an agreement, lest

the judge deliver thee to the officer, and thou be cast into prison,

"It was an affirmative command in the law, says Maimonides, to appoint
"judges" and "officers" in every country and province, as it is said,
[Deu 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018). "judges" they are the
judges that are fixed in the sanhedrim, and such that engage in law
suits come before them: "officers"; these are the masters of the rod and
scourge, i.e. who beat and scourge delinquents; and these stand before
the judges--and all they do, is by the order of the judges.''

Now it is one of these that is meant by "the officer"; in Munster's
Hebrew Gospel, he is called who, when he had authority from the judge,
could cast into prison, and that for debt; of which we have no account
in the law of Moses.

\(g\) Misn. Sanhedrim, c. 1. sect. 1. (h) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 95. 2.
(i) Maimof. Hilch. Sanhedrim, c. 6. sect. 7.

[Matthew 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 5:26</span></span>

Verily, I say unto thee,.... This may be depended upon, you may assure
yourself of it, that

thou shalt by no means come out thence, from prison,

till thou hast paid the uttermost farthing, or "last farthing"; or as
the Ethiopic version reads it, "till thou hast exactly paid all"; which
seems to express the inexorableness of the creditor, and the
impossibility of the debtor's release.

[Matthew 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 5:27</span></span>

Ye have heard that it was said,.... These forms of speech, as well as
what follows,

by them of old time, have been explained, in ver. 21. The law here
mentioned,

thou shalt not commit adultery, is recorded in [Exo
20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014) and the meaning of our Lord is,
not that the then present Jews had heard that such a law had been
delivered "to the ancients", their fathers, at Mount Sinai; for that
they could read in their Bibles: but they had received it by tradition,
that the sense of it, which had been given to their ancestors, by the
ancient doctors of the church, was, that this law is to be taken
strictly, as it lies, and only regards the sin of uncleanness in married
persons; or, what was strictly adultery, and that actual; so that it had
no respect to fornication, or unchaste thoughts, words, or actions, but
that single act only.

[Matthew 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 5:28</span></span>

But I say unto you, that whosoever looketh on a woman,.... Many and
severe are the prohibitions of the Jews, concerning looking upon a
woman, which they aggravate as a very great sin: they say (k), it is not
lawful to look upon a beautiful woman, though unmarried; nor upon
another man's wife, though deformed; nor upon a woman's coloured
garments: they forbid (l) looking on a woman's little finger, and say
(m), that he that tells money to a woman, out of his hand into her's,
that he may look upon her, though he is possessed of the law and good
works, even as Moses, he shall not escape the damnation of hell: they
affirm (n), that he that looks upon a woman's heel, his children shall
not be virtuous; and that a man may not go after a woman in the way, no,
not after his wife: should he meet her on a bridge, he must take her to
the side of him; and whoever goes through a river after a woman, shall
have no part in the world to (o) come: nay, they forbid (p) a man
looking on the beauty of his own wife. Now these things were said by
them, chiefly to cover themselves, and because they would be thought to
be very chaste; when they were, as Christ calls them, an "adulterous
generation" in a literal sense: they usually did what our Lord observes,
"strain at a gnat, and swallow a camel". We read in the Talmud (q), of ,
a "foolish saint" and it is asked, who is he? and it is answered, one
that sees a woman drowning in a river, and says it is not lawful for me
, "to look" upon her, and deliver her. It was not any looking upon a
woman, that is forbid by Christ as criminal; but so to look, as "to lust
after her"; for such an one

hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. But these men,
who forbad external looking upon a woman, generally speaking, had no
notion of heart sins; and which was the prevailing opinion of the
Pharisees, in Christ's time.

"A good thought, they (r) allow, is reckoned as if done; as it is said,
[Mal 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#016). Upon which it is asked,
what is the meaning of that, and "that thought" upon "his name?" Says R.
Ase, if a man thinks to do a good work, and is hindered, and does it
not, the Scripture reckons it to him, as if he did it; but an evil
thought, the holy blessed God does not account of it as if done, as is
said, [Psa 66:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#018).''

Upon which words, a noted commentator (s) of their's has this remark:

"Though I regard iniquity in my heart to do it, even in thought, yea,
against God himself, as if I had expressed it with my lips, he does not
hear it; that is, , "he does not reckon it to me for sin"; because the
holy blessed God does not account an evil thought for an action, to them
that are in the faith of God, or of the true religion.''

For it seems, this is only true of the Israelites; it is just the
reverse with the Gentiles, in whom God does not reckon of a good
thought, as if it was done, but does of an evil one, as if it was in act
(t). It must be owned, that this is not the sense of them all; for some
of them have gone so far as to say (u), that

"the thoughts of sin are greater, or harder, than sin itself:''

by which they mean, that it is more difficult to subdue sinful lusts,
than to refrain from the act of sin itself; and particularly, some of
them say things which agree with, and come very near to what our Lord
here says; as when they affirm (w), that

"everyone that looks upon a woman with intention, it is all one as if he
lay with her.''

And that , "he that committeth adultery with his eyes, is called an
adulterer" (x). Yea, they also observe (y), that a woman may commit
adultery in her heart, as well as a man; but the Pharisees of Christ's
time were of another mind.

\(k\) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 1, 2. (l) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 24. 1.
Sabbat. fol. 64. 2. (m) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 61. 1. Eruvin, fol. 18. 2.
(n) T. Bab. Nedarim, fol. 20. 1. T. Hieros. Challa, fol. 58. 3. Derech
Eretz. c. 1. fol. 17. 3. (o) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 61. 1. Eruvin, fol.
18. 2. (p) Zohar in Lev. fol. 34. 4. (q) T. Bab Sota, fol. 21. 2. (r) T.
Bab. Kiddushin, fol. 40. 1. (s) R. David Kimchi, in Psal. lxvi. 18. (t)
T. Hieros. Peah, fol. 16. 2. (u) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 29. 1. (w) T.
Hieros. Challa, fol. 58. 3. Massechet Calah, fol. 16. 4. Vid. Maimon.
Issure Bia, c. 21. sect. 2. & Moses Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora precept. neg.
126. (x) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 23. fol. 265. 1. (y) Bemidbar Rabba, sect.
9. fol. 196. 1.

[Matthew 5:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 5:29</span></span>

And if thy right eye offend thee,.... Or "cause thee to offend", to
stumble, and fall into sin. Our Lord has no regard here to near and dear
relations seeking to alienate us from God and Christ, and hinder us in
the pursuit of divine things; whose solicitations are to be rejected
with the utmost indignation, and they themselves to be parted with, and
forsaken, rather than complied with; which is the sense some give of the
words: for both in this, and the following verse, respect is had only to
the law of adultery; and to such members of the body, which often are
the means of leading persons on to the breach of it; particularly the
eye and hand. The eye is often the instrument of ensnaring the heart
this way: hence the Jews have a (z) saying,

"whoever looks upon women, at the end comes into the hands of
transgression.''

Mention is only made of the right eye; not but that the left may be an
occasion of sinning, as well as the right; but that being most dear and
valuable, is instanced in, and ordered to be parted with:

pluck it out, and cast it from thee: which is not to be understood
literally; for no man is obliged to mutilate any part of his body, to
prevent sin, or on account of the commission of it; this is no where
required, and if done, would be sinful, as in the case of Origen: but
figuratively; and the sense is, that persons should make a covenant with
their eyes, as Job did; and turn them away from beholding such objects,
which may tend to excite impure thoughts and desires; deny themselves
the gratification of the sense of seeing, or feeding the eyes with such
sights, as are graceful to the flesh; and with indignation and contempt,
reject, and avoid all opportunities and occasions of sinning; which the
eye may be the instrument of, and lead unto:

for it is profitable for thee, that one of thy members should perish,
and not that thy whole body should be cast into hell. This is still a
continuation of the figure here used; and the meaning is, that it will
turn to better account, to lose all the carnal pleasures of the eye, or
all those pleasing sights, which are grateful to a carnal heart, than,
by enjoying them, to expose the whole man, body and soul, to everlasting
destruction, in the fire of hell.

\(z\) T. Bab. Nedarim, fol. 20. 1.

[Matthew 5:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 5:30</span></span>

And if thy right hand offend thee,.... Or "cause thee to offend"; that
is, is the means of ensnaring thine heart; and of drawing thee into
either mental, or actual adultery; for, as before, all unchaste looks,
so here, all unchaste touches, embraces, &c. are condemned. As adultery
may be committed in the heart, and by the eye, so with the hand:

"says R. Eliezer (a) what is the meaning of that Scripture, "your hands
are full of blood", [Isa 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#015)? It is
replied, , "these are they, that commit adultery with the hand". It is a
tradition of the house of R. Ishmael, that the sense of that command,
"thou shalt not commit adultery", is, there shall be none that commits
adultery in thee, whether "with the hand", or "with the foot".''

Like orders are given as before,

cut it off, and cast it from thee; as a man would choose to do, or have
it done for him, when such a part of the body is mortified, and
endangers all the rest. The Jews enjoined cutting off of the hand, on
several accounts; if in a morning, before a man had washed his hands, he
put his hand to his eye, nose, mouth, ear, &c. it was to be "cut off"
(b); particularly, the handling of the "membrum virile", was punishable
with cutting off of the hand.

"Says R. (c) Tarphon, if the hand is moved to the privy parts, , "let
his hand be cut off to his navel".''

That is, that it may reach no further; for below that part of the body
the hand might not be put (d); lest unclean thoughts, and desires,
should be excited. In the above (e) place it is added,

"what if a thorn should be in his belly, must he not take it away? It is
replied, no: it is further asked, must not his belly be ripped up then?
It is answered, it is better that his belly be ripped up, , "than that
he should go down to the pit of corruption."''

A way of speaking, much like what our Lord here uses; and to the above
orders and canons, he may be very well thought to allude: but he is not
to be understood literally, as enjoining the cutting off of the right
hand, as they did; but of men's refraining from all such impure
practices, either with themselves, or women, which are of a defiling
nature; and endanger the salvation of them, body and soul; the same
reason is given as before.

\(a\) T. Bab. Nidda, fol. 13. 2. Vid. Maimon. Issure Bia, c. 21. sect.
18. (b) T. Bab. Sabbat. fol. 108. 2. Massechet Callah, fol. 17. 1. (c)
T. Bab. Nidda, fol. 13. 2. (d) Maimon. lssure Bia, c. 21. sect. 23. (e)
T. Bab. Nidda, fol. 13. 2.

[Matthew 5:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 5:31</span></span>

It hath been said,.... It is not added here, as in the former instances,
"by them of old time"; nor prefaced with these words, "ye have heard";
because the case of divorce was not any law of Moses, or of God by him;
but only a permission, because of the hardness of the hearts of the
Jews: and as to the controversy, about the causes of divorce, this was
not debated by them of old time, but was a new thing, just started in
the time of Christ; and was a controversy then agitating, between the
schools of Hillell and Shammai: the one allowing it upon any frivolous
cause; the other, only on account of adultery.

Whosoever shall put away his wife, dissolve the marriage bond, dismiss
her from his bed, and send her from his house, see [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001) "let him give her a writing of
divorcement", , "a bill of divorcement", or "a book of cutting off". For
though a wife was obtained by several ways, there was but one way of
dismissing her, as the Jews observe (f), and that was, by giving her a
bill. The form of a writing of divorcement, as given by Maimonides (g),
is as follows:

"On such a day of the week, in such a month, of such a year, either from
the creation, or the epocha of contracts, according to the usual way of
computation, which we observe in such a place; I such an one, the son of
such an one, of such a place; or if I have any other name, or surname,
or my parents, or my place, or the place of my parents; by my own will,
without any force, I put away, dismiss, and divorce thee. Thee, I say,
who art such an one, the daughter of such an one, of such a place; or if
thou hast any other name, or surname, or thy parents, or thy place, or
the place of thy parents; who wast my wife heretofore, but now I put
thee away, dismiss and divorce thee; so that thou art in thine own hand,
and hast power over thyself, to go, and marry any other man, whom thou
pleasest; and let no man hinder thee in my name, from this day forward
and for ever; and lo! thou art free to any man: and let this be unto
thee, from me, a bill of divorce, an instrument of dismission, and a
letter of forsaking, according to the law of Moses and Israel.''

"Such an one, the son of such an one, witness. Such an one, the son of
such an one, witness.''

Would you choose to have one of these bills, filled up in proper form,
take it in manner (h) following.

"On the fourth day of the week, on the eleventh day of the month Cisleu,
in the year five thousand four hundred and fifty four, from the creation
of the world; according to the computation which we follow here, in the
city of Amsterdam, which is called Amstelredam; situated by the sea
side, called Taya, and by the river Amstel; I Abraham, the son of
Benjamin, surnamed Wolphius, the priest; and at this time dwelling in
the city of Amsterdam, which is called Amstelredam, which is situated by
the sea side, called Taya, and by the river Amstel; or if I have any
other name, or surname, or my parents, or my place, or the place of my
parents; by my own free will, without any compulsion, I put away,
dismiss, and divorce thee, my wife Rebecca, the daughter of Jonas the
Levite; who at this time abides in the city of Amsterdam, called
Amstelredam, situated by the sea side, called Taya, and by the river
Amstel; or if thou hast any other name, or surname, or thy parents, or
thy place, or the place of thy parents, who wast heretofore my wife; but
now I put thee away, dismiss, and divorce thee; so that thou art in
thine own hands, and hast power over thyself, to go and marry any other
man, whom thou pleasest: and let no man hinder thee in my name, from
this day forward, and for ever; and lo! thou art free to any man. Let
this be to thee, from me, a bill of divorce, an instrument of
dismission, and a letter of forsaking, according to the law of Moses and
Israel.''

"Sealtiel, the son of Paltiel, witness. Calonymus, the son of Gabriel,
witness.''

This bill being written in twelve lines, neither more nor less, and
being sealed by the husband, and signed by the witnesses, was delivered,
either by him, or by a messenger, or deputy of his or hers, into her
hand, lap, or bosom, in the presence of two persons; after which, she
might, if she would, enrol it in the public records, and marry whom she
pleased.

\(f\) Baal Hatturim in Deut. xxiv. 1. Maimon. Hilchot Ishot, c. 1. sect.
2, 3. (g) Hilchot Gerushin, c. 4. sect. 12. (h) In Surenhusii Misna,
Vol. III. p. 324. Vid. Moses Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora pr. affirm. 50.

[Matthew 5:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 5:32</span></span>

But I say unto you; that whosoever shall put away his wife,.... Christ
does not infringe, or revoke the original grant, or permission of
divorce; only frees it from the false interpretations, and ill use, the
Pharisees made of it; and restores the ancient sense of it, in which
only it was to be understood: for a divorce was allowable in no case,

saving for the cause of fornication; which must not be taken strictly
for what is called fornication, but as including adultery, incest, or
any unlawful copulation; and is opposed to the sense and practices of
the Pharisees, who were on the side of Hillell: who admitted of divorce,
upon the most foolish and frivolous pretences whatever; when Shammai and
his followers insisted on it, that a man ought only to put away his wife
for uncleanness; in which they agreed with Christ. For so it is written
(i),

"The house of Shammai say, a man may not put away his wife, unless he
finds some uncleanness in her, according to [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001) The house of Hillell say, if she
should spoil his food, (that is, as Jarchi and Bartenora explain it,
burns it either at the fire, or with salt, i.e. over roasts or over
salts it,) who appeal also to [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001). R. Akiba says, if he finds
another more beautiful than her, as it is said, [Deu
24:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#001) "and it come to pass that she
find no favour in his eyes."''

The commentators (k) on this passage say that the determination of the
matter is, according to the school of Millell; so that, according to
them, a woman might be put away for a very trivial thing: some
difference is made by some of the Jewish doctors, between a first and
second wife; the first wife, they say (l), might not be put away, but
for adultery; but the second might be put away, if her husband hated
her; or she was of ill behaviour, and impudent, and not modest, as the
daughters of Israel. Now our Lord says, without any exception, that a
man ought not to put away his wife, whether first or second, for any
other reason than uncleanness; and that whoever does, upon any other
account,

causeth her to commit adultery; that is, as much as in him lies: should
she commit it, he is the cause of it, by exposing her, through a
rejection of her, to the sinful embraces of others; and, indeed, should
she marry another man, whilst he is alive, which her divorce allows her
to do, she must be guilty of adultery; since she is his proper wife, the
bond of marriage not being dissolved by such a divorce: and

whosoever shall marry her that is divorced, committeth adultery; because
the divorced woman he marries, and takes to his bed; is legally the wife
of another man; and it may be added, from [Mat
19:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#009) that her husband, who has put her
away, upon any other account than fornication, should he marry another
woman, would be guilty of the same crime.

\(i\) Misn. Gittin, c. 9. sect. 10. Vid. T. Hieros. Gittin, fol. 49. 4.
& Sota, fol. 16. 2. & Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 9. fol. 195. 2. (k) Maimon.
& Bartenora in Gittin, c. 9. sect. 10. (l) T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 90. 2.
Maimon. Hilch. Gerushin, c. 10. sect. 21, 22.

[Matthew 5:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 5:33</span></span>

Again, ye have heard that it hath been said,.... Besides what has been
observed, in ver. 21 and 27 you know it has also been said,

by, or to them of old time, what is written in [Lev
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#012). "And ye shall not swear by my
name falsely"; which seems to be referred to, when it is said, "thou
shalt not forswear thyself": and is the law forbidding perjury, or false
swearing; and was what the Jews were chiefly, if not only concerned
about; little regarding the vanity, only the truth of an oath: for they
took swearing vainly, to be the same as swearing falsely; wherefore so
long as what they swore was truth, they were not careful whether it was
of any importance or not: moreover, these men sinned, in that they swore
by the creatures, which they thought they might do, and not sin; and
when they had so done, were not under obligation to perform; because
they made no use of the name of God, to whom only vows and oaths were to
be performed, "but shalt perform unto the Lord thine oaths", [Num
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#002) which they understood of vows
only made to the Lord, and not to others; and of oaths, when in his
name, and not by others; which they did do, and yet thought themselves
not obliged by them.

[Matthew 5:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 5:34</span></span>

But I say unto you, swear not at all,.... Which must not be understood
in the strictest sense, as though it was not lawful to take an oath upon
any occasion, in an affair of moment, in a solemn serious manner, and in
the name of God; which may be safely done: but of rash swearing, about
trivial matters, and by the creatures; as appears by what follows,

neither by heaven; which is directly contrary to the Jewish canons (m),
which say,

"they that swear "by heaven", and by earth, are free.''

Upon the words in [Sol 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#007), "I adjure
you", &c. it is asked (n),

"by what does she adjure them? R. Eliezer says, by the heavens, and by
the earth; by the hosts, the host above, and the host below.''

So Philo the Jew says (o) that the most high and ancient cause need not
to be immediately mentioned in swearing; but the "earth", the sun, the
stars, "heaven", and the whole world. So R. Aben Ezra, and R. David
Kimchi, explain [Amo 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo004.htm#002). "The Lord
God hath sworn by his holiness"; that is, say they, "by heaven": which
may be thought to justify them, in this form of swearing; though they
did not look upon it as a binding oath, and therefore if broken they
were not criminal (p).

"He that swears by heaven, and by the earth, and by the sun, and the
like; though his intention is nothing less than to him that created
them, this is no oath.''

The reason why it is forbidden by Christ to swear by heaven, is,

for it is God's throne; referring to [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001) where he sits, the glory of his
majesty shines forth, and is itself glorious and excellent, and not to
be mentioned in a vain way; and especially, for the reason Christ
elsewhere gives, [Mat 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#022) that "he
that shall swear by heaven, sweareth by the throne of God, and by him
that sitteth thereon"; so that they doubly sinned, first, by openly
swearing by that which is God's creature; and then, by tacitly bringing
God into their rash and vain oaths.

\(m\) Misn. Shebuot, c. 4. sect. 13. (n) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 10. 4.
(o) De Special. leg. p 770. (p) Maimon. Hilch. Shebuot, c. 12. sect. 3.

[Matthew 5:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 5:35</span></span>

Nor by the earth, for it is his footstool,.... That the Jews were wont
to swear by the earth, is clear from the above mentioned instances; and
is condemned by Christ for this reason, because the earth is God's
"footstool", referring, as before, to [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001) on which he treads; and where he
also manifests forth his glory, and is a considerable part of the work
of his hands.

Neither by Jerusalem, which the Jews used to swear by: such forms of
vows as these are to be met with in their writings (q);

"as the altar, as the temple, "as Jerusalem";''

that is, by Jerusalem, I vow I will do this, or the other thing.

"R. Judah says, he that says Jerusalem (i.e. as Bartenora observes (r),
without the note of comparison, as) says nothing.''

In the Gemara (s) it is,

"he that says as Jerusalem, does not say anything, till he has made his
vow concerning a thing, which is offered up in Jerusalem.''

Dr. Lightfoot (t) has produced forms of vowing and swearing, which have
not occurred to me.

"Jerusalem; "for", or "unto Jerusalem", which exactly answers to , here;
and "by Jerusalem";''

The reason given for prohibiting this kind of oath, is;

for it is the city of the great king: not of David, but of the King of
kings, the Lord of hosts; who had his residence, and his worship, here;
see [Psa 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002).

\(q\) Misn. Nedarim, c. 1. sect. 3. (r) In. ib. (s) T. Bab. Nedarim,
fol. 11. 1. (t) In loc. ex Tosapht. in Nedarim, c. 1.

[Matthew 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 5:36</span></span>

Neither shalt thou swear by thy head,.... This also was a common form of
swearing among the Jews: take a few instances.

"If anyone is bound to his friend by an oath, and says to him, vow unto
me , "by the life of thy head"; R. Meir says (u), he may retract it; but
the wise men say, he cannot.''

Again (w), a certain Rabbi said to Elijah,

"I heard "Bath Kol" (or the voice from heaven) mourning like a dove, and
saying, woe to my children; for, because of their sins, I have destroyed
my house, and have burnt my temple, and have carried them captive among
the nations: and he (Elijah) said unto him , "by thy life, and by the
life of thy head", not this time only it says so, but it says so three
times every day.''

Once more (x), says R. Simeon ben Antipatras, to R. Joshua,

"I have heard from the mouth of the wise men, that he that vows in the
law, and transgresses, is to be beaten with forty stripes: he replies,
blessed art thou of God, that thou hast so done, , "by thy life, and by
the life of thy head", he that is used to do so is to be beaten.''

This form of swearing is condemned, for this reason,

because thou canst not make one hair white or black: which shows, that a
man's head, nor, indeed, one hair of his head, is in his own power, and
therefore he ought not to swear by it; as he ought not to swear by
heaven, or earth, or Jerusalem, because these were in the possession of
God. Some copies read, "canst not make one white hair black".

\(u\) Misn. Sanhedrim, c. 3. sect 2. (w) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 3. 1. (x)
Derech. Eretz, c. 6. fol. 18. 2.

[Matthew 5:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 5:37</span></span>

But let your communication be yea, yea,.... That is, let your speech, in
your common conversation, and daily business of life, when ye answer to
anything in the affirmative, be "yea"; and when ye answer to anything in
the negative, "nay": and for the stronger asseveration of the matter,
when it is necessary, double these words; but let no oaths be joined
unto them: this is enough; a righteous man's yea, is yea, and his no, is
no; his word is sufficient. Hence it appears, that our Lord is here
speaking of rash swearing, and such as was used in common conversation,
and is justly condemned by him. The Jews have no reason to reject this
advice of Christ, who often use and recommend the same modes of
expression. They endeavour to raise the esteem of their doctors and wise
men, by saying, that their words, both in doctrines and dealings with
men, are "yea, yea" (y). One of their (z) commentators on the word
"saying", in, [Exo 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#001) makes this
observation;

"hence we learn, that they used to answer, "concerning yea, yea, and
concerning nay, nay".''

This way of speaking, they looked upon equivalent to an oath; yea, they
affirm it was one.

"Says R. Eliezer (a), , "nay is an oath; yea is an oath", absolutely;
"nay" is an oath, as it is written, [Gen
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011) and [Isa
54:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#009). But that "yea" is an oath, how
does it appear? It is concluded from hence, that "nay" is an oath; saith
Rabba, there are that say "nay, nay", twice; and there are that say
"yea, yea", twice; as it is written, [Gen
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#011) and from hence, that "nay" is
twice, "yea" is also twice said.''

The gloss upon it is,

"he that says either "nay, nay", twice, or "yea, yea", twice; lo! it is
"as an after oath", which confirms his words.''

For whatsoever is more than these, cometh of evil: that is, whatever
exceeds this way of speaking and conversation, in the common affairs of
life, is either from the devil, who is the evil one, by way of eminency;
or from the evil heart of man, from the pride, malice, envy, &c. that
are in it.

\(y\) T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 20. 1. Maimon. Hilch. Dayot. c. 5. sect.
13. (z) R. Sol. Jarchi, in Exod. xx. 1. (a) T. Bab. Shebuot, fol. 36. 1.
Vid. Maimon. Hilch. Shebuot, c. 2. sect. 1.

[Matthew 5:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 5:38</span></span>

Ye have heard that it hath been said,.... That is, to, or by them of old
time, as is expressed in some of the foregoing instances,

an eye for an eye, and a tooth for a tooth, [Exo
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#024). This is "lex talionis", the
"law of retaliation"; which, whether it is to be understood literally,
or not, is a matter of question. The Baithuseans, or Sadducees, among
the Jews, took it in a literal sense, and so does Josephus, who says
(b), he that shall blind, i.e. put out a man's eyes, shall suffer the
like. But the Jewish doctors generally understood it of paying a price
equivalent to the damage done, except in case of life. R. Sol. Jarchi
(c) explains the law thus:

"He that puts out his neighbour's eye, must give him , "the price of his
eye", according to the price of a servant sold in the market; and so the
same of them all; for, not taking away of the member is strictly
meant.''

And, says Maimonides (d),

"if a man cuts off his neighbour's hand, or foot, he is to be considered
as if he was a servant sold in a market; what he was worth then, and
what he is worth now; and he must pay the diminution which is made of
his price; as it is said, "eye for eye". From tradition it is learned,
that this for, spoken of, is to be understood of paying money; this is
what is said in the law, "as he hath caused a blemish in a man, so shall
it be done to him again". Not that he is to be hurt, as he has hurt his
neighbour; but inasmuch as he deserves to want a member, or to be hurt
as he has done; therefore he ought to pay the damage.''

And Josephus himself (e) says, that he must be deprived of that, which
he has deprived another of, except he that has his eye put out is
willing to receive money; and which, he observes, the law allows of. The
controversy about the sense of this law may be seen in a few words, as
managed between R. Sandish Hagson, and Ben Zeta (f).

"Says R. Sandish, we cannot explain this verse according to its literal
sense; for if a man should smite the eye of his neighbour, and the third
part of the light of his eye should depart, how will he order it, to
strike such a stroke, as that, without adding or lessening? perhaps he
will put out the whole light of his eye. And it is yet more difficult
with respect to burning, wound, and stripe; for should they be in a
dangerous place the man might die but that is intolerable. Ben Zeta
answers him, is it not written, in another place, "as he hath caused a
blemish in a man, so shall it be done to him again?" To which Hagson
replies, "in", is instead of "upon", or against; and lo! the sense is,
so shall the punishment be upon him. Ben Zeta answers him again, as he
does, so shall it be done to him. Hagson replies, behold Samson said,
"as they have done to me, so will I do to them"; but Samson did not take
their wives, and give them to others, he only rendered to them their
reward: but Ben Zeta replies, if a poor man should smite, what must be
his punishment? Hagson answers him, if a blind man should put out the
eye of one that sees, what shall be done to him? as for the poor man, he
may become rich, and pay, but the blind man can never pay.''

Now our Lord here, does not find fault with the law of retaliation, as
delivered by Moses, but with the false gloss of the Scribes and
Pharisees; who, as they interpreted it of pecuniary mulcts, as a
compensation for the loss of a member, which sometimes exceeded all just
and due bounds; so they applied it to private revenge, and in favour of
it: whereas this law did not allow of a retaliation to be made, by
private persons, at their pleasure, but by the civil magistrate only.

\(b\) Antiq. Jud. l. 4. c. 8. sect. 35. (c) In Exod. xxi. 24. (d)
Hilchot Chebel. c. 1. sect. 2, 3. (e) In loc. supra citat. (f) In Aben
Ezra in Exod. xxi. 24.

[Matthew 5:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 5:39</span></span>

But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil,.... This is not to be
understood of any sort of evil, not of the evil of sin, of bad actions,
and false doctrines, which are to be opposed; nor of the evil one,
Satan, who is to be resisted; but of an evil man, an injurious one, who
has done us an injury. We must not render evil for evil, or repay him in
the same way; see [Jam 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#006). Not but
that a man may lawfully defend himself, and endeavour to secure himself
from injuries; and may appear to the civil magistrate for redress of
grievances; but he is not to make use of private revenge. As if a man
should pluck out one of his eyes, he must not in revenge pluck out one
of his; or should he strike out one of his teeth, he must not use him in
the same manner; but patiently bear the affront, or seek for
satisfaction in another way.

But whosoever shall smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other
also: which is to be understood comparatively, rather than seek revenge,
and is directly contrary to the Jewish canons, which require, in such a
case, a pecuniary fine (g).

"He that strikes his neighbour (which Maimonides explains, he that
strikes his neighbour with his hand shut, about the neck) he shall give
him a "sela", or "shekel": R. Judah says, in the name of R. Jose the
Galilean, one pound: if he smite him (i.e. as Maimonides says, if he
smite him with his double fist upon the face; or, as Bartenora, with the
palm of his hand, "on the cheek", which is a greater reproach) he shall
give him two hundred "zuzim"; and if he does it with the back of his
hand, four hundred "zuzim".''

R. Isaac Sangari (h) manifestly refers to this passage of Christ's, when
he says to the king he is conversing with,

"I perceive that thou up braidest us with poverty and want; but in them
the great men of other nations glory: for they do not glory but in him,
who said, "Whosoever smiteth thee thy right cheek, turn to him the left;
and whosoever taketh away thy coat, give him thy cloak".''

\(g\) Misn. Bava Kama, c. 8. sect. 6. Vid. Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.
(h) Sepher Cosri, Orat. 1. Sign. 113. fol. 56. 1.

[Matthew 5:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 5:40</span></span>

And if any man will sue thee at the law,.... Or "will contend with
thee", or as the Syriac renders it, , "will strive", or "litigate with
thee"; not contest the matter, or try the cause in an open court of
judicature, a sense our version inclines to; but will wrangle and
quarrel in a private way, in order to

take away thy coat, by force and violence,

let him have thy cloak also; do not forbid, or hinder him from taking
it; see [Luk 6:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#029). The "coat", is the
same with "the upper garment": and what we render a "cloak", answers to
"the inward garment"; by which words Sangari expresses the passage in
the place before cited: and the sense is, if a wrangling, quarrelsome
man, insists upon having thy coat, or upper garment, let him take the
next; and rather suffer thyself to be stripped naked than engage in a
litigious broil with him. This also is contrary to the above canon of
the Jews (i), which says;

"If a man should pull another by his ear, or pluck off his hair, or
spit, and his spittle should come to him, or "should take his coat from
him", or uncover a woman's head in the street, he shall pay four hundred
"zuzim", and all this is according to his dignity; says R. Akiba; even
the poor in Israel, they consider them as if they were noblemen, who are
fallen from their estates, for they are the children of Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob.''

\(i\) Misn. Bava Kama, c. 8. sect. 6.

[Matthew 5:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 5:41</span></span>

And whosoever shall compel thee to go a mile,.... The word rendered
"compel", is generally said to be of Persic original; the "Angari",
among the Persians, were the king's messengers, or those who rode post,
and were maintained at the king's expenses; and had power to take
horses, and other carriages, and even men, into their service, by force,
when they had occasion for them: hence the word is used to force, or
compel persons to do this or the other thing; the word is often to be
met with in the Jewish writings, and is in them expounded to be (k), the
taking of anything for the service of the king. David de Pomis renders
it by "a yoke" (l); meaning, any servile work, which such, who were
pressed into the king's service, were obliged unto. And (m) is used to
compel persons to go along with others, to do any service; in which
sense it is here used: and Christ advises, rather than to contend and
quarrel with such a person, that obliges to go with him a mile, to

go with him twain: his meaning is, not to dispute such a matter, though
it may be somewhat laborious and disagreeable, but comply, for the sake
of peace. The Jews (n), in their blasphemous book of the birth of
Christ, own that he gave advice in such words as these, when they
introduce Peter thus speaking of him.

"He, that is, Jesus, hath warned and commanded you to do no more evil to
a Jew; but if a Jew should say to a Nazarene, go with me one mile, he
shall go with him two miles; and if a Jew shall smite him on the left
cheek, he shall turn to him also the right.''

Can a Jew find fault with this advice?

\(k\) Vid. Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 6. sect. 3. (l)
Tzemach David, fol. 8. 4. (m) Vid. Buxtorf. Lex. Rabb. p. 131, 132. (n)
Toldos Jesu, p 22.

[Matthew 5:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 5:42</span></span>

Give to him that asketh thee,.... To every man, [Luk
6:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#030) whether Jew or Gentile; friend or
foe; believer or unbeliever; a good, or a bad man; worthy or unworthy;
deserving or not, that asketh alms, whether food or money; give it
freely, readily, cheerfully, according to your abilities, and as the
necessity of the object requires: for such rules are always supposed,
and to be observed; and though all are to be relieved, yet the
circumstances of persons, and their relation to men, are to be
considered, and special regard is to be had to the household of faith.

And from him that would borrow of thee, turn not away; refuse him not,
turn not away from him with a frown, or without speaking to him, or with
a denial; look upon him with a pleasant countenance, cheerfully lend him
what he wants, whether he be a Jew, from whom it was not lawful to take
usury, or a stranger, from whom it, was lawful to take it, yet take it
not; lend him freely, "hoping for nothing again", [Luk
6:35](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#035) which must not be understood of
not hoping for the money lent, for then it would be giving, and not
lending; but of not hoping for any reward for lending it: and indeed the
money itself is not to be hoped for again, when the circumstances of the
borrower are such, that he is not able to make a return.

[Matthew 5:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 5:43</span></span>

Ye have heard that it hath been said,.... By, or to them of old time.
This law has been delivered to them,

thou shalt love thy neighbour, with this appendage to it, or false gloss
upon it,

and hate thine enemy; for the first of these only is the law of Moses,
[Lev 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#018), the other is the addition,
or wrong interpretation of the Scribes and Pharisees: wherefore the Jew
(o) has no reason to charge Christ, or the Evangelist, with a false
testimony, as he does, because the latter is no where written in the
law, nor in the prophets: nor does Christ say it is; he only observes,
that it had been traditionally handed down to them from the ancients, by
the masters of the traditions of the elders, that the law of loving the
neighbour was so to be understood as to allow, and even enjoin, hatred
of enemies: in proof of which, take the following instances (p).

"When one man sins against another, he may not hate him in his heart,
and be silent, as is said of the wicked; Absalom spoke not with Amnon:
but it is commanded to make it known to him, and to say to him, why hast
thou done to me so and so? As it is said, "rebuking, thou shalt rebuke
thy neighbour"; and if he returns, and desires him to pardon him, he
shall not be implacable and cruel; but if he reproves him many times,
and he does not receive his reproof, nor turn from his sin, then , "it
is lawful to hate him".''

Again, they say (q),

"Every disciple of a wise man, , "who does not revenge, and keep as a
serpent"; that is, as the gloss explains it, "enmity in his heart", as a
serpent, is no disciple of a wise man.''

And so Maimonides (r), one of their better sort of writers, says;

"A disciple of a wise man, or a scholar, whom a man despises and
reproaches publicly, it is forbidden him to forgive him, because of his
honour; and if he forgives him, he is to be punished, for this is a
contempt of the law; but "he must revenge, and keep the thing as a
serpent", until the other asks pardon of him, and then he may forgive
him.''

Thus they bred their scholars in hatred and malice against their
enemies. This arises from a mistaken sense of the word "neighbour",
which they understood only of a friend; and concluded, that if a friend
was to be loved, an enemy was to be hated; not the Gentiles only, but
anyone, among themselves, which could come under that name.

\(o\) R. Isaac Chizuk Emunah, par. 2. c. 11. p. 402. (p) Moses Kotsensis
Mitzvot Tora precept. neg. 5. Vid. Maimon. Hilchot Rotseach, c. 13.
sect. 14. (q) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 22. 2. & 23. 1. (r) Maimon. Hilch.
Talmud Tora, c. 7. sect. 13.

[Matthew 5:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 5:44</span></span>

But I say unto you, love your enemies,.... That is, as the Apostle Paul
may be thought to interpret the words of Christ, [Rom
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020). "If thine enemy hunger, feed
him: if he thirst, give him drink": unless our Lord should be supposed
rather to regard the internal affection of the mind; since outward
expressions of love, by words and works, are urged in the following
exhortations: the actions of a man may be hated, and just indignation be
expressed against them, and yet his person be loved, tenderness be used
to him, and pity shown him: all men, even enemies, are to be loved with
a natural love, as men; though they cannot be loved with a spiritual
affection, as brethren in Christ: and in natural affection there are
degrees, according to the relation and circumstances that persons stand
in to one another.

Bless them that curse you: when wicked men curse you, as Shimei cursed
David, do not "render evil for evil, or railing for railing, but
contrariwise, blessing"; give good words, use kind language, mild and
soft expressions; such as may either win upon them, or put them to shame
and silence: "bless, and curse not"; the latter belongs to them, the
former to you; "let them curse, but bless thou": curses better fit their
mouths, and blessings thine. Blessing here, does not signify praising
them, for that would be sinful, which is sometimes the sense of the
word; nor wishing, or praying for a blessing on them, which is right and
good; but this is mentioned afterwards, as distinct from blessing;
wherefore, it is better to understand it of a sweet and engaging address
unto, and behaviour and conduct towards such, whose mouths are full of
cursing and bitterness.

Do good to them that hate you; such as hate you in their hearts, and
discover their hatred by their actions; do not make returns in the same
way, but on the contrary, do them all the good you can; perform all the
kind offices that lie in your power; let them partake of your bounty and
liberality; if poor, feed, clothe, and supply them, as you are able,
with the necessaries of life; and give them wholesome advice for the
good of their souls: by "so doing", you will "heap coals of fire on
their heads"; of enemies, make them friends; engage their affections to
you, and you may be happy instruments in doing them good, both in soul
and body:

and pray for them that despitefully use you and persecute you. What
Christ here commands and advises to, he himself did; for as he hung upon
the cross, he prayed for his crucifiers, who were then using him in the
most despiteful, as well as cruel manner; saying, "Father, forgive them,
for they know not what they do": and in this he has left us an example,
that we should tread in his steps; and here in he was quickly followed
by his holy martyr Stephen; who, whilst he was being stoned, prayed for
his persecutors and murderers, saying, "Lord, lay not this sin to their
charge". This breathes out the true spirit of Christianity, and is
peculiar to it. The whole of this is directly opposite to the tenets of
the Jews, particularly the Scribes and Pharisees; who allowed of
revenge, and keeping anger against any person that had done them an
injury, as has been observed: and which were also the sentiments of the
Karaites, or Scripturarians, another sect among them who kept to the
letter of the Scriptures, and rejected the traditions of the elders,
which the Pharisees held: but in this they agreed with them,

"that it was right to do good to their friends, and to forgive them that
asked pardon of them; but to such men who rendered evil, and did not
return to do well, that they might receive forgiveness, , "it is not
forbidden to revenge, and to keep anger against them" (s).''

It is indeed said (t) of their former holy men, "Hasideans", which some
have thought to be the same with the "Essenes", and a sort of
Christians; however, were a better sort of Jews; that these

"heard their reproach, but did not return it; and not only so, but they
pardoned him that reproached them, and forgave him.''

And it is reported of these men, that they used to pray to God to pardon
and forgive all that disturbed them. But the Pharisees, whom Christ had
to do with, and against whom he inveighs, were men of another
complexion.

\(s\) R. Eliahu in Adderet, c. 3. apud Trigland. de Sect. Karaeorum, c.
10. p. 166, 167. (t) Maimon. Hilch. Talmud Tora. c. 7. sect. 13.

[Matthew 5:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 5:45</span></span>

That ye may be the children of your father,.... Not that any became the
children of God, by doing things in imitation of him: for as in nature
no man becomes the son of another by imitating him, or by doing the
things he does but either by birth, or by adoption; so in grace no man
becomes a child of God by the works he does, as a follower of God, but
by adopting grace; and which is discovered in regeneration. Christ's
meaning is, that they might appear, and be known to be the children of
God, by doing those things in which they resemble their heavenly Father;
and which are agreeable to his nature and conduct; as the tree is known
by its fruit, and the cause by its effect: for where adoption and
regenerating grace take place, the fruit of good works is brought forth
to the glory of God. Some copies, instead of "children", read "like":
and accordingly, the Persic version renders it thus, "that ye may be
like your Father, which is heaven". Our Lord seems to have respect to
the Jews, often having in their mouths this expression, , "our Father
which is in heaven"; and to their frequent boasting that they were the
children of God; and therefore he would have them make this manifest by
their being like him, or acting in imitation of him;

for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil, and on the good. Christ
instances in one of the greatest blessings in nature, the sun, so useful
to the earth, and so beneficial to mankind for light and heat; which he
calls "his sun": his own, and not another's; which he has made, and
maintains, orders to run its race, and commands it to rise morning by
morning, and that upon good and bad men; one, as well as another; all
equally share in, and partake of its benign influences, and enjoy the
comfortable effects and blessings of it:

and sendeth rain on the just and unjust; that is, on the fields of
persons of such different characters, even both the early and the latter
rain; which makes the earth fruitful, crowns it with goodness, and
causes it to bring forth bread to the eater, and seed to the sower. This
is one of the most considerable blessings of life; the gift of it is
God's sole prerogative; it is peculiar to him; it is what none of the
vanities of the Gentiles can give; and yet is bestowed by him on the
most worthless and undeserving. This flows from that perfection of God,
which the Cabbalists (u) call

""chesed, mercy", or benignity, to which it is essential to give largely
to all, both "to the just and unjust".''

The Jews have a saying (x), that

"greater is the day of rain, than the resurrection of the dead; for the
resurrection of the dead is for the just; but rain is , "both for the
just, and for the wicked":''

a way of speaking much like this here. They also used to praise God for
rain, on this consideration, because it was given to unworthy persons.

"(y) R. Jose Bar Jacob went to visit R. Joden of Magdala; whilst he was
there, rain descended, and he heard his voice, saying, thousands of
thousands, and millions of millions are bound to praise thy name, O our
king, for every drop thou causest to descend upon us, , "because thou
renderest good to the wicked".''

Now our Lord instances in things which could not be denied, and they
themselves allowed; and makes use of their own words, to engage them to
imitate God, whom they call their Father, by doing good to their
enemies, and them that hated them, as well as to their friends and
neighbours: yet sometimes they could scarcely allow, that the Gentiles
had the same share in this divine favour with themselves; for they say
(z), that

"God works by way of miracle, that rain should not be wanting in his
land, although it is wanting in the countries of the Heathen; as he
says, [Job 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#010) "who giveth rain on
the earth", which is the land of Israel; for on that , "a great rain"
descends, and "sendeth waters", "few (which is added to the text) upon
the fields"; which relates to what is without the land, whereupon it
does not descend, but the substance of the land of Israel; therefore he
saith, the Lord will open to thee his good treasure, and not to
others.''

\(u\) Sepher Shaar Hassamaim, Tract. 7. c. 12. p. 155. (x) T. Bab.
Taanith, fol. 7. 1. (y) T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 14. 1. & Taanith, fol.
64. 2. (z) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 152. 4.

[Matthew 5:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 5:46</span></span>

For if ye love them which love you,.... That is, if ye only love such
that love you; for that such who love should be loved again, is both
natural and just: our Lord's meaning is not, that ye ought not to love
them that love you, but that these should not be the only objects of
your love; for should this be the case,

what reward have ye? or "shall ye have?" Do you deserve any thanks for
your love now? none at all, it is what you are obliged to by your
friend's love to you. Do you expect any hereafter with God? if you do,
you will be mistaken; you have your reward with men, who have loved you
as much as you have done them, and therefore none can be due to you,
either from God or men: besides,

do not even the publicans the same? men of the worst characters, and who
were most hateful to the Jews, upon many accounts; partly because of
their business, which was to collect the Roman tax, and carry it to the
proper officers appointed to receive it, and of whom they sometimes
farmed it. Now the Roman yoke was very grievous to the Jews, who boasted
of their being a free people; nor did they willingly pay their tribute
money; and some of them would refuse to do it, under a pretence of
religion; wherefore those publicans, or tax gatherers, which were
oftentimes men of their own nation, as appears from the instances of
Levi and Zacchaeus, were very odious to them; because they looked upon
them as joining with the Romans, in oppressing them, and abridging them
in their liberty: and partly because of their character and conduct,
being men of great improbity, rapine, and covetousness: hence, as in the
New Testament, they are frequently joined with "sinners", as being
notorious ones themselves; so in the Talmudic writings, with thieves
(a), and are reckoned as thieves, with murderers, and robbers (b); they
were not allowed as witnesses (c) in any of their courts of judicature;
nor were they to be kept company (d) with in private houses. Now our
Lord instances in these men who were the most profligate part of the
nation, and had in greatest contempt by the rest; and yet these, by the
very dictates of nature, loved such as loved them: wherefore it must be
shameful and scandalous in the Pharisees, and others, who pretended to
great sanctity and religion, to do no more than these persons did.

\(a\) Maimon. Hilch. Gezela, c. 5. sect. 9. 11. (b) Misn. Nedarim, c. 3.
sect. 4. (c) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 25. 2. Maimon. Hilch. Eduth, c. 10.
sect. 4. Moses Kotsensis Mitzvot Tora pr. neg. 214. (d) Maimon. Hilch.
Mishcab, c. 10. sect. 8.

[Matthew 5:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 5:47</span></span>

And if you salute your brethren only,.... This does not mean salutation
by embraces or kisses, but by words, asking of each other's welfare, and
wishing prosperity and happiness to one another.

"The manner of salutation among the wise men was this (e); he that
salutes says, a good day to my lord; and he replies, saying, a good, and
long day to my lord: always he that replies doubles the salutation.''

The persons they usually gave their salutations to were those of their
own nation, their countrymen, relations, and friends; and who are here
designed by "brethren"; meaning, not brethren in the strict sense, but
any kindred, acquaintance, or any of their own nation. Some copies read
it "friends", who, generally speaking, only partook of such favours.

"A man, (says Maimonides (f),) might not salute his master, nor return a
salutation to him in the manner they gave a salutation to "friends": and
they return it to one another.''

They were not very free in saluting any persons, as strangers and
Gentiles: such advice as this is indeed given (g), "prevent every man
with a salutation", or be first in saluting every man; upon which
passage their commentators (h) say, even a Gentile in the streets.
Accordingly, it is elsewhere (i) observed, that

"R. Abai used to say, let a man be always cunning with fear, for "a soft
answer turns away wrath"; and multiply salutation with his brethren, and
with his relations, and with every man, even with a stranger in the
streets.''

But this proceeded not from any cordial hearty respect, but out of
policy, and from fear; and in order to maintain peace; and for selfish
ends, and with sinister views: otherwise their salutations were confined
to their brethren and kinsfolk after the flesh. Now, this being the
case, says Christ,

what do ye more than others? do not even publicans so? Or, as some
copies read it, Gentiles or Heathens; and accordingly the Ethiopic
version, and the Vulgate Latin so render it: the Arabic renders it
"idolaters". Now, what great matter was this to salute their brethren
and their friends, when even the very Heathens, who had nothing but the
light of nature to guide them, did the same?

\(e\) Sepher Chasidim, fol. 5. col. 2. apud Buxtorf. Florileg. Heb. p.
300, 301. (f) Hilch. Talmud Tora, c. 5. sect. 5. (g) Pirke Abot, c. 4.
sect. 15. (h) Jarchi & Bartenora in ib. (i) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 17. 1.

[Matthew 5:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 5:48</span></span>

Be ye therefore perfect, as your Father,.... This perfection is to be
restrained to the subject Christ is upon, love to men, and not to be
referred to any, or every other thing; wherefore, in [Luk
6:36](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#036) it is, "be ye merciful, as your
Father also is merciful"; and regards not a perfection of degree in
that, but objects and quality: that is to say, not that men may, or can,
or ought to be as perfect in love, as to the degree of it, as God is;
that is impossible: the "as" here, is not a note of equality, but of
likeness: such, who profess God to be their Father, ought to imitate
him, particularly in their love to men, which ought to be extended to
the same objects, as the divine goodness is; that, as he shows regard in
a providential way to all men, good and bad, just and unjust, and his
tender mercies are over all his works; so ought they to love all men
with a natural affection, and hate no man, no, not their enemies: for he
that loves only his friends, and not his enemies, loves imperfectly; he
does not take in the whole compass of objects his love is to extend
unto; and as God loves sincerely, and without dissimulation, so should
they. To be "perfect", is to be sincere and upright: in this sense is
the word often used, and answers to the Hebrew word which signifies the
same: see [Deu 18:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#013) which is the
passage Christ seems to refer to here; and the sense is, be ye sincere
and upright in your love to all men, as your heavenly Father is hearty
and sincere in his affections to them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 6](mat006)

</div>
