<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Matthew Index](mat.md)  
  [Previous](mat019)  [Next](mat021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001.md)

[Matthew 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 20:1</span></span>

For the kingdom of heaven is like unto a man,.... That is, the Gospel
dispensation, or times of the Messiah, may fitly be represented by a man

that is an householder, or master of a family, as Christ is; See Gill on
[Mat 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#025.md) He is master of the whole
family of God, in heaven, and in earth, of all the children of God, and
household of faith; his house they are, he is Father and master, son and
firstborn, priest and prophet there.

Which went out early in the morning to hire labourers into his vineyard:
by "the vineyard" may be meant the church, which, like a vineyard, is
separated by electing, redeeming, and calling grace, and by the order
and ordinances of the Gospel, from the rest of the world; is set with
various vines, with trees of righteousness, with pleasant plants, both
fruitful and profitable; and which are dear and valuable to Christ; and
about which much care is used to preserve, keep, and improve them. This
may be called "his", Christ's, being what he has chosen for himself, his
Father has given him, and he is heir of; which he has purchased with his
blood, and which he plants, waters, takes care of, and enjoys. The
"labourers" design either the ministers of the Gospel, who labour in the
word and doctrine, who are, or at least ought to be, labourers in
Christ's vineyard, and not loiterers; whose work in study, meditation,
and prayer, in the ministration of the word and ordinances, and in
performing other services they are called unto, is very laborious; and
made more so, through the wickedness of some, and weakness of others:
the employment of these labourers in the vineyard is various; the
business of some is to plant; they are chiefly made use of in
conversion: the work of others is to water; these are instruments in
edification, and means of the growth of grace: others have a good hand
at pruning, giving reproofs and corrections, in a suitable manner, with
success, to the checking of sin, and bringing forth more fruit: others
are useful in propping and supporting the vines, comforting and
strengthening weak believers; and others in protecting and defending the
outworks of the church, the doctrines and ordinances of it: or else
private Christians in general may be intended, who all are, or should be
labourers, both in the exercise of grace; for there is the work of
faith, and the labour of love, to God, Christ, and his people, in which
they should be continually employed; and in the discharge of duty, with
regard to themselves; and in the care of their own vineyard, with
respect to their families, which are their charge, and also to the
church of Christ, of which they are members. These labourers are said to
be "hired" by the householder, or owner of the vineyard, Christ, not
strictly and properly speaking; nor does it mean that he had no prior
right to their obedience, or that there is any merit in their labour, or
that that is the condition of their salvation; but it signifies the
influence of his grace, in making them willing to serve him cheerfully,
and labour in his vineyard freely; to encourage them in which, he makes
them many gracious, and exceeding great and precious promises, and
particularly that of eternal life: for which purpose, it is said, that
he "went out", either from his Father as mediator, being sent by him; or
from heaven into this world, by the assumption of human nature; or by
his Spirit, and the influence of his grace, in the calls of his people,
to their several services, in his church; and that "early in the
morning": some of them being very early called to labour there; meaning
either in the morning of the world, as Adam, Abel, Seth, Enoch, and
others; or in the morning of the Jewish church state, as Abraham, Moses,
Joshua, and the like; or in the morning of the Gospel dispensation, as
the apostles of Christ, which seems most likely; or in the morning of
youth, as Timothy and others. Several things, in this first part of the
parable, might be illustrated from the Jewish writings. They have a
parable indeed, which, in the several parts of it, greatly resembles
this, and begins thus (m);

"to what is R. Bon like? to a king that hath a vineyard, , "and hires
labourers into it", &c.''

Out of which some other things will be remarked, in the following parts
of this parable: of a son's being sent, and going out to hire labourers
into the vineyard, take the following instance (n):

"it happened to R. Jochanan ben Matthia, that said to his son, , "go
out, and hire labourers" for us: "he went out", and agreed with them for
their food.''

The time of hiring labourers, here mentioned, exactly agrees with the
Jewish accounts (o).

"Says R. Juda ben Bethira, when the face of all the east is light unto
Hebron, all the people go out, every man to his work; and when it is so
light, it is good "to hire labourers we say".''

Upon which the gloss says,

"every man goes out to his work, not for labourers, but the
"householder", who , "rises earlier to find labourers to hire".''

Perhaps it may not be worth while to observe, how large a spot of
ground, set with vines, was, by them, called a vineyard: it is
frequently said by them (p),

"that a vineyard planted by less than four cubits, is no vineyard; but
R. Simeon, and the wise men, say it is a vineyard.''

\(m\) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 21. 3. Vid. Midrash Kohelet, fol. 72. 4.
& Talmud Hicros. Beracot, fol 5. 3. (n) Misua Bava Metzia, c. 7. sect.
1. (o) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 28. 2. (p) T. Hieros. Sheviith, fol. 33. 2. T.
Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 37. 2. & 33. 1.

[Matthew 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 20:2</span></span>

And when he had agreed with the labourers for a penny a day,.... These
labourers were of that sort that were called , "hired for a day";
concerning whom is the following rule (q):

"he that is hired for a day, may demand it all the night; and he that is
hired for a night may demand it all the day: he that is hired for hours,
may demand it all the night, and all the day; he that is hired for a
week, he that is hired for a month, he that is hired for a year, he that
is hired for seven, if he goes out in the day, may demand all the day;
and if he goes out in the night, he may demand it all the night, and all
the day.''

And the wages of a day were usually "a penny"; which, if understood of a
Roman penny, was seven pence halfpenny of our money. One of their canons
runs thus (r):

"he that hires a labourer in the winter, to work with him in the summer,
, "for a penny every day", and he gives him his hire; and, lo! his hire
is alike to that in the winter, a "sela" every day, this is forbidden;
because it looks as if he chose that time to lessen his wages; but if he
says to him, work with me from this day, to such a time, "for a penny
every day", though his hire is the same, a "sela" every day, this is
lawful.''

By the penny a day agreed for with the labourers, may be meant external
privileges; or the free promise made, whether to ministers, or private
believers, of a sufficient supply of grace daily, that as their day is,
their strength shall be; together with that of eternal life and
happiness at last.

He sent them into his vineyard; to labour there: for none have any
business there, but such who are called and sent by the owner of it; and
where sons are sent, and work, as well as servants; see [Mat
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat021.htm#028.md).

\(q\) Misna Bava Metzia, c. 9. sect. 11. Maimen Hilch. Shericut, c. 11.
sect. 2. (r) Maimon. Hilch. Milvah Ulavah, c. 7. sect. 12. Vid. T. Bab.
Bava Bathra, fol. 86. 2. & 87. 1. & Gloss. in ib.

[Matthew 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 20:3</span></span>

And he went out about the third hour,.... About nine o'clock in the
morning,

and saw others standing idle in the market place: the place where
labourers used to be hired: and may design the world, because a place
full of people, and of great wickedness, for the whole world lies in it;
a place of trade and traffic in worldly things, and likewise of worldly
and carnal pleasure, and also of idleness. Now God's elect before
calling, are in this place: they are natives of it, have their
conversation according to it: here Christ came in person, and here he
sends his ministers, his Gospel, to find them out, and by his Spirit and
grace he calls them from hence; so that afterwards they are no more of
it, though they are in it: but before conversion they belong to it, and
their posture then is standing idle; being sluggish, and slothful in
business, unwilling to work, and afraid of a little danger and trouble,
sauntering away their time in carnal pleasures, and so clothed with
rags, and in a starving, famishing condition: but Christ's eye is upon
them; he observes, and takes notice of them in this disagreeable
position and situation, and speaks of them in the following manner.

[Matthew 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 20:4</span></span>

And said unto them, go ye also into the vineyard,.... Expressive of a
call of divine grace out of the world, into the church; and which arises
from mere grace, and good will, without any merit in, or motive from
man, as the case here shows: for the householder went out to these men,
not they to him; he puts the question to them, and calls them, and bids
them go into his vineyard; they do not ask him to hire them, nor desire
to be in his service. Moreover, the persons called were a parcel of
idle, mean, vulgar people, as market folks commonly are; the weak, base,
and foolish things of the world. The encouragement given them follows,

and whatsoever is right I will give you which is to be understood, not
of strict justice; for in this sense nothing could be given to sinful
mortals, for their services; but of grace, for what is had on this
score, whether in this, or in the other world, is in a way of giving and
receiving, which are the phrases used here, and in the context. It
properly signifies what is meet and convenient, and will be satisfying;
and since it is not expressed what he would give them, and they should
receive, it calls for faith and dependence on divine goodness: for it
does not yet appear, what the faithful labourers in Christ's vineyard
will want, and shall receive in this life, nor what will be their
happiness in the world to come: the glories and joys of heaven are
unseen things; and eternal life is a hidden one at present, and must be
trusted for:

and they went their way: into the vineyard, the church, to labour there;
which shows, that the call was powerful and efficacious; they were
powerfully wrought upon by it; were at once inclined, and made willing
to, and did go cheerfully, without standing to dispute about their work
or wages.

[Matthew 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 20:5</span></span>

Again he went out about the sixth and ninth hour,.... About twelve
o'clock, or at noon, and three o'clock in the afternoon. These three
last mentioned seasons of the day, were the hours of prayer; see [Act
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#015.md) and did likewise: seeing others
in the same place, and posture, he called them, and sent them into his
vineyard, to labour there, giving them the same promise he did to
others.

[Matthew 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 20:6</span></span>

And about the eleventh hour he went out,.... About five o'clock in the
afternoon. The Persic version reads it, "the twelfth hour", which was
six o'clock in the afternoon, the last hour of the day. The Jews divided
their day into twelve hours, [Joh 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#009.md)
and these twelve hours into four parts; [Neh
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#003.md) each part containing three hours,
to which division there is a manifest respect in this parable. These
different seasons of the husbandman's going out to hire labourers, may
have regard either to the several periods of time, and ages of the
world, as before the law, under the law, the times of the Messiah, and
the last days; or the various dispensations of the Gospel, first by
Christ, and John the Baptist to the Jews, then by the apostles to the
same in their first mission, afterwards when their commission was
renewed, first to the Jews in Judea, and then to the same among the
nations of the world, and last of all to the Gentiles; or to the several
stages of human life, and may regard Christ's call of persons in
childhood, youth, manhood, and old age; which last may be signified by
the eleventh hour, as also the Gentiles, and the remainder of God's
elect in the last day:

and found others standing idle; in the same place and position as
before: for the state and condition of God's elect, by nature, as it is
the same with others, it is the same with them all. The word "idle" is
omitted here by the Vulgate Latin, the Arabic, and Ethiopic versions,
and in Munster's Hebrew Gospel; but is retained in the Syriac and Persic
versions; and stands in the Greek copies:

and saith unto them, why stand ye here all the day idle? for being about
the eleventh hour, the day was far spent, it was almost gone, a small
portion of it remained, but one hour, as appears from [Mat
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#012.md).

[Matthew 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 20:7</span></span>

They say unto him, because no man hath hired us,.... This may be fitly
applied to the Gentiles, who hundreds of years were neglected by God; he
overlooked the times of their ignorance, took no notice of them in their
state of stupidity, blindness, and irreligion; but suffered them to walk
in their own ways, sent no prophets to instruct them, nor messages, nor
messengers to them; till at length the Jews, having rejected and
crucified the Messiah, and persecuted his apostles, and contradicted,
and blasphemed the Gospel, they were ordered to go to the Gentiles, and
preach it to them:

he saith unto them, go ye also into the vineyard: the Gospel was made
the power of God unto salvation to them; they were called by grace,
became of the same body the church, were fellow heirs with the believing
Jews, partakers of the same promises and privileges, in a Gospel church
state, and were equally labourers in the Lord's vineyard:

and whatsoever is right, that shall ye receive; with the rest of the
labourers in it. This clause is left out in the Vulgate Latin, and in
Munster's Hebrew Gospel; nor is it in Beza's most ancient Greek copy,
though in all the rest; nor is it in the Persic version, which has
added, "and they went", as they were bidden, into the vineyard, the call
being effectual; but is retained in the Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic
versions.

[Matthew 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 20:8</span></span>

So when even was come,.... At six o'clock, or when the sun was set,
which was the time of paying labourers their wages: thus in the parable
of the Jews, before referred to, which bears some resemblance to this,
it is said,

"bre tel, (s) that "at evening time" the labourers came to take their
wages.''

Sooner than this, one that was hired for a day, could not demand it; nor
was the master of the vineyard, who hired him, obliged to pay him till
the sun was set (t), which was the time of his going forth from his
labour (u). This even may be understood, either of the evening of the
Jewish state, upon the calling of the Gentiles; or of the end of the
world, the close of the Gospel dispensation; when the work of it will be
over, when all the elect of God, Jews and Gentiles, shall be called and
gathered in, and all brought to repentance towards God, and faith in
Christ.

The lord of the vineyard saith unto his steward: by the lord of the
vineyard may be meant God the Father, who has chosen and separated the
vineyard of the church for himself; and has made it the care and charge
of his Son Jesus Christ; who, as mediator, may be designed by "his
steward"; who has not only all the stores of grace in his hand, to
distribute to his people, in this life, as their cases require; but has
also eternal life and happiness in his possession for them; not only the
promise of it, but that itself; and has a power of giving it to as many
as the Father hath given him; and which he, the righteous judge, and
faithful steward, will give at the day of judgment, to all that love his
appearing.

Call the labourers, and give them their hire; the proper time being
come: for the Jews say (w).

"it is an affirmative precept to give the wages of an hired person in
its time; as it is said, [Deu 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#015.md) at
"his day thou shalt give him his hire"; and if it is prolonged after its
time, it is transgressing a negative precept, as it is said, (in the
same place,) "neither shall the sun go down upon it."''

So Jews and Gentiles were called to partake of the same Gospel
privileges; and so will all the faithful labourers in the Lord's
vineyard be called together, and have the reward of eternal life
bestowed upon them, and be bid to enter into the joy of their Lord, and
inherit the kingdom prepared for them, as they before were ordered to go
into the vineyard, and work. And though eternal life may be called hire
or reward, because as hire is given to labourers, so is eternal life;
and as that is given at the even and close of the day, and when the
labourer has done his work, so everlasting glory will be given to the
saints at the end of life, and when they have done the will and work of
God: yet it will not be bestowed by way of merit, or, as if there was a
just proportion between the work, labour, and services of the saints,
and the glory that shall be revealed in them. Their purest services,
even their sufferings for Christ, are not worthy to be compared with
that; nor are there any that are done by them, but what are due to God,
what he has a right unto, and are their duty to perform; so that when
they are done by them in the best and most perfect manner, they are but
unprofitable servants: nor can they, by anything they do, be profitable
to God, or give anything to him, which can be obligatory upon him, to do
anything for them, or be a valuable consideration for anything they
should receive from him; and therefore they cannot merit anything at his
hand, and much less eternal life: besides, their services are impure and
imperfect, and whenever anything is well done by them, it is done not by
their own strength and might, but by the assistance and grace of God;
and therefore they can have no demand upon him for what they do: eternal
life, though a reward, is not a reward of debt, but of grace; it is the
free gift of God through Christ; God has graciously promised it in the
covenant of his grace, before the world began; he has given it into the
hands of his Son for his people, with whom it is sure; and he gives it
freely to all the sheep the Father has given him.

Beginning from the last unto the first; beginning with the last that was
called and sent into the vineyard, and so proceeding on to the next to
them; giving them their wages as he went along, till he came to the
first, who were early in the morning hired into this service;
intimating, that some such method will be taken in the introducing of
the saints into the kingdom of the Messiah here, and into his
everlasting kingdom hereafter; whereby that saying of our Lord's which
occasioned this parable, will be also fulfilled, "the first shall be
last, and last first".

\(s\) Shirashirim Rabba, fol. 21. 3. Midrash Kohelet, fol. 72. 4. T.
Hicros. Beracot, fol. 5. 3. (t) Bartenora in Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 9.
sect. 11. (u) Jarchi in Lev. xix. 13. (w) Maimen, Helch. Secirut, c. 11.
sect. 1.

[Matthew 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 20:9</span></span>

And when they came that were hired about the eleventh hour,.... Who were
the last that were hired; and signify either such, as are called in
their last days, in old age; or Gentile sinners; or the last of God's
elect, that will be called by grace, in the end of the world:

they received every man a penny: the same they first agreed for, that
were hired early into the vineyard; and all, and every man alike, not
one more and another less. So the same church privileges and immunities
are common to all believers, Jews or Gentiles, sooner or later called;
and equal title give to the same eternal life and happiness, which will
be enjoyed alike, by one saint as another: they are all loved with the
same everlasting love by God; they are chosen alike by him in his Son,
at the same time, in the same way and manner, and to the same grace and
glory; they are interested in the same covenant, in all the promises and
blessings of it; they are bought with the same price of a Redeemer's
blood, are justified by the same righteousness, and are called in one
hope of their calling; they are equally the sons of God, and their glory
and happiness are always expressed by the same thing, as a kingdom, a
crown, and inheritance, &c. They are all equally heirs of the same
kingdom and glory, and are born again to the same incorruptible
inheritance, of which they will all be partakers; they will all be
called to inherit the same kingdom, they will sit on the same throne of
glory, and wear the same crown of righteousness, and enjoy the same
uninterrupted communion with Father, Son, and Spirit. Now, indeed, they
have not the same measures of grace; some have more, others less; but in
heaven, it will be alike, complete and perfect in all; and even now,
they have the same grace for nature and kind, only it is not in all in
the same exercise; now the saints are distinguished by the several
stations and places in which they are; though they are members of the
same body, they have not the same office, and have gifts differing from
one another; but in the other state, all such offices and gifts will
cease, and all will be upon an equal foot; be where Christ is, and
behold his glory, and will stand in no need of each other's instruction
and help. Now the capacities of man are different, according to the
different temperament of their bodies, their different education,
opportunities, advantages, and stations in life, but in the other world,
where this difference will be no more, every vessel of mercy being
prepared for glory, will be equally capable of receiving it: and though
there will be degrees of punishment in hell, proportionate to the sins
of men, which the justice of God requires, yet it follows not, that
there will be degrees in glory; since that is not proportioned to the
works of men, but springs from the grace of God, and yet in a way of
justice too, through the blood, righteousness, and sacrifice of Christ:
and since the saints have an equal interest in these things, it seems
that upon the foot of justice, they should equally enjoy all that
happiness which these entitle them to.

[Matthew 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 20:10</span></span>

But when the first came,.... Who were early hired into the vineyard; and
design either the first saints that were in the world; or the Jews that
first believed in Christ, either really or nominally; or such, who were
called by grace in their early days:

they supposed, or "hoped", as the Syriac version renders it,

that they should have received more; than a penny, a greater reward: not
that they could expect it on the foot of their agreement, or on account
of their work; but because they observed, that they that came last into
the vineyard, had as much as they agreed for; and therefore hoped, from
the goodness of their Lord to them, that they should receive more:

and they likewise received every man a penny; the selfsame privileges of
the Gospel, and a title to the selfsame reward of free grace, the
selfsame glory and happiness.

[Matthew 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 20:11</span></span>

And when they had received it,.... The external privileges of the Gospel
dispensation, an inheritance among them that are sanctified, and a right
unto it, on the foot of free grace,

they murmured against the good man of the house; who had been so kind
and liberal, to those who came last into the vineyard, and had done no
injury to them, but gave them a full reward. So the Jews that first
believed in Christ, were at first uneasy at the Gospel being preached to
the Gentiles, at the calling of them, and their partaking of the same
privileges in a Gospel church state with them, without submitting to the
ceremonies of the law, as they had done; just as the Pharisees, in
Christ's time, murmured against him; for receiving sinners, and eating
with them: though in the latter day, the envy of Ephraim shall depart,
and in the ultimate glory there will be no murmuring at each other's
happiness.

[Matthew 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 20:12</span></span>

Saying, these last have wrought but one hour,.... Thinking it hard, that
they should have the same reward for the service of one hour, others had
for the service of many. This is grudged by the Jews (x);

""Bath Kol", a voice from heaven, went out and said, "Ketiah bar
Shallum", is prepared for the life of the world to come; Rabbi wept, and
said, there is that obtains his world (or the world to come for himself)
, "in one hour"; and there is that obtains it in many years.''

The same observation is also made by the same person, on account of R.
Eleazar ben Durdia (y). So in the parable of the Jews above mentioned,
which is the broken remains of a common proverb among them like (z)
this; it is observed, that there being one labourer among those that
were hired, who did his work better than all the rest, and who was taken
notice of by the king; that when

"at even the labourers came to take their wages, this labourer also came
to take his; and the king gave him his wages equal with them, (or, as in
another place, a perfect one,) the labourers began to press him with
difficulty, (or as elsewhere (a) "they murmured",) and said, Oh! our
Lord, the king, "we have laboured all the day"; but this man has not
laboured but two or three hours in the day, and he takes his wages, even
as ours, or a perfect reward.''

And so it follows here,

and thou hast made them equal to us, who have borne the burden and heat
of the day; of all the Jewish rites and ceremonies, which were
burdensome and intolerable. The ceremonial law was a burden to the
Jewish people; the multitude of sacrifices enjoined them, and the
frequent repetition of them, together with the great number of other
ordinances and institutions, produced a weariness in them; especially in
the carnal part of them, who saw not the things typified by them, the
use and end of them, and so did not enjoy spiritual pleasure in them,
[Mal 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#013.md). It was a yoke, and a yoke
of bondage to them, which brought on them a spirit of bondage, through
the fear of death, which was the penalty annexed to it; and it was an
insupportable one, which neither they, nor their forefathers, were able
to bear, because it made them debtors to keep the whole law: and this
was made still more burdensome, by the traditions of the elders, which
were added to it, and which the Scribes and Pharisees obliged to the
observance of; to which they themselves still added, and bound heavy
burdens, and grievous to be borne, and laid them on men's shoulders. The
law was a fiery law, and the dispensation of it was a hot and scorching
one; it was uncomfortable working under the flashes of a mount, that
burned with fire: the law worked wrath, and possessed the minds of men
with a fearful looking for of judgment, and fiery indignation. This may
also be applied to such Christians, who are called to more severe
service or sufferings for Christ, than others are; who are almost
pressed down without measure, and endure fiery trials, are scorched, and
made black, with the sun of persecution beating upon them; as the saints
under the ten persecutions of the Roman emperors, and as the confessors
and martyrs in the times of papal power and cruelty; and who, it might
be thought, will have a greater degree of glory and happiness hereafter;
and so some have been of opinion, that these are they that shall live
and reign with Christ a thousand years, [Rev
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004.md) But it rather seems, that others
will be made equal with them, who have not endured what they have done;
for all the dead in Christ, all that have part in the first
resurrection, when Christ comes, as all the saints will then rise, will
share in that glory; even the innumerable company, chosen, redeemed, and
called, out of every nation, tongue, and people, and will be admitted to
the same honour and happiness, [Rev
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#009.md) And this character will also agree
with many other servants of Christ, who are called to harder and more
laborious service than others are, and labour more abundantly in the
Lord's vineyard than others do, and are longer employed in it; as for
instance, the Apostle Paul; and yet the same crown of righteousness that
is laid up for him, and given to him, will be given to all that love the
appearance of Christ, though they have not laboured for his name's sake,
as he has done.

\(x\) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 10. 2. (y) Ib. fol. 17. 1. (z)
Shirhashirim Rabba, fol 21. 4. Midrash Kohelet, fol. 72. 4. (a) T.
Hieros. Beracot, fol. 5. 3.

[Matthew 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 20:13</span></span>

But he answered one of them,.... Who was the forwardest and loudest in
his complaints, and represented the rest;

and said, friend, I do thee no wrong; by giving all alike, the same
privileges and blessings to the last, as to the first, since nothing was
withheld from him. And indeed the Lord does no wrong to any, by the
distinction which he makes among his creatures: he is righteous in all
his ways, and holy in all his works: he does no injury to the evil
angels, by choosing the good angels, and confirming them in the estate
in which they were created; when the others are reserved in chains of
darkness, to the judgment of the great day; or by choosing fallen men,
in Christ, and making provisions of grace for them, and not devils: and
so there is no unrighteousness in him, nor does he do any wrong to any,
when, like the potter, out of the same clay, he makes one vessel to
honour, and another to dishonour; any more than when, in a providential
way, he gives riches and wealth to some, and withholds them from others;
or sends his Gospel, the means of grace to one, and not to another: and
still less can he be thought to do wrong to the sons of men, by giving
to them alike the same grace and privileges here, and the same happiness
and glory hereafter; since neither have any right to what they have, or
shall enjoy, and no one has the less for what is given to the other.

Didst thou not agree with me for a penny? That is, to labour in the
vineyard all the day for a penny; yea, this agreement was made
personally with him, not with a servant, or messenger of his; though if
it had, it ought, according to the Jewish canons, to have been abode by,
which run thus (b):

"A man says to his messenger, or servant, go and hire workmen for me for
three pence; he goes and hires them for four pence: if the messenger
says to them, your wages be upon me, he gives them four pence, and takes
three pence of the master of the house; he looses one out of his own
purse: if he says to them, your hire be upon the master of the house,
the master of the house gives them according to the custom of the
province: if there are one in the province that hired for three pence,
and others that are hired for four pence, he gives them but three pence,
"and the murmuring" is against the messenger; in what things? When the
work is not known, but when the work is known, and it is worth four
pence, the master of the house gives them four pence; but if his
messenger does not say to them four pence, they do not labour and do
what deserves four pence. The householder says to him, hire me for four
pence, and the messenger goes and hires for three pence, though the work
deserves four pence, they have but three pence; because that , "they
took it upon themselves", (i.e. they agreed for so much,) and their
murmuring is against the messenger.''

Thus the argument in the parable proceeds upon the agreement, which
ought to be abode by.

\(b\) Maimon. Hilch, Shecirut, c. 9. sect. 3.

[Matthew 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 20:14</span></span>

Take that thine is,.... By agreement, and go thy way; out of my sight,
give me no more trouble on this head; which looks like a dismissal from
his service, and after privileges; and was true of many among the Jews,
who were only nominal professors, and from whom the Gospel and
ordinances of it were taken:

I will give unto this last man that was called, and sent into the
vineyard,

even as unto thee; the same outward privileges, besides special grace,
and eternal glory, which it looks as if the other had not.

[Matthew 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 20:15</span></span>

Is it not lawful for me to do what I will with mine own?.... External
gifts and outward privileges, such as enjoying the word and ordinances,
are God's own; and he may, as he does, bestow them on whom he will, and
when and where he pleases; as he gave them to the Jews, and continued
them many hundred years, when the Gentiles were utterly with them
destitute of them; and as he has bestowed them in a more abundant manner
for a long time on the Gentiles, whilst the Jews despise and reject
them. Special grace is his own, which he gives to whom he pleases; it is
by his own grace, and not the merits of men, that any are chosen,
adopted, justified, pardoned, regenerated, and called; that they have
faith, hope, love, repentance, or perform new obedience from a new
heart, and new principles. Heaven and glory is his own, of his own
preparing and giving; and both grace and glory are disposed of, and that
very rightly and lawfully, according to his sovereign good will and
pleasure: he chooses, adopts, justifies, pardons, regenerates, calls,
and sanctifies whom he pleases; and brings what sons to glory he thinks
fit, and bestows it equally upon them: and in so doing, does no wrong,
or any injustice to any of his creatures; not to the fallen angels, by
choosing some of their species, and confirming them in their original
constitution; and by leaving them, the fallen angels, in their apostasy;
nor by making provision for fallen man, and not them, nor by punishing
them with everlasting destruction; nor do they ever complain of any
wrong being done them: nor to non-elect men; for none of Adam's race
have any right to grace or glory, and therefore no wrong is done to any
of them, by withholding them from them, whereby nothing is taken from
them, and given to others; and by punishing them for sin; nor to any
elect men, by making others partners with them; since they are all alike
by nature, unworthy of grace and glory, and deserving of wrath: what is
enjoyed by any of them, is of mere grace, and not through merit; and one
has not a whit the less, for what the other is possessed of; so that
there is no room for envy, murmuring, and complaint:

is thine eye evil because I am good? An "evil eye", is opposed to a good
eye, frequently in Jewish writings, as a "good eye" signifies
beneficence and liberality; hence it is said (c).

"He that gives a gift, let him give it "with a good eye"; bountifully
and generously; and he that devoteth anything, let him devote it with a
"good eye",''

cheerfully and freely: so an "evil eye" intends envy and covetousness,
as it does here: and the sense is, art thou envious at the good of
others, and covetous and greedy to monopolize all to thyself, because I
am liberal, kind, and beneficent? Men are apt to complain of God, and
charge his procedures in providence and grace, with inequality and
injustice; whereas he does, as he may, all things according to his
sovereign will, and never contrary to justice, truth, and goodness;
though he is not to be brought to man's bar, and men should submit to
his sovereignty.

\(c\) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 65. 1. & 71. 1. & 72. 1.

[Matthew 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 20:16</span></span>

So the last shall be first, and the first last,.... As he had asserted
in [Mat 19:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#030.md) and which is clearly
illustrated by this parable, as it may be applied to Jews or Gentiles,
or to nominal and real Christians:

for many be called; externally, under the ministration of the Gospel, as
the Jews in general were, by Christ and his apostles; but

few chosen; in Christ from all eternity, both to grace and glory; and in
consequence, and as an evidence of it, but few among the Jews; as also
in the Gentile world, comparatively speaking: and even but a few of
those that are outwardly called, are inwardly and effectually called by
the powerful grace of God, out of darkness into marvellous light, into
the grace and liberty of the Gospel, into communion with Christ, and to
the obtaining his kingdom and glory, according to the eternal purpose of
God. It is a saying of R. Simeon ben Jochai (d).

"I have seen the children of the world to come (elsewhere (e) it is, of
the chamber), , "and they are few".''

Though he vainly thought, that if those few were but two, they were
himself and his son.

\(d\) T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 13. 4. (e) T. Bab. Succa, fol. 45. 2. &
Sanhedrim, fol. 97. 2.

[Matthew 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 20:17</span></span>

And Jesus going up to Jerusalem,.... Which was situated (f) in the
highest part of the land of Israel: the land of Israel, is said to be
higher than any other land whatever; and the temple at Jerusalem, higher
than any part of the land of Israel; wherefore Christ's going to
Jerusalem, is expressed by going up to it. Whither he came either from
the coasts of Judea, from beyond Jordan, [Mat
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#001.md) where he had been some time
healing diseases, disputing with the Pharisees, discoursing with the
young ruler, and instructing his disciples; or from a country near to
the wilderness, from a city called Ephraim, [Joh
11:54](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#054.md) where he continued some time
with his disciples, after the sanhedrim had took counsel to put him to
death; for this was his last journey to Jerusalem.

Took the twelve disciples apart in the way: into some private place,
which lay near the road; for it seems that there were others that
followed him, besides the twelve; when he was not willing they should
hear what he had to say to them, concerning the issue of this, journey;
lest either they should be discouraged and desert him, or it should be
made public, and methods be used to prevent it: and said unto them; the
disciples, whom he thought fit once more to remind of his sufferings and
death, and to prepare them for the same; and though they would not so
thoroughly understand all that he should say, yet when it was come to
pass, they would remember it, and which would be of service to confirm
their faith in him, as the true Messiah. See Gill on [Mar
10:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar010.htm#032.md).

\(f\) T. Bab. Sanhedrim, fol. 87. 1.

[Matthew 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 20:18</span></span>

Behold, we go up to Jerusalem,.... This is the last time of our going
thither; observe, and take notice of what I am about to say; some
extraordinary things will come to pass, and, as Luke relates that he
said,

all things that are written by the prophets concerning the Son of man,
shall be accomplished; everything that is recorded in [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001.md), and in [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md), or in any other prophecies of
the Old Testament, relating to the ill treatment the Messiah should meet
with, to his sufferings and death, and all the circumstances attending
them, shall be exactly fulfilled in every point: and that they might not
be at a loss about what he meant, he gives an account of various
particular things, which should befall him;

and the Son of man shall be betrayed: he does not say by whom, though he
knew from the beginning who should betray him, that it would be one of
his disciples, and that it would be Judas; but the proper time was not
yet come to make this discovery: the persons into whose hands he was to
be betrayed, are mentioned;

unto the chief priests, and unto the Scribes; who were his most
inveterate and implacable enemies; and who were the persons that had
already taken counsel to put him to death, and were seeking all
advantages and opportunities to execute their design:

and they shall condemn him to death; which is to be understood not of
their declaring it as their opinion, that he was guilty of death, and
ought to die by a law of their's, which declaration they made before
Pilate; nor of their procuring the sentence of death to be pronounced by
him, upon him; but of their adjudging him to death among themselves, in
the palace of the high priest; which was done by them, as the sanhedrim
and great council of the nation; though either they could not, or did
not, choose to execute it themselves, and therefore delivered him up to
the Romans; for this act of condemning him to death, was to be, and was,
before the delivery of him up to the Gentiles, as is clear from what
follows.

[Matthew 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 20:19</span></span>

And shall deliver him to the Gentiles,.... To Pilate, an Heathen
governor, and to the Roman officers and soldiers under him; see [Joh
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh018.htm#035.md).

To mock him, as they did, by putting on him a scarlet robe, platting a
crown of thorns, and placing it on his head, and a reed in his hand; and
then bowed the knee to him, and cried, hail, king of the Jews!

and to scourge him: as he was by Pilate, at least by his orders: Mark
adds, "and spit upon him"; as not only did the Jews in the palace of the
high priest, but also the Gentiles, the Roman soldiers, after they had
mocked him in the manner before described:

and to crucify him: which, as it was a cruel and shameful death, such as
slaves and the worst of malefactors were put to, so it was a Roman one;
for which reason, the Jews choose to deliver him into the hands of the
Gentiles. The Persic version here adds, "and put him into the grave":
which though it followed his crucifixion, was not done by the Gentiles,
but by Joseph of Arimathea, a Jew, and a disciple of Jesus; and that not
in a contemptuous, but honourable manner

and the third day he shall rise again: this he said for the comfort of
his disciples; but now, though these things were so clearly and
distinctly expressed by Christ, and which show his omniscience, and give
proof both of his deity and Messiahship, yet Luke observes of the
disciples, "that they understood none of these things, and this saying
was hid from them, neither knew they the things which were spoken": the
words were plain, the grammatical sense of them was easy, but they could
not imagine that they were to be taken literally; which was such a
glaring contradiction to their received and rooted principles of the
temporal kingdom of the Messiah, and the grandeur of it, that they
fancied these expressions carried a mystical, secret meaning in them,
which they were not masters of: and certain it is, that what our Lord
now said, was so far from destroying, or weakening these prejudices of
theirs, that it rather confirmed them in them; particularly, what he
said about rising again, which seemed to have put them afresh in mind,
and to excite their hopes of this external felicity, as appears from the
following case.

[Matthew 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 20:20</span></span>

Then came to him the mother of Zebedee's children,.... Whose name was
Salome, as may be concluded from [Mat
27:56](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#056.md) compared with [Mar
15:40](../../../bib/kjv/mar015.htm#040.md). She is not called the wife of
Zebedee, who might be now dead, but the mother of his children, his two
sons, as the Arabic version renders it: James and John, and who were the
disciples of Christ: it is not certain, that Zebedee was ever a follower
of him; and therefore the woman is described by her relation to her
children, and not her husband; and the rather, because it was in their
name, and on their account, that she came to Jesus. She is said to be
the sister of Joseph, the husband of Mary, the mother of our Lord; and
if so, might hope to succeed in her request, on the foot of relation; as
also, since she herself had been a constant follower of, and attendant
on him; and especially, inasmuch as her sons were his favourite
disciples;

with her sons; her two sons, James and John, whom Mark mentions by name:

worshipping him,

and desiring a certain thing of him; that is, she came in a very
submissive manner to him, either bowed unto him, or kneeled down before
him, or threw herself at his feet, and signified that she had a single
favour, and a very considerable one, to ask of him. Mark represents the
case thus, that her two sons, James and John, came to Christ, and that
they themselves spoke to him, and addressed him in this manner: "Master,
we would that thou shouldest do for us, whatsoever we shall desire":
which was a very odd request, both as to the matter and manner of it;
that they should ask; and insist upon everything to be done for them,
they desired; and suggest, that they expected that he would promise them
this, before they declared the particular favour they had to ask of him.
The matter may be reconciled thus. These two disciples, having observed
what Christ had said concerning the twelve disciples sitting on twelve
thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel, and what he had just
related, concerning his rising again the third day, which they might
understand of some display of his glory; and concluding from all this,
that the setting up of his temporal monarchy was at hand, inform their
mother of it, and move to her, to use her interest with Christ, in their
favour: and which they did, partly to shun the envy and ill will of the
rest of the disciples; and partly, to conceal their own pride and
vanity; as also, they might think a request from her, on their behalf,
would be more easily granted: accordingly, she agreeing to the motion,
they all three came, as Matthew relates, and the mother is the mouth,
and speaks for her sons; so that they may be said to make such a request
by her, she representing them; or they joined in the petition with her;
or as soon as she had made it, they seconded it, and made it their own.

[Matthew 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 20:21</span></span>

And he said unto her, what wilt thou?.... Mark says, "he said unto
them"; her two sons, James and John, "what would you that I should do
for you?" Both is true; what is this singular favour? what business of
moment and importance is it, you would have me do for you, you are so
eager and pressing for, and so solicitous of? This he said, not as being
ignorant of the matter; he knew the corruption of their hearts, the
vanity of their minds, their carnal, worldly, and ambitious views; but
to lead them on to say all they had to say upon this head; in which may
be observed the goodness, humanity, and patience of Christ, in not
upbraiding them with their pride and insolence, in bearing with their
rashness and folly, and in giving them room to believe, that he should
answer their request in every thing that was right and reasonable to be
done,

She saith unto him, grant that these my two sons may sit, the one on the
right hand, and the other the left in thy kingdom: or, as in Mark, "in
thy glory" that is, in thy glorious kingdom; meaning a temporal one,
which would outdo all the kingdoms of the world, in external glory,
pomp, and splendour, as they imagined: to sit one on the right hand and
the other on the left hand of Christ, when he should be seated,
literally, on the throne of his father David, signifies to be nearest to
his person; to be next to him in power and authority; to have the
highest posts of honour, and places of trust and profit; to be his prime
ministers; and, in a word, to have the greatest share next to him of
worldly honour, riches, and power. To sit at the right hand, was, with
the Jews, reckoned a great mark of honour and affection; see [Kg1
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#019.md) and so with other nations: with
the Egyptians especially, it was accounted a great honour to be placed
on the right hand, but the greatest to be in the middle: which was
equally observed among the Romans, and the same with the Africans and
Numidians; though Xenophon relates, that Cyrus, with a singular
prudence, that he might receive his guests the more honourably, used to
place them at the left hand, accounting that part, as nearest the heart,
to be the more worthy. (g) These two, the best and most honourable
places, this woman was for engrossing for her two sons, who joined with
her in the request; for Mark says, that "they said unto him, grant unto
us that we may sit, &c." and Christ's answer here, which follows,
implies as much.

\(g\) Alex. ab. Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 2. c. 19.

[Matthew 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 20:22</span></span>

But Jesus answered, and said,.... To her two sons,

ye know not what ye ask. They were ignorant of the nature of Christ's
kingdom, which is spiritual, and not of this world: or they would never
have asked such a question, or sued for that which will never be enjoyed
by any and supposing that Christ's kingdom had been such as they
imagined, yet in asking for honours and riches, they might not know what
they asked for; they might promise themselves much pleasure and
happiness in the enjoyment of them, and yet, if indulged with them,
might be disappointed, and find unexpected troubles and uneasiness. It
would have been much more proper and seasonable, on hearing of Christ's
being mocked, scourged, spit upon, and crucified, if they had put such a
question to themselves, Christ here directs to,

are ye able to drink of the cup that I shall drink of, and to be
baptized with the baptism I am baptized with? meaning his reproaches,
sorrows, sufferings, and death; which because of the disagreeableness of
them, he compares to a bitter cup of vengeance, wrath, fury, and
indignation; and because they were appointed to him, and allotted for
him, they were his portion, therefore he expresses them by a "cup"; and
because they were so many and great, of such an overwhelming nature,
that he seemed to be plunged into them, and covered with them, therefore
he likens them to a "baptism" and which the ordinance of water baptism,
performed by immersion, is a lively representation of. Now Christ
suggests to these disciples, that instead of indulging their ambitious
desires of worldly grandeur, that they would do well to consider what a
bitter cup he had to drink of, and what a sea of sorrows and sufferings
he was about to be plunged into, and drenched in; and whether they could
think of enduring anything of the like kind, for his sake, which was
most likely to be in a short time, what they would be called unto, and
not to honours, ease, and pleasure; and what they must be sure, more or
less, to undergo, before they entered the everlasting kingdom of glory:

they say unto him, we are able; not considering the nature of these
sufferings, and their own weakness; but partly through ignorance of
themselves, and a vain confidence which possessed them; and chiefly
through a vehement desire of the places in his kingdom, they asked for,
and which they thought drinking his cup, and being baptized with his
baptism, were the condition, and the means of enjoying; and so rashly
affirm their ability, and which includes their willingness to comply
herewith.

[Matthew 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 20:23</span></span>

And he saith unto them, ye shall drink indeed of my cup,.... Not of the
selfsame, but of what was like unto it; meaning, that they should endure
much persecution for his name's sake, as all that will live godly in
Christ Jesus must expect in one shape or another. Thus James, who was
one of these persons, was slain with the sword by Herod; John, the
other, was imprisoned, and beaten by the order of the Jewish sanhedrim,
was banished into the isle of Patmos by Domitian; and, some say, was
cast into a cauldron of boiling oil, though saved in it: so that these
words seem to be a prophecy of what they should suffer for Christ,
instead of enjoying places of worldly honour and profit under him, they
were seeking for.

And be baptized with the baptism that I am baptized with: this clause is
here, and in the former verse, omitted by the Vulgate Latin, and
Ethiopic versions, and in some Greek copies, and is thought to be
transcribed hither out of Mark's Gospel; but the Syriac, Arabic, and
Persic versions have it, and so has Munster's Hebrew Gospel, and it
appears in many Greek copies. James, being bathed in his own blood, when
killed with the sword, and John being cast into a vessel of scalding
oil, these are fitly expressed by a baptism.

But to sit on my right hand, and on my left, is not mine, to give; in
the sense in which they asked it, since he was no temporal prince; nor
was his kingdom of this world; nor had he any such external favours, or
worldly honours: and as to the true and spiritual sense of such a
phrase, it was not a point to be fixed now by him, as man, and according
to his own will; as who should reign with him in the kingdom of heaven,
who should sit down on the same throne with him, and enjoy all the
glories and happiness of the world to come; and though, as mediator, all
this glory was given to him, and he had it in his hands to give to
others, yet to none

but those

for whom, says he,

it is prepared of my Father: for this is the true reading and sense of
the last clause; signifying, that eternal life, or the heavenly glory,
is a kingdom prepared by his Father, from the foundation of the world,
and not for anybody, and every person, but for some only, according to
his Father's sovereign will and pleasure; and that this is an affair
that was fixed by him, in his eternal counsels and purposes, and in the
covenant of his grace, and not to be adjusted now; nor was the
designation of it to be, nor will the distribution of it be according to
the merits of men, but the free grace of God; and though he, as
mediator, was appointed to bestow both grace and glory on men, yet only
on those the Father had given to him, for whom grace was laid up in him,
and glory prepared.

[Matthew 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 20:24</span></span>

And when they ten heard it,.... The other ten apostles, who either were
within hearing the request made, and Christ's answer, or had by some
means information of it:

they were moved with indignation against the two brethren; the two sons
of Zebedee, James and John: they were not so much displeased with the
mother of them, who asked the favour for them, as with her sons, knowing
that they have put her upon making this motion to Christ; nor were they
so much moved with indignation at the action, detesting all notions of
superiority and preeminence; for they were all tinctured with the same
carnal principle, and each was desirous of the chief place for himself;
but they were angry, and out of all temper, that these two brethren
should move for that, which they thought they had as good a right unto,
as any of them: wherefore, as Mark says, "they began to be much
displeased with" them, and to show their resentment, not only by their
looks and gestures, but by words; and very probably they would have rose
to very high words, and a downright quarrel, had not Christ interposed;
as, from the following verse, it appears he did.

[Matthew 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 20:25</span></span>

But Jesus called them unto him,.... All his twelve disciples, perceiving
that the same ambitious views prevailed in them all: to discourage
which, and to prevent their quarrelling one with another, he called them
to him, and made use of the following reasonings:

and said, ye know that the princes of the Gentiles exercise dominion
over them, and they that are great exercise authority upon them;
appealing to them in a case that was well known by them, what the
princes of the Gentiles did; or, as Mark expresses it, "they which are
accounted", or "seem to rule over the Gentiles": who know not God, the
King of kings, and Lord of lords, who neither serve and obey him, or
have any dependence on him, but assume a power of governing others, take
upon them to rule the nations of the world, and are acknowledged as such
by them: these claim a superiority over others, and exercise lordly
power over them; and they that are their great ones, their lords, and
nobles under them; these also assert a preeminence, and exercise
authority on those that are below them; which they have received from
those that are above them: this is the usual way and method of the
governments of the kingdoms of this world: wherefore, for the apostles
to affect and desire a superiority to each other, in the kingdom of
Christ, was to imitate the Gentiles, and to act according to worldly
forms of government; which is very unsuitable to the followers of the
meek and lowly Jesus, whose kingdom is spiritual, and not of this world.

[Matthew 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 20:26</span></span>

But it shall not be so among you,.... This is not to be extended to
Christian nations, as if there were to be no order of magistracy
subsisting in them; but that all must be on a level, and no distinction
of princes and subjects, of governors and governed; nor to Christian
churches, as if there was no ecclesiastical authority to be used, or any
church government and power to be exercised; none to rule, whom others
are to obey and submit themselves to; but is to be restrained to the
apostles as such, among whom there was an entire equality; being all
apostles of Christ, being equally qualified and sent, and put into the
selfsame office by him: the same holds good of all pastors of churches,
who have no superintendency and pre-eminence over one another, or can,
or ought to exercise any lordly power and authority, one, or more, over
the rest; being equally invested with the same office power, one as
another: for otherwise Christ's kingdom would appear like the nations of
the world, and to be of a worldly nature; whereas it is spiritual, and
does not lie in worldly pomp and grandeur, and in external superiority
and pre-eminence of one another; but in the spiritual administration of
the word and ordinances; which every pastor of a church has an equal
right to exercise, and obedience to them lies in a submission to these
things:

but whosoever will be great among you, let him be, or, as in Mark,

shall be your minister: whoever would be reckoned a great man in the
kingdom of Christ, or under the Gospel dispensation, must be a minister
to others if he is desirous of being truly great in the esteem of God,
and of men, he must do great service for Christ, and to the souls of
men; and seek to bring great glory to God, by faithfully ministering the
word and ordinances, and by denying himself worldly honour and glory,
and by serving others, through much reproach, difficulty, and
opposition.

[Matthew 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 20:27</span></span>

And whosoever will be chief among you,.... Or first, or have the
pre-eminence, the first place in the kingdom of the Messiah,

let him be your servant; or, as in Mark,

shall be servant of all: not only a minister, but a servant; not a
servant of some only, but of all. This was verified in the Apostle Paul,
who became a servant to all men, though he was free, that he might gain
some to Christ; and by so doing was the chief, though he reckoned
himself the least of the apostles, yea, less than the least of all
saints. The Jews have a saying somewhat like this, that (h).

"everyone that makes himself as a servant, for the words of the law in
this world, shall be made free in the world to come.''

\(h\) T. Bab. Bava Metzia, fol. 35. 2.

[Matthew 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 20:28</span></span>

Even as the son of man,.... Meaning himself, the seed of the woman, the
son of Abraham, and of David, according to the flesh; and whom he
proposes as an example of humility, and as an argument to draw them off
from their ambitious views of worldly grandeur, and from all thoughts of
the Messiah's setting up a temporal kingdom; since he

came not to be ministered unto by others; to be attended on in pomp and
state, to have a numerous retinue about him, waiting upon him, and
ministering to him; as is the case of the princes, and great men of the
world; though he is Lord of all, and King of kings;

but to minister; in the form of a servant unto others, going about from
place to place to do good, both to the bodies and souls of men: he
"came" forth from his Father, down from heaven, into this world, by his
assumption of human nature, to "minister" in the prophetic office, by
preaching the Gospel, and working miracles, in confirmation of it; and
in the priestly office, one branch of which is expressed in the next
clause,

and to give his life a ransom for many: what he came to give was his
life, which was his own, and than which nothing is more dear and
precious: besides, his life was an uncommon one, being not only so
useful to men, and entirely free from sin in itself, but was the life of
the man Jesus, who is in union with the Son of God: this he came to
"give", and did give into the hands of men, to the justice of God, and
death itself; which giving, supposes it to be his own, and at his own
disposal; was not forfeited by any act of his, nor was it forced from
him, but freely laid down by him; and that as a "ransom", or redemption
price for his people, to deliver them from the evil of sin, the bondage
of Satan, the curses of a righteous law, from eternal death, and future
wrath, and, in short, from all their enemies: which ransom price was
paid "for" them in their room and stead, by Christ, as their substitute;
who put himself in their legal place, and laid himself under obligation
to pay their debts, and clear their scores, and redeem them from all
their iniquities, and the evil consequences of them: and this he did
"for many"; for as many as were ordained to eternal life; for as many as
the Father gave unto him; for many out of every kindred, tongue, and
people, and nation; but not for every individual of human nature; for
many are not all.

[Matthew 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 20:29</span></span>

And as they departed from Jericho,.... Which, was distant about ten
parsas, or miles, from Jerusalem (i), through which Christ just passed,
and had met with Zacchaeus, and called him, and delivered the parable
concerning a nobleman's going into a far country. The Syriac and Persic
versions render the words, "when Jesus departed from Jericho"; and the
Arabic, "when he went out of Jericho"; not alone, but "with his
disciples", as Mark says; and not with them only, for a great multitude
followed him out of the city; either to hear him, or be healed by him,
or to see him, or behold his miracles, or to accompany him to Jerusalem;
whither he was going to keep the feast of the passover, and where they
might be in some expectation he would set up his kingdom. The Ethiopic
version reads it, "as they went out from Jerusalem", contrary to all
copies and versions.

\(i\) Bartenora in Misn. Taraid, c. 3. sect. 8.

[Matthew 20:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 20:30</span></span>

And behold, two blind men,.... Mark and Luke make mention but of one;
which is no contradiction to Matthew; for they neither of them say that
there was but one. A greater difficulty occurs in Luke's account; for
whereas Matthew and Mark both agree, that it was when Jesus came out of
Jericho, that this cure was wrought, Luke says it was "when he came nigh
unto it"; which some reconcile by observing, that that phrase may be
rendered, "while he was near Jericho"; and so only signifies his
distance from it, and not motion to it; but this will not solve the
difficulty, because we after read of his entrance into it, and passing
through it. Some therefore have thought, that Christ met with, and cured
one blind man before he entered the city, and another when he came out
of it and that Matthew has put the history of both together: but to me
it seems, that there were three blind men cured; one before he went into
Jericho, which Luke only relates, and two as he came out of Jericho,
which Matthew here speaks of; and one of which, according to Mark, was
by name Bartimaeus, the son of Timaeus; for so Bartimaeus signifies.
Tima, or Timaeus, was a name in use among the Jews: we often read of R.
Judah , Ben Tima (k), the son of Tima, or Timaeus. Origen (l) thinks, he
had his name from the Greek word which signifies "honour"; and so
"Time", with the Jews, is used for honour and profit (m). This man's
father might have been a very honourable and useful man, though the son
was fallen into poverty and distress, through blindness; for which
reason he may be mentioned, as being a person well known to the Jews.

Sitting by the wayside; Mark says, "begging", where such were wont to
sit, in order to ask alms of persons, as they passed by;

when they heard that Jesus passed by; who, upon perceiving that there
was an unusual concourse of people, might ask the reason of it, when it
was told them that Jesus of Nazareth was coming that way: or, without
asking, they might hear the people speak of him; and inasmuch as they
had heard many things concerning him, and the miracles he wrought,
applied to him for help, and

cried out, saying, have mercy on us, O Lord, thou son of David: in which
may be observed the titles of honour they give him, which declare their
faith in him; calling him Lord, expressing their sense of his deity,
dominion, and power; and "Son of David", thereby owning and professing
him to be the Messiah, that being a common name of him, well known among
the Jews; See Gill on [Mat 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#001.md), the
petition they make is, that he would "have mercy on them", who, through
blindness, were in a poor, helpless, and miserable condition; and this
was made with great vehemency: they "cried" out aloud, that he might
hear them, and take pity on them; being eagerly desirous of having their
sight, and firmly believing that he was able to restore it to them.

\(k\) T. Hieros. Nazir, fol. 52. 1. Erubin, fol. 19. 4. T. Bab. Gittin,
fol. 84. 1. Bava Metzig, fol. 94. 1. Massech. Semachot, c. 9. Juchasin,
fol. 159. 2. (l) Comment. in Matt. vol. 1. p. 428. Ed. Huet. (m) Targum
in Esth. iii. 8. & v. 13. T. Hicros. Peah, fol. 15. 4.

[Matthew 20:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 20:31</span></span>

And the multitude rebuked them,.... Who were either the friends or
enemies of Christ: if his friends, they might rebuke them, that they
might not be so troublesome to him, and judging it unworthy of him to
have anything to do with such mean persons, and supposing that their
business was only to ask alms of him; or if they were his enemies, or
not so well affected to him, they might chide them for giving him such
high characters, as Lord, and Son of David; and therefore being
displeased with such encomiums, reproved them,

because they should hold their peace; be silent, and say no more of that
kind, lest others should take up the same notion of him, and it should
prevail among the people,

But they cried the more, saying, have mercy on us, O Lord, thou Son of
David. They lifted up their voice higher, and cried the more loudly,
that their voice might be above the noise of the people, and be heard by
Christ; and renewed their request with more eagerness and importunity,
repeating the characters they before gave him, being not in the least
intimidated by the rebukes of the people: their faith in Jesus, as the
Messiah, being more increased, and their desires of his pity and
compassion being more enlarged, they grew bolder, and more resolute, as
faith often does by opposition, and trials.

[Matthew 20:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 20:32</span></span>

And Jesus stood still,.... Made a full stop, when he was near, or right
against where these blind men sat; which shows the strength of faith,
the force of prayer, and the great regard Christ has to both:

and called them: himself, being near unto them, and within the reach of
his voice; or he commanded them to be brought to him, as Mark says: he
ordered others to call them, or let them know, that it was his will they
should come to him; upon which they threw away their garments, their
long upper garments, which were some hindrance to a quick motion, at
least Bartimaeus did; that they might be the sooner with him: and when
they were come to him, he said,

what will ye that I shall do unto you? is it alms you want? or would you
have your sight restored? This question he put, not as being ignorant of
their desires, but to show both his power and willingness to do anything
for them they should ask; and that their faith in him might be made
manifest, and the people have their expectations raised, and they
prepared to attend the miracle now to be wrought.

[Matthew 20:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 20:33</span></span>

They say unto him, Lord, that our eyes may be opened. That is, that
their sight might be restored to them; for being deprived of that, it
was all one as if their eyes were so closed, that they could not open
them; and so the recovery of it is expressed by an opening of them. The
opening of the eyes of the blind was prophesied of, as what should be
done in the days of the Messiah, and by him, as an evidence of his being
that person, [Isa 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#005.md) which prophecy
these blind men might be acquainted with, and be an encouragement to
their faith to expect a cure from him. They do not ask for alms, but for
the recovery of their sight; which being granted, they would be able to
get their bread in another way; for they were not like some idle persons
that choose rather to be under such a calamity, or any other, that they
might not be obliged to work with their hands for a livelihood. Their
request shows, that they made no doubt of it, but firmly believed that
Christ was able to do this for them, though the thing was impossible to
be done by man; who therefore must conclude that he was not a mere man,
but the Son of the living God.

[Matthew 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat020.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 20:34</span></span>

So Jesus had compassion on them,.... His bowels moved towards them as a
man; he pitied their miserable and distressed condition, and discovered
the tenderness of his heart towards them by some outward sign, by his
looks, or by some gesture or another:

and touched their eyes; with his bare hand, without the use of any
instrument or medicine. The Ethiopic version adds; "and said unto them,
according to your faith shall it be unto you"; which seems to be taken
out of [Mat 9:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#029.md). The Evangelist Mark
relates, that "Jesus said unto him (Bartimaeus) go thy way, thy faith
hath made thee whole": not that the virtue of healing came from the act
of faith, but from the object of it; his faith was not the cause of, nor
the reason why, but the way and means in and by which he received the
cure:

and immediately their eyes received sight; or, as the Syriac and Persic
versions render the words, "that moment their eyes were opened": the
cure was wrought at once, directly; a clear proof of the omnipotence of
Christ, and of his true and proper deity: the words, "their eyes", are
not in some copies: and are omitted by the Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and
Ethiopic versions, which read thus, "they immediately saw". The Persic
version adds, and they saw the world; the men and things of it, which
they either had never seen before, or, at least, for a considerable
time; which must be a very surprising and agreeable sight to them.

And they followed him; in a corporal sense they joined the multitude,
and went after him to Jerusalem; partly to express their gratitude for
such a wonderful favour bestowed upon them; and partly that they might
be witnesses of the power of his deity, and the truth of his
Messiahship, as they went along, and at Jerusalem: and in a spiritual
sense; they became his disciples, they embraced his doctrines, believed
in him as the Messiah, submitted to his ordinances, imitated him in the
exercise of grace, and in the performance of duty: for, at the same time
he restored their bodily sight, he gave them a spiritual one to look to
him, and follow him, the light of the world, that they might enjoy the
light of life in another world.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 21](mat021.md)

</div>
