<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Matthew Index](mat)  
  [Previous](mat023)  [Next](mat025) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Matthew Chapter 24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001)

[Matthew 24:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mat 24:1</span></span>

And Jesus went out, and departed from the temple,.... He not only went
out of it for that time, but took his final leave of it, never to return
more to it; having foretold its desolation, which he, in part, by so
doing, immediately fulfilled: this the disciples observing, and being
intent on the outward splendour, and worldly grandeur of it, were
concerned that so beautiful a structure should be deserted; and almost
thought it incredible, that so strong, and firm a building could be
destroyed.

And his disciples came unto him: as he went, and as soon as he was come
out of the temple, and whilst in view of it:

for to show him the buildings of the temple; the walls of it, and courts
adjoining to it, how beautiful and firm they were: whether this was done
by them to raise in him admiration or commiseration, in hopes he might
change the sentence he had passed upon it, is not easy to say; or
whether this did not express their incredulity about the desolation of
it; which Christ's answer, in the next verse, seems to imply. Mark says,
it was "one of the disciples" that observed these to him, who might be
accompanied with the rest, and in their name address him; and who,
probably, might be Peter, since he was generally their mouth; and that
he should speak to him in this manner: "master, see what manner of
stones, and what buildings are here!" Luke says, "how it was adorned
with goodly stones, and gifts." The Jews give very great encomiums of
the second temple, as repaired by Herod; and it was undoubtedly a very
fine structure. They say (p), that he built the house of the sanctuary,
"an exceeding beautiful building"; and that he repaired the temple, in
beauty "greatly exceeding" that of Solomon's (q). They moreover observe
(r), that

"he who has not seen the building of Herod, has never seen, , "a
beautiful building." With what is it built? says Rabbah, with stones of
green and white marble. And there are others say, that it was built with
stones of spotted green and white marble.''

These, very likely, were the very stones the disciples pointed to, and
admired; and were of a prodigious size, as well as worth. Some of the
stones were, as Josephus (s) says,

"forty five cubits long, five high, and six broad.''

Others of them, as he elsewhere affirm (t),

"were twenty five cubits long, eight high, and twelve broad.''

And he also tells us, in the same place, that there were,

"in the porches, four rows of pillars: the thickness of each pillar was
as much as three men, with their arms stretched out, and joined
together, could grasp; the length twenty seven feet, and the number of
them an hundred and sixty two, and beautiful to a miracle.''

At the size of those stones, and the beauty of the work, it is said (u),
Titus was astonished, when he destroyed the temple; at which time his
soldiers plundered it, and took away "the gifts", with which it is also
said to be adorned. These were rich and valuable things which were
dedicated to it, and either laid up in it, or hung upon the walls and
pillars of it, as it was usual in other temples (w). These may, intend
the golden table given by Pompey, and the spoils which Herod dedicated;
and particularly the golden vine, which was a gift of his (x); besides
multitudes of other valuable things, which were greatly enriching and
ornamental to it. Now the disciples suggest, by observing these, what a
pity it was such a grand edifice should be destroyed; or how
unaccountable it was; that a place of so much strength, could easily be
demolished.

\(p\) Juchasin, fol. 139. 1. (q) Ganz Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 24. 2.
(r) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 4. 1. & Succa, fol. 51. 2. (s) De Bello
Jud. l. 5. c. 5. (t) Antiq. Jud. l. 15. c. 14. (u) Egesippus, l. 5. c.
43. (w) Vid. Ryckium de Capitol. Rom. c. 21, &c. (x) Joseph. Antiq. l.
15.

[Matthew 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mat 24:2</span></span>

And Jesus said unto them, see ye not all these things?.... "These great
buildings", as in Mark; all these goodly stones, so beautiful and large,
and so firmly put together:

verily, I say unto you, there shall not be left here one stone upon
another, that shall not be thrown down; or broken, as Munster's Hebrew
Gospel reads it: which prediction had a full and remarkable
accomplishment; and which is not only attested by Josephus (y), who
relates, that both the city and temple were dug up, and laid level with
the ground; but also by other Jewish writers; who tell us (z) that

"on the ninth of Ab, a day prepared for punishments, Turnus Rufus the
wicked, , "ploughed up the temple", and all round about it, to fulfil
what is said, "Zion shall be ploughed as a field".''

Yes, and to fulfil what Christ here says too, that not one stone should
be left upon another, which a plough would not admit of.

\(y\) De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 7. (z) Maimon. Hilch. Taaniot, c. 5. sect.
3. T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 23. 1. & Gloss. in ib.

[Matthew 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mat 24:3</span></span>

And as he sat upon the Mount of Olives,.... Which was on the east of the
city of Jerusalem (a), "over against the temple", as Mark says, and
where he could sit and take a full view of it; for the wall on the east
side was lower than any other, and that for this reason; that when the
high priest burnt the red heifer on this mount, as he did, and sprinkled
the blood, he might have a view of the gate of the temple. It is said
(b),

"all the walls which were there, were very high, except the eastern
wall; for the high priest, when he burned the heifer, stood on the top
of the mount of Olives, and directed himself, and looked to the gate of
the temple, at the time he sprinkled the blood.''

This place, very probably, our Lord chose to sit in, that he might give
his disciples an occasion to discourse more largely with him on this
subject; and that he might take the opportunity of acquainting them with
what would be the signs and forerunners of this desolation, and so it
proved:

the disciples came to him privately; these four at least, Peter, and
James, and John, and Andrew, as Mark relates; and that either separately
from the rest of the disciples, or from the multitude: it might not be
thought so proper, to ask the following questions before them, and they
might suppose that Christ would not be so ready to give an answer to
them plainly, before the common people; when they might hope to be
indulged with one by him, in private:

saying, tell us, when shall these things be? That this house will be
left desolate, these buildings will be destroyed, and not one stone left
upon another? This first question relates purely to the destruction of
the temple, and to this Christ first answers, from [Mat
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#004).

And what shall be the sign of thy coming, and of the end of the world?
Which two are put together, as what they supposed would be at the same
time, and immediately follow the destruction of the temple. That he was
come in the flesh, and was the true Messiah, they firmly believed: he
was with them, and they expected he would continue with them, for they
had no notion of his leaving them, and coming again. When he at any time
spake of his dying and rising from the dead, they seemed not to
understand it: wherefore this coming of his, the sign of which, they
inquire, is not to be understood of his coming a second time to judge
the world, at the last day; but of his coming in his kingdom and glory,
which they had observed him some little time before to speak of;
declaring that some present should not die, till they saw it: wherefore
they wanted to be informed, by what sign they might know, when he would
set up his temporal kingdom; for since the temple was to be destroyed,
they might hope a new one would be built, much more magnificent than
this, and which is a Jewish notion; and thai a new state of things would
commence; the present world, or age, would be at a period; and the world
to come, they had so often heard of from the Jewish doctors, would take
place; and therefore they ask also, of the sign of the end of the world,
or present state of things in the Jewish economy: to this Christ
answers, in the latter part of this chapter, though not to the sense in
which they put the questions; yet in the true sense of the coming of the
son of man, and the end of the world; and in such a manner, as might be
very instructive to them, and is to us.

\(a\) Bartenora in Misn. Middot, c. 1. sect. 3. (b) Misn. lb. c. 2.
sect. 4.

[Matthew 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mat 24:4</span></span>

And Jesus answered and said unto them,.... Not to indulge their
curiosity, but to instruct them in things useful to be known, and which
might be cautions to them and others, against deceivers; confirm them in
the faith of himself, when they should see his predictions accomplished;
and be directions to them, of what might shortly be expected.

Take heed that no man deceive you: by pretending to come from God with a
new revelation, setting himself up for the Messiah, after my departure;
suggesting himself to be the person designed by God to be the deliverer
of Israel, and to be sent by him, to set up a temporal kingdom, in great
worldly splendour and glory; promising great names, and high places of
honour and trust in it; things which Christ knew his disciples were fond
of, and were in danger of being ensnared by; and therefore gives them
this suitable and seasonable advice, and caution.

[Matthew 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mat 24:5</span></span>

For many shall come in my name,.... by his orders, or with delegated
powers and authority from him; but should assume the name of the
Messiah, which was peculiarly his, to themselves; and take upon them his
office, and challenge the honour and dignity which belonged unto him:

saying, I am Christ, and shall deceive many. This is the first sign,
preceding the destruction of the city and temple of Jerusalem; as there
was a general expectation among the Jews of a Messiah; that is, of one
that should arise and deliver them from the Roman yoke, which was the
common idea tacked to that word; in this period of time, many set up
themselves to be deliverers and redeemers of the people of Israel: who
had each of them their followers in great numbers, whom they imposed
upon, and brought to destruction. Of this sort was Theudas, not he that
Gamaliel speaks of, [Act 5:36](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#036) for he
was before this time; but one that was in the time of Claudius Caesar,
when Cuspius Fadus was governor of Judea; who persuaded a great number
to follow him to the river Jordan, which he promised to divide, by a
word of command, and give them a passage over; and thereby, as the
historian observes (c), , "he deceived many"; which is the very thing
that is here predicted: but he and his company were routed Fadus, and
his head cut off. There was another called the Egyptian, mentioned in
[Act 21:38](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#038) who made an uproar, and led
four thousand cut-throats into the wilderness; and this same man
persuaded thirty thousand men to follow him to Mount Olivet, promising a
free passage into the city; but he being vanquished by Felix, then
governor of Judea; fled, and many of his followers were killed and taken
(d): and besides, there were many more magicians and impostors, that
pretended to signs and wonders, and promised the people deliverance from
their evils, by whom they were imposed upon to their ruin. There were
others also besides these, that set up for deliverers, who called
themselves by the name of the Messiah. Among these, we may reckon Simon
Magus, who gave out that he was some great one; yea, expressly, that he
was the word of God, and the Son of God (e), which were known names of
the Messiah; and Dositheus the Samaritan, asserted himself to be Christ
(f); and also Menander affirmed, that no man could be saved, unless he
was baptized in his name (g); these are instances before the destruction
of Jerusalem, and confirm the prophecy here delivered.

\(c\) Joseph. Antiq. l. 20. c. 2. (d) Joseph. Antiq. l. 20. c. 6. (e)
Jerom in loc. Iren. adv. Haeres. l. 1. c. 20. (f) Origen contr. Cels. l.
1. p. 44. (g) Tertull. de prescript. Haeret. c. 46.

[Matthew 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mat 24:6</span></span>

And ye shall hear of wars and rumours of wars,.... This is the second
sign of the destruction of Jerusalem: it is observable that this, and
some of the following signs, are given by the Jews, as signs of the
Messiah's coming; whereas they were forerunners of their ruin, for the
rejection of him who was already come. They suppose the Messiah will
come in the seventh year, or the year of rest and release:

"On the seventh year (they say (h)) will be "wars": and in the going
out, or at the close of the seventh year, the son of David will come.''

Which wars, the gloss says, will be between the nations of the world,
and Israel. Here wars may mean the commotions, insurrections, and
seditions, against the Romans, and their governors; and the intestine
slaughters committed among them, some time before the siege of
Jerusalem, and the destruction of it. Under Cureanus the Roman governor,
a sedition was raised on the day of the passover, in which twenty
thousand perished; after that, in another tumult, ten thousand were
destroyed by cut-throats: in Ascalon two thousand more, in Ptolemais two
thousand, at Alexandria fifty thousand, at Damascus ten thousand, and
elsewhere in great numbers (i). The Jews were also put into great
consternation, upon hearing the design of the Roman emperor, to put up
his image in their temple:

see that ye be not troubled; so as to leave the land of Judea as yet,
and quit the preaching of the Gospel there, as if the final destruction
was just at hand;

for all these things must come to pass; these wars and the reports of
them and the panic on account of them; these commotions and slaughters,
and terrible devastations by the sword must be; being determined by God,
predicted by Christ, and brought upon the Jews by their own wickedness;
and suffered in righteous judgment, for their sin:

but the end is not yet; meaning not the end of the world, but the end of
Jerusalem, and the temple, the end of the Jewish state; which were to
continue, and did continue after these disturbances in it.

\(h\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 97. 1. & Megilia, fol. 17. 2. Zohar in
Exod. fol. 3. 3, 4. (i) Vid. Joseph. Antiq. l. 20. c. 6. & de Bello Jud.
l. 2, &c.

[Matthew 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mat 24:7</span></span>

This seems to be a distinct and third sign, foreboding the general
calamity of the Jews; that there should be not only seditions and
intestine wars, in the midst of their country, but there should be wars
in other nations, one with another; and with the Jews, and the Jews with
them: and this also is made a sign of the Messiah's coming by them, for
so they say (k);

"when thou seest, , "kingdoms stirred up one against another", look for
the feet of the Messiah: know thou that so it shall be; for so it was in
the days of Abraham: by the means of kingdoms stirred up one against
another, redemption came to Abraham.''

Poor blinded creatures! when these very things were the forerunners of
their destruction. And so it was, the Jewish nation rose up against
others, the Samaritans, Syrians, and Romans: there were great commotions
in the Roman empire, between Otho and Vitellius, and Vitellius and
Vespasian; and at length the Romans rose up against the Jews, under the
latter, and entirely destroyed them; compare the writings in 2 Esdras:

"And one shall undertake to fight against another, one city against
another, one place against another, one people against another, and one
realm against another.'' (2 Esdras 13:31)

"the beginning of sorrows and great mournings; the beginning of famine
and great death; the beginning of wars, and the powers shall stand in
fear; the beginning of evils! what shall I do when these evils shall
come?'' (2 Esdras 16:18)

"Therefore when there shall be seen earthquakes and uproars of the
people in the world:'' (2 Esdras 9:3)

And there shall be famines: a fourth sign of the desolation of the city
and temple, and which the Jews also say, shall go before the coming of
the Messiah:

"in the second year (of the week of years) in which the son of David
comes, they say (l), there will be "arrows of famine" sent forth; and in
the third year, , "a great famine": and men, women, and children, and
holy men, and men of business, shall die.''

But these have been already; they followed the Messiah, and preceded
their destruction: one of these famines was in Claudius Caesar's time,
was foretold by Agabus, and is mentioned in [Act
11:28](../../../bib/kjv/act011.htm#028) and most dreadful ones there
were, whilst Jerusalem was besieged, and before its utter ruin, related
by Josephus.

And pestilences: a pestilence is described by the Jews after this manner
(m):

"a city that produces a thousand and five hundred footmen, as Cephar
Aco, and nine dead men are carried out of it in three days, one after
another, lo! , "this is a pestilence"; but if in one day, or in four
days, it is no pestilence; and a city that produces five hundred
footmen, as Cephar Amiko, and three dead men are carried out of it in
three days, one after another, lo! this is a pestilence.''

These commonly attend famines, and are therefore mentioned together; and
when the one was, the other may be supposed sooner or later to be:

and earthquakes in divers places of the world; as, at Crete (n), and in
divers cities in Asia (o), in the times of Nero: particularly the three
cities of Phrygia, Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Colosse; which were near to
each other, and are all said to perish this way, in his reign (p);

"and Rome itself felt a tremor, in the reign of Galba (q).''

\(k\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 42. fol. 37. 1. (l) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol.
97. 1. Misn. Sota, c. 9. sect. 15. (m) T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 21. & 19.
1. Maimon. Hilch. Taaniot, c. 2. sect. 5. (n) Philostrat. in vit.
Apollon. l. 4. c. 11. (o) Sueton. in vit. Nero, c. 48. (p) Orosius, l.
7. c. 7. (q) Sueton. in vit. Galba, c. 13.

[Matthew 24:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mat 24:8</span></span>

All these are the beginning of sorrows,.... They were only a prelude
unto them, and forerunners of them; they were only some foretastes of
what would be, and were far from being the worst that should be endured.
These were but light, in comparison of what befell the Jews, in their
dreadful destruction. The word here used, signifies the sorrows and
pains of a woman in travail. The Jews expect great sorrows and
distresses in the times of the Messiah, and use a word to express them
by, which answers to this, and call them, , "the sorrows of the
Messiah"; they say (r), signifies the sorrows of a woman in travail; and
the Syriac version uses the same word here. These they represent to be
very great, and express much concern to be delivered from them. They (s)
ask,

"what shall a man do, to be delivered from "the sorrows of the Messiah?"
He must employ himself in the law, and in liberality.''

And again (t),

"he that observes the three meals on the sabbath day, shall be delivered
from three punishments; from "the sorrows of the Messiah", from the
judgment of hell, and from Gog and Magog.''

But alas there was no other way of escaping them, but by faith in the
true Messiah, Jesus; and it was for their disbelief and rejection of
him, that these came upon them.

\(r\) Gloss. in T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 118. 2. (s) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol.
98. 2. (t) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 118. 2.

[Matthew 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mat 24:9</span></span>

Then shall they deliver you up to be afflicted,.... Our Lord proceeds to
acquaint his disciples, what should befall them in this interval; and
quite contrary to their expectations, who were looking for a temporal
kingdom, and worldly grandeur, assures them of afflictions,
persecutions, and death; that about these times, when these various
signs should appear, and this beginning of sorrows take place; whilst
these will be fulfilling in Judea, and other parts of the world; the
Jews continuing in their obstinacy and unbelief, would deliver them up
to the civil magistrates, to be scourged and imprisoned by them; either
to their own sanhedrim, as were Peter and John; or to the Roman
governors, Gallio, Festus, and Felix, as was the Apostle Paul.

And shall kill you; as the two James', Peter, Paul, and even all the
apostles, excepting John, who suffered martyrdom, and that before the
destruction of Jerusalem:

and ye shall be hated of all nations for my name's sake; as the apostles
and first Christians were, both by Jews and Gentiles; the latter being
stirred up against them by the former, wherever they came, and for no
other reason, but because they professed and preached in the name of
Christ, as the Acts of the Apostles show: and their hatred proceeded so
far, as to charge all their calamities upon them; as war, famine,
pestilence, earthquakes, &c. as the apologies of the first Christians
declare.

[Matthew 24:10](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mat 24:10</span></span>

And then shall many be offended,.... That is, many who had been hearers
of the apostles, and professors of the Christian religion; who were
highly pleased with it, and were strenuous advocates for it, whilst
things were tolerably quiet and easy; but when they saw the apostles,
some of them beaten, and imprisoned; others put to death, and others
forced to fly from place to place; and persecutions and affliction,
because of Christ and his Gospel, likely to befall themselves, would be
discouraged hereby, and stumble at the cross; and fall off from the
faith of the Gospel, and the profession of it:

and shall betray one another; meaning, that the apostates, who would
fall off from the Christian religion, would prove treacherous to true
believers, and give in their names to the persecutors, or inform them
where they were, that they might take them, or deliver them into their
hands themselves: these are the false brethren, the Apostle Paul was in
perils among:

and shall hate one another; not that the true Christians should hate
these false brethren, any more than betray them; for they are taught to
love all men, even their enemies; but these apostates should hate them,
in whose communion they before were, and to whom they belonged; and even
to a very great degree of hatred, as it often is seen, that such who
turn their backs on Christ, and his Gospel, prove the most bitter
enemies, and most violent persecutors of its preachers and followers.

[Matthew 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mat 24:11</span></span>

And many false prophets shall rise,.... Out of, from among the churches
of Christ; at least under the name of Christians; for false teachers are
here meant, men of heretical principles, pretending to a spirit of
prophecy, and to new revelations, and a better understanding of the
Scriptures; such as Simon Magus, Ebion, and Cerinthus, who denied the
proper deity, and real humanity of Christ; Carpocrates, and the Gnostics
his followers, the Nicolaitans, Hymcneus, Philetus, and others:

and shall deceive many: as they all of them had their followers, and
large numbers of them, whose faith was subverted by them; and who
followed their pernicious ways, being imposed upon and seduced by their
fair words, specious pretences, and licentious practices.

[Matthew 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mat 24:12</span></span>

And because iniquity shall abound,.... Meaning, either the malice and
wickedness of outrageous persecutors, which should greatly increase; or
the treachery and hatred of the apostates; or the errors and heresies of
false teachers; or the wickedness that prevailed in the lives and
conversations of some, that were called Christians: for each of these
seem to be hinted at in the context, and may be all included, as making
up the abounding iniquity here spoken of; the consequence of which would
be,

the love of many shall wax cold. This would be the case of many, but not
of all; for in the midst of this abounding iniquity, there were some,
the ardour of whose love to Christ, to his Gospel, and to the saints,
did not abate: but then there were many, whose zeal for Christ, through
the violence of persecution, was greatly damped; and through the
treachery of false brethren, were shy of the saints themselves, not
knowing who to trust; and through the principles of the false teachers,
the power of godliness, and the vital heat of religion, were almost
lost; and through a love of the world, and of carnal ease and pleasure,
love to the saints was grown very chill, and greatly left; as the
instances of Demas, and those that forsook the Apostle Paul, at his
first answer before Nero, show. This might be true of such, who were
real believers in Christ; who might fall under great decays, through the
prevalence of iniquity; since it does not say their love shall be lost,
but wax cold.

[Matthew 24:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mat 24:13</span></span>

But he that shall endure to the end,.... In the profession of faith in
Christ, notwithstanding the violent persecutions of wicked men; and in
the pure and incorrupt doctrines of the Gospel, whilst many are deceived
by the false teachers that shall arise; and in holiness of life and
conversation, amidst all the impurities of the age; and shall patiently
bear all afflictions, to the end of his life, or to the end of sorrows,
of which the above mentioned were the beginning:

the same shall be saved; with a temporal salvation, when Jerusalem, and
the unbelieving inhabitants of it shall be destroyed: for those that
believed in Christ, many of them, through persecution, were obliged to
remove from thence; and others, by a voice from heaven, were bid to go
out of it, as they did; and removed to Pella, a village a little beyond
Jordan (u), and so were preserved from the general calamity; and also
with an everlasting salvation, which is the case of all that persevere
to the end, as all true believers in Christ will.

\(u\) Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 5.

[Matthew 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mat 24:14</span></span>

And this Gospel of the kingdom,.... Which Christ himself preached, and
which he called and sent his apostles to preach, in all the cities of
Judah; by which means men were brought into the kingdom of the Messiah,
or Gospel dispensation; and which treated both of the kingdom of grace
and glory, and pointed out the saints' meetness for the kingdom of
heaven, and their right unto it, and gives the best account of the
glories of it:

shall be preached in all the world; not only in Judea, where it was now
confined, and that by the express orders of Christ himself; but in all
the nations of the world, for which the apostles had their commission
enlarged, after our Lord's resurrection; when they were bid to go into
all the world, and preach the Gospel to every creature; and when the
Jews put away the Gospel from them, they accordingly turned to the
Gentiles; and before the destruction of Jerusalem, it was preached to
all the nations under the heavens; and churches were planted in most
places, through the ministry of it:

for a witness unto all nations; meaning either for a witness against all
such in them, as should reject it; or as a testimony of Christ and
salvation, unto all such as should believe in him:

and then shall the end come; not the end of the world, as the Ethiopic
version reads it, and others understand it; but the end of the Jewish
state, the end of the city and temple: so that the universal preaching
of the Gospel all over the world, was the last criterion and sign, of
the destruction of Jerusalem; and the account of that itself next
follows, with the dismal circumstances which attended it.

[Matthew 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mat 24:15</span></span>

When ye therefore shall see the abomination of desolation,.... From
signs, Christ proceeds to the immediate cause of the destruction of
Jerusalem; which was, "the abomination of desolation", or the desolating
abomination; or that abominable thing, which threatened and brought
desolation upon the city, temple, and nation: by which is meant, not any
statue placed in the temple by the Romans, or their order; not the
golden eagle which Herod set upon the temple gate, for that was before
Christ said these words; nor the image of Tiberius Caesar, which Pilate
is said to bring into the temple; for this, if true, must be about this
time; whereas Christ cannot be thought to refer to anything so near at
hand; much less the statue of Adrian, set in the most holy place, which
was an hundred and thirty years and upwards, after the destruction of
the city and temple; nor the statue of Titus, who destroyed both, which
does not appear: ever to be set up, or attempted; nor of Caligula,
which, though ordered, was prevented being placed there: but the Roman
army is designed; see [Luk 21:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#020) which
was the , "the wing", or "army of abominations making desolate", [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027). Armies are called wings, [Isa
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#008) and the Roman armies were
desolating ones to the Jews, and to whom they were an abomination; not
only because they consisted of Heathen men, and uncircumcised persons,
but chiefly because of the images of their gods, which were upon their
ensigns: for images and idols were always an abomination to them; so the
"filthiness" which Hezekiah ordered to be carried out of the holy place,
[Ch2 29:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2029.htm#005) is by the Targum called, "an
abomination"; and this, by the Jewish writers (w), is said to be an
idol, which Ahaz had placed upon the altar; and such was the abomination
of desolation, which Antiochus caused to be set upon the altar:

"Now the fifteenth day of the month Casleu, in the hundred forty and
fifth year, they set up the abomination of desolation upon the altar,
and builded idol altars throughout the cities of Juda on every side;''
(1 Maccabees 1:54)

And so the Talmudic writers, by the abomination that makes desolate, in
[Dan 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011) to which Christ here
refers, understand an image, which they say (x) one Apostomus, a Grecian
general, who burnt their law, set up in the temple. Now our Lord
observes, that when they should see the Roman armies encompassing
Jerusalem, with their ensigns flying, and these abominations on them,
they might conclude its desolation was near at hand; and he does not so
much mean his apostles, who would be most of them dead, or in other
countries, when this would come to pass; but any of his disciples and
followers, or any persons whatever, by whom should be seen this
desolating abomination,

spoken of by Daniel the prophet: not in [Dan
11:31](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#031) which is spoken of the
abomination in the times of Antiochus; but either in [Dan
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#011) or rather in [Dan
9:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#027) since this desolating abomination
is that, which should follow the cutting off of the Messiah, and the
ceasing of the daily sacrifice. It is to be observed, that Daniel is
here called a prophet, contrary to what the Jewish writers say (y), who
deny him to be one; though one of (z) no inconsiderable note among them
affirms, that he attained to the end, , "of the prophetic border", or
the ultimate degree of prophecy: when therefore this that Daniel, under
a spirit of prophecy, spoke of should be seen,

standing in the holy place; near the walls, and round about the holy
city Jerusalem, so called from the sanctuary and worship of God in it;
and which, in process of time, stood in the midst of it, and in the holy
temple, and destroyed both; then

whoso readeth, let him understand: that is, whoever then reads the
prophecy of Daniel; will easily understand the meaning of it, and will
see and know for certain, that now it is accomplished; and will consider
how to escape the desolating judgment, unless he is given up to a
judicial blindness and hardness of heart; which was the case of the
greater part of the nation.

\(w\) R. David Kimchi, & R. Sol. ben Melech, in 2 Chron. xxix. 5. (x) T.
Bab. Taanith, fol. 28. 2. & Gloss. in ib. (y) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol.
94. 1. & Megilla, fol. 3. 1. & Tzeror Ham, mor, fol. 46. 4. Zohar in
Num. fol. 61. 1. (z) Jacchiades in Dan. i. 17.

[Matthew 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mat 24:16</span></span>

Then let them which be in Judea,.... When this signal is given, let it
be taken notice of and observed; let them that are in the city of
Jerusalem, depart out of it; or who are in any other parts of Judea, in
any of the towns, or cities thereof; let them not betake themselves to
Jerusalem, imagining they may be safe there, in so strong and fortified
a place, but let them flee elsewhere; see [Luk
21:21](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#021) and accordingly it is observed,
that many did flee about this time; and it is remarked by several
interpreters, and which Josephus (a) takes notice of with surprise, that
Cestius Gallus having advanced with his army to Jerusalem, and besieged
it, on a sudden, without any cause, raised the siege, and withdrew his
army, when the city might have been easily taken; by which means a
signal was made; and an opportunity given to the Christians, to make
their escape: which they accordingly did, and went over Jordan, as
Eusebius says (b), to a place called Pella; so that when Titus came a
few mouths after, there was not a Christian in the city, but they had
fled as they are here bidden to

flee into the mountains; or any places of shelter and refuge: these are
mentioned particularly, because they are usually such; and design either
the mountains in Judea, or in the adjacent countries. The Syriac and
Persic versions read in the singular number, "into the mountain"; and it
is reported that many of them did fly, particularly to Mount Libanus
(c).

\(a\) De Bello Jud. l. 2. c. 19. sect. 7. (b) Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 5. p.
75. (c) Joseph. ib.

[Matthew 24:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">mat 24:17</span></span>

Let him which is on the housetop,.... Who should be there either for his
devotion or recreation; for the houses of the Jews were built with flat
roofs and battlements about them, which they made use of both for
diversion and pleasure, and for private meditation and prayer, for
social conversation, and sometimes for public preaching; see [Mat
10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027)

not come down to take anything out of his house: that is, let him not
come down in the inner way, but by the stairs, or ladder, on the outside
of the house, which was usual. They had two ways of going out of, and
into their houses; the one they call (d), , "the way of the doors"; the
other, , "the way of the roof": upon which the gloss is,

"to go up on the outside, , "by way" or "means" of a ladder, fixed at
the entrance of the door of the upper room, and from thence he goes down
into the house by a ladder;''

and in the same way they could come out; see [Mar
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/mar002.htm#004) and let him not go into his house
to take any of his goods, or money, or food along with him necessary for
his sustenance in his flight; lest, whilst he is busy in taking care of
these, he loses his life, or, at least, the opportunity of making his
escape; so sudden is this desolation represented to be.

\(d\) T. Bab. Bava Metzia, fol. 117. 1.

[Matthew 24:18](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">mat 24:18</span></span>

Neither let him which is in the field,.... Ploughing, or sowing, or
employed in any other parts of husbandry, or rural business,

return back to take clothes; for it was usual to work in the fields
without their clothes, as at ploughing and sowing. Hence those words of
Virgil (e).

"Nudus ara, sere nudus, hyems ignava colono.''

Upon which Servius observes, that in good weather, when the sun warms
the earth, men might plough and sow without their clothes: and it is
reported by the historian (f) of Lucius Quinctius Cincinnatus, that the
messengers who were sent to him, from Minutius the consul, whom he had
delivered from a siege, found him ploughing naked beyond the Tiber: not
that he was entirely naked, but was stripped of his upper garments: and
it is usual for people that work in the fields to strip themselves to
their shirts, and lay their clothes at the corner of the field, or at
the land's end; and which we must suppose to be the case here: for our
Lord's meaning is not, that the man working in the field, should not
return home to fetch his clothes, which were not left there; they were
brought with him into the field, but put off; and laid aside in some
part of it while at work; but that as soon as he had the news of
Jerusalem being besieged, he should immediately make the best of his
way, and flee to the mountains, as Lot was bid to do at the burning of
Sodom; and he might not return to the corner of the field, or land's
end, where his clothes lay, as Lot was not to look behind; though if his
clothes lay in the way of his flight, he might take them up, but might
not go back for them, so sudden and swift should be the desolation. The
Vulgate Latin reads, in the singular number, "his coat"; and so do the
Syriac, Persic, and Ethiopic versions, and Munster's Hebrew Gospel; and
so it was read in four copies of Beza's, in three of Stephens's, and in
others; and may design the upper coat or garment, which was put off
whilst at work.

\(e\) Georgic. l. 1. (f) Aurel Victor. de illustr. viris, c. 20.

[Matthew 24:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">mat 24:19</span></span>

And woe unto them that are with child,.... Not that it should be
criminal for them to be with child, or a judgment on them; for it was
always esteemed a blessing to be fruitful, and bear children: but this
expresses the miserable circumstances such would be in, who, by reason
of their heavy burdens, would not be able to make so speedy a flight, as
the case would require; or would be obliged to stay at home, and endure
all the miseries of the siege: so that these words, as the following are
not expressive of sin, or punishment, but of pity and concern for their
misery and distress:

and to them that give suck in those days; whose tender affection to
their infants will not suffer them to leave them behind them; and yet
such their weakness, that they will not be able to carry them with them;
at least, they must be great hindrances to their speedy flight. So that
the case of these is much worse than that of men on the house top, or in
the field, who could much more easily leave their goods and clothes,
than these their children, as well as had more agility and strength of
body to flee. So , "women with child, and that give suck"; are mentioned
together in the Jewish writings, as such as were excused from certain
fasts, though obliged to others (g).

\(g\) T. Hieros. Taanioth, fol. 64. 3. Maimon. Hilch. Taanioth, c. 5.
sect. 10.

[Matthew 24:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">mat 24:20</span></span>

But pray ye that your flight be not in the winter,.... When days are
short, and unfit for long journeys, and roads are bad, and sometimes not
passable, through large snows, or floods of water; and when to dwell in
desert places, and lodge in mountains, must be very uncomfortable:
wherefore Christ directs to pray to God, who has the disposal of all
events, and of the timing of them, that he would so order things in the
course of his providence, that their flight might not be in such a
season of the year, when travelling would be very difficult and
troublesome. Dr. Lightfoot observes, from a Jewish writer (h), that it
is remarked as a favour of God in the destruction of the first temple,
that it happened in the summer, and not in winter; whose words are
these:

"God vouchsafed a great favour to Israel, for they ought to have gone
out of the land on the tenth day of the month Tebeth; as he saith [Eze
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#002) "son of man, write thee the name
of the day, even of this same day": what then did the Lord, holy and
blessed? If they shall now go out in the winter, (saith he,) they will
all die; therefore he prolonged the time to them, and carried them away
in summer.''

And since therefore they received such a favour from him at the
destruction of the first temple, there was encouragement to pray to him,
that they might be indulged with the like favour when Jerusalem should
be besieged again:

neither on the sabbath day: the word "day" is not in the Greek text; and
some (i) have been of opinion, that the "sabbatical year", or the
seventh year, is meant, when no fruits would be found in the fields, and
a great scarcity of provisions among people; who would not have a
sufficiency, and much less any to spare to strangers fleeing from their
native places; but rather the sabbath day, or "day of the sabbath", as
the Persic version reads it, is designed; and Beza says, four of his
copies read it in the genitive case: and so four of Stephens's. And the
reason why our Lord put them on praying, that their flight might not be
on the sabbath day, was, because he knew not only that the Jews, who
believed not in him, would not suffer them to travel on a sabbath day
more than two thousand cubits; which, according to their traditions (k),
was a sabbath day's journey; and which would not be sufficient for their
flight to put them out of danger; but also, that those that did believe
in him, particularly the Jerusalem Jews, would be all of them fond of
the law of Moses, and scrupulous of violating any part of it, and
especially that of the sabbath; see [Act
21:20](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#020). And though the Jews did allow,
that the sabbath might be violated where life was in danger, and that it
was lawful to defend themselves against an enemy on the sabbath day; yet
this did not universally obtain; and it was made a question of, after
the time of Christ, whether it was lawful to flee from danger on the
sabbath day; of which take the following account (l).

"Our Rabbins teach, that he that is pursued by Gentiles, or by thieves,
may profane the sabbath for the sake of saving his life: and so we find
of David, when Saul sought to slay him, he fled from him, and escaped.
Our Rabbins say, that it happened that evil writings (or edicts) came
from the government to the great men of Tzippore; and they went, and
said to R. Eleazar ben Prata, evil edicts are come to us from the
government, what dost thou say? "shall we flee?" and he was afraid to
say to them "flee"; but he said to them with a nod, why do you ask me?
go and ask Jacob, and Moses, and David; as it is written, of Jacob, [Hos
12:12](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#012) "and Jacob fled"; and so of
Moses, [Exo 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#015) "and Moses fled"; and
so of David, [Sa1 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#018) "and David
fled, and escaped": and he (God) says, [Isa
26:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#020) "come my people, enter into thy
chambers".''

From whence, it is plain, it was a question with the doctors in
Tzippore, which was a town in Galilee, where there was an university,
whether it was lawful to flee on the sabbath day or not; and though the
Rabbi they applied to was of opinion it was lawful, yet he was fearful
of speaking out his sense plainly, and therefore delivered it by signs
and hints. Now our Lord's meaning, in putting them on this petition,
was, not to prevent the violation of the seventh day sabbath, or on
account of the sacredness of it, which he knew would be abolished, and
was abolished before this time; but he says this with respect to the
opinion of the Jews, and "Judaizing" Christians, who, taking that day to
be sacred, and fleeing on it unlawful, would find a difficulty with
themselves, and others, to make their escape; otherwise it was as lawful
to flee and travel on that day, as in the winter season; though both,
for different reasons, incommodious.

\(h\) Taachuma, fol. 57. 2. (i) Vid. Reland. Antiq. Heb. par. 4. c. 10.
sect. 1. & Hammond in loc. (k) Maimon. Hilch. Sabbat, c. 27. sect. 1.
(l) Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 23. fol. 231. 4.

[Matthew 24:21](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">mat 24:21</span></span>

For then shall be great tribulation,.... This is urged as a reason for
their speedy flight; since the calamity that would come upon those who
should remain in the city, what through the sword, famine, pestilence,
murders, robberies, &c. would

be such as was not since the beginning of the world, to this time, no,
nor ever shall be. The burning of Sodom and Gomorrha, the bondage of the
children of Israel in Egypt, their captivity in Babylon, and all their
distresses and afflictions in the times of the Maccabees, are nothing to
be compared with the calamities which befell the Jews in the siege and
destruction of Jerusalem. Great desolations have been made in the
besieging and at the taking of many famous cities, as Troy, Babylon,
Carthage, &c. but none of them are to be mentioned with the deplorable
case of this city. Whoever reads Josephus's account will be fully
convinced of this; and readily join with him, who was an eyewitness of
it, when he says (m), that

"never did any city suffer such things, nor was there ever any
generation that more abounded in malice or wickedness.''

And indeed, all this came upon them for their impenitence and
infidelity, and for their rejection and murdering of the Son of God; for
as never any before, or since, committed the sin they did, or ever will,
so there never did, or will, the same calamity befall a nation, as did
them.

\(m\) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 11.

[Matthew 24:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">mat 24:22</span></span>

And except those days should be shortened,.... That is, those days of
tribulation which commenced at the siege of Jerusalem; and therefore
cannot refer to the times before it, and the shortening of them by it,
which were very dreadful and deplorable through the murders and
robberies of the cut-throats and zealots; but to those after the siege
began, which were very distressing to those that were within; and which,
if they had not been shortened, or if the siege had been lengthened out
further,

there should no flesh be saved; not one Jew in the city of Jerusalem
would have been saved; they must everyone have perished by famine, or
pestilence, or sword, or by the intestine wars and murders among
themselves: nor indeed, if the siege had continued, would it have fared
better with the inhabitants of the other parts of the country, among
whom also many of the same calamities prevailed and spread themselves;
so that, in all likelihood, if these days had been continued a little
longer, there had not been a Jew left in all the land.

But for the elect's sake; those who were chosen in Christ, before the
foundation of the world, to believe in him, and to be saved by him with
an everlasting salvation; both those that were in the city, or, at
least, who were to spring from some that were there, as their immediate
offspring, or in future ages, and therefore they, and their posterity,
must not be cut off; and also those chosen ones, and real believers, who
were at Pella, and in the mountains, and other places, for the sake of
these, and that they might be delivered from these pressing calamities,

those days shall be shortened: for otherwise, if God had not preserved a
seed, a remnant, according to the election of grace, that should be
saved, they had been as Sodom and as Gomorrha, not one would have
escaped. The shortening of those days is not to be understood literally,
as if the natural days, in which this tribulation was, were to be
shorter than usual. The Jews indeed often speak of the shortening of
days in this sense, as miraculously done by God: so they say (n), that

"five miracles were wrought for our father Jacob, when he went from
Beersheba to go to Haran. The first miracle was, that , "the hours of
the day were shortened for him", and the sun set before its time,
because his word desired to speak with him.''

They also say (o),

"that the day in which Ahaz died, was shortened ten hours, that they
might not mourn for him; and which afterwards rose up, and in the day
that Hezekiah was healed, ten hours were added to it.''

But the meaning here is, that the siege of Jerusalem, and the calamities
attending it, should be sooner ended: not than God had determined, but
than the sin of the Jews deserved, and the justice of God might have
required in strict severity, and might be reasonably expected,
considering the aggravated circumstances of their iniquities. A like
manner of speech is used by the Karaite Jews (p), who say,

"if we walk in our law, why is our captivity prolonged, and there is not
found balm for our wounds? and why are not , "the days" of the golden
and silver kingdom "lessened", for the righteousness of the righteous,
which were in their days?''

\(n\) Targum Jonathan ben Uzziel, & Targum Hieros. in Gem xxviii. 10.
(o) R. Sol. Jarchi in Isa. xxxviii. 8. (p) Chilluk M. S. apud Trigland.
de sect. Karaeorum, c. 9. p. 147.

[Matthew 24:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">mat 24:23</span></span>

Then if any man shall say unto you,.... Either at the time when the
siege shall be begun, and the abomination of desolation standing in the
holy place; or during the days of tribulation, whilst the siege lasted;
or after those days were shortened, and the city destroyed, and the
Roman army was gone with their captives: when some, that were scattered
up and down in the country, would insinuate to their countrymen, that
the Messiah was in such a place: saying,

lo! here is Christ, or there, believe it not; for both during the time
of the siege, there were such that sprung up, and pretended to be
Messiahs, and deliverers of them from the Roman power, and had their
several abettors; one saying he was in such place, and another that he
was in such a place; and so spirited up the people not to fly, nor to
deliver up the city; and also, after the city was taken and destroyed,
one and another set up for the Messiah. Very quickly after, one
Jonathan, a very wicked man, led many into the desert of Cyrene,
promising to show them signs and wonders, and was overthrown by
Catullius, the Roman governor (q); and after that, in the times of
Adrian, the famous Barcochab set up for the Messiah, and was encouraged
by R. Akiba, and a multitude of Jews (r).

\(q\) Joseph. Antiq. l. 7. c. 12. (r) Ganz. Tzemach David, par. 1. fol.
28. 2.

[Matthew 24:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">mat 24:24</span></span>

For there shall arise false Christs, and false prophets,.... Such as the
above mentioned: these false Christs had their false prophets, who
endeavoured to persuade the people to believe them to be the Messiah, as
Barcochab had Akiba, who applied many prophecies to him. This man was
called Barcochab, which signifies the son of a star, in allusion to [Num
24:17](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#017) he was crowned by the Jews, and
proclaimed the Messiah by Akiba; upon which a Roman army was sent
against him, and a place called Bitter was besieged, and taken, and he,
and a prodigious number of Jews were destroyed. This deceiver was
afterwards, by them, called Barcoziba, the son of a lie:

and shall show great signs and wonders; make an appearance of doing
them, though they really did them not: so that Jonathan, before
mentioned, pretended to show signs and sights; and Barcochab made as if
flame came out of his mouth; and many of the Jewish doctors in these
times, and following, gave themselves up to sorcery, and the magic art;
and are, many of them, often said (s) to be , "expert in wonders", or
miracles:

if it were possible, they shall deceive the very elect. By whom we are
to understand, not the choicest believers, or the persevering
Christians: not but that such who are truly converted, are choice
believers in Christ, and persevering Christians are undoubtedly the
elect of God; but then the reason why they are elect, and why they are
so called, is not because they are converted, are choice believers, and
persevering Christians; but, on the contrary, the reason why they are
converted, become true believers, and persevere to the end, is, because
they are elected; conversion, faith, and perseverance being not the
causes or conditions, but the fruits and effects of election: besides to
talk of the final seduction of a persevering Christian, is a
contradiction in terms. Such an interpretation of the phrase must be
absurd and impertinent; for who knows not that a persevering Christian
cannot be finally and totally deceived? But by the elect are meant, a
select number of particular persons of Adam's posterity, whom God, of
his sovereign goodwill and pleasure, without respect to their faith,
holiness, and good works, has chosen, in Christ, before the foundation
of the world, both to grace and glory: and to deceive these finally and
totally, is impossible, as is here suggested; not impossible,
considering their own weakness, and the craftiness of deceivers, who, if
left to themselves, and the power of such deception, and the working of
Satan with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, might easily be
seduced; but considering the purposes and promises of God concerning
them, the provisions of his grace for them, the security of them in the
hands of Christ, and their preservation by the mighty power of God,
their final and total deception is not only difficult, but impossible.
They may be, and are deceived before conversion; this is one part of
their character whilst unregenerate, "foolish, disobedient, deceived",
[Tit 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#003) yea, they may be, and
oftentimes are, deceived after conversion; but then this is in part
only, and not totally; in some lesser, and not in the greater matters of
faith; not so as to let go their hold of Christ their head, and quit the
doctrine of salvation by him, or fall into damnable heresies: they may
be seduced from the simplicity of the Gospel, but not finally; for they
shall be recovered out of the snare of the devil, and not to be left to
perish in such deceivings. This clause, as it expresses the power of
deceivers, and the efficacy of Satan, so the influence and certainty of
electing grace and the sure and firm perseverance of the saints, to the
end, notwithstanding the cunning and craft of men and devils; for if
these, with all their signs and wonders, could not deceive them, it may
be pronounced impossible that they ever should be finally and totally
deceived.

\(s\) T. Bab. Meila, fol. 17. 2. Juchasin, fol. 20. 1, 2. & 42. 2. & 56.
2. & 77. 1. & 96. 2.

[Matthew 24:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">mat 24:25</span></span>

Behold, I have told you before. Meaning not before in this discourse,
though he had in [Mat 24:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#005) signified
also, that false Christs, and false prophets should arise, but before
these things came to pass; so that they had sufficient notice and
warning of them, and would be inexcusable if they were not upon their
guard against them; and which, when they came to pass, would furnish out
a considerable argument in proof of him, as the true Messiah, against
all these false ones, showing him to be omniscient; and so would serve
to establish their faith in him, and be a means of securing them from
such deceivers.

[Matthew 24:26](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">mat 24:26</span></span>

Wherefore if they shall say unto you,.... Any of the false prophets, or
the deluded followers of false Christs:

behold, he is in the desert, go not forth: that is, should they affirm,
that the Messiah is in such a wilderness, in the wilderness of Judea, or
in any other desert place, do not go out of the places where you are to
see, or hear, and know the truth of things; lest you should, in any
respect, be stumbled, ensnared, and brought into danger. It was usual
for these impostors to lead their followers into deserts, pretending to
work wonders in such solitary places: so, during the siege, Simon, the
son of Giora, collected together many thousands in the mountainous and
desert parts of Judea (t); and the above mentioned Jonathan, after the
destruction of the city, led great multitudes into the desert:

behold, he is in the secret chambers, believe it not; or should others
say behold, or for certain, the Messiah is in some one of the secret and
fortified places of the temple; where, during some time of the siege,
were John and Eleazar, the heads of the zealots (u); do not believe
them. Some reference may be had to the chamber of secrets, which was in
the temple (w);

"for in the sanctuary there were two chambers; one was called , "the
chamber of secrets", and the other the chamber of vessels.''

Or else some respect may be had to the notions of the Jews, concerning
the Messiah, which they imbibed about these times, and ever since
retained, that he was born the day Jerusalem was destroyed, but is hid,
for their sins, in some secret place, and will in time be revealed (x).
Some say, that he is hid in the sea; others, in the walks of the garden
of Eden; and others, that he sits among the lepers at the gates of Rome
(y). The Syriac version here reads in the singular number, "in the
bedchamber"; in some private apartment, where he remains till a proper
time of showing himself offers, for fear of the Romans: but these are
all idle notions, and none of them to be believed. The true Messiah is
come, and has showed himself to Israel; and even the giving out these
things discovers a consciousness, and a conviction that the Messiah is
come.

\(t\) Joseph de Bello. Jud. l. 5. c. 7. (u) Ib. c. 6. l. 4. (w) Misn.
Shekalim, c. 5. sect. 6. (x) Aben Ezra in Cant. vii. 5. Targum in Mic.
iv. 8. (y) Vid. Buxtorf. Synag. Jud. c. 50.

[Matthew 24:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">mat 24:27</span></span>

For as the lightning cometh out of the east,.... The eastern part of the
horizon,

and shineth even unto the west; to the western part of it, with great
clearness; in a moment; in the twinkling of an eye, filling the whole
intermediate space;

so shall also the coming of the son of man be; which must be understood
not of his last coming to judgment, though that will be sudden, visible,
and universal; he will at once come to, and be seen by all, in the
clouds of heaven, and not in deserts and secret chambers: nor of his
spiritual coming in the more sudden, and clear, and powerful preaching
of the Gospel all over the Gentile world; for this was to be done before
the destruction of Jerusalem: but of his coming in his wrath and
vengeance to destroy that people, their nation, city, and temple: so
that after this to look for the Messiah in a desert, or secret chamber,
must argue great stupidity and blindness; when his coming was as sudden,
visible, powerful, and general, to the destruction of that nation, as
the lightning that comes from the east, and, in a moment, shines to the
west.

[Matthew 24:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">mat 24:28</span></span>

For wheresoever the carcass is,.... Not Christ, as he is held forth in
the Gospel, crucified and slain, through whose death is the savour of
life, and by whom salvation is, and to whom sensible sinners flock,
encouraged by the ministry of the word; and much less Christ considered
as risen, exalted, and coming in great glory to judgment, to whom the
word "carcass" will by no means agree, and but very poorly under the
former consideration: but the people of the Jews are designed by it, in
their fallen, deplorable, miserable, and lifeless state, who were like
to the body of a man, or any other creature, struck dead with lightning
from heaven; being destroyed by the breath of the mouth, and brightness
of the coming of the son of man, like lightning, just as antichrist will
be at the last day:

there will the eagles be gathered together: not particular believers
here, or all the saints at the day of judgment; though these may be, as
they are, compared to eagles for many things; as their swiftness in
flying to Christ, their sagacity and the sharpness of their spiritual
sight, soaring on high, and renewing their spiritual strength and youth:
but here the Roman armies are intended, whose ensigns were eagles; and
the eagle still is, to this day, the ensign of the Roman empire:
formerly other creatures, with the eagle, were used for ensigns; but C.
Marius, in his second consulship, banished them, and appropriated the
eagle only to the legions: nor was it a single eagle that was carried
before the army, but every legion had an eagle went before it, made of
gold or silver, and carried upon the top of a spear (z): and the sense
of this passage is this, that wherever the Jews were, whether at
Jerusalem, where the body and carcass of them was, in a most forlorn and
desperate condition; or in any other parts of the country, the Roman
eagles, or legions, would find them out, and make an utter destruction
of them. The Persic version, contrary to others, and to all copies,
renders it "vultures". Though this creature is of the same nature with
the eagle, with respect to feeding on carcasses: hence the proverb,

"cujus vulturis hoe erit cadaver?''

"what vulture shall have this carcass?" It has a very sharp sight, and
quick smell, and will, by both, discern carcasses at almost incredible
distance: it will diligently watch a man that is near death; and will
follow armies going to battle, as historians relate (a): and it is the
eagle which is of the vulture kind, as Aristotle (b) observes, that
takes up dead bodies, and carries them to its nest. And Pliny (c) says,
it is that sort of eagles only which does so; and some have affirmed
that eagles will by no means touch dead carcasses: but this is contrary
not only to this passage of Scripture, but to others; particularly to
[Job 39:30](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#030) "her young ones also suck
up blood, and where the slain are, there is she": an expression much the
same with this in the text, and to which it seems to refer; see also
[Pro 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017). Though Chrysostom (d)
says, both the passage in Job, and this in Matthew, are to be understood
of vultures; he doubtless means the eagles that are of the vulture kind,
the Gypaeetos, or vulture eagle. There is one kind of eagles,
naturalists say (e), will not feed on flesh, which is called the bird of
Jupiter; but, in common, the eagle is represented as a very rapacious
creature, seizing, and feeding upon the flesh of hares, fawns, geese,
&c. and the rather this creature is designed here; since, of all birds,
this is the only one that is not hurt with lightning (f), and so can
immediately seize carcasses killed thereby; to which there seems to be
an allusion here, by comparing it with the preceding verse: however, the
Persic version, though it is literally a proper one, yet from the
several things observed, it is not to be overlooked and slighted.

\(z\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 10. c. 4. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 4.
c. 2. (a) Aelian. de Animal. Natura, l. 2. c. 46. (b) De Hist. Animal.
l. 9. c. 32. (c) Hist. Nat l. 10. c. 3. (d) In Matt. Homil. 49. (e)
Aelian. de Animal. l. 9. c. 10. (f) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 2. c. 55.

[Matthew 24:29](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">mat 24:29</span></span>

Immediately after the tribulation of those days,.... That is,
immediately after the distress the Jews would be in through the siege of
Jerusalem, and the calamities attending it; just upon the destruction of
that city, and the temple in it, with the whole nation of the Jews,
shall the following things come to pass; and therefore cannot be
referred to the last judgment, or what should befall the church, or
world, a little before that time, or should be accomplished in the whole
intermediate time, between the destruction of Jerusalem, and the last
judgment: for all that is said to account for such a sense, as that it
was usual with the prophets to speak of judgments afar off as near; and
that the apostles often speak of the coming of Christ, the last
judgment, and the end of the world, as just at hand; and that one day
with the Lord is as a thousand years, will not answer to the word
"immediately", or show that that should be understood of two thousand
years after: besides, all the following things were to be fulfilled
before that present generation, in which Christ lived, passed away, [Mat
24:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#034) and therefore must be understood
of things that should directly, and immediately take place upon, or at
the destruction of the city and temple,

Shall the sun be darkened: not in a literal but in a figurative sense;
and is to be understood not of the religion of the Jewish church; nor of
the knowledge of the law among them, and the decrease of it; nor of the
Gospel being obscured by heretics and false teachers; nor of the temple
of Jerusalem, senses which are given into by one or another; but of the
Shekinah, or the divine presence in the temple. The glory of God, who is
a sun and a shield, filled the tabernacle, when it was reared up; and so
it did the temple, when it was built and dedicated; in the most holy
place, Jehovah took up his residence; here was the symbol of his
presence, the mercy seat, and the two cherubim over it: and though God
had for some time departed from this people, and a voice was heard in
the temple before its destruction, saying, "let us go hence"; yet the
token of the divine presence remained till the utter destruction of it;
and then this sun was wholly darkened, and there was not so much as the
outward symbol of it:

and the moon shall not give her light; which also is to be explained in
a figurative and metaphorical sense; and refers not to the Roman empire,
which quickly began to diminish; nor to the city of Jerusalem; nor to
the civil polity of the nation; but to the ceremonial law, the moon, the
church is said to have under her feet, [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001) so called because the observance
of new moons was one part of it, and the Jewish festivals were regulated
by the moon; and especially, because like the moon, it was variable and
changeable. Now, though this, in right, was abolished at the death of
Christ, and ceased to give any true light, when he, the substance, was
come; yet was kept up by the Jews, as long as their temple was standing;
but when that was destroyed, the daily sacrifice, in fact, ceased, and
so it has ever since; the Jews esteeming it unlawful to offer sacrifice
in a strange land, or upon any other altar than that of Jerusalem; and
are to this day without a sacrifice, and without an ephod:

and the stars shall fall from heaven; which phrase, as it elsewhere
intends the doctors of the church, and preachers falling off from purity
of doctrine and conversation; so here it designs the Jewish Rabbins and
doctors, who departed from the word of God, and set up their traditions
above it, fell into vain and senseless interpretations of it, and into
debates about things contained in their Talmud; the foundation of which
began to be laid immediately upon their dispersion into other countries:

and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken; meaning all the
ordinances of the legal dispensation; which shaking, and even removing
of them, were foretold by [Hag 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#006) and
explained by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews, [Heb
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026) whereby room and way were made
for Gospel ordinances to take place, and be established; which shall not
be shaken, so as to be removed, but remain till the second coming of
Christ. The Jews themselves are sensible, and make heavy complaints of
the great declensions and alterations among them, since the destruction
of the temple; for after having taken notice of the death of several of
their doctors, who died a little before, or after that; and that upon
their death ceased the honour of the law, the splendour of wisdom, and
the glory of the priesthood, they add (g),

"from the time that the temple was destroyed, the wise men, and sons of
nobles, were put to shame, and they covered their heads; liberal men
were reduced to poverty; and men of violence and calumny prevailed; and
there were none that expounded, or inquired, or asked. R. Elezer the
great, said, from the time the sanctuary were destroyed, the wise men
began to be like Scribes, and the Scribes like to the Chazans, (or
sextons that looked after the synagogues,) and the Chazans like to the
common people, and the common people grew worse and worse, and there
were none that inquired and asked;

that is, of the wise men there were no scholars, or very few that
studied in the law,

\(g\) Misn. Sotah, c. 9. sect. 15.

[Matthew 24:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">mat 24:30</span></span>

Not the sound of the great trumpet, mentioned in the following verse;
nor the clouds of heaven in this; nor the sign of the cross appearing in
the air, as it is said to do in the times of Constantine: not the
former; for though to blow a trumpet is sometimes to give a sign, and is
an alarm; and the feast which the Jews call the day of blowing the
trumpets, [Num 29:1](../../../bib/kjv/num029.htm#001) is, by the
Septuagint, rendered , "the day of signification"; yet this sign is not
said to be sounded, but to appear, or to be seen, which does not agree
with the sounding of a trumpet: much less can this design the last
trumpet at the day of judgment, since of that the text does not speak;
and, for the same reason, the clouds cannot be meant in which Christ
will come to judgment, nor are clouds in themselves any sign of it: nor
the latter, of which there is no hint in the word of God, nor any reason
to expect it, nor any foundation for it; nor is any miraculous star
intended, such as appeared at Christ's first coming, but the son of man
himself: just as circumcision is called the sign of circumcision, [Rom
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#011) and Christ is sometimes called a
sign, [Luk 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#034) as is his resurrection
from the dead, [Mat 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039) and here the
glory and majesty in which he shall come: and it may be observed, that
the other evangelists make no mention of the sign, only speak of the son
of man, [Mar 13:26](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#026) and he shall
appear, not in person, but in the power of his wrath and vengeance, on
the Jewish nation which will be a full sign and proof of his being come:
for the sense is, that when the above calamities shall be upon the civil
state of that people, and there will be such changes in their
ecclesiastical state it will be as clear a point, that Christ is come in
the flesh, and that he is also come in his vengeance on that nation, for
their rejection and crucifixion him, as if they had seen him appear in
person in the heavens. They had been always seeking a sign, and were
continually asking one of him; and now they will have a sign with a
witness; as they had accordingly,

And then shall the tribes of the earth, or land,

mourn; that is, the land of Judea; for other lands, and countries, were
not usually divided into tribes, as that was; neither were they affected
with the calamities and desolations of it, and the vengeance of the son
of man upon it; at least not so as to mourn on that account, but rather
were glad and rejoiced:

and they shall see the son of man coming in the clouds of heaven, with
power and great glory. The Arabic version reads it, "ye shall see", as
is expressed by Christ, in [Mat 26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064).
Where the high priest, chief priests, Scribes, and elders, and the whole
sanhedrim of the Jews are spoken to: and as the same persons, namely,
the Jews, are meant here as there; so the same coming of the son of man
is intended; not his coming at the last day to judgment; though that
will be in the clouds of heaven, and with great power and glory; but his
coming to bring on, and give the finishing stroke to the destruction of
that people, which was a dark and cloudy dispensation to them: and when
they felt the power of his arm, might, if not blind and stupid to the
last degree, see the glory of his person, that he was more than a mere
man, and no other than the Son of God, whom they had despised, rejected,
and crucified; and who came to set up his kingdom and glory in a more
visible and peculiar manner, among the Gentiles.

[Matthew 24:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">mat 24:31</span></span>

And he shall send his angels,.... Not the angels, i.e. ministering
spirits, so called, not from their nature, but their office, as being
sent forth by God and Christ; but men angels, or messengers, the
ministers and preachers of the Gospel, whom Christ would call, qualify,
and send forth into all the world of the Gentiles, to preach his Gospel,
and plant churches there still more, when that at Jerusalem was broken
up and dissolved. These are called "angels", because of their mission,
and commission from Christ, to preach the Gospel; and because of their
knowledge and understanding in spiritual things; and because of their
zeal, diligence, and watchfulness,

With a great sound of a trumpet, meaning the Gospel; see [Isa
27:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#013) so called in allusion either to
the silver trumpets which Moses was ordered to make of one piece, and
use them for the calling of the assembly, the journeying of the camps,
blowing an alarm for war, and on their solemn and festival days, [Num
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#001). The Gospel being rich and
precious, all of a piece, useful for gathering souls to Christ, and to
his churches; to direct saints in their journey to Canaan's land; to
encourage them to fight the Lord's battles; and is a joyful sound, being
a sound of love, grace, and mercy, peace, pardon, righteousness, life
and salvation, by Christ: or else so called, in allusion to the trumpet
blown in the year of "jubilee"; which proclaimed rest to the land,
liberty to prisoners, a release of debts, and restoration of
inheritances; as the Gospel publishes rest in Christ, liberty to the
captives of sin, Satan, and the law, a payment of debts by Christ, and a
release from them upon that, and a right and title to the heavenly
inheritance. The Vulgate Latin reads it, "with a trumpet, and a great
voice"; and so does Munster's Hebrew Gospel; and so it was read in four
of Beza's copies:

and they shall gather his elect from the four winds, from one end of
heaven to the other; that is, by the ministration of the Gospel; the
Spirit of God accompanying it with his power, and grace, the ministers
of the word should gather out of the world unto Christ, and to his
churches, such persons as God had, before the foundation of the world,
chosen in Christ, unto salvation, through sanctification of the Spirit,
and belief of the truth; wherever they are under the whole heavens, from
one end to another; or in any part of the earth, though at the greatest
distance; for in [Mar 13:27](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#027) it is
said, "from the uttermost part of the earth, to the uttermost part of
the heaven". The Jews (h) say, that "in the after redemption (i.e. by
the Messiah) all Israel shall be gathered together by the sound of a
trumpet, from the four parts of the world.

\(h\) Zohar in Lev. fol. 47. 1.

[Matthew 24:32](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">mat 24:32</span></span>

Now learn a parable of the fig tree,.... Take a similitude, or
comparison from the fig tree, which was a tree well known in Judea; and
the putting forth of its branches, leaves, and fruit, fell under the
observation of everyone:

when its branch is yet tender; through the influence of the sun, and the
motion of the sap, which was bound up, and congealed in the winter
season:

and putteth forth leaves; from the tender branches, which swell, and
open, and put forth buds, leaves, and fruit:

ye know the summer is nigh; spring being already come: the fig tree
putting forth her green figs, is a sign that the winter is past, the
spring is come, and summer is at hand; see [Sol
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011).

[Matthew 24:33](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">mat 24:33</span></span>

So likewise ye, when ye shall see all these things,.... That are
mentioned above, relating to the signs of the destruction of the temple
and city, and the destruction itself, with all those several things that
should directly take place upon it; this is an accommodation of the
above parable, similitude, or comparison:

know that it is near, even at the doors; meaning, either that "he is
near", as the Ethiopic version reads it, the son of man is near, even at
the doors; or as the Vulgate Latin renders it, "in the gates", or
"doors", and so does Munster's Hebrew Gospel; and signifies, that he was
already come; for to be in the doors, or within the gates, is more than
to be at the doors, or at the gates: and thus the fig tree putting forth
its leaves, is a sign that summer is not only nigh, but is already come,
even that part of it we call spring; for the Scripture divides the whole
year only into two parts, summer and winter; so these calamities and
desolations on the Jews, were a sign that the son of man was come, was
in the gates, displaying his power and his glory: or the redemption and
deliverance of the people of God was at hand, from the persecutions of
the Jews; for till the destruction of Jerusalem, the persecutions of the
Christians were chiefly from the Jews, or occasioned by them; but now,
they being destroyed, the summer of deliverance was at hand: or else the
kingdom of God, or a more enlarged state of the Gospel dispensation was
near; the winter of the legal dispensation was over, the spring of the
Gospel dispensation was come, through the preaching of John the Baptist,
Christ and his apostles; and now the summer of it was at hand, through
the general spread of it, all over the Gentile world. So the second
coming of Christ, will be a summer of joy and comfort to the saints:
Christ will appear most lovely and amiable to them, he will be glorified
by them, and admired in them; great grace will be brought unto them, and
great glory will be put upon them; they will then enjoy full redemption
and salvation: the winter of sorrows, afflictions, and persecutions, and
of coldness, darkness, and desertion, will be over; the sun shall no
more go down, nor the moon withdraw itself, but the Lord will be the
everlasting light of his people.

[Matthew 24:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">mat 24:34</span></span>

Verily I say unto you, this generation shall not pass,.... Not the
generation of men in general; as if the sense was, that mankind should
not cease, until the accomplishment of these things; nor the generation,
or people of the Jews, who should continue to be a people, until all
were fulfilled; nor the generation of Christians; as if the meaning was,
that there should be always a set of Christians, or believers in Christ
in the world, until all these events came to pass; but it respects that
present age, or generation of men then living in it; and the sense is,
that all the men of that age should not die, but some should live

till all these things were fulfilled; see [Mat
16:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#028) as many did, and as there is
reason to believe they might, and must, since all these things had their
accomplishment, in and about forty years after this: and certain it is,
that John, one of the disciples of Christ, outlived the time by many
years; and, as Dr. Lightfoot observes, many of the Jewish doctors now
living, when Christ spoke these words, lived until the city was
destroyed; as Rabban Simeon, who perished with it, R. Jochanan ben
Zaccai, who outlived it, R. Zadoch, R. Ishmael, and others: this is a
full and clear proof, that not anything that is said before, relates to
the second coming of Christ, the day of judgment, and end of the world;
but that all belong to the coming of the son of man, in the destruction
of Jerusalem, and to the end of the Jewish state.

[Matthew 24:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">mat 24:35</span></span>

Heaven and earth shall pass away,.... This is either an assertion, which
will be true at the end of time; not as to the substance of the heavens
and earth, which will always remain, but as to the qualities of them,
which will be altered: they will be renewed and refined, but not
destroyed; the bad qualities, or evil circumstances, which attend them
through the sin of man, will be removed and pass away, but they
themselves will continue in being: or is a comparative expression, and
the sense is, that the heavens and the earth, and the ordinances
thereof, than which nothing can be more firm and strong, being fixed and
supported by God himself, shall sooner pass away, than anything asserted
and predicted by Christ shall:

but my words shall not pass away; be vain and empty, and unaccomplished;
which is true of anything, and everything spoken by Christ; and
especially here regards all that he had said concerning the calamities
that should befall the Jews, before, at, or upon the destruction of
their nation, city, and temple; and the design of the expression, is to
show the certainty, unalterableness, and sure accomplishment of these
things; see [Jer 31:36](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#036).

[Matthew 24:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">mat 24:36</span></span>

But of that day and hour knoweth no man,.... Which is to be understood,
not of the second coming of Christ, the end of the world, and the last
judgment; but of the coming of the son of man, to take vengeance on the
Jews, and of their destruction; for the words manifestly regard the date
of the several things going before, which only can be applied to that
catastrophe, and dreadful desolation: now, though the destruction itself
was spoken of by Moses and the prophets, was foretold by Christ, and the
believing Jews had some discerning of its near approach; see [Heb
10:25](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#025) yet the exact and precise time
was not known: it might have been: calculated to a year by Daniel's
weeks, but not to the day and hour; and therefore our Lord does not say
of the year, but of the day and hour no man knows; though the one week,
or seven years, being separated from the rest, throws that account into
some perplexity; and which perhaps is on purpose done, to conceal the
precise time of Jerusalem's destruction: nor need it be wondered at,
notwithstanding all the hints given, that the fatal day should not be
exactly known beforehand; when those who have lived since, and were
eyewitnesses of it, are not agreed on what day of the month it was; for,
as Dr. Lightfoot (i) observes, Josephus (k) says,

"that the temple perished the "tenth" day of "Lous", a day fatal to the
temple, as having been on that day consumed in flames, by the king of
Babylon.

And yet Rabbi Jochanan ben Zaccai, who was also at the destruction of
it, as well as Josephus, with all the Jewish writers, say it was on the
"ninth of Ab"; for of this day they (l) say, five things happened upon
it:

"On the "ninth of Ab" it was decreed concerning our fathers, that they
should not enter into the land (of Canaan), the first and second temple
were destroyed, Bither was taken, and the city ploughed up.

Though the words of R. Jochanan, cited by the doctor, refer to the
first, and not to the second temple, and should have been rendered thus:

"If I had been in the generation (which fixed the fast for the
destruction of the first temple), I would not have fixed it but on the
tenth (of Ab); for, adds he, the greatest part of the temple was burnt
on that day; but the Rabbins rather regarded the beginning of the
punishment (m).

And so the fasting of Rabbi, and R. Joshua ben Levi, on the "ninth" and
"tenth" days, were on account of the first temple; for they were under
the same difficulty about the one, as the other:

no, not the angels of heaven; who dwell there, always behold the face of
God, stand in his presence ready to do his will, and are made acquainted
with many of his designs, and are employed in the executing of them, and
yet know not the time of God's vengeance on the Jews; to this agrees the
sense that is given of the day of vengeance in [Isa
63:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#004) it is asked (n),

"what is the meaning of these words, "the day of vengeance is in my
heart?" Says R. Jochanan, to my heart I have revealed it, to the members
I have not revealed it: says R. Simeon ben Lakish, to my heart I have
revealed it, , "to the ministering angels I have not revealed it".

The Ethiopic version adds here, "nor the son", and so the Cambridge copy
of Beza's; which seems to be transcribed from [Mar
13:32](../../../bib/kjv/mar013.htm#032) where that phrase stands; and
must be understood of Christ as the son of man, and not as the Son of
God; for as such, he lay in the bosom of the Father, and knew all his
purposes and designs; for these were purposed in him: he knew from the
beginning who would betray him, and who would believe in him; he knew
what would befall the rejecters of him, and when that would come to
pass; as he must know also the day of the last judgment, since it is
appointed by God, and he is ordained to execute it: but the sense is,
that as he, as man and mediator, came not to destroy, but to save; so it
was not any part of his work, as such, to know, nor had he it in
commission to make known the time of Jerusalem's ruin:

but my Father only; to the exclusion of all creatures, angels and men;
but not to the exclusion of Christ as God, who, as such, is omniscient;
nor of the Holy Spirit, who is acquainted with the deep things of God,
the secrets of his heart, and this among others,

\(i\) In Mark xiii. 32. (k) De Bello Jud. l. 6. c. 26. (l) Misu.
Taanith, c. 4. sect. 7. T. Hieros. Taanioth, fol. 68. 3. & Maimon.
Hilch. Taanioth, c. 5. sect. 2. (m) T. Bab, Taanith, fol. 29. 1. (n) T.
Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 99. 1.

[Matthew 24:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">mat 24:37</span></span>

But as the days of Noe were,.... So Noah is usually called Noe by the
Septuagint: the sense is, as were the practices of the men of that
generation, in which Noah lived, so will be the practices of the men of
that age, in which the son of man comes; or as the flood, which happened
in the days of Noah, was sudden and unexpected; it came upon men
thoughtless about it, though they had warning of it; and was universal,
swept them all away, excepting a few that were saved in the ark:

so shall also the coming of the son of man be; to take vengeance on the
Jews, on a sudden, at an unawares, when they would be unthoughtful about
it; though they were forewarned of it by Christ and his apostles, and
their destruction be as universal; all would be involved in it,
excepting a few, that were directed a little before, to go out of the
city of Jerusalem to Pella; where they were saved, as Noah and his
family were in the ark.

[Matthew 24:38](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">mat 24:38</span></span>

For as in the days that were before the flood,.... Not all the days
before the flood, from the creation of the world; but those immediately
preceding it, a century or two before it:

they were eating and drinking, marrying and giving in marriage: not that
these civil actions of life were criminal in themselves, had care been
taken that they were not abused. It is lawful to eat and drink, provided
it be in moderation, and not to excess; and to marry, and give in
marriage, when the laws, rules, and ends thereof, are observed: and
therefore this must be understood, either of their wholly giving
themselves up to the pleasures of life, and lusts of the flesh, without
any concern about the affairs of religion, the worship and glory of God,
the welfare of their souls and their approaching danger, of which Noah
had given them warning; or of their luxury and intemperance, in eating
and drinking, and of their libidinous and unlawful marriages; for the
word here used for eating, signifies eating after the manner of brute
beasts: they indulged themselves in a brutish way, in gluttony and
drunkenness; and it is certain from the account given of them, in [Gen
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#002) that they entered into unlawful
marriages, and unclean copulations: wherefore these things may be spoken
of them, as what were really sinful and wicked, and denote a course of
sinning, a constant practice of these sins of intemperance and lust, and
which is still more fully expressed in the next clause:

until the day that Noe entered into the ark. The Arabic version renders
it, "the ship"; the vessel which God directed him to make, for the
saving of himself and family. Now the men of that generation persisted
in their wicked course of living, after, and notwithstanding, the
warning God had given them by Noah, of the flood that would come upon
them; and all the while the ark was building, even to the very day that
Noah and his family, by the order of God, went into the ark.

[Matthew 24:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">mat 24:39</span></span>

And knew not until the flood came,.... That is, they did not advert or
give heed to what Noah said to them about it: they slighted and despised
his warnings; they did not believe, that what he said of the flood was
true; they had notice of it, but they would not know it, and therefore
God gave them up to judicial blindness and hardness of heart; and so
they remained, until it came upon them at once:

and took them all away; the whole world of the ungodly, every man,
woman, and child, except eight persons only; Noah and his wife, and his
three sons and their wives; for the deluge was universal, and reached to
all the inhabitants of the world, who all perished in it, excepting the
above persons,

So shall also the coming of the son of man be: such shall be, as it was,
the case of the Jews, before the destruction of Jerusalem: they gave
themselves up to all manner of wickedness and uncleanness; they
disregarded the warnings of Christ and his apostles; they were careless
and secure of danger; they would not believe their ruin was at hand,
when it was just upon them; they buoyed themselves up to the very last,
that a deliverer would arise, and save them; they cried peace, peace,
when sudden destruction was nigh; even of them all, their nation, city,
and temple, a few only excepted, as in the days of Noah: and though they
were so much like the men of that generation, yet they themselves say of
them, that "the generation of the flood have no part in the world to
come, nor shall they stand in judgment, according to [Gen
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#003) (o).

\(o\) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 11. sect. 3.

[Matthew 24:40](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">mat 24:40</span></span>

Then shall two be in the field,.... About their proper business, of
husbandry, ploughing, or sowing, or any other rural employment:

the one shall be taken; not by the preaching of the Gospel, into the
kingdom of God, or Gospel dispensation; though such a distinction God
makes, by the ministry of the word, accompanied by his Spirit and power;
nor by angels, to meet Christ in the air, and to be introduced into his
kingdom and glory; but by the eagles, the Roman army, and either killed
or carried captive by them:

and the other left; not in a state of nature and unregeneracy, as many
are, to whom the Gospel is preached; nor with devils at the last day, to
be thrust down by them into the infernal regions; but by the Romans,
being by some remarkable providence, or another, delivered out of their
hands; which was the case of some few, and these of the meaner sort; and
therefore persons of a rural life and occupation are instanced in.

[Matthew 24:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">mat 24:41</span></span>

Two women shall be grinding at the mill,.... Though the word women is
not in the Greek text, yet it is rightly supplied by our translators, as
it is in the Persic version; for the word rendered grinding, is in the
feminine gender, and was the work of women, as appears both from the
Scripture, [Exo 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#005) and from several
passages in the Jewish writings, concerning which their canons run thus
(p),

"These are the works which a woman is to do for her husband, "she must
grind", and bake, and wash, and boil, and make his bed, &c.

And elsewhere it is asked (q),

"how does she grind? she sits at the mill, and watches the flour, but
she does not grind, or go after a beast, that so the mill may not stop;
but if their custom is to grind at a hand mill, she may grind. The
sanhedrim order this to poor people; for if she brings one handmaid, or
money, or goods, sufficient to purchase, she is not obliged to grind,
&c.

Frequent mention is made, of women grinding together at the same mill: a
case is put concerning two women grinding at an hand mill (r), and
various rules are given about it; as, that (s).

"a woman may lend her neighbour that is suspected of eating the fruits
of the seventh year after time, a meal sieve, a fan, a mill, or a
furnace, but she may not winnow, nor "grind with her".

Which it supposes she might do, if she was not suspected: again (t),

"the wife of a plebeian, "may grind" with the wife of a learned man, in
the time that she is unclean, but not when she is clean.

Nor was this the custom of the Jews only, for women to grind, but also
of other countries, as of the Abyssines (u), and of both Greeks and
Barbarians (w):

the one shall be taken, and the other left; as before, one shall be
taken by the Romans, and either put to death, or carried captive; and
the other shall escape their hands, through the singular providence of
God. The Ethiopic version, and Munster's Hebrew Gospel add, "two shall
be in one bed, one shall be taken, and the other left"; but these words
are not in the copies of Matthew in common, but are taken out of [Luk
17:34](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#034) though they are in the Cambridge
copy of Beza's, and in one of Stephens's,

\(p\) Misn. Cetubot, c. 5. sect. 5. Vid. T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 47. 9.
& 48. 1. (q) Maimon. Hilch. Ishot. c. 21. sect. 5, 6. (r) T. Bab. Nidda,
fol. 60. 2. (s) Misn. Sheviith, c. 5. 9. & Gittin, c. 5. sect. 9. (t) T.
Hieros. Teruinot, fol. 46. 3. T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 61. 2. & Cholin, fol.
6. 2. Misn. Taharot, c. 7. sect. 4. (u) Ludolph. Hist. Ethiop. l. 4. c.
4. (w) Plutarch apud Beza. in loc.

[Matthew 24:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">mat 24:42</span></span>

Watch therefore,.... Since the time of this desolation is so uncertain,
and since it will come upon the Jews unawares, and some wilt escape,
whilst others perish; for the words are plainly an inference from what
precedes, and clearly relate to things going before, and are not a
transition to a new subject:

for ye know not what hour your Lord doth come; to avenge himself of the
unbelieving Jews, and fulfil what he in person, and by his apostles, had
predicted and warned them of: though I will not deny, but that what
follows may be much better accommodated and applied to the second coming
of Christ, and the last judgment, and the behaviour of men with regard
to both, than anything said before; and it may be our Lord's intention,
to lead his disciples gradually, and as it were imperceptibly, to the
last scene of things on earth, to make way for the parables and
description of the future judgment, in the next chapter; still keeping
in view, and having reference to, the subject he had been so long upon.

[Matthew 24:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">mat 24:43</span></span>

But know this,.... Or you do know this: this may be illustrated by
supposing a case well known to men, and in which common prudence would
direct a man how to behave:

that if the good man of the house, or householder, or master of the
family,

had known in what watch the thief would come; whether at the first,
second, third, or fourth watch; for the night was divided into four
watches; had he any previous notice given by any of the associates of
the thief, or by those that had overheard, or by any means had got
intelligence of his design and measures, and the time of his pursuing
them,

he would have watched; in every watch either in person, or by employing
others, or both:

and would not have suffered his house to be broken up: or "dug through";
see [Job 24:16](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#016) concerning which, there
is a law in [Exo 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002) and is explained
by the Jewish canonists thus:

"He that comes in by digging, whether by day or by night, there is no
blood for him (i.e. to be shed for him, if he is killed); but if the
master of the house, or any other man kill him, they are free; and every
man has power to kill him, whether on a weekday, or on a sabbath day;
and with whatsoever death he can put him to, as it is said, there is no
blood for him, [Exo 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#002). And one that
comes in, "by digging", or a thief that is found in the midst of a man's
roof, or in his court, or within his hedge, whether in the day or in the
night, (may be killed;) and wherefore is it called digging? because it
is the way of most thieves to come in by digging in the night (x).

Wherefore no doubt since the master of the house had such a law on his
side, he would never suffer, if possible, his house to be entered by
digging, when he had, especially, any previous notice of it. Now the
application of this case, or parabolical way of speaking, is to the
coming of Christ, and the watchfulness of every good man who has notice
of it, that he may not be surprised with it, but be in a readiness to
receive him. The coming of the son of man, is here represented by the
coming of the thief in the night: but when he is compared to a thief,
this is not to be understood in a bad sense, in which Satan is called
one, who comes to kill and to destroy the souls of men; and likewise
heretics and false teachers, and everyone that climbs up, and gets into
the church of God in a wrong way; but this only respects the manner of
Christ's coming, which is like that of a thief, secretly, suddenly, and
at unawares. The "good man of the house", or householder, is every
Christian, or believer in Christ, who has a house to look after, his own
soul, the spiritual affairs and everlasting salvation of it, things of
moment and concern unto him: and as the Christians, before the
destruction of Jerusalem, had notices of Christ's coming in that way, by
our Lord's predictions, by the hints the apostles gave, to refresh their
memories with them, and by the signs of the times and voices that were
heard; so the saints have of Christ's coming to judgment: wherefore as
it became the one, so it does the other, to watch, to be upon their
guard, to be in a readiness, to have their loins girt about, and their
lights burning, and they like men that wait for their Lord; that so when
he comes, their houses may not be broken up, may not be surprised, and
the several powers and faculties of their souls may not be thrown into
disorder and confusion; wherefore it follows,

\(x\) Mairmon. Hilch. Genibah, c. 9. sect. 7, 8.

[Matthew 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">mat 24:44</span></span>

Therefore be ye also ready,.... Or prepared for the coming of the son of
man; which as it is said to be like a thief in the night, expresses the
suddenness of it, may excite to watchfulness and readiness; which
readiness is to be understood, not of a readiness to do the will and
work of God, though this is absolutely necessary; as to watch and pray,
to hear the word preached, to confess Christ, and give a reason of the
hope that is in us, to communicate to the support of the cause and
interest of Christ, and to suffer for his sake; but of a preparedness to
meet the Lord in the way of his judgments, when desolating judgments are
coming on the earth, such as these in Jerusalem; by faith and trust in
the power, providence, and care of God; by humiliation before him, and
resignation to his will: and if this can be applied to a readiness for a
future state after death; for the second coming of Christ, and last
judgment; this lies not in a dependence on the absolute mercy of God;
nor in an external humiliation for sin; nor in an abstinence from
grosser sins, or in mere negative holiness; nor in any outward, legal,
civil, and moral righteousness; nor in a submission to Gospel
ordinances; nor in a mere profession of religion; but in being in
Christ, having on his righteousness, and being washed in his blood; and
also in regeneration and sanctification, in having true knowledge of
Christ, and faith in him; for all which it becomes men to be concerned,
as also all believers to be actually, as well as habitually ready; being
in the lively exercise of grace, and cheerful discharge of duty, though
without trusting to either. And such a readiness in either branch of it,
is not of themselves, but lies in the grace of God, which gives a
meetness for glory; and in the righteousness of Christ, the fine linen,
clean and white, which being granted by him, his people are made ready
for him: and as for their faith, and the exercise of it, and their
constant performance of duty, these are not from the strength of nature
and the power of freewill, but from the Spirit of God and his grace; who
makes ready a people prepared for the Lord, and all according to the
ancient settlements of grace, in which provision is made for the vessels
of mercy, afore prepared for glory: though there should be a studious
concern in men for such readiness, for nothing is more certain than
death, and nothing more uncertain than when it will be; and after death,
no readiness can be had, but he that is then righteous, shall be
righteous still, and he that is filthy, shall be filthy still, and a
deathbed is by no means to be trusted to; and though a person may not be
snatched away suddenly, but may have space given him to repent, yet if
grace is not given him, to repent and believe in Christ, he never will;
the grave is ready for men, and in a little time all will be brought to
this house, appointed for all living, where there is no wisdom,
knowledge, and device; and therefore whatever we are directed to do,
should be now done, with all that might, and strength, and grace, that
is given us; to which may be added, that after death comes judgment; the
day is fixed, the judge is appointed, and all must stand before his
judgment seat; and nothing is more sure than that Christ will come a
second time, to judge both quick and dead; and happy will those be that
are ready; they will be received by Christ into everlasting habitations,
and be for ever with him: and miserable will those be, who will not be
ready, who will not have the oil of grace in their hearts with their
lamps, nor the wedding garment on them; they will be shut out, and bid
to depart into everlasting burnings: how fit and proper is such an
advice and exhortation as this, "be ye also ready". A readiness the Jews
report Bath Kol, or the voice from heaven, gave out concerning the
Israelites,

"Bath Kol (say (y) they) went out, and said to them, , "ye are all of
you ready for the life of the world to come".

And elsewhere it is said of Bath Kol, that it went forth and affirmed of
some particular Rabbins, that they were ready for eternal life; as of
Ketiah bar Shalom, R. Eleazar ben Durdia, and R. Chanina (z):

for in such an hour as ye think not, the son of man cometh: this is true
of his coming in power to destroy Jerusalem, and of his second coming to
judgment. The Jews say much the same of the coming of the Messiah, whom
they expect:

"there are three things, they say (a), which come, "without knowledge",
or unthought of, at an unawares; and they are these, the Messiah,
anything that is found, and a scorpion.

\(y\) T. Bab. Moed Katon, fol. 9. 1. (z) T. Bab Avoda Zara, fol. 10. 2.
& 17. 1. & 18. 1. & Callah, fol. 17. 2. & Cetubot, fol. 103. 2. (a) T.
Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 97. 1.

[Matthew 24:45](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">mat 24:45</span></span>

Who then is a faithful and wise servant,.... The Vulgate Latin adds, "do
you think?" and is a question put to the disciples, which they might
apply to themselves: in [Luk 12:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#042), it
is spoken in answer to a question of Peter's, in relation to the above
exhortation, whether it was spoken to them, or to all; and by this
answer, it looks as if it was more especially designed for them, though
it may be applied to other. The "servant" is there called a "steward",
for such a servant is meant; and a name that is very proper for the
apostles and ministers of the word, who are stewards of the mysteries of
Christ, and of the manifold grace of God; and whose characters are, that
they are "faithful": for this is required in stewards, that they be
faithful to the trust reposed in them; as ministers are, when they
preach the pure Gospel of Christ, and the whole of it; conceal no part,
nor keep anything of it; seek not to please men, but God; neither seek
their own things, their ease, honour, and profit, but the glory of God,
the honour of Christ, and the good of souls; and abide by the truths,
cause, and interest of a Redeemer, at all hazards. And they are "wise",
who know and are well instructed in divine things; who make Christ the
main subject of their ministry; who improve their talents and time for
their master's use, and the advantage of those that are under their
care; who seek for, and deliver acceptable words and matter; and manage
their whole trust, so as to be able to give in a good account of their
stewardship another day. The post that such a person is put in, and the
work he is to do, follow:

whom his Lord hath made ruler over his household; or "family", the
church of God, which is the household of God, and of faith, in which are
believers of various growths and sizes; some fathers, some young men,
some children; and over these, the ministers are, by their Lord, made
and placed as rulers; not as lords and tyrants over God's heritage, to
govern them in an arbitrary way, but as over them in the Lord, to rule
them according to the word of God, and the laws of his house; by
preaching the Gospel, administering ordinances, and keeping up his
worship and the discipline of the church; and whose principal business
it is,

to give them meat in due season; even "their portion" of it, as in [Luk
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#042), for the word of God is to be
cut and rightly divided, and everyone in the family, according to his
age, appetite, and digestion, is to have his proper part and portion
given him: it must be meat, proper food, such as is solid, substantial,
and nourishing; even the wholesome words of Christ Jesus, that must be
given them, and not husks and empty trash; and all in due season, in its
proper time, as their cases and circumstances require, and call for; as
whether weary, or uncomfortable, or in the dark, or under temptations
and afflictions: for a word fitly and seasonably spoken, how useful is
it!

[Matthew 24:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">mat 24:46</span></span>

Blessed is that servant whom his Lord, when he cometh,.... Whether in a
way of judgment, as against Jerusalem; or at death, when he comes to
remove him out of time, into eternity; or at the day of judgment, when
he, the righteous judge, will give the crown of righteousness to him:

shall find so doing; acting the faithful and wise part, ruling the
household of God well; giving to all wholesome food, a proper portion of
it, and that in the right time.

[Matthew 24:47](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">mat 24:47</span></span>

Verily I say unto you,.... Nothing is a greater truth, more certain, or
to be depended on, than this; all such wise, faithful, diligent, and
industrious servants may expect it:

that he, shall make him ruler over all his goods; will honour him with
greater gifts, bestow a larger degree of Gospel light and knowledge on
him, make him more useful in the church below, and at last cause him to
inherit all things in the other world, all glory, happiness, and bliss.

[Matthew 24:48](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">mat 24:48</span></span>

But and if that evil servant,.... Or should there be an evil servant, an
unwise and faithless one, who though he may have gifts and talents, yet
destitute of the grace of God; and though he may be in the highest post
and office in the church of God for sometimes wicked and graceless men
are in such places; yet if he

shall say in his heart; secretly to himself, and with pleasure to his
mind, and strengthen himself in a full persuasion of this,

my Lord delayeth his coming; and begins to think that either he will not
come at all, to call him to an account for the use of his time, gifts,
and talents; or if he does, it will be long first ere he will come, and
visit the people of the Jews, by desolating calamities; or by death, to
summon him to his bar; or at judgment, to give in his account of his
stewardship.

[Matthew 24:49](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">mat 24:49</span></span>

And shall begin to smite his fellow servants,.... By abusing the power
lodged in him, usurping a dominion over their faith, and imposing on
their consciences things which Christ has never commanded; vexing and
burdening them with trifling rites and ceremonies, and other unnecessary
things; wounding, grieving, offending weak minds by his conduct and
example; or persecuting the saints, such of them as cannot come into
everything in his way of believing and practising:

and to eat and drink with the drunken; giving himself up to luxury and
intemperance; feeding himself instead of the family; serving his own
belly, and not his Lord and Master Christ; living an ungodly and
licentious life, altogether unbecoming the Gospel of Christ: such
servants and stewards have been, and are in the church of God; but sad
will be their case, when their Lord comes, as follows. Respect seems to
be had either to the ecclesiastical rulers among the Jews, who went
under the name of the servants of the Lord, but persecuted the apostles,
and those that believed in Christ; or the "Judaizing" Christians, and
false teachers, that were for imposing the ceremonies of the law upon
believers; or Simon Magus, and his followers, a set of licentious, men;
or all of them; who lived in this period of time, between the death of
Christ, and the destruction of the temple.

[Matthew 24:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">mat 24:50</span></span>

The lord of that servant,.... Not by redemption and grace, but by
creation and profession,

shall come in a day when he looked not for him, and in an hour that he
is not aware of: suddenly and unexpectedly: such was his coming in wrath
and vengeance on the Jewish nation; and such is his coming oftentimes by
death; and such will be his coming at the day of judgment.

[Matthew 24:51](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">mat 24:51</span></span>

And shall cut him asunder,.... The Persic version renders it, "he shall
separate him from himself": he shall separate soul and body by death; he
shall take away all his gifts and talents from him; and remove him from
his place and office, and from the church of God, and communion of the
saints, and out of this world. Some think the allusion is to the cutting
up of the sacrifices, and dividing them into pieces; and the sense is,
that this wicked servant should have no share in the sacrifice of
Christ; but should fall himself a victim to divine justice, and be used
as sacrifices were; or, in other words, be severely punished for his
sins; though the allusion seems rather to be to the manner of punishing
treacherous and unfaithful persons, by dismembering them, cutting them
in pieces, or in two: and so the Arabic version renders it, "he shall
cut him in the middle": this was certainly a way of putting persons to
death; though some say it was not known to the Jews; but the following
instances show the contrary. Mention is made of some that were sawn
asunder, [Heb 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037) and the Jews say
(b), that Isaiah was sawn asunder by Manasseh; and such a kind of death
is spoken of in the Targum (c); where it is said, that "the priests went
before Mordecai, and proclaimed, saying, whoever does not salute, or
wish prosperity to Mordecai, and to the Jews, "he shall be cut into
pieces", and his house be made a dunghill.

And elsewhere (d) it is said of a wicked man, that they put him upon a
carpenter's block, and , "sawed him asunder"; and he cried out, woe,
woe, woe, that I have provoked my Creator. This was also a punishment
used among the Heathens, as Gataker (e), and others out of Heathen
writers, have shown. It must not here be understood literally, that this
wicked servant should be put to such a corporeal death; but that he
should be punished in the severest manner, and should be the object of
the fierce wrath and sore displeasure of God,

and appoint him his portion with the hypocrites. Luke says, "with the
unbelievers" [Luk 12:46](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#046), very likely
both phrases were used by Christ; intimating, that such as make a
profession of him, and have only a form of godliness, without the power
of it, and are wicked and hypocritical men, will share the same fate
with those that believe not; and the portion of these is the lake which
burns with fire and brimstone; see [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008) or all such persons are intended,
who put on the mask of religion, and do not answer to the character they
bear: and are unfaithful to the trust reposed in them, and therefore
will made examples of righteous judgment, and have their part in the
lowest hell:

there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. See Gill on [Mat
13:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#042).

\(b\) T. Hieros. Sanhedrin, fol. 28. 3. & T. Bab. Yebamot, fol. 49. 2.
(c) Targum in Esth. viii. 15. (d) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 65. fol. 58. 4.
(e) Adversaria, p. 455.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Matthew Chapter 25](mat025)

</div>
