<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Micah Index](mic)  
  [Previous](mic003)  [Next](mic005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)

[Micah](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">mic 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO MICAH 4

This chapter contains some gracious promises concerning the glory and
happiness of the church of Christ in the last days; as of its stability,
exaltation, and increase, and of the spread of the Gospel from it, [Mic
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001); and of the peace and security of
it, and constant profession and exercise of religion in it, [Mic
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003); and of the deliverance of it from
affliction and distress, and the ample and everlasting kingdom of Christ
in it, [Mic 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#006); and then follow some
prophecies more particularly respecting the Jews; as that, though they
should be in distress, and be carried captive into Babylon, they should
be delivered from thence, [Mic 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009);
and, though many people should be gathered against them, yet should not
be able to prevail over them, but their attempts would issue in their
own destruction, [Mic 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011).

[Micah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 4:1</span></span>

But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the
house of the Lord shall be established in the top of the mountains,....
It appears by the adversative but, with which these words are
introduced, that they have a dependence upon and a connection with the
last of the preceding chapter; signifying, that though "the mountain of
the house", on which the temple stood, should become desolate, yet "the
mountain of the house of the Lord", which is not literally the same, but
what that was typical of, the church of Christ, should be greatly
exalted and enlarged; and which, according to this prophecy, would be
"in the last days": that is, as Kimchi rightly interprets it, the days
of the Messiah; and it should be observed, that all this will be in the
last of his days, or of the Gospel dispensation: the first of these days
were the days of Christ in the flesh, the times of his ministry, and of
John the Baptist his forerunner, and of his disciples; and were indeed
the last days of the Jewish world, or of their civil and church state;
and when also it must be allowed the mountain of the Lord's house, or
the temple literally taken, became glorious by the presence of Christ in
it, by his doctrine and miracles there, and by the effusion of the
Spirit on his disciples in that place, and the ministration of the
Gospel; but then all this was before the destruction of the second
temple; whereas this prophecy follows that, and is opposed to it, and
supposes it; besides, in those times there was not such an exaltation
and stability of the church of Christ; nor such a flow of nations to it;
nor such a settled and universal peace and security as here promised:
this prophecy therefore respects times yet to come, as Aben Ezra
observes; the last of the days of the Messiah, or the last times of the
Gospel dispensation, when the reign of antichrist will be at an end; he
will be destroyed, and the kingdom of Christ set up, established, and
enlarged in the world. The Prophet Isaiah predicts the same things, and
much in the same words, [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002);
these two prophets were contemporary, and might converse together, and
communicate to each other what they had received from the Lord upon this
subject; but it is needless to inquire which might have them from the
other, since they were both holy men of God, and moved by his Spirit,
and were inspired by the same Spirit, with the same things, and to speak
the same language; yet there is a diversity in words, though an
agreement in sentiment nor does it appear a clear case that they
borrowed, much less that they stole, their words from one other, as the
false prophets did; for they do not always use the same words to convey
the same idea; and there are some words which Isaiah has that Micah has
not and there are others that Micah uses that Isaiah has not; though in
the whole there is a most beautiful harmony of sense in their diversity
of expression. By "the mountain of the house of the Lord" is not meant
the temple built on Mount Moriah, where the divine Majesty resided;
where were the symbols of his presence, the ark and mercy seat, and
where he was worshipped, which has been destroyed long ago, and will
never be rebuilt more; for a third temple hereafter to be built at
Jerusalem is a mere fiction of the Jews; nor indeed is any material
building here intended, and still less any such building to be erected
in such an absurd sense, literally taken, as if mountain was piled on
mountain, and hill on hill, to raise it higher; but, mystically and
spiritually, it designs the church of God, called so because it is built
by him, and built for a habitation for him; where he will, at the time
here referred to, more manifestly dwell in a spiritual manner; and by
whom, and by which spiritual and gracious presence of his, it will be
made very beautiful and glorious: and it is signified by a "mountain",
to denote its visibility, immovableness, and perpetuity; and is said to
be "established in the top of the mountains", with respect to the
kingdoms of this world, and especially antichristian churches, which,
because of their eminence, and largeness, and national establishment,
may seem like mountains; but, in the latter day, the true church of
Christ, which now may seem like a mole hill to them, will be above them,
and will be in a settled state and condition, and not be fluctuating,
and tossed to and fro, and removing here and there, as now; but be fixed
and stable, and continue so until the second and personal coming of
Christ:

and it shall be exalted above the hills: by "hills" may be meant petty
kingdoms, inferior to greater monarchies; or religious states, not of
Christ's constitution; and the "exaltation" of the church above them
denotes her power over them, to enjoy the one, and crush the other: it
may respect the glory of the church, both as to things temporal and
spiritual; for now will the kingdoms under the whole heaven be given to
the saints of the most High; civil government will come into their
hands, the kings and princes of the earth being now members of Gospel
churches; so that the church will be in a glorious and exalted state,
having riches, power, and authority, a large extent everywhere, and a
multitude of members, and those of the highest class and rank, as well
as of the meaner and lower sort; and all of them possessed largely of
the gifts and graces of the Spirit of God, and enjoying the Gospel and
Gospel ordinances in their power and purity:

and the people shall flow unto it: in great abundance, in large numbers,
in company like the flowing streams of a river; and may denote not only
their numbers, but their swiftness and readiness to join themselves with
the church of God, to hear the word, and partake of the ordinances, and
of all the privileges of the house of the Lord. It may be rendered,
"they shall look unto it", as the word is translated in [Psa
34:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#006); and so the Targum here,

"and the kingdoms shall look (or turn their faces) to serve upon it;''

and this sense is preferred by many learned Jewish writers (n); and the
meaning may be, that multitudes, seeing the glory of the church, and the
many desirable things in it, shall look to it with a look of love and
affection, and with a wishful look, greatly desiring to be admitted into
it. In [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002); it is said, "and all
nations shall flow unto it": not the people of the Jews only, now
converted; or a single and, on only, or some out of that; but all the
nations of the world, at least great numbers out of all, by far the
greatest in them; such an increase will there be of the churches in the
latter day.

\(n\) R. Saadiah, Abu Walid, R. Tanchuma apud Pocock in loc.

[Micah 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 4:2</span></span>

And many nations shall come, and say, come, and let us go up to the
mountain of the Lord, and to the house of the God of Jacob,.... In [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003); it is, "many people", &c. the
sense is the same; See Gill on Isa 2:3;

and he will teach us of his ways, and we will walk in his paths; the
teacher is the King Messiah, as Kimchi observes; the great Prophet of
his people, the teacher sent from God; and will in the last days teach
men by his Spirit and word, in a very plentiful manner, and with great
success:

for the law shall go forth of Zion, and the word of the Lord from
Jerusalem; these, according to Kimchi, are the words of the prophet, and
not of the people, that encourage one another to go up to the house of
the Lord; but the sense is much the same; for they contain a reason why
the people of different nations would encourage one another to go to the
house of the Lord, that they might learn his ways, and walk in his
statutes, because here the word of the Lord is preached; the word which
comes from God, and is concerning him, his love and grace to men; the
word of peace and righteousness, of life and salvation, by Jesus Christ:
and each of the doctrines of grace intended by the "law" or "doctrine"
of the Lord; the doctrines of God's everlasting love, of election in
Christ, and redemption by him; of justification by his righteousness,
pardon by his blood, and satisfaction by his atonement; as well as of
regeneration by the Spirit of God, and of perseverance in grace: in
these, and others, now shall all the Lord's people be taught more
clearly, distinctly, and comfortably; all shall know him, from the least
to the greatest; and not only their light and knowledge, under such a
teacher and such will be very great, but their practice will be
answerable to it; as they will be instructed in all the ways of the
Lord, and in the methods of his grace, so they will walk in all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord blameless; See Gill on [Isa
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003).

[Micah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mic 4:3</span></span>

And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke strong nations afar
off,.... That are in the most distant parts of the world; not only the
isles afar off, but the remotest parts of the continent, the American
nations found out since. In [Isa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004),
it is, "and he shall judge among the nations, and shall rebuke many
people"; that is, the King Messiah, as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben
Melech. Some render it, "it shall judge", &c. and interpret it either of
the Church, the mountain of the Lord's house; or of the word and
doctrine of the Lord; or of the Lord in the church, by the ministry of
the word, The phrase, "afar off", is not in [Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004); which the Targum interprets "for
ever", and the "strong nations" of strong kings; signifying that the
kingdom of Christ should not only be to the ends or the earth, but
should endure for ever, unto distant time, even till it shall be no
more; as well as shall reach to distant lands, as to situation, and to
the Gentiles afar off, as to state and condition; see [Eph
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#014);

and they shall beat their swords into plough shares, and their spears
into pruning hooks; nation shall not lift up a sword against nation,

neither shall they learn war any more; which as yet has never been
fulfilled; but will be the case when Christ's kingdom appears in its
glory, and the kingdoms of this world become his, and all the enemies of
the church are destroyed; See Gill on [Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004). These words are by the Jews (o)
applied to the days of the Messiah.

\(o\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 63. 1.

[Micah 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 4:4</span></span>

But they shall sit every man under his vine, and under his fig tree,....
A proverbial phrase, expressive of the greatest tranquillity, security,
and enjoyment of property; see [Kg1
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#025); when persons need not keep
within their walled towns and cities, and lack themselves up in their
houses, but may sit down in their gardens, fields, and vineyards, and
enjoy the fruit thereof; as the Targum interprets it,

"under the fruit of his vine, and under, the fruit of his fig tree.''

It was usual for persons in the eastern countries to sit under vines and
fig trees to read, meditate, pray, or converse together, where they grow
very large, as were their vines; and even with us they are frequently
raised and carried over supporters, so as to be sat under; and of fig
trees, we frequently read in Jewish writings of their being very large,
and of their going up to them, and praying on the top of them; and of
sitting under them, and studying in the law there. So one of the Rabbins
says (p), he went up into his mustard tree, as one goes up to the top of
a fig tree; and it is said (q), he that prays on the top of an olive
tree, or on the top of a fig tree must come down, and pray below; and
again (r), R. Jacob and his companions were fasting, studying in the
law, under a certain fig tree; and sometimes they speak of all these
together, of sitting under olives, and under vines, and under fig trees,
and studying in the words of the law (s); see [Joh
1:48](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#048). This is to be understood, as
Aben Ezra and Kimchi explain it, of all men; not of the Israelites only,
but of all nations, since there will be no more war any where; hence it
follows:

and none shall make them afraid; the enemies of God's people will be no
more, neither Turk nor pope, eastern or western antichrist, beast or,
false prophet; wherefore, in those days of the Messiah, Judah shall be
saved, and Israel shall dwell safely, even all the spiritual Israel of
God, Jews and Gentiles; there shall be none to hurt in the holy mountain
of the Lord, or any violence and oppression, wasting and destruction,
anywhere; see [Jer 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005);

for the mouth of the Lord of hosts hath spoken it; who speaks nothing
but truth, and who is able and faithful to perform what he has spoken;
and therefore all this may be depended on.

\(p\) T. Hieros. Peah, c. 7. fol. 20. 2. (q) T. Hieros. Beracot, c. 2.
fol. 5. 1. (r) Ib. col. 3. (s) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 16. 4.

[Micah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 4:5</span></span>

For all people will walk everyone in the name of his god,.... Till those
times come before described; when many nations and people shall flock to
the church, and there shall be such general peace and tranquillity as
here promised; till then the nations of the earth shall retain their
former religion, and the profession of it, with constancy, till they are
otherwise instructed, as Aben Ezra; or till the Messiah shall turn them
into the right way, as Kimchi; till that time comes, the Pagans will
worship their idols, and continue in the idolatry of their ancestors;
the Papists will retain their image worship, and hold to their lord god
the pope, as they call him; the Mahometans will cleave to their prophet,
and walk according to the rules he has left them to observe. Jarchi's
note is,

"they shall go to destruction because of their idolatry;''

with which he says the Targum agrees, which is,

"all nations shall go according to the idols they have worshipped;''

or, as the king of Spain's Bible,

"they shall be guilty or condemned because they have worshipped idols:''

and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God for ever and ever; both
in the mean while, and when those happy times shall come, and so through
all generations as long as the world stands. This is the language of
those that know the Lord, believe in him, and sincerely serve him; who
determine in the strength of divine grace to continue in their
profession of faith of him, in his worship and service, in his ways,
truths, and ordinances, whatever others, do; and indeed are the more
animated to it, when they observe how constant and steadfast idolaters,
Pagans, Papists, and Mahometans, are in their false worship, both in the
profession and practice of it. The Targum is,

"we will trust in the Word of the Lord our God for ever and ever;''

in Christ the essential Word; and so the phrase is expressive of faith,
and a profession of faith in him; and of constant attendance upon his
word and ordinances.

[Micah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 4:6</span></span>

In that day, saith the Lord, will I assemble her that halteth,.... The
Jews or Israelites so described; not from the halting of Jacob their
father, as Abarbinel thinks; nor because of their halting between two
opinions, worshipping both the true God and idols, as in the times of
Elijah; for this will not suit with the Jews in their present state; but
because they were like lame and maimed sheep, to which the allusion is;
or because they were guilty of sins, which are sometimes expressed by
halting, [Jer 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#010). The word
signifies such that go sideways, and not uprightly; and fitly describes
such who deviate from the ways of God, and walk not according to the
divine word: now "in that day" or time before referred to, the last days
of the Gospel dispensation, the Lord will convert the Jews; or "heal"
these lame and maimed ones, so Jarchi interprets the word; or will
gather them by his Spirit and grace to the Messiah, and assemble them
into his church, and among his people, and bring them into the
sheepfold, under the care of the one Shepherd, the Lord Jesus Christ:

and I will gather her that is driven out; out of the land of Israel, and
scattered among the nations of the world; even driven out by the Lord
himself, because of their transgressions against him; see [Jer
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#015);

and her that I have afflicted; with various calamities, with famine and
sword, with captivity and poverty; the Targum adds,

"for the sins of my people;''

the Israelites for their idolatry, and the Jews for the rejection of the
Messiah, and other sins.

[Micah 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 4:7</span></span>

And I will make her that halted a remnant,.... That is, make a reserve
of her, and not utterly cut her off for her halting or sinning; that
there may be a seed, a posterity descending from her, that shall serve
the Lord, and appear to be a remnant according to the election of grace;
which will be the persons called and gathered in the latter day:

and her that was cast afar off a strong nation; Kimchi thinks this
refers to the ten tribes that were carried far off into Media and other
parts, [Kg2 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg2017.htm#006); who shall now be a
mighty and numerous people; and especially shall be strong in a
spiritual sense in the Lord, and in the power of his might, in Christ
and his grace, and in the faith of him; see [Isa
60:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#022);

and the Lord shall reign over them in Mount Zion from henceforth, even
for ever; that is, Christ, who is Jehovah our righteousness, shall reign
over the converted Jews and Israelites in the church of God, often
signified by Mount Zion; where they shall be assembled, and shall
acknowledge him as their King, and be subject to his word and
ordinances, and never more depart from him; nor will his government over
them ever cease more, [Luk 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032). This
shows that this prophecy refers not to the that times of the Gospel; for
then the Jews would not have him to reign over them; but to times yet to
come, the last days of the Gospel dispensation.

[Micah 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 4:8</span></span>

And thou, O tower of the flock,.... The words "Migdal Eder" are left by
some untranslated, and think that place to be intended so called, which
was near to Bethlehem, [Gen 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019); and
perhaps is the same which Jerom (t) calls the tower of Ader, about a
mile from Bethlehem: this is supposed to be the place where the
shepherds were watching over their flocks at the time of Christ's birth,
the tidings of which were first brought to them here; and the Jewish (u)
doctors speak of it as near Jerusalem, and as a place of pasture; for
they say, that cattle between Jerusalem and Migdal Eder, and in an equal
space to every wind; the males were used for burnt offerings, and the
females for peace offerings; and this place is thought to be referred to
in the latter clause of this verse: others think that Bethlehem itself
is meant, to which the dominion came; but rather, as in the next
chapter, the ruler came out of that; others think that the gate in
Jerusalem called the sheep gate is meant, [Neh
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#032); and the tower at it, through
which Christ is supposed to pass when he entered into Jerusalem as King,
amidst the Hosannahs of the people; others take it to be the same with
the tower of David, and put for Jerusalem itself, whither the tribes
were gathered together three times a year, like sheep in a fold, so
Kimchi and Ben Melech; here others interpret it spiritually of the
church of Christ; but though that is sometimes spoken of as a strong
city, and a fortified place, yet is never called a tower, or a strong
hold; which phrases, when figuratively used, are always spoken of a
divine person; see [Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002); and here
of the Messiah; and so the Targum interprets it,

"O Christ of Israel:''

the church indeed is the "flock": the people of God are often compared
to sheep for their harmlessness and innocence, and the church to a flock
of them, which is Christ's flock he feeds like a shepherd; the flock of
slaughter, a little one, consisting of persons separated from the world,
and under his peculiar care; and he is the tower of this flock, in
allusion to a shepherd's cottage, called a tower, as a cottage in a
vineyard is in [Isa 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002); where the
shepherds watch, and into which they bring the sick and lame, and take
care of them; Christ is a high tower, where his people are safe out of
the reach of their enemies; and a strong one, being the mighty God and
mighty Saviour, who has all power and strength to defend his church and
people, and may be well called their tower: and

the strong hold of the daughter of Zion; "the daughter of Zion" is the
church, particularly the church of the converted Jews; Christ is the
strong hold of it, into which, as prisoners of hope, they will be
directed to turn, [Zac 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#012); a strong
refuge he is to flee unto from the avenger of blood, the justice of God;
from the curses of the law; from the storm of divine wrath; from the
temptations of Satan, and from the persecutions of men; a strong hold is
he to dwell in, and where the saints dwell safely, pleasantly, at ease
and peace, and very comfortably, and in great plenty; a strong hold for
shelter from every enemy:

unto thee shall it come; not the kingdom, as follows, which our version
leads to, and is the sense of Aben Ezra; for there is a considerable
accent on the word "come", which makes a large stop; and that it refers,
as Jarchi observes, to "her that halteth", &c. "it" or "she" that
halteth shall come, being assembled and gathered, or converted by the
grace of God unto the Messiah; as to her, or their tower and strong
hold, where all blessings of grace, and the supplies of it, and all
salvation and safety, are to be had and enjoyed. The promise respects
the Jews coming to Christ upon their conversion, even such who have been
the halt, the maimed, the lame, and the blind:

even the first dominion; the kingdom shall come to the daughter of
Jerusalem; or rather, "and the first dominion shall come, the kingdom to
the daughter of Jerusalem": meaning, not the first notice of the
Messiah's kingdom, given by John the Baptist, Christ, and his apostles,
to the Jews, in the first times of the Gospel; or the preaching of the
Gospel of the kingdom first to them; but rather he who has the first or
principal dominion, and to whom the kingdom belongs, he shall come to
the daughter of Zion, as in [Zac 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009);
though it rather respects here his coming to them at the time of their
conversion, when they shall come to him, [Rom
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026); and when the first, chief, and
principal kingdom in the world, and which is preferable to all others,
will come unto, and be placed among them, as in [Mic
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#007); and when it shall be, as some
interpret it, as at the beginning, in the days of David and Solomon, and
much more abundantly.

\(t\) De locis Hebr. fol. 89. E. (u) T. Hieros. Kiddushin, fol. 63. 1.
T. Ban. Kiddushin, fol. 55. 1. Misn. Shekalim, c. 7. sect. 4.

[Micah 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 4:9</span></span>

Now why dost thou cry out aloud?.... Or "cry a cry" (w); a vehement one,
or set up a most lamentable cry, as if no help or hope were to be had,
but as in the most desperate condition: here the prophet represents the
Jews as if they were already in captivity, and in the utmost distress,
and as they certainly would be; and yet had no reason to despair of
deliverance and salvation, since the Messiah would certainly come to
them, and his kingdom would be set up among them, The word used has
sometimes the notion of friendship and association; hence the Targum
renders it,

"now why art thou joined to the people?''

and so Jarchi,

"thou hast no need to seek friends and lovers, the kings of Egypt and
Assyria, for help.''

And which sense of the word as approved by Gussetius (x).

Is there no king in thee? is thy counsellor perished? he it so that they
were; as was the case when Zedekiah was taken and carried captive, and
his princes, nobles, and counsellors killed; yet God, their King and
Counsellor, was with them, to keep and preserve them, counsel, instruct,
and comfort them, and at last to deliver and save them; and the King
Messiah would be raised up, and sent unto them in due time, who is the
Wonderful Counsellor Isaiah had prophesied of:

for pangs have taken thee as a worn an in travail; which is often
expressive of great sufferings and sorrows; and yet, as the pangs of a
woman in travail do not continue always, but have an end, so would
theirs, and therefore there was no reason for despair; and as, when she
brings forth her issue, her sorrow is turned into joy, this would be
their case.

\(w\) "quid vociferabis vociferationem", Pagninus, Montanus. So
Vatablus, Drusius. (x) Ebr. Comment. p. 789.

[Micah 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 4:10</span></span>

Be in pain, and labour to bring forth, O daughter of Zion,

like a woman in travail,.... Bear thy troubles and calamities,
sufferings and sorrows, patiently, and expect deliverance from them, as
a woman in such circumstances does: or, as some render it in the future,
"thou shalt be in pain", &c. (y); and so is a prediction of their
distress and captivity, which is expressed in plainer terms in the
following clauses:

for now shalt thou go forth out of the city; the city of Jerusalem;
either by flight, in a private and secret manner, as Zedekiah and his
princes, and part of his army did; or by force, being taken and led out
by the enemy:

and thou shalt dwell in the field; being turned out of their houses,
they were obliged to lodge in the fields, while they were collected
together, and in a body marched as captives to Babylon; and while on the
road lay in the open fields, and not in houses, who had been used to
dwell in a city, and in their panelled houses; but now even their city
itself was ploughed like a field, as before predicted:

and thou shalt go even to Babylon; to the city of Babylon, as their king
did, and many of them also; and others of them into various parts of
that kingdom: this is a clear prophecy of the Babylonish captivity,
which came to pass upwards of a hundred years after this:

there shalt thou be delivered; after seventy years captivity, by the
hand of Cyrus; who taking the city of Babylon, and making himself master
of the whole empire, delivered the Jews from their bondage, and gave
them liberty to return to their own land:

there the Lord shall redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies; the
Chaldeans: and this was typical of the deliverance and redemption of all
the Lord's people from the hand of all their spiritual enemies; from
Satan and the world, law, death, and hell; by the blood of the great
Redeemer, and near kinsman of his people, the Lord Jesus Christ.

\(y\) "dolebis ac suspirabis", so some in Vatablus.

[Micah 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 4:11</span></span>

Now also many nations are gathered against thee,.... Which is to be
understood, not of Sennacherib's army invading Judea, and besieging
Jerusalem, in Hezekiah's time; for that was not threshed, as the phrase
is afterwards used, or destroyed by the daughter of Zion, but by an
angel from heaven: nor of the Babylonians or Chaldeans, since they
succeeded in their attempt, and were the conquerors, and not conquered:
rather this respects the times of the Maccabees, as the series of
prophecy and history agreeing together shows; in which times many of the
neighbouring nations of the Jews gave them a great deal of trouble, and
especially Antiochus king of Syria; and many and mighty armies sent by
him. The Jews, as Kimchi, Aben Ezra, and Abarbinel (z), interpret this
of the armies of Gog and Magog, in the times of their vainly expected
Messiah. Some Christian interpreters, with much more probability,
understand this passage of the first times of the Gospel, and the
opposition made to that and the Christian church, which yet in the issue
prevailed; and perhaps it may have reference to the last times, and
receive its full accomplishment in the battle at Armageddon, [Rev
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014);

that say, let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion; either
defiled with sin; so the Targum,

"that say, when will she sin, and our eye shall behold the fall of
Zion?''

as the effect of her sin: or, as others, "let her play the hypocrite"
(a); and be condemned as such: or rather, be defiled with slaughter and
bloodshed, that they might be delighted with so pleasing a sight, and
their eyes might feed with pleasure on an object so agreeable to their
wishes.

\(z\) Mashmiah Jeshuah, fol. 62. 1. (a) "hypocrita fuit", Tigurine
version; velut hypocrita damnatur", Tarnovius; "hypocrisi
contaminabitur, Cocceius.

[Micah 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 4:12</span></span>

But they know not the thoughts of the Lord, neither understand they his
counsel,.... Which are very different from theirs: the thoughts and
designs of the enemies of Zion, in the times of the Maccabees, were, to
destroy utterly the people of God, and root them out of the earth, and
abolish their religion and worship; but the intentions of God were to
defeat them, and bring them to ruin: the views of the kings of the
earth, being stirred up by unclean spirits to the battle of Almighty
God, will be to extirpate the interest and kingdom of Christ; but the
end of the Lord, in suffering them to be gathered together, will be
utterly and totally to destroy them; and the counsel of the Lord, that
shall stand, and the thoughts of his heart, to all generations. Men know
their own designs, but they do not know the designs of the Lord; they
intend the ruin of others, but God intends to bring about theirs; and
his intentions are never frustrated, but theirs are;

for he shall gather them as sheaves into the floor; as, when the harvest
is ripe, it is cut down, and bound up in sheaves, and brought home, and
these are laid in order upon the floor to be threshed; so, when the
nations of the earth are fully ripe for ruin, God will put, or order to
be put; in the sickle, and cut them down, and bind them in bundles, and
lay them on his threshingfloor of wrath and vengeance, and utterly
destroy them contrary to their views and expectations.

[Micah 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 4:13</span></span>

Arise, and thresh, O daughter of Zion,.... The nations gathered against
her, and now laid together on the floor as sheaves to be threshed. Here
the people of God are aroused, and called out of a low and weak estate,
and are animated and encouraged to exert themselves, and fall upon their
enemies, and destroy them; alluding to the threshing of grain on the
floor, the metaphor being here carried on from [Mic
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic004.htm#012). The Targum is,

"arise, and kill, O congregation of Zion;''

for I will make thine horn iron, and I will make thy hoofs brass;
signifying that the Lord would give them strength sufficient to such
work, and such power their enemies should not be able to resist and
overcome; and that they should into their hands, and be crushed, trod,
and trampled on by them, and utterly subdued. The allusion is to oxen
that have horns and hoofs; and it suggests that they should be as strong
as they; have horns like them, that is, power to push down their enemies
and hoofs to trample upon them: or as these creatures have a horny
substance on their feet, or hoofs, which are strong, and fit for the
purposes of treading out corn, for which they were used in the eastern
countries, drawing after them iron wheels, or planks stuck with flints;
so horses and oxen that have strong feet, and hard hoofs, are said to
have feet of brass (b); thus the Lord's people should have such courage,
force, and power, as not only to withstand their enemies, but to obtain
a conquest over them The Targum is,

"I will make the people in them strong as iron, and their remnant firm
as brass;''

which was true of, and accomplished in, Judas Maccabeus and his
brethren; and will be more clearly fulfilled in the Christian kings and
princes in the latter day, when engaged with the antichristian states;

and thou shalt beat in pieces many people; as the Maccabees did subdue
many people and nations, as all Palestine, Moab, Idumea, Samaria, and
Iturea, as Josephus (c) relates; and as the Christian princes will beat
in pieces, and utterly destroy, all the antichristian kings of the
earth, their states and kingdoms, and bring them into subjection to
them:

and I will consecrate their gain unto the Lord, and their substance unto
the Lord of the whole earth; that is, to Christ, who in the last day
will appear to be King and Lord of the whole earth; and all the riches
of the antichristian nations, Pagan, Papal, and Mahometan, will be
devolved to, and employed in, his interest and service; see [Rev
21:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#024); these are the words of God the
Father, with respect to his Son Jesus Christ; who will now have a
dominion, glory, and kingdom given him, by the ancient of days, that so
all people, nations, and languages, shall serve him, [Dan
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#014); of which there might be some
type and shadow in the times of the Maccabees.

\(b\) "aeripedes equos", Homer. Iliad. 8. v. 41. (c) Antiqu. l. 13. c.
15. sect. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 5](mic005)

</div>
