<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Micah Index](mic.md)  
  [Previous](mic000)  [Next](mic002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Micah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001.md)

INTRODUCTION TO MICAH 1

This chapter treats of the judgments of God on Israel and Judah for
their idolatry. It begins with the title of the whole book in which is
given an account of the prophet, the time of his prophesying, and of the
persons against whom he prophesied, [Mic
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001.md); next a preface to this chapter,
requiring attention to what was about to be delivered, urged from the
consideration of the awful appearance of God, which is represented as
very grand and terrible, [Mic 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002.md); the
cause of all which wrath that appeared in him was the transgression of
Jacob; particularly their idolatry, as appears by the special mention of
their idols and graven images in the account of their destruction, [Mic
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005.md); which destruction is exaggerated
by the prophet's lamentation for it, [Mic
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008.md); and by the mourning of the
inhabitants of the several places that should be involved in it, which
are particularly mentioned, [Mic 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010.md).

[Micah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">mic 1:1</span></span>

The word of the Lord that came to Micah the Morasthite,.... So called,
either from Mareshah, mentioned [Mic
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#015.md); and was a city in the tribe of
Judah, [Jos 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044.md); as the Targum,
Jarchi, Kimchi, and Zacutus (i); or rather from Moresheth, from which
Moreshethgath, [Mic 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014.md); is
distinguished; which Jerom (k) says was in his time a small village in
the land of Palestine, near Eleutheropolis. Some think these two cities
to be one and the same; but they appear to be different from the account
of Jerom (l) elsewhere. The Arabic version reads it, Micah the son of
Morathi; so Cyril, in his commentary on this place, mentions it as the
sense of some, that Morathi was the father of the prophet; which can by
no means be assented to:

in the days of Jotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah, kings of Judah; by which it
appears that he was contemporary with Isaiah, Hoses, and Amos, though
they began to prophesy somewhat sooner than he, even in the days of
Uzziah; very probably he conversed with these prophets, especially
Isaiah, with whom he agrees in many things; his style is like his, and
sometimes uses the same phrases: he, being of the tribe of Judah, only
mentions the kings of that nation most known to him; though he
prophesied against Israel, and in the days of Zachariah, Shallum,
Menahem, Pekahiah, Pekah, and Hoshea:

which he saw concerning Samaria and Jerusalem; in the vision of
prophecy; Samaria was the metropolis of the ten tribes of Israel, and is
put for them all; as Jerusalem was of the tribes of Judah and Benjamin,
and is put for them Samaria is mentioned first, because it was the head
of the greatest body of people; and as it was the first in
transgression, it was the first in punishment.

\(i\) Juchashin, fol. 12. 1. (k) Prolog. in Mic. (l) Epitaph. Paulae, ut
supra. (tom. 1. operum, fol. 60. A. B.)

[Micah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">mic 1:2</span></span>

Hear, all ye people,.... Or, "the people, all of them" (m); not all the
nations of the world, but the nations of Israel, so called from their
several tribes; though some (n) think the rest of the inhabitants of the
earth are meant: thee are the same words which are used by Micaiah the
prophet in the times of Ahab, long before this time, from whom they
might be borrowed, [Kg1 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#028.md). The
phrase in the Hebrew language, as Aben Ezra observes, is very wonderful,
and serves to strike the minds and excite the attention of men; it is
like the words of a crier, in a court of judicature, calling for
silence:

hearken, O earth, and all that therein is; or, "its fulness" (o); the
land of Israel and Judah, the whole land of promise, and all the
inhabitants of it; for to them are the following words directed:

and let the Lord God be witness against you; or, "in you" (p); the Word
of the Lord, as the Targum; let him who is the omniscient God, and knows
all hearts, thoughts, words, and actions, let him bear witness in your
consciences, that what I am about to say is truth, and comes from him;
is not my own word, but his; and if you disregard it, and repent not,
let him be a witness against you, and for me, that I have prophesied in
his name; that I have faithfully delivered his message, and warned you
of your danger, and reproved you for your sins, and have kept back
nothing I have been charged and entrusted with: and now, you are
summoned into open court, and at the tribunal of the great God of heaven
and earth; let him be a witness against you of the many sins you have
been guilty of, and attend while the indictment is read, the charge
exhibited, and the proof given by

the Lord from his holy temple, from heaven, the habitation of his
holiness; whose voice speaking from thence should be hearkened to; who
from thence beholds all the actions of men, and from whence his wrath is
revealed against their sins, and he gives visible tokens of his
displeasure; and especially when he seems to come forth from thence in
some remarkable instances of his power and providence, as follows:

\(m\) "populi omnes ipsi", Montanus, Drusius, Piscator, Tarnovius. (n)
So Burkius. (o) "et plenitude ejus", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus,
Drusius, Cocceius, Burkius. (p) "in vobis", Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius, Cocceius.

[Micah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">mic 1:3</span></span>

For, behold, the Lord cometh out of his place,.... Out of heaven, the
place of the house of his Shechinah or Majesty, as the Targum; where his
throne is prepared; where he keeps his court, and displays his glory;
from whence he removes, not by local motion, since he is everywhere; but
by some manifest exertion of his power, either on the behalf of his
people, or in taking vengeance on his and their enemies; or on them
sinning against him, in which sense it is probably to be understood. It
signifies not change of place, but of his dispensations; going out of
his former customary method into another; removing, as Jarchi has it,
from the throne of mercies to the throne of judgment; doing not acts of
mercy, in which he delights, but exercising judgment, his strange work.
So the Cabalistic writers (q) observe on the passage, that

"it cannot be understood of place properly taken, according to [Isa
40:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#012.md); for God is the place of the
world, not the world his place; hence our wise men so expound the text,
he cometh forth out of the measure of mercy, and goes into the measure
of justice;''

or property of it. Some understand this of his leaving the temple at
Jerusalem, and giving it up into the hands of the Chaldeans; but the
former sense is best:

and will come down, and tread upon the high places of the earth; which
are his footstool; Samaria and Jerusalem, built on mountains, and all
other high towers and fortified places, together with men of high looks
and haughty countenances, who exalt themselves like mountains, and swell
with pride: these the Lord can easily subdue and humble, bring low and
tread down like the mire of the street; perhaps there may be an allusion
to the high places where idols were worshipped; and which were the cause
of the Lord's wrath and vengeance, and of his coming forth, in this
unusual way, in his providences.

\(q\) Kabala Denudata, par. 1. p. 408.

[Micah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">mic 1:4</span></span>

And the mountains shall be molten under him,.... As Sinai was when he
descended on it, and as all nations will be at the general
conflagration; but here the words are to be taken, not literally, but
figuratively, for the kingdoms of Israel and Judah, and for the kings,
and princes, and great men in them, that lifted up their heads as high,
and thought themselves as secure, as mountains; yet when the judgments
of God should fall upon them, their hearts would melt through fear under
him; as well as all their glory and greatness depart from them, and they
be no more what they were before, but levelled with the meanest subject:

and the valleys shall be cleft: have chasms made in them by the melting
of the mountains, or by the flow of water from the hills: these may
design the lower sort of people, who shall have their share in this
calamity; the inhabitants of the valleys and country villages; who,
though mean and low, shall be lower still, and lose that little
substance, that liberty and those privileges, they had; as valleys may
be cleft, and open, and sink into the lower parts of the earth; so it is
signified that these people should be in a more depressed state and
condition:

as wax before the fire; melts, and cannot stand the force of it; so the
mountains should melt at the presence of the Lord; and kingdoms and
states, and the greatest and mightiest of men in them, would not be able
to stand before the fierceness of his wrath; see [Psa
68:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#002.md);

and as the waters that are poured down a steep place; that run with
great swiftness, force, and rapidity, and there is no stopping them; so
should the judgments of God come down upon the lower sort of people, the
inhabitants of the valleys; neither high nor low would escape the
indignation of the Lord, or be able to stand against it, or stand up
under it.

[Micah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">mic 1:5</span></span>

For the transgression of Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the
house of Israel,.... All this evil, all these calamities and judgments,
signified by the above metaphorical phrases, these did not come by
chance, nor without, reason; but were or would be inflicted, according
to the righteous judgment of God, upon the people of Israel and Judah,
for their manifold sins and transgressions, especially their idolatry:
and should it be asked,

what is the transgression of Jacob? what notorious crime has he been
guilty of? or what is the iniquity the two tribes are charged with, that
is the cause of so much severity? the answer is,

is it not Samaria? the wickedness of Samaria, the calf of Samaria? as in
[Hos 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/hos007.htm#001.md); that is, the worship of the
calf of Samaria; is not that idolatry the transgression of Jacob, or
which the ten tribes have given into? it is; and a just reason for all
this wrath to come upon them: or, "who is the transgression of Jacob?"
(r) who is the spring and source of it; the cause, author, and
encourager of it? are they not the kings that have reigned in Samaria
from the times of Omri, with their nobles, princes, and great men, who,
by their edicts, influence, and example, have encouraged the worship of
the golden calves? they are the original root and motive of it, and to
them it must be ascribed; they caused the people to sin: or, as the
Targum,

"where have they of the house of Jacob sinned? is it not in Samaria?''

verily it is, and from thence, the metropolis of the nation, the sin has
spread itself all over it:

and what are the high places of Judah? or, "who are they?" (s) who have
been the makers of them? who have set them up, and encouraged idolatrous
worship at them?

are they not Jerusalem? are they not the king, the princes, and priests,
that dwell at Jerusalem? certainly they are; such as Ahaz, and others,
in whose times this prophet lived; see [Kg2
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#004.md); or, as the Targum,

"where did they of the house of Judah commit sin? was it not in
Jerusalem?''

truly it was, and even in the temple; here Ahaz built an altar like that
at Damascus, and sacrificed on it, and spoiled the temple, and several
of the vessels in it, [Kg2 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/kg2016.htm#010.md).

\(r\) "quis est praevaricatio Jacobi?" De Dieu; so Pagninus, Burkius;
"quis defectio Jacobi?" Cocceius; "quis scelus Jacobi?" Drusius. (s)
"quis est excelsa Judae?" Montanus, Drusius, De Dieu; "quis cesla
Judae?" Cocceius; "quis fuit causa excelsorum Jehudae?" Burkius; so
Kimchi.

[Micah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">mic 1:6</span></span>

Therefore I will make Samaria as an heap of the field, and as plantings
of a vineyard,.... As a field ploughed, and laid in heaps; see [Mic
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic003.htm#012.md); or as stones gathered out of a
field, and out of a vineyard planted, and laid in a heap; so should this
city become a heap of stones and rubbish, being utterly demolished; and
this being done according to the will of God, and through his
instigation of Shalmaneser king of Assyria to it, and by his providence
succeeding his army that besieged it, is said to be done by him. With
this agrees the Vulgate Latin version,

"I will make Samaria as a heap of stones in a field, when a vineyard is
planted;''

see [Isa 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#002.md); for the city, being
destroyed, cannot be compared to the plants of a vineyard set in good
order, beautiful and thriving; but, as to heaps of stones in a field, so
to such in a vineyard; or to hillocks raised up there for the plants of
vines; and if the comparison is to plants themselves, it must be to
withered ones, that are good for nothing. The note of similitude as is
not in the text; and the words may be read without it, "I will make
Samaria an heap of the field, plantings of a vineyard" (t); that is, it
shall be ploughed up, and made a heap of; turned into a field, and vines
planted on it; for which its situation was very proper, being on a hill
where vines used to be planted, and so should no more be inhabited as a
city:

and I will pour down the stones thereof into the valley; the stones of
the buildings and walls of the city, which, being on a hill, when pulled
down, rolled into the valley; and with as much swiftness and force as
waters run down a steep place, as in [Mic
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#004.md); where the same word is used as
here:

and I will discover the foundations thereof; which should be fused up,
and left bare; not one stone should be upon another; so that there
should be no traces and footsteps of the city remaining, and it should
be difficult to know the place where it stood. This is expressive of the
total desolation and utter destruction of it: this was not accomplished
by Shalmaneser when he took it; for though he carried captive the
inhabitants thereof, he put others in their room; but this was entirely
fulfilled, not by Jonathan Maccabeus, though he is said (u) to besiege
it, and level it with the ground; but by John Hyrcanus; and the account
of the destruction of it by him, as given by Josephus (w), exactly
answers to this prophecy, and, to [Hos
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos013.htm#016.md); where its desolation is also
predicted; he says that Hyrcanus, having besieged it a year, took it;
and, not content with this only, he utterly destroyed it, making brooks
to run through it; and by digging it up, so that it fell into holes and
caverns, insomuch that there were no signs nor traces of the city left.
It was indeed afterwards rebuilt by Gabinius the Roman proconsul of
Syria, and restored by Augustus Caesar to Herod, who adorned and
fortified it, and called it by the name of Sebaste, in honour of
Augustus (x); though Benjamin of Tudela pretends that Ahab's palace
might be discerned there in his time, or the place known where it was,
which is not likely; excepting this, his account is probable.

"From Luz (he says (y)) is one day's journey to Sebaste, which is
Samaria; and still there may be perceived there the palace of Ahab king
of Israel; and it is a fortified city on a very high hill, and in it are
fountains; and is a land of brooks of water, and gardens, orchards,
vineyards, and olive yards;''

but, since his time, it is become more ruinous. Mr. Maundrell, who some
years ago was upon the spot, gives a fuller account of it;

"this great city (he says (z)) is now wholly converted into gardens; and
all the tokens that remain, to testify that there has ever been such a
place, are only on the north side, a large square piazza, encompassed
with pillars; and, on the east, some poor remains of a great church,
said to be built by the Empress Helena, over the place where St. John
Baptist was both imprisoned and beheaded.''

So say others (a),

"the remains of Sebaste, or the ancient Samaria, though long ago laid in
ruinous heaps, and a great part of it turned into ploughed land and
garden ground, do still retain some monuments of its ancient grandeur,
and of those noble edifices in it, with which King Herod caused it to be
adorned;''

and then mention the large square piazza on the north, and the church on
the east. It was twelve miles from Dothaim, and as many from Merran, and
four from Atharoth, according to Eusebius (b); and was, as Josephus (c)
says, a day's journey from Jerusalem. Sichem, called by the Turks
Naplus, is now the metropolis of the country of Samaria; Samaria, or
Sebaste, being utterly destroyed, as says Petrus a Valle (d), a
traveller in those parts.

\(t\) "in acervum agri, in plantationem, vel plantationes vinae",
Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Cocceius; as Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, Burkius. (u) Paschale Chronicon, p. 181. apud Reland.
Palestina Illustrata, tom. 2. l. 3. p. 980. (w) Antiqu. l. 13. c. 10.
sect. 3. (x) Ibid. l. 14. c. 5. sect. 3. &. l. 15. c. 7. sect. 3. & c.
8. sect. 5. (y) Itinerarium, p. 38. (z) Journey from Aleppo, &c. p. 59.
Ed. 7. (a) Universal History, vol. 2. p. 439. (b) In voc. Dothaim, &c.
(c) Antiqu. l. 15. c. 8. sect. 5. (d) Epist. 14. Morino apud Antiqu.
Eccles. Oriental. p. 166.

[Micah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">mic 1:7</span></span>

And all the graven images thereof shall be beaten to pieces,.... By the
Assyrian army, for the sake of the gold and silver of which they were,
made, or with which they were adorned, as was usually done by conquerors
to the gods of the nations they conquered; these were the calf of
Samaria, and other idols; and not only those in the city of Samaria, but
in all the other cities of Israel which fell into the hands of the
Assyrian monarch; see [Isa 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#011.md);

and all the hires thereof shall be burnt with fire; this the Targum also
interprets of idols; such as escaped the plunder of the soldiers should
be burnt with fire: Kimchi, by "hires", understands the beautiful
garments, and other ornaments, with which they adorned their idols,
which were gifts unto them; and they committing spiritual adultery with
them, these are compared to the hire of a harlot: or it may design their
fine houses, and the furniture of them, all their substance and riches,
which they looked upon as obtained by entering into alliances with
idolatrous nations, and as the hire and reward of their idolatry; all
these should be consumed by fire when the city was taken:

and all the idols thereof will I lay desolate; such as were not broke to
pieces, nor burnt, should be thrown down, and trampled upon, and made no
account of, or carried away with other spoil. The Targum interprets it
of the houses or temples of their idols, which should be demolished. By
this and the preceding clause it appears, that, besides the golden calf,
there were other idols worshipped in Samaria. In the times of Ahab was
the image of Baal, with others, for which he built an altar and a temple
in Samaria, and a grove, [Kg1 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#031.md);
and at the time it was taken by Shalmaneser there were idols in it, as
appears from [Isa 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#010.md); and there
were still more after a colony of the Babylonians and others were
introduced into it; the names of which were Succothbenoth, Nergal,
Ashima, Nibhaz, Tartak, Adrammelech, and Anammelech. The first of these
is thought, by Selden (e) to be Venus; and the two last, both by him and
Braunius (f), to be the same with Mo, having the signification of a king
in them, as that word signifies, and children being burnt unto them:
they are all difficult to be understood. The account the Jews (g) give
of them is, that "Succothbenoth" were images of a hen and chickens;
"Nergal", a cock; "Ashima", a goat without hair; "Nibhaz", or "Nibchan",
as sometimes read, a dog; and "Tartak", an ass; "Adrammelech", a mule,
or a peacock; and "Anammelech", a horse, or a pheasant. And it was not
unusual for some of these creatures to be worshipped by the Heathens, as
a cock by the Syrians, and others; a goat by the Mendesians; and the dog
Anubis, perhaps the same with Nibhaz, by the Egyptians (h). And though
the inhabitants of Samaria might be better instructed, after Manasseh
and other Jews came to reside among them in later times, still they
retained idolatrous practices; and, even in the times of our Lord, they
were ignorant of the true object of religious worship, [Joh
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#022.md); and they are charged by the
Jewish writers (i) with worshipping the image of a dove on Mount
Gerizim, and also such strange gods, the teraphim, which Jacob hid under
the oak at Sichem; however, let their idols be what they will they
worshipped, they are now utterly destroyed, according to this prophecy;

for she gathered it of the hire of an harlot, and they shall return to
the hire of an harlot; as all the riches of Samaria and its inhabitants
were gathered together as the reward of their idolatry, as they
imagined, so they should return to idolaters, the Assyrians; to Nineveh,
called the well favoured harlot, [Nah
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#004.md); the metropolis of the Assyrian
empire; and to the house or temple of those that worshipped idols, as
the Targum; with which they should adorn their idols, or use them in
idolatrous worship: or the sense in general is, that as their riches
were ill gotten, as the hire of a harlot, and which never prospers, so
theirs should come to nothing; as it came, so it should go: according to
our proverb, "lightly come, lightly go". The allusion seems to be to
harlots prostituting themselves in the temples of idols, which was
common among the Heathens, as at Comana and Corinth, as Strabo (k)
relates; and particularly among the Babylonians and Assyrians, which may
be here referred to: for Herodotus (l) says, it was a law with the
Babylonians that every woman of that country should once in her life sit
in the temple of Venus, and lie with a strange man: here women used to
sit with a crown upon their heads: nor might they return home until some
stranger threw money into their laps, and took them out of the temple,
and lay with them; and he that cast it must say, I implore the goddess
Mylitta for thee; the name by which the Assyrians call Venus; nor was it
lawful to reject the price or the money, be it what it would, for it was
converted to holy uses, and Strabo (m) affirms much the same. So the
Phoenician women used to prostitute themselves in the temples of their
idols, and dedicate there the hire of their bodies to their gods,
thinking thereby to appease their deities, and obtain good things for
themselves (n).

\(e\) De Dis Syris Syntagm. 2. c. 7. p. 309. (f) Selecta Sacra, l. 4. c.
8. sect. 117. p. 465. (g) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 63. 2. Vid. etiam T.
Hieros. Avoda Zara, fol. 42. 3, 4. (h) Vid. Godwin's Moses and Aaron, l.
4. c. 7. (i) Maimon. in Misn. Beracot, c. 8. sect. 11. & Bartenora in
ib. c. 7. sect. 1. & in Nidda, c. 4. sect. 1. Shalshelet Hakabala, fol.
15. 2. (k) Geograph. l. 12. p. 385. (l) Clio, sive l. 1. c. 199. (m)
Ibid. l. 16. p. 513. (n) Athanasius contra Gentes, p. 21.

[Micah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">mic 1:8</span></span>

Therefore I will wail and howl, I will go stripped and naked,.... To his
shut, putting off his upper garment; the rough one, such as the prophets
used to wear; which he did as the greater sign of his mourning:
sometimes, in such cases, they rent their garments; at other times they
stripped themselves of them, and walked naked, as Isaiah did, [Isa
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa020.htm#003.md); he went about like a madman, one
disturbed in his mind, bereft of his senses, because of the desolation
coming upon Israel; and without his clothes, as such persons often do:
so the word rendered "stripped" signifies, as the Jewish commentators
observe. This lamentation, and with these circumstances, the prophet
made in his own person, to show the reality and certainty of their ruin,
and to represent to them the desolate condition they would be in,
destitute of all good things, and to them with it; as well as to express
the sympathy of his heart, and thereby to assure them that it was not
out of ill will to them, or a spirit of revenge, that he delivered such
a message: or this he did in the person of all the people, showing what
they would do, and that this would be their case shortly. So the Targum,

"for this they shall wail and howl, and go naked among the spoilers;''

I will make a wailing like the dragons; as in their fight with
elephants, at which time they make a hideous noise (n); and whose
hissings have been very terrible to large bodies of men. Aelianus (o)
speaks of a dragon in India, which, when it perceived Alexander's army
near at hand, gave such a prodigious hiss and blast, that it greatly
frightened and disturbed the whole army: and he relates (p) of another,
that was in a valley near Mount Pellenaeus, in the isle of Chios, whose
hissing was very terrible to the inhabitants of that place; and Bochart
(q) conjectures that this their hissing is here referred to; and who
observes of the whale, that it has its name from a word in the Hebrew
tongue, which signifies to lament; and which word is here used, and is
frequently used of large fishes, as whales, sea calves, dolphins, &c.
which make a great noise and bellowing, as the sea calf; particularly
the balaena, which is one kind of a whale, and makes such a large and
continued noise, as to be heard at the distance of two miles, as
Rondeletius (r) says; and dolphins are said to make a moan and groaning
like human creatures, as Pliny (s) and Solinus (t) report: and Peter
Gillius relates, from his own experience, that lodging one night in a
vessel, in which many dolphins were taken, there were such weeping and
mourning, that he could not sleep for them; he thought they deplored
their condition with mourning, lamentation, and a large flow of tears,
as men do, and therefore could not help pitying their case; and, while
the fisherman was asleep, took that which was next him, that seemed to
mourn most, and cast it into the sea; but this was of no avail, for the
rest increased their mourning more and more, and seemed plainly to
desire the like deliverance; so that all the night he was in the midst
of the most bitter moaning: wherefore Bochart, who quotes these
instances, elsewhere (u) thinks that the prophet compares his mourning
with the mourning of these creatures, rather than with the hissing of
dragons. Some (w) think crocodiles are here meant; and of them it is
reported (x), that when they have eaten the body of a creature, which
they do first, and come to the head, they weep over it with tears; hence
the proverb of crocodiles tears, for hypocritical ones; but it cannot
well be thought, surely, that the prophet would compare his mourning to
that of such a creature. The learned Pocock thinks it more reasonable
that the "jackals" are meant, called by the Arabians "ebn awi", rather
than dragons; a creature of a size between a fox and a wolf, or a dog
and a fox, which makes a dreadful howling in the night; by which
travellers, unacquainted with it, would think a company of women or
children were howling, and goes before the lion as his provider;

and mourning as the owls; or "daughters of the owl" (y); which is a
night bird, and makes a very frightful noise, especially the screech
owl. The Targum interprets it of the ostrich (z); and it may be meant
either of the mourning it makes when its young are about to be taken
away, and it exposes itself to danger on their account, and perishes in
the attempt. Aelianus (a) reports that they are taken by sharp iron
spikes fixed about their nest, when they are returning to their young,
after having been in quest of food for them; and, though they see the
shining iron, yet such is their vehement desire after their young, that
they spread their wings like sails, and with great swiftness and noise
rush into the nest, where they are transfixed with the spikes, and die:
and not only Vatablus observes, that these creatures have a very
mournful voice; but Bochart (b) has shown, from the Arabic writers, that
they frequently cry and howl; and from John de Laet, who affirms that
those in the parts about Brazil cry so loud as to be heard half a mile;
and indeed they have their name from crying and howling. The Targum
renders it by a word which signifies pleasant; and so Onkelos on [Lev
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#016.md), by an antiphrasis, because its
voice is so very unpleasant. Or, since the words may be rendered, "the
daughters of the ostrich" (c), it may be understood of the mourning of
its young, when left by her, when they make a hideous noise and
miserable moan, as some observe (d).

\(n\) Aelian. de Animal. l. 6. c. 22. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 11. (o)
Ib. l. 15. c. 21. (p) Ib. l. 16. c. 39. (q) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 3. c.
14. col. 437. (r) Apud Bochart. ib. par. 1. l. 1. c. 7. col. 47. (s)
Nat. Hist. l. 9. c. 9. (t) Polyhistor. c. 22. (u) Ut supra, (Hierozoic.
par. 2. l. 3. c. 14.) col. 48. (w) Ludolphus apud Burkium in loc. (x)
Vid. Frantzii Hist. Animal. Sacr. par. 1. c. 26. sect. 2. (y) "ut filiae
ululae", Piscator, Burkius; "instar filiarum. ululae", Cocceius. So
Montanus. (z) So the Vulgate Latin, Munster, Pagninus, Drusius,
Bochartus, and others. (a) De Animal. l. 14. c. 7. (b) Hierozoic. par.
2. l. 2. c. 14. col. c. 228. (c) "Filiarum struthionis", Pagninus;
"juvenes struthiones", Tigurine version. (d) Vid. Frantz. Hist. Animal.
Sacr. par. 2. c. 2. p. 339, 342.

[Micah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">mic 1:9</span></span>

For her wound is incurable,.... Or her "stroke is desperate" (e). The
ruin of Samaria, and the ten tribes, was inevitable; the decree being
gone forth, and they hardened in their sins, and continuing in their
impenitence; and their destruction was irrevocable; they were not to be
restored again, nor are they to this day; nor will be till the time
comes that all Israel shall be saved: or "she is grievously sick of her
wounds"; just ready to die, upon the brink of ruin, and no hope of
saving her; this is the cause and reason of the above lamentation of the
prophet: and what increased his grief and sorrow the more was,

for it is come unto Judah; the calamity has reached the land of Judah;
it stopped not with Israel or the ten tribes, but spread itself into the
two tribes of Judah and Benjamin; for the Assyrian army, having taken
Samaria, and carried Israel captive, in a short time, about seven or
eight years, invaded Judea, and took the fenced cities of Judah in
Hezekiah's time, in which Micah prophesied;

he is come unto the gate of my people, even to Jerusalem; Sennacherib,
king of Assyria, having taken the fenced cities, came up to the very
gates of Jerusalem, and besieged it, where the courts of judicature were
kept, and the people resorted to, to have justice done them; and Micah,
being of the tribe of Judah, calls them his people, and was the more
affected with their distress.

\(e\) "desperata est plaga ejus", V. L. "plagae ejus", Montanus,
Drusius.

[Micah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">mic 1:10</span></span>

Declare ye it not at Gath,.... A city of the Philistines, put for all
the rest: the phrase is borrowed from [Sa2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#020.md); where the reason is given, and
holds good here as there; and the sense is, not that the destruction of
Israel, or the invasion of Judea, or the besieging of Jerusalem, could
be hid from the Philistines; but that it was a thing desirable, was it
possible, since it would be matter of rejoicing to them, and that would
be an aggravation of the distress of Israel and Judah:

weep ye not at all; that is, before the Philistines, or such like
enemies, lest they should laugh and scoff at you; though they had reason
to weep, and did and ought to weep in secret; yet, as much as in them
lay, it would be right to forbear it openly, because of the insults and
reproach of the enemy. The learned Reland (f) suspects that it should be
read, "weep not in Acco": which was another city in Palestine, to the
north from the enemy, as Gath was to the south; and observes, that there
is a like play on words (g) in the words, as in the places after
mentioned. Acco is the same with Ptolemais, [Act
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#007.md); See Gill on [Act
21:7](../../../bib/kjv/act021.htm#007.md). It had this name from Ptolemy
Lagus king of Egypt, who enlarged it, and called it after his own name;
but Mr, Maundrell (h) observes,

"now, since it hath been in the possession of the Turks, it has,
according to the example of many other cities in Turkey, cast off its
Greek, and recovered some semblance of its old Hebrew name again, being
called Acca, or Acra. As to its situation (he says) it enjoys all
possible advantages, both of sea and land; on its north and east sides
it is compassed with a spacious and fertile plain; on the west it is
washed by the Mediterranean sea; and on the south by a large bay,
extending from the city as far as Mount Carmel;''

in the house of Aphrah roll thyself in the dust; as mourners used to do,
sit in the dust, or cover their heads with it, or wallow in it; this is
allowed to be done privately, in houses or in towns distinct from the
Philistines, as Aphrah or Ophrah was, which was in the tribe of
Benjamin, [Jos 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#023.md); called here
"Aphrah", to make it better agree with "Aphar", dust, to which the
allusion is: and it may be rendered, "in the house of dust roll thyself
in the dust"; having respect to the condition houses would be in at this
time, mere heaps of dust and rubbish, so that they would find enough
easily to roll themselves in. Here is a double reading; the "Keri", or
marginal reading, which the Masora directs to, and we follow, is, "roll
thyself": but the "Cetib", or writing, is, "I have rolled myself" (i);
and so are the words of the prophet, who before says he wailed and
howled, and went stripped and naked; here he says, as a further token of
his sorrow, that he rolled himself in dust, and as an example for Israel
to do the like. This place was a village in the times of Jerom (k) and
was called Effrem; it was five miles from Bethel to the east.

\(f\) Palestina Illustrata, tom. 2. p. 534, 535. (g) . (h) Journey from
Aleppo, &c. p. 54. (i) "volutavi me", De Dieu. (k) De locis Hebr. fol.
88. H.

[Micah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">mic 1:11</span></span>

Pass ye away, thou inhabitant of Saphir,.... A village, according to
Eusebius (l), between Eleutheropolis and Ashkelon; perhaps the same with
Sephoron; it is mentioned among the cities of Judah, in the Greek
version of [Jos 15:48](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#048). Calmet (m.md)
conjectures the prophet intends the city of Sephoris or Sephora in
Galilee. Hillerus (n): takes it to be the same with Parah, mentioned
with Ophrah, in [Jos 18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#023.md); so called
from its ornament, neatness, beauty, and elegance, as both words
signify, to which the prophet alludes: now everyone of the inhabitants
of this place are called upon to prepare to go into captivity to
Babylon; which would certainly be their case, though they dwelled in
fine buildings, neat houses, and streets well paved. In the margin it
is, "thou that dwellest fairly" (o); which some understand of Samaria;
others of Judea; and particularly Jerusalem, beautifully situated, yet
should go into captivity:

having thy shame naked; their city dismantled, their houses plundered,
and they stripped of their garments, and the shame of their nakedness
discovered; which must be the more distressing to beautiful persons,
that have dressed neatly, and lived in handsome well built houses, and
elegantly furnished, and now all the reverse;

the inhabitant of Zaanan came not forth in the mourning of Bethezel; or
house of Azel, where the posterity of Azel, of the tribe of Benjamin,
dwelt. Hillerus (p) suspects it to be the same with Mozah, [Jos
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#026.md); so called from Moza, the great
grandfather of Azel, [Ch1 8:37](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#037.md).
Capellus takes it to be the same with Azal in [Zac
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#005.md). This place being taken and
plundered by the enemy occasioned great mourning among the inhabitants:
and it seems to have been taken first, before Zaanan; perhaps the same
with Zenan, [Jos 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#037.md); and is here
read "Sennan" by Aquila; the inhabitants of which did not "come forth",
in which there is an allusion to its name (q), either to help them in
their distress, or to condole them; they being in fear of the enemy
themselves, and in arms in their own defence, expecting it would be
their turn next, and that they should share the same fate with them.
Some think that under the name of Bethezel is meant Bethel; and of
Zaanan, Zion; and that the sense is, that when Bethel, Samaria, and the
ten tribes, were in distress, they of Zion and Judea did not come to
give them any relief; and when they were carried captive did not mourn
with them, were not affected with their case, nor troubled themselves
about them;

he shall receive of him his standing: either the enemy, as R. Joseph
Kimchi, shall receive of the inhabitants of Zaanan his standing; that
is, he shall make them dearly pay for stopping him, for making him stand
and stay so long before their city before he could take it; for all his
loss of time, men, and money, in besieging it; by demolishing their
city, plundering their houses, and carrying them captive; who remained
he put to death by the sword. Aben Ezra interprets the word "receive" of
doctrine or learning, as in [Pro 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#002.md);
and renders it, "he shall learn"; either Bethezel, or rather Zaanan,
shall learn, by the case of Bethezel, and other neighbouring places,
what would be his own case, whether he should stand or fall.

\(l\) Ad vocem (m) Dictionary, in the word "Saphir". (n) Onomast. Sacr.
p. 925. (o) "habitans pulchre", Montanus; "habiatrix elegantis loci",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (p) Ibid. p. 516, 951. (q) from Vid. V.
L. vers.

[Micah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">mic 1:12</span></span>

For the inhabitant of Maroth waited carefully for good,.... Or, "though
they waited for good" (r); expected to have it, yet the reverse befell
them: or "verily they were grieved for good" (s); for the good things
they had lost, or were likely to lose; and which they had no more hope
of, when they saw Jerusalem in distress. Grotius thinks, by
transposition of letters, Ramoth is intended by Maroth, or the many
Ramahs which were in Judah and Benjamin; but Hillerus (t) is of opinion
that Jarmuth is meant, a city of Judah, [Jos
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035.md); the word Maroth signifies
"bitterness"; see [Rut 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#020.md); and,
according to others, "rough places"; and may design the inhabitants of
such places that were in great bitterness and trouble because of the
invasion of the enemy, who before that had promised themselves good
things, and lived in the expectation of them:

but evil came down from the Lord unto the gate of Jerusalem; meaning the
Assyrian army under Sennacherib, which came into the land of Judea by
the order, direction, and providence of God, like an overflowing flood;
which spread itself over the land, and reached to the very gates of
Jerusalem, which was besieged by it, and threatened with destruction: or
"because evil came down", &c. that is, "because" of that, the
inhabitants of Maroth grieved, or were in pain, as a woman in travail.

\(r\) "quamvis". (s) "certe doluit propter bonum", Vatablus; "siquidem
doluit", Pagninus, Montanus; "quia doluit propter bonum", Burkius. (t)
Onomast. p. 87, 951.

[Micah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">mic 1:13</span></span>

O thou inhabitant of Lachish, bind the chariot to the swift beast,....
Horses, camels, dromedaries, or mules. Some (u) render the word swift
horse or horses, post horses; others dromedaries (w); and some mules (x)
the two latter seem more especially to be meant, either dromedaries, as
the word is translated in [Kg1 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#028.md);
which is a very swift creature: Isidore says (y) the dromedary is one
sort of camels, of a lesser stature, yet swifter, from whence it has its
name, and is used to go more than a hundred miles a day; this is thought
to be what the Jews (z) call a flying camel; which the gloss says is a
sort of camels that are as swift in running as a bird that flies; they
are lighter made than a camel, and go at a much greater rate; whereas a
camel goes at the rate of thirty miles a day, the dromedary will perform
a journey of one hundred and twenty miles in a day; they make use of
them in the Indies for going post, and expresses frequently perform a
journey of eight hundred miles upon them in the space of a week (a):
this may serve the better to illustrate [Jer
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#023.md); and improve the note there: but
whether these were used in chariots I do not find; only Bochart (b)
takes notice of a kind of camel, that has, like the dromedary, two humps
on its back, which the Arabians call "bochet", and put to chariots: or
else mules are meant, for by comparing the above text in [Kg1
4:28](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#028.md) with [Ch2
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#024.md), it looks as if "mules" were
there intended; and so the word here used is rendered in [Est
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/est008.htm#010.md); and by their being there said to
be used for posts to ride on expresses, it up pears to be a swift
creature. Aelianus (c) makes mention of mules in India of a red colour,
very famous for running; and mules were used in the Olympic games, and
many riders of them got the victory; and that these were used in
chariots, there is no doubt to be made of it: Homer (d) speaks of mules
drawing a four wheeled chariot; so Pausanias (e) of mules yoked
together, and drawing a chariot, instead of horses; and the Septuagint
version of [Isa 66:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#020.md); instead of "in
litters and on mules", renders it, "in litters" or carriages "of mules":
but, be they one or the other that are here meant, they were creatures
well known, and being swift were used in chariots, to which they were
bound and fastened in order to draw them, and which we call "putting
to"; this the inhabitants of Lachish (f) are bid to do, in order to make
their escape, and flee as fast as they could from the enemy, advancing
to besiege them; as they were besieged by the army of Sennacherib,
before he came to Jerusalem, [Ch2
32:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#001.md). Or these words may be spoken in
an ironical and sarcastic way, that whereas they had abounded in horses
and chariots, and frequently rode about their streets in them, now let
them make use of them, and get away if they could; and may suggest,
that, instead of riding in these, they should be obliged to walk on foot
into captivity. Lachish was a city in the tribe of Judah, in the times
of Jerom (g); it was a village seven miles from Eleutheropolis, as you
go to Daroma or the south;

she is the beginning of the sin to the daughter of Zion; lying upon the
borders of the ten tribes, as Lachish did, it was the first of the
cities of Judah that gave into the idolatry of Jeroboam, the worshipping
of the calves; and from thence it spread itself to Zion and Jerusalem;
and, being a ringleader in this sin, should be punished for it: though
some think this refers to their conspiracy with the citizens of
Jerusalem against King Amaziah, and the murder of him in this place, now
punished for it, [Kg2 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/kg2014.htm#018.md);

for the transgressions of Israel were found in thee; not only their
idolatry, but all other sins, with which it abounded; it was a very
wicked place, and therefore no wonder it was given up to destruction.
The Targum is,

"for the transgressors of Israel were found in thee.''

\(u\) "ad equos velocissimos", Pagninus; "equo veloci", Montanus;
"angariis sc. equis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (w) "Dromadibus",
Vatablus. So Elias. (x) "Mulis", so some in Piscator; "ad mulum
celerem", Burkius. (y) Origin. l. 12. c. 1. p. 102. (z) T. Bab. Maccot,
fol. 5. 1. (a) See Harris's Voyages and Travels, vol. 1. p. 469. (b)
Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 4. col. 87. (c) De Animal. l. 16. c. 9. (d)
Iliad. 24. l. 324. (e) Eliac. prior, sive l. 5. p. 302. So Suetonius in
Vit. Jul. Caesar. c. 31. "mulis ad vehiculum junctis". (f) There is a
likeness in sound between and (g) De locis Hebr. fol. 92. M.

[Micah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">mic 1:14</span></span>

Therefore shalt thou give presents to Moreshethgath,.... Since Lachish
was the cause of leading Judah into idolatry, and was a city so very
wicked; therefore it should be reduced to such distress as to send
messengers with presents to the Philistines at Moreshethgath, a place
near to Gath of the Philistines, and may include that and other cities
of theirs, to come and help them against the Assyrians:

the houses of Achzib shall be a lie to the kings of Israel; a city of
Judah, [Jos 15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044.md); or of Asher, [Jos
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029.md); the same with Chezib, [Gen
38:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#005.md); and called Ecdippa by Josephus
(h), Pliny (i), and Ptolemy (k). The Jewish writers commonly call it
Cezib, of which they (l) say many things about that, and the land unto
it, being subject to tithes, the laws of the seventh year, and the like.
Maimonides and Bartenora say (m) it is the name of a place which divided
between the land of Israel, which they possessed who came out of
Babylon, and that land which they enjoyed who came out of Egypt; but the
Jews are not agreed about the situation of it. One of their writers (n)
places it to the northeast of the land of Israel; but another (o)
observes, and proves from one that resided in those parts some time, and
diligently inquired into and made his observation on places, that Cezib,
and also Aco and Amana, frequently mentioned with it, were all on the
western sea of the land of Israel, that is, the Mediterranean sea; in
which he was right, without all doubt: the place is now called Zib by
contraction, of which Mr. Maundrell (p) gives this account;

"having travelled about one hour in the plain of Acra, we passed by an
old town called Zib, situate on an ascent close by the seaside; this may
probably be the old Achzib, mentioned [Jos
19:29](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#029.md); called afterwards Ecdippa; for
St. Jerom (q) places Achzib nine miles distant from Ptolemais (or Aco),
towards Tyre, to which account we found the situation of Zib exactly
agreeing.''

Now the houses or families that dwelt in this place, or the idols'
temples there, as some, and the idolatry exercised therein, should be a
lie unto, or disappoint the expectations of, the kings of Israel; which,
according to Kimchi, is put for Judah, who placed confidence in them,
and had dependence on them: there is an elegant play on words between
Achzib and a "lie" (r). The Targum is,

"thou shall send gifts to the heirs of Gath; the houses of Achzib shall
be delivered to the people, because of the sins of the kings of Israel,
who worshipped idols in them.''

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 1. sect. 22. De Bello Jud. l. 1. c. 13. sect. 4.
(i) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 19. (k) Geograph, l. 5. c. 15. (l) T. Hieros.
Sheviith, fol. 36. 2. T. Bab. Gittin, foi. 7. 2. Misn. Demai, c. 1.
sect. 3. (m) In Misn. Demai, c. 1. sect. 3. (n) Bartenora in Misn.
Sheviith, c. 6. 1. & Challa, c. 4. sect. 8. (o) Yom Tob in Sheviith, c.
6. 1. e Caphtor Uperah, c. 11. (p) Journey from Aleppo, &c. p. 33. Ed.
7. (q) De locis Hebr. fol. 88. I. (r) &

[Micah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">mic 1:15</span></span>

Yet will I bring an heir unto thee, O inhabitant of Mareshah,....
Another city in the tribe of Judah, mentioned with Achzib in [Jos
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044.md); and by many thought to be the
birth place of this prophet; and, if so, his faithfulness may be
observed in declaring the whole counsel of God, though against his own
fire place; and this must be an aggravation of the sin of the
inhabitants of it, that they had such a prophet that arose from them,
and they regarded him not. There is a beautiful allusion in the word
"heir" to Mareshah (s), which signifies an "inheritance"; and here were
an "heir" or heirs for it, as the Targum; not the Persians, as some in
Aben Ezra, and in an Agadah mentioned by Jarchi, who descended from Elam
the firstborn of Shem; and so had a right of inheritance, as those
interpreters suppose; but the king of Assyria, who should invade the
land, and seize upon this place among others, and possess it, as if it
was his by right of inheritance, having obtained it by conquest: and
this being by the permission and according to the will of God, he is
said to be brought by him to it. Capellus thinks, on the contrary, that
Hezekiah and his posterity are meant:

he shall come unto Adullam the glory of Israel; another city in the
tribe of Judah, a royal one, [Jos
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035.md); said by Jerom to be in his time
no small village, and to be about ten miles from Eleutheropolis; called
the "glory of Israel", having been a royal city in Joshua's time, [Jos
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos012.htm#015.md); and a fenced city in the times
of Rehoboam, [Ch2 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#007.md); and Eusebius
says it was a large town; and Jerom says it was not a small one in his
time; though some think Jerusalem is meant, the metropolis of the
nation, Israel being put for Judah, as in [Mic
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#014.md); and to be read, "he that is the
enemy and heir shall come to Adullam, yea, to the glory of Israel" (t);
even to Jerusalem, the most glorious city in all the tribes; though
others are of opinion that this is the character of the enemy or heir
that should come thither, called so by way of contradiction, as coming
to the reproach and disgrace of Israel; or, ironically, whom Israel
before gloried in, when they had recourse to him for help. The margin of
our Bible reads, "the glory of Israel shall come to Adullam"; that is,
the great men, the princes and heads of the people, shall flee to the
cave of Adullam (u), to hide them from the enemy, where David was hid
from Saul; see [Sa1 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001). Burkius (w.md),
a very late commentator, takes Adullam for an appellative, and with
Hillerus (x) renders it, "the perpetuity of the yoke"; and the whole
thus, "at the perpetuity of the yoke, the glory of Israel shall come";
that is, when all things shall seem to tend to this, that the yoke once
laid on Israel by the Gentiles shall become perpetual, without any hope
of deliverance, then shall come the Deliverer, that is, Jesus, the Glory
of Israel; and, adds he, God forbid we should think of any other subject
here; and so he interprets the "heir" in the preceding clause of the
Messiah; and which is a sense far from being despicable.

\(s\) & (t) So Piscator, Juuius, Drusius. (u) "Ad Adullam veniet gloria
Israelis", Cocceius. (w) He published Annotations on the twelve minor
Prophets at Heilbronn, 1753, which he calls a Gnomon, written in
imitation of Bengelius's Gnomon of the New Testament, whose son-in-law
it seems he is, and by whom his work is prefaced. (x) Onomast. Sacr. p.
739.

[Micah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">mic 1:16</span></span>

Make thee bald, and poll thee for thy delicate children,.... Which is
said, either with respect to Mareshah, or to Adullam, or to the whole
land, as Kimchi observes; rather to the latter; and that either to
Israel, or to Judah, or both; the prophecy in general being concerning
them both, [Mic 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/mic001.htm#001.md); making baldness,
whether by plucking off the hair, or by shaving it, was used in token of
mourning, [Job 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#020.md); and so it is
designed to express it here: the inhabitants of the land are called to
lamentation and weeping for their children taken from them, whom they
dearly loved, and brought up in a delicate manner. The Targum is,

"pluck off thy hair, and cast it upon the children of thy delight;''

and Sanctius observes; that it was a custom with the Gentiles to cut off
their hair, and cast it into the graves of their kindred and friends at
their interment, to which be thinks the prophet alludes:

enlarge thy baldness as the eagle; when it moults, and cast off all its
feathers, as it does in old age, and so renews its youth; to which the
allusion seems to be in [Psa 103:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005.md); or
every year, as birds of prey usually do at the beginning of the spring.
The Jewish writers (y) say this happens to it every ten years; when,
finding its feathers heavy and unfit for flying, it makes a tour to the
sun with all its force it can, to get as near it as possible; and,
having heated its plumage excessively, it casts itself into the sea for
cooling, and then its feathers fall off, and new ones succeed; and this
it does until it is a hundred years old; and to its then state of
baldness, while it is moulting, is the allusion here; unless it can be
thought any respect is had to that kind of eagle which is called the
bald one. In Virginia (z) there are three sorts of eagles; one is the
grey eagle, about the size of a kite; another the black eagle,
resembling those in England; and a third the bald eagle, so called
because the upper part of the neck and head are covered with a sort of
white down: but the former sort of baldness seems to be intended, which
is at certain stated times, and not what always is, and is only partial;
for it denotes such an universal baldness to be made, as to take in all
the parts of the body where any hair grows; as expressive of the general
devastation that should be made, which would be the cause of this great
mourning:

for they are gone into captivity from thee; that is, the delicate
children of Israel and Judah, and so were as dead unto them, or worse:
this was accomplished in Israel or the ten tribes, partly by
Tiglathpileser, and more completely by Shalmaneser, king of Assyria,
[Kg2 15:29](../../../bib/kjv/kg2015.htm#029.md); and in Judah or the two
tribes, when Sennacherib came and took their fenced cities; and
doubtless some of the inhabitants and their children were carried
captive by him, though not Jerusalem; and therefore cannot be addressed
here, as some do interpret the words, unless the prophecy is to be
extended to the destruction of Jerusalem by the Babylonians.

\(y\) Saadiah Gaon apud Kimchi & Ben Melech in Psal. ciii. 5. & lsa. xl.
31. (z) See Harris's Voyages and Travels, vol. 2. p. 229. Lowthorp's
Philosoph. Transact. abridged, vol. 3. p. 589.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Micah Chapter 2](mic002.md)

</div>
