<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nahum Index](nah)  
  [Previous](mic007)  [Next](nah001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nahum Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

[Nahum](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">nah 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NAHUM

This book is called, in the Vulgate Latin version, "the Prophecy of
Nahum"; and in the Syriac and Arabic versions, "the Prophecy of the
Prophet Nahum"; and in [Nah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#001); it is
called "the Book of the Vision of Nahum"; which is very singular; and
from whence we learn of what place this prophet was; but of this more
will be said on that verse. His name signifies "consolation": and though
the subject of his prophecy chiefly relates to the destruction of the
Assyrian empire, and of Nineveh, the chief city of it; yet this was a
comfort to the people of the Jews, that an enemy so powerful, and who
was so troublesome to them, and whom they dreaded, should one day be
destroyed. In what age Nahum lived is not said; and writers very much
disagree about it. Some make him to be the most ancient of all the
prophets; who suppose him to prophesy of the destruction of Nineveh,
before the reigns of Joash king of Judah, and Jehu king of Israel, as
Huetius (a) observes; and others bring him down as low, placing him
after Ezekiel, in the times of Zedekiah, Clemens of Alexandria (b);
neither of which is likely. The Jewish chronologers (c) generally make
him to live in the times of Manasseh, and so Abarbinel; but Josephus
(d), with more probability, puts him in the times of Jotham; though
perhaps what the greater number of interpreters give into may be most
correct; as that he lived in the times of Hezekiah, and was contemporary
with Isaiah, Hosea, Amos, and Micah; and that this prophecy was
delivered out after the ten tribes were carried captive by the king of
Assyria, which was in the sixth year of Hezekiah, and before
Sennacherib's invasion of Judea, and siege of Jerusalem, which was in
the fourteenth year of his reign; and which is thought to be referred to
in the "first" chapter of this prophecy. Mr. Whiston (e) places him in
the year of the world A. M. 3278, or 726 B.C.; and says that he foretold
the destruction of Nineveh an hundred fifteen years before it came to
pass, so says Josephus (f). How long this prophet lived, and where he
died, and was buried, is uncertain. Pseudo-Epiphanius (g) says he died
and was buried in Begabar. Isidore (h) says it was in Bethafarim; both
which are to be corrected by Dorotheus, who calls the place Bethabara,
as Huetius (i) observes; the same where John was baptizing, [Joh
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#028); but Benjamin of Tudela (k) says
his grave was to be seen in a place called Einsiphla, in the land of
Chaldea; and speaks of a synagogue of this prophet in the province of
Assyria (l); but on these things we cannot depend. Of the authority of
this prophecy there need be no doubt, as appears from the inscription of
the book, the sublimity and majesty of the style, and its agreement with
other prophets; see [Nah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#015);
compared with [Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007); and the
accomplishment of the prophecies contained in it, which respect the ruin
of the Assyrian empire, and particularly Nineveh, the metropolis of it;
the cause of which were their sins and transgressions, the inhabitants
thereof were guilty of, and are pointed at in it.

\(a\) Demonstr. Evangel. prop. 4. p. 298. (b) Strom. l. 1. p. 329. (c)
Seder Olam Rabbi, c. 10. p. 55. &. Zuta, p. 105. Juchasin, fol. 12. 2.
Tzemach David, fol. 15. 1. Shalshelet Hakabala, fol. 12. 1. (d) Antiqu.
l. 9. c, 11. sect. 3. (e) Chronological Tables, cent. 8. (f) Antiqu. l.
9. c. 11. sect. 3. (g) De Proph. Vit. & Inter. c. 17. (h) De Vit. &
Mort. Sanct. c. 46. (i) Ut supra. (Demonstr. Evangel. prop. 4. p. 298.)
(k) Itinerarium, p. 30. (l) Ibid. p. 62.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nahum Chapter 1](nah001)

</div>
