<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh003)  [Next](neh005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NEHEMIAH 4

This chapter relates, how the Jews, while building, were mocked by their
enemies, to which no answer was returned but by prayer to God, and they
went on notwithstanding in their work, [Neh
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001) and how that their enemies
conspired against them, to hinder them by force of arms, [Neh
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#007) to oppose which, both spiritual
and temporal weapons were made use of, so that the work was still
carried on, [Neh 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#013).

[Nehemiah 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 4:1</span></span>

But it came to pass, that when Sanballat heard that we builded the
wall,.... Or were building it; for as yet it was not finished, see [Neh
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#006),

he was wroth, and took great indignation; inwardly, though outwardly he
pretended to treat the work with contempt, as if it never would be
accomplished, which yet he feared:

and mocked the Jews; as a set of foolish builders, and unable to finish
what they had begun.

[Nehemiah 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 4:2</span></span>

And he spake before his brethren,.... Tobiah the Ammonite, and Geshem
the Arabian, and perhaps some other governors of the king of Persia in
those parts:

and before the army of Samaria: which, and the inhabitants of it, were
implacable enemies of the Jews:

and said, what do these feeble Jews? what do they pretend to do, or what
can they do?

will they fortify themselves? by building a wall about their city; can
they think they shall ever be able to do this, or that it will be
allowed?

will they sacrifice? meaning not their daily sacrifice, as Jarchi, that
they had done a long time, but for the dedication of their building, as
Aben Ezra:

will they make an end in a day? they seem to be in as great a hurry and
haste as if they meant it; and indeed, unless they can do it very
quickly, they never will: they will soon be stopped:

will they revive the stones out of the heaps of the rubbish which are
burnt? where will they find materials? do they imagine that they can
make burnt stones firm and strong again, or harden the dust and rubbish
into stones, or make that, which is as if dead, alive? to do this is the
same as to revive a dead man, and they may as well think of doing the
one as the other; burnt stones being reckoned as dead, as Eben Ezra
observes.

[Nehemiah 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 4:3</span></span>

Now Tobiah the Ammonite was by him,.... Who was one of his brethren he
spake before, [Neh 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#002),

and he said; in the like contemptuous and scoffing manner:

even that which they build, if a fox go up, he shall break down their
stone wall; signifying not only that it was so low that a fox could
easily get up to it, or leap over it; but that the materials were so
bad, and the work so poorly done, that the weight of a fox would break
it down; of which creatures many were thereabout, since Jerusalem was
desolate, see [Lam 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/lam005.htm#018).

[Nehemiah 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 4:4</span></span>

Hear, O our God, for we are despised,.... Here begins the prayer of
Nehemiah, who had been informed of what these men said in contempt of
him, and his builders, and to whom he sent no answer, but applied to
God:

and turn their reproach upon their own head; as they have despised and
reproached us, let them be despised and reproached by their neighbours:

give them for a prey in the land of captivity; let them be carried
captive, as we have been, and become a prey and booty to their enemies.

[Nehemiah 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 4:5</span></span>

And cover not their iniquity, and let not their sin be blotted out from
before thee,.... Let it not go unpunished, and even let it not be
pardoned; which is spoken, not from a private spirit of revenge, but
from a public spirit for the glory of God, and his justice; and not as a
mere imprecation, but as a prophecy of what would be the case, in like
manner as many of David's petitions in the Psalms; and for this there
was a good foundation, since God had threatened the Moabites and
Ammonites with utter destruction:

for they have provoked thee to anger before the builders; by despising
his people, and mocking at the work the Lord had called them to; and
this they did publicly, and on purpose to discourage the workmen.

[Nehemiah 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 4:6</span></span>

So built we the wall,.... Went on in building it, notwithstanding their
scoffs and threats:

and all the wall was joined together unto the half thereof; it was
carried all round the city to half the height of it:

for the people had a mind to work; their heart was in it, they had a
good will to it, and they made haste to finish it.

[Nehemiah 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 4:7</span></span>

And it came to pass that when Sanballat, and Tobiah, and the
Arabians,.... Who were under and influenced by Geshem the Arabian:

and the Ammonites; over whom Tobiah was governor:

and the Ashdodites; who were of Ashdod or Azotus, one of the
principalities of the Philistines, who were always enemies to the Jews:

heard that the walls of Jerusalem were made up; or "the length of them
went up" (d); that is, the height of them; that they rose up high apace,
and were got up to, or almost to their proper height:

and that the breaches began to be stopped; for the walls were not all
thrown down by the Chaldeans, but breaches made here and there, which
were now repaired:

then they were very wroth; and could not avoid showing it; before they
mocked them, as attempting what they could not go through with; but now,
perceiving the work went on with great success, they were enraged.

\(d\) "ascendisset longitudo", Montanus; so Coeceius in rad.

[Nehemiah 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 4:8</span></span>

And conspired all of them together,.... All the above men and people
entered into a confederacy and combination:

to come and to fight against Jerusalem; to bring an army with them, and
by force cause the Jews to desist; the Jews (e) pretend they came to
war, and brought with them an army of 180,000 men, which is not
probable:

and to hinder it; the building of the walls of it; or "to make a
wandering for him" (f); for Nehemiah, or the people, or both, to, cause
them to stray from their work, to frighten them from it, that they might
become like men at their wits end, not knowing what to do, where to turn
themselves, or what course to steer, but to wander about as persons out
of their senses; so Aben Ezra. De Dieu joins this clause to the next
verse, to cause everyone of them to wander, we prayed, &c.

\(e\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 38. (f) "ad faciendum ei errorem", Montanus; "ei
aberrationem", Genevenses; "vagationem et palationem", alii apud De
Dieu.

[Nehemiah 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 4:9</span></span>

Nevertheless, we made our prayer unto our God,.... Spread their case
before him in prayer, entreating direction and help from him:

and set a watch against them day and night, because of them; to give
notice of their approach, that they might prepare to defend themselves;
though they prayed to God, and trusted in him for deliverance, they did
not neglect the use of means.

[Nehemiah 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 4:10</span></span>

And Judah said,.... Several of the men of Judah:

the strength of the bearers of burdens is decayed; through much labour,
in carrying heavy loads of stone and timber to the builders, and yet
more through fear of the enemy:

and there is much rubbish; which ought to be removed, but that the
labourers were so weak that they could not do it:

so that we are not able to build the wall; to finish it before the enemy
comes to attack us.

[Nehemiah 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 4:11</span></span>

And our adversaries said, they shall not know,.... Our designs upon
them:

neither see; or perceive what we are about to do:

till we come in the midst of them; with an army suddenly, at an
unawares, and unexpected:

and slay them; they being unarmed, and not prepared to defend
themselves:

and cause the work to cease; as it must in course, the builders being
slain.

[Nehemiah 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 4:12</span></span>

Near Samaria, Arabia, and Ashdod, and had intelligence of their designs:

came, they said to us ten times; that is, they came to them at
Jerusalem, and often told them, as this phrase "ten times" signifies;
see Gill on [Gen 31:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#007),

from all places whence ye shall return unto us: they will be upon you,
come which way you will, so that ye are in the utmost danger: or "from
all places"; where you are repairing and rebuilding:

return to us; that ye may enjoy peace and prosperity with us under
Sanballat, &c. and escape the wrath and fury you are now exposed to; or
"from all places we come, that ye may return to us"; so De Dieu; these
Jews, though they pretended to be friends, to their brethren, yet seemed
to be in friendship with their enemies, and sought to discourage them,
and weaken their minds, and cause them to cease building.

[Nehemiah 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 4:13</span></span>

Therefore set I in the lower places behind the wall,.... Where the wall
was lowest, and the enemy could more easily break it down, or get over
it:

and on the higher places; where the wall was higher; or rather on the
towers upon the walls, as the word signifies the tops of rocks, which
are dry and smooth, see [Eze 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/eze024.htm#002).

I even set the people after their families; according to their rank,
number, strength, and valour:

with their swords, their spears, and their bows; with weapons they could
use both near, and at a distance.

[Nehemiah 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 4:14</span></span>

And I looked,.... Took a view of the people, and observed that they were
in their proper place, and sufficiently armed, and also whether the
enemy was coming:

and rose up and said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest
of the people; who were under their nobles and rulers, as their captains
and commanders:

be not ye afraid of them; of their enemies, their numbers, and their
threats:

remember the Lord, which is great and terrible; who is greater than
they, and is to be feared and trusted in by his people, and is terrible
even to the kings of the earth:

and fight for your brethren, your sons and your daughters, your wives
and your houses; intimating, that they were in danger of losing all that
was near and dear, valuable and precious to them, if they did not fight
for them; and therefore it became them to quit themselves like men, and
be strong.

[Nehemiah 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 4:15</span></span>

And it came to pass, when our enemies heard it was known unto us,....
What they intended, as might be reported to them from the preparations
made by the Jews to receive them, and defend themselves:

and God had brought their counsel to naught; which was to come upon them
secretly and unawares; but being discovered, they dropped their design,
and their scheme came to nothing:

so that we returned all of us to the wall, every man to his work; to
that part of it where he wrought, in order to finish it.

[Nehemiah 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 4:16</span></span>

And it came to pass from that time forth,.... That they were thus
alarmed of danger from their enemies:

that the half of my servants wrought in the work; of building the wall;
his domestic servants, his guards, or mighty men, as Jarchi, men of war,
the soldiers:

and the other half of them held both the spears, the shields, and the
bows; some offensive, others defensive weapons; some to fight with at a
distance, others near at hand:

and the habergeons; coats of mail, which they took and clothed
themselves with:

and the rulers were behind all the house of Judah; the Jews that were
working at the wall, to animate and encourage them, protect and defend
them.

[Nehemiah 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 4:17</span></span>

That laid the mortar and stones upon it, and timber where it was
necessary:

and they that bore burdens; that carried the mortar, stones, and timber
to the builders, and served them:

with those that laded; which prepared the above for them, and laid them
on their shoulders:

everyone with one of his hands wrought in the work, and with the other
hand held a weapon; which is not to be understood strictly and
literally, for without both hands they could not well perform either of
the above works; but proverbially, signifying that they were intent on
both working and fighting, and were ready and prepared to do the latter,
as well as the former, having weapons lying by them, or girt about them,
as is explained in the following verse.

[Nehemiah 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">neh 4:18</span></span>

For the builders had everyone his sword girded by his side, and so
builded,.... Thus accoutred he wrought, and was prepared for either
service:

and he that sounded the trumpet was by me; to give the alarm of war,
that everyone might lay aside his work, and prepare for the battle: this
officer stood by Nehemiah, that when he found it necessary, might give
him orders to sound his trumpet, for the men to gather to him.

[Nehemiah 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">neh 4:19</span></span>

And I said unto the nobles, and to the rulers, and to the rest of the
people,.... See Gill on [Neh 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#014),

the work is great and large; the building of the wall all around the
city of Jerusalem:

and we are separated upon the wall one far from another; some at work on
one part of it, and some at another, so that the distance between one
another, at least in the further part, was very considerable.

[Nehemiah 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">neh 4:20</span></span>

In what place therefore ye hear the sound of the trumpet,.... Be it what
part of the wall soever they were at work, even the most distant:

resort ye thither to us; to Nehemiah, and the half of his servants
armed, where the trumpet was blown; that was to be the place of
rendezvous:

our God shall fight for us; and give us victory over our enemies; none
have any reason to be intimidated, when they shall hear the sound of the
trumpet.

[Nehemiah 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">neh 4:21</span></span>

So we laboured in the work,.... Of building the wall: and half of them
held the spears; and other weapons before mentioned, [Neh
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#016)

from the rising of the morning till the stars appeared; that is, from
morning to evening, the space of time the builders and labourers worked.

[Nehemiah 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 4:22</span></span>

Likewise at the same time said I unto the people,.... That were at work
upon the wall:

let everyone with his servant lodge within Jerusalem; every builder had
a servant, or a lad, as the word signifies, to wait upon him, to bring
mortar or stone, or what he wanted; and some of these builders, with
their lads, came out of the country towns and villages in the morning,
and returned at night; now Nehemiah proposed, for the safety of the city
and its walls, that for the present they would lodge in Jerusalem:

that in the night they may be a guard unto us, and labour on the day;
might help to protect them in the night, should they be surprised with
the enemy, and be ready for their work in the daytime.

[Nehemiah 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">neh 4:23</span></span>

So neither I, nor my brethren,.... The nobles and rulers:

nor my servants; his domestic servants that waited upon him:

nor the men of the guard which followed me; his bodyguard, which
attended him as a commissioner of the king of Persia for state and
grandeur:

none of us put off our clothes; at night when they laid themselves down
to sleep, but laid in, them, that they might be ready upon an alarm
made:

saving that everyone put them off for washing; not for common washing,
because dirty, but for washing on account of ceremonial uncleanness,
which required washing both of bodies and garments, see [Lev
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#005), &c. and the Vulgate Latin
version expresses it by baptism, as the apostle calls such ceremonial
ablutions in [Heb 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#002). It is in the
margin of our Bibles, "everyone went with his weapon for water"; when he
went to Siloam, or any other place, for water, he took a weapon with him
to defend himself upon occasion; which is no bad sense of the words.
Noldius (g) renders the words, "everyone with his weapon (and) water";
both were at his bolster, ready, if wanted, see [Sa1
26:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#011).

\(g\) Ebr. Concord. Partic. p. 322.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 5](neh005)

</div>
