<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Nehemiah Index](neh)  
  [Previous](neh002)  [Next](neh004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Nehemiah Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)

[Nehemiah](../../../bib/kjv/neh001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">neh 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NEHEMIAH 3

This chapter contains the names of the builders of the wall of
Jerusalem, the order in which they worked, where they began, and where
they ended, which was the sheep gate, [Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001).

[Nehemiah 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">neh 3:1</span></span>

Then Eliashib the high priest rose up with his brethren the priests,....
This was the grandson of Jeshua or Joshua the high priest, his father's
name was Joiakim, [Neh 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh012.htm#010), being
high priest, and rising first, he set a good example both to the priests
and to the people, and served no doubt greatly to animate and encourage
them:

and they built the sheep gate; so called, because the sheep were led
through it to the temple, and near it was the sheep market, where they
were sold, and the sheep pool, where the sacrifices were washed; and
this being near the temple, and for the service of it, the priests
undertook that; not that they laboured with their hands at it, though it
is possible some of them might; but they were at the expense of it,
employed labourers, and paid them, and directed them, and had the
oversight of them: this gate was to the south of the city; and Rauwolff
(u) says, it was still standing by Moriah, the mountain of the temple,
which the Turks have taken to themselves, and built on it a Turkish
mosque or temple. Near the gate you see still, he says, the sheep pond,
which is large and deep, wherein the Nethinims used to wash the beasts,
and then gave them to the priests; it is said (w) to lead to the mount
of Olives, to Bethany, to Jericho, the desert, and all the east country
to Jordan:

they sanctified it; this being for sacred use, and they sacred persons;
and this the first part of the building, they prayed for a blessing on
it, and in it on the whole work undertaken, of which this was the
firstfruits:

and set up the doors of it; and so finished it:

even unto the tower of Meah they sanctified it, unto the tower of
Hananeel; so far they built, and what they built they sanctified. The
tower of Meah, or a "hundred", as the word signifies, might be so
called, either because it was one hundred cubits from the sheep gate on
one side, and as many from the tower of Hananeel on the other side,
standing between both; or because it was one hundred cubits high: these
two towers, perhaps, were firm and strong, and needed no repair, since
no mention is made of any; though they seem to me to be one and the same
tower; see [Jer 31:38](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#038).

\(u\) Travels, par. 3. c. 3. p. 226, 228. (w) Vid. Quistorp. in loc.

[Nehemiah 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">neh 3:2</span></span>

And next unto him builded the men of Jericho,.... The posterity of those
that formerly inhabited that city; these began where Eliashib and the
priests ended, and went on from thence:

and next to them; or rather "to him", the high priest:

builded Zaccur the son of Imri; who probably was the chief of the men of
Jericho.

[Nehemiah 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">neh 3:3</span></span>

But the fish gate did the sons of Hassenaah build,.... So called,
because fish was brought from the sea coasts through it, and near it was
the fish market; this also was southward, according to Dr. Lightfoot
(x); others say northward; some say it led to the sea of Galilee,
Jordan, and all the east and north country: but it is most likely to be
westward towards the Mediterranean sea, Tyre, and Joppa, from whence
fish were brought; and Rauwolff says (y) it is still standing towards
the west, behind Mount Sion, and over against Mount Gihon, see [Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014) he also says, this gate was
called the gate of Hebron, because the road of Hebron went through it,
which is about seven or eight hours' walking distant from it:

who also laid the beams thereof, and set up the doors thereof, the locks
thereof, and the bars thereof; completely finished it.

\(x\) Chorograph. Cent. of the Land of Israel, c. 26. p. 27. vol. 2. (y)
Ut supra, (Travels, par. 3. c. 3.) p. 226, 227.

[Nehemiah 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">neh 3:4</span></span>

And next unto them repaired Meremoth, the son of Uriah, the son of
Koz,.... And the men under him; see [Ezr
8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ezr008.htm#033), this part of the wall on which
they worked was not wholly demolished, only weakened, and therefore did
not rebuild it, but repaired and strengthened it, and this phrase is
used all along afterwards:

and next unto them repaired Meshullam, the sort of Berechiah, the son of
Meshezabeel: and next unto them repaired Zadok, the son of Baana; but
who they were cannot be said.

[Nehemiah 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">neh 3:5</span></span>

And next unto them the Tekoites repaired,.... The inhabitants of Tekoa,
a city in the tribe of Judah; see [Amo
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/amo001.htm#001)

but their nobles put not their necks to the work of their Lord; either
of Nehemiah, as some, or rather of the lord and prince appointed over
their families, as Aben Ezra, to whom they would not be subject; though
it seems best, with Jarchi, to understand it of the Lord their God, by
whose command this work was begun; but they refused to give any
assistance to it with their purses or presence, but withdrew from it, as
refractory oxen withdraw their necks from the yoke. This is observed to
their disgrace, when the common people of their city were ready to work,
and did.

[Nehemiah 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">neh 3:6</span></span>

Moreover, the old gate repaired Jehoiada, the son of Paseah, and
Meshullam the son of Besodeiah,.... Which some think was so called
because it led to the old city Salem. Dr. Lightfoot (a) thinks it is the
same with the second or third gate, [Zep
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zep001.htm#010). According to Vatablus, it was
the gate of the old pool, [Isa 22:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#011),
or rather, perhaps, it was the gate of the old wall Josephus speaks of
(b); it led to the north of the land:

they laid the beams thereof; as in [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003).

\(a\) Ut supra. (Chorograph. Cent. of the Land of Israel, c. 26. p. 27.
vol. 2.) (b) De Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 4. sect. 2, 3.

[Nehemiah 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">neh 3:7</span></span>

And next unto them repaired Melatiah the Gibeonite, and Jadon the
Meronothite, the men of Gibeon and Mizpah,.... Which places were both in
the tribe of Benjamin, [Jos 18:25](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#025) and
one of these men was of the one place, and the other of the other:

unto the throne of the governor on this side the river; where the
governor of those parts under the king of Persia had his seat, and now
Nehemiah; but, according to Aben Ezra, Cisse, rendered "throne", is the
name of a man who was the governor.

[Nehemiah 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">neh 3:8</span></span>

Next unto him repaired Uzziel the son of Harhaiah, of the
goldsmiths,.... Or Tzorephim, which, according to Jarchi, was the name
of a family so called from their trade and business:

next unto him also repaired Hananiah the son of one of the apothecaries;
or confectioners, which also might be the name of a family so called for
the same reason:

and they fortified Jerusalem unto the broad wall; which reached from the
gate of Ephraim to the corner gate, which was broken down by Joash, king
of Israel, but was rebuilt so strong by Uzziah, king of Judah, that it
stood firm to this time; wherefore these men repaired up to it, but left
that as they found it; see [Ch2 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch2025.htm#023),
and were not careful to repair it, it not wanting any repair.

[Nehemiah 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">neh 3:9</span></span>

And next unto them repaired Rephaiah, the son of Hur, the ruler of the
half part of Jerusalem. That city belonging partly to the tribe of
Judah, and partly to the tribe of Benjamin; one part of it was under a
governor that was of the tribe of Judah, as this man seems to be; and
the other part under one of the tribe of Benjamin; see [Neh
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#012).

[Nehemiah 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">neh 3:10</span></span>

And next unto him repaired Jedaiah, the son of Harumaph, over against
his house,.... That part of the wall which stood right against his
house; and to take this part he could not well object to it, and it
might be reasonably thought he would take care to repair it well, and
make it strong for his own safety:

and next unto him repaired Hattush, the son of Hashabniah; but who he
was is not known.

[Nehemiah 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">neh 3:11</span></span>

Malchijah the son of Harim, and Hashub the son of Pahathmoab,.... The
fathers of these were heads of families that came out of captivity with
Zerubbabel, [Ezr 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#006)

repaired the other piece: or second piece, below and next to that which
Hattush repaired, the last builder mentioned:

and the tower of the furnaces; near to which were furnaces for the
baking of bread, or of bricks.

[Nehemiah 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">neh 3:12</span></span>

And next unto him repaired Shallum, the son of Hallohesh,.... So called,
as Ben Melech says, from his being an enchanter of serpents, or a wise
prudent counsellor:

the ruler of the half part of Jerusalem; of the other half; see [Neh
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#009)

he and his daughters; who were rich widows or heiresses, and employed
men to build at their own expense; he seems to have had no sons.

[Nehemiah 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">neh 3:13</span></span>

The valley gate repaired Hanun,.... Of which see [Neh
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013),

and the inhabitants of Zanoah; a city in the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#034),

they built it, and set up the doors thereof, &c. see [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003),

and a thousand cubits on the wall to the dung gate; that is, they
repaired the wall to such a length from the valley gate to the dung
gate; see [Neh 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#013).

[Nehemiah 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">neh 3:14</span></span>

But the dung gate repaired Malchiah the son of Rechab,.... If this was
one of the Rechabites, they were forbid to build houses, [Jer
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer035.htm#007) but, perhaps, though they might
not build private houses for themselves to dwell in, they might be
employed in building walls and fortresses for public security; though it
is more probable that this man was not of that family:

the ruler of part of Bethhaccerem; or of the tract of Bethhaccerem, a
place between Tekoah and Jerusalem; see [Jer
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#001),

he built it, and set up the doors thereof; &c. as in [Neh
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#003).

[Nehemiah 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">neh 3:15</span></span>

But the gate of the fountain,.... Of which see [Neh
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#014)

repaired Shallum, the son of Colhozeh, the ruler of part of Mizpah; of a
tract, district, town, or city so called; perhaps that in the tribe of
Benjamin; see [Neh 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#007),

he built it, and covered it; roofed it, which is not said of any of the
other gates, whether because of the fountain at it:

and set up the doors thereof, &c. finished it completely:

and the wall of the pool of Siloah, by the king's garden; which was
formerly without the wall, on the west, but afterwards taken in by
Manasseh, who built it; see [Ch2
33:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch2033.htm#014), and from hence the king's
garden was watered:

and unto the stairs that go down from the city of David: Zion, which was
built on an eminence, from which they went down by steps into the lower
city Acra.

[Nehemiah 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">neh 3:16</span></span>

After him repaired Nehemiah the son of Azbuk, the ruler of the half part
of Bethzur. A strong fortified place in the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:58](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#058),

unto the place over against the sepulchres of David; where he and his
family, and the kings of his race, were buried, which remained to this
time untouched by the Babylonians, and to many ages after; see [Act
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#029)

and to the pool that was made; not a natural, but an artificial one,
which was made by Hezekiah, [Kg2
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2020.htm#020),

and unto the house of the mighty; where was a garrison of soldiers in
former time for defence.

[Nehemiah 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">neh 3:17</span></span>

After him repaired the Levites, Rehum the son of Bani,.... Who was one
of them, as he that follows was another:

next unto him repaired Hashabiah, the ruler of the half part of Keilah:
a city of the tribe of Judah, [Jos
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#004)

in his part; either with the men of that part of Keilah under his
jurisdiction, or at the expense of that part of it.

[Nehemiah 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">neh 3:18</span></span>

After him repaired their brethren,.... Either the brethren of the two
before named particularly, or the Levites their brethren in general, as
Jarchi:

Bavai, the son of Henadad, the ruler of the half part of Keilah; the
other half of that place.

[Nehemiah 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">neh 3:19</span></span>

And next to him repaired Ezer, the son of Jeshua, the ruler of
Mizpah,.... Either of another Mizpah, or of the other half of Mizpah,
[Neh 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#015)

another piece; or a second piece; one of the two pieces; for another is
mentioned in the next verse:

over against the going up to the armoury, at the turning of the wall;
the western wall towards the south, near to which was a place where
armour was laid up; perhaps the same with the tower of David, to which
there is an allusion in [Sol 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004).

[Nehemiah 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">neh 3:20</span></span>

After him Baruch the son of Zabbai earnestly repaired the other
piece,.... Towards and next to that Ezer the last builder mentioned had
repaired; and this he did "earnestly", or in anger as the word
signifies, being angry with himself or others that there was any
backwardness shown to the work; and therefore, with all haste and
eagerness imaginable, attended to it:

from the turning of the wall; see the preceding verse:

unto the door of the house of Eliashib the high priest; of whom see [Neh
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#001), now either his house was upon the
wall, or that part of the wall that was right against the door of his
house is here meant.

[Nehemiah 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">neh 3:21</span></span>

After him repaired Meremoth the son of Uriah, the son of Koz, another
piece,.... He had wrought before in another part, [Neh
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004), but having finished that, he sets
his hand a second time to the work:

from the door of the house of Eliashib, even to the end of the house of
Eliashib; the door of his house seems to have been at one end of it, and
from that end to the other was a considerable length; he being a great
man, the high priest, had a large house.

[Nehemiah 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">neh 3:22</span></span>

And after him repaired the priests, the men of the plain. Either of the
plain of Jericho, where, in later times at least, there was a station of
the priests, or of the plain about Jerusalem; those also assisted in the
repairs of the wall.

[Nehemiah 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">neh 3:23</span></span>

After him,.... The last of the priests before mentioned:

repaired Benjamin, and Hashub, over against their house; as much of the
wall as the length of their house, or houses, were:

after him repaired Azariah the son of Maaseiah, the son of Ananiah, by
his house: as far as that reached.

[Nehemiah 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">neh 3:24</span></span>

After him repaired Binnui the son of Henadad, another piece.....
Beginning where Azariah ended:

unto the turning of the wall, even unto the corner; the corner where the
wall turned from the south to the east.

[Nehemiah 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">neh 3:25</span></span>

Palal the son of Uzai, over against the turning of the wall,.... Who
dwelt there, and so repaired what was right against him:

and the tower which lieth out from the king's high house: which might be
built for prospect, or his upper house:

that was by the court of the prison; and we often read in Jeremiah of
the court of the prison being in or near the king's house, see [Jer
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#002),

after him Pedaiah the son of Parosh; went on from hence with the repair.

[Nehemiah 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">neh 3:26</span></span>

Moreover, the Nethinims dwelt in Ophel,.... An high tower upon the wait,
in this part of it, see [Ch2 27:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2027.htm#003),
these were servants to the Levites, and repaired here, where their
dwellings were:

unto the place over against the water gate toward the east: and as one
part of their work was to fetch water for the temple, they were here
very properly situated; it led to the king's garden, the valley of
Jehoshaphat, and from thence a plain way to Bethany:

and the tower that lieth out; from the wall.

[Nehemiah 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">neh 3:27</span></span>

After them the Tekoites repaired another piece,.... Having finished what
they undertook in another part of the wall, [Neh
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#005), they engage in this part of it;
which shows their great zeal and diligence, when their nobles were so
backward to it, and withdrew from it:

over against the great tower that lieth out; the same as in the
preceding verse:

even unto the wall of Ophel; from right against the great tower unto the
wall the Tekoites repaired.

[Nehemiah 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">neh 3:28</span></span>

From above the horse gate repaired the priests,.... So called, either
because near it were stables for horses; or through it horses were led
to be watered at the brook of Kidron, to which it was near; or to be
exercised in the valley; Josephus (c) speaks of the "hippie", or horse
tower, which might be near it:

everyone over against his house; for it seems there was a row of houses
in which the priests dwelt, and each of them repaired as much of the
wall as was right against his house.

\(c\) Ut supra. (De Bello Jud. l. 5. c. 4. sect. 2, 3.)

[Nehemiah 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">neh 3:29</span></span>

After them repaired Zadok the son of Immer, over against his house,....
After the last of the priests, this begun where they ended, and repaired
as far as his house reached; and being, perhaps, a person of some note,
his house might be a large one:

after him repaired also Shemaiah, the son of Shechaniah, the keeper of
the east gate; that is, of the temple; for the gates of the city having
been burnt so long, it cannot be thought there should be a keeper of any
of them.

[Nehemiah 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">neh 3:30</span></span>

After him repaired Hananiah the son of Shelemiah, and Hanun the sixth
son of Zalaph, another piece,.... This last man had six sons; but only
his youngest son wrought at this work, which is observed to his great
commendation:

after him repaired Shelemiah the son of Berechiah, over against his
chamber; the same as in [Neh 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#004) who
having finished what he engaged in there, took his part where his
chamber was, and repaired over against that.

[Nehemiah 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">neh 3:31</span></span>

After him repaired Malchiah, the goldsmith's son,.... Or the son of
Tzoreph, as some, so called from his business:

unto the place of the Nethinims, and of the merchants; he repaired up to
the place where these dwelt:

over against the gate Miphkad; where some think was an house of
visitation or correction; and others, where the sanhedrim sat, tried
causes, and exercised justice:

and to the going up of the corner; from the east to the north.

[Nehemiah 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/neh003.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">neh 3:32</span></span>

And between the going up of the corner unto the sheep gate,.... Where
the building first began and where it now ended:

repaired the goldsmiths and the merchants; or druggists; which was done
at their expense; and so the wall all round, with the gates of it, were
rebuilt and repaired, which was all done in fifty two days, [Neh
6:15](../../../bib/kjv/neh006.htm#015).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Nehemiah Chapter 4](neh004)

</div>
