<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num034)  [Next](num036) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 35](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 35:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 35

Though the tribe of Levi had no part in the division of the land, yet
cities out of the several tribes are here ordered to be given them to
dwell in, to the number of forty eight, [Num
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001), six of which were to be cities
of refuge, [Num 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#009), but not for
wilful murderers, in whatsoever way they might kill a man, [Num
35:16](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#016), but for such who had killed a
man unawares, [Num 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#022), and several
rules are given relating to such persons, [Num
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#025), but no satisfaction was to be
taken in case of murder, nor to excuse a person's return to his own
house before the death of the high priest, who had fled to a city of
refuge, that so the land might not be defiled, [Num
35:30](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#030).

[Numbers 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 35:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake to Moses,.... After he had described the borders of
the land, and given instructions about the division of it among the
several tribes, and named the persons that should be concerned in
parting and putting it into the possession of the Israelites, he makes a
provision for the Levites; for though they had no inheritance in the
land as a tribe, yet it was proper they should have cities and houses to
dwell in; for it would not be suitable that they should be always about
the tabernacle, as they were in the wilderness; and it is concerning
this the Lord is said to speak to Moses:

in the plains of Moab by Jordan, near Jericho: where the Israelites now
were, and had been for some time:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 35:2](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 35:2</span></span>

Command the children of Israel,.... All the tribes of them; it is not a
bare instruction that is given them, much less a mere request that is
made to them, or something proposed, and left to their option whether
they would agree to it or not; but it is strictly enjoined them by the
Lord, who had given them freely all they should possess, and who had a
right to all they had, and to whom they were in duty and gratitude bound
to do his will and pleasure: the order is:

that they give unto the Levites, of the inheritance of their possession,
cities to dwell in; which was but reasonable and requisite, that the
ministers of God, and the assistants of the priests, and who did the
service of the congregation, that they should have, habitations for them
and their families, as well as food and raiment was provided for them in
another way:

and ye shall give also unto the Levites suburbs for the cities round
about them; which were partly for ornament to their cities, and partly
for their health, that they might have air, and not be too closely
confined within the walls of their cities; and also for convenience,
that they have room for their cattle, and places to lay up the increase
of their fields, as after suggested. Jarchi says, that a suburb was a
space and place parted without the city, round about, for the beauty of
it; but they were not allowed to build there an house (i.e. to dwell
in), nor to plant a vineyard, nor to sow seed; other ground is after
provided for such uses.

[Numbers 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 35:3</span></span>

And cities shall they have to dwell in,.... For them and their families,
and indeed for nothing else, they having no trades nor worldly business
to carry on in them:

and the suburbs of them shall be for their cattle; for stables and
stalls to put them up in, and for barns and storehouses to lay in
provender for them:

and for their goods; where to bestow them, as the increase of their
fields, oliveyards, and vineyards, see [Luk
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#018).

and for all their beasts; or living creatures; or "for their whole life"
(z); or livelihood, whatsoever was for the support of it; the Targum of
Jonathan adds, by way of explanation, for all their necessities; and so
Jarchi.

\(z\) "ad vitam ipsorum". Vid. Drusium.

[Numbers 35:4](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 35:4</span></span>

And the suburbs of the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites,....
The dimensions and bounds of them were not left to the Israelites, to
give what ground they pleased for this purpose, but were fixed to what
length they should be: these

shall reach from the walls of the city, and outward, a thousand cubits
round about; which was half a sabbath day's journey, and pretty near
half a mile, which all around a city must contain a considerable
quantity of ground, if the city was of any size, as it is certain that
some of them given them at least were.

[Numbers 35:5](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 35:5</span></span>

And ye shall measure from without the city on the east side two thousand
cubits,.... Before only 1000 cubits were ordered to bemeasured, and now
2000, even 2000 more, which were to be added to the other, and to begin
where they ended. The first 1000 were for their cattle and goods, these
2000 for their gardens, orchards, fields, and vineyards; and so the
Jewish writers understand it. Jarchi observes, that 1000 cubits are
ordered, and after that 2000; and asks, how is this? or how is it to be
reconciled? to which he answers, 2000 are put to them round about, and
of them the 1000 innermost are for suburbs, and the outermost (i.e. the
2000) are for fields and vineyards; and with this agrees the Misnah (a),
from whence he seems to have taken it; and the same was to be on every
other side of the city, south, west, and north, as follows:

and on the south side two thousand cubits, and on the west side two
thousand cubits, and on the north side two thousand cubits; which, added
to the other 1000 all around, must make a large circumference of land:

and the city shall be in the midst; in the midst of the circuit of three
thousand cubits all around, so that it must stand very pleasant and
convenient:

this shall be to them the suburbs of the cities; such a quantity of
ground, consisting of so many cubits, shall be assigned to every city;
the suburbs or glebe land to a Levite's city, on the four sides were
four squares, and each square consisted of seventy six acres, one rood,
twenty perches, and eighty square feet; all the four squares amounting
to three hundred and five acres, two roods, one perch, besides fifty
seven feet square, according to Bishop Cumberland.

\(a\) Sotah, c. 5. sect. 3. Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Numbers 35:6](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 35:6</span></span>

And among the cities which ye shall give unto the Levites,.... The
number of which is not yet expressed, but is afterwards: there shall be

six cities for refuge; a sort of asylums, of which there were many among
the Heathens, perhaps in imitation of these, for persons to have
recourse to for safety, when in danger of life: the Septuagint render
the words, "cities of flight" (b); or to flee unto, which certainly was
the use of them: to this the apostle alludes when he speaks of some that
fled for refuge, to lay hold on the hope set before them, [Heb
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018), the word (c) used for refuge
signifies "gathering or receiving", for here persons in distress
gathered or betook themselves; and here they were received, retained,
protected, and sheltered: what and where these six cities were to be,
and were, is after shown:

which ye shall appoint for the manslayer; not for any and everyone, not
for one that killed a man presumptuously and purposely, through enmity
and malice, but for one that did it ignorantly, unawares, and without
design:

that he may flee thither; with all haste, after the commission of the
fact; and, to facilitate his flight, and that he might have no
interruption in it, the sanhedrim were obliged to prepare the ways to
the cities of refuge, and to make them fit and large; and they removed
everything that might cause him to stumble; and they did not leave in
the way neither an hillock, nor a dale, nor a river but they made a
bridge over it, that nothing might retard him that fled thither, as it
is said:

thou shalt prepare thee a way; [Deu
19:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#003) and the breadth of the way to the
cities of refuge was not less than thirty two cubits; and at the parting
of ways (on posts erected) were written, "refuge, refuge", so that the
slayer might know (the way) and turn there (as this directed him): and
on the fifteenth of Adar or February, they met every year, to take care
of this business (d); and they also appointed two disciples of the wise
men, or two studious and understanding persons, to accompany him, not so
much for the direction of the way, as lest the avenger of blood should
meet with him, and slay him in the way; and who were to talk to him, and
persuade him not to do it, suggesting to him that it was not done
designedly, but unawares, and that it would be a bad thing to kill a man
for what he did not intend to do, and which was done without any malice
or enmity to the person killed, and with such like words to cool and
appease the avenger (e):

and to them ye shall add forty two cities; according to the Jewish
writers these also were cities of refuge; for so they say (f),"all the
cities of the Levites receive or are refuges, every one of them is a
city of refuge, as it is said, "and to them ye shall add", &c. the
Scripture makes them all alike for refuge: what difference is there
between cities of refuge, which are separated for refuge, and the rest
of the cities of the Levites? the gates of the cities of refuge receive,
whether according to knowledge or not, (which Mr. Selden (g) interprets,
whether the inhabitants will or not; but the sense of Maimonides
elsewhere (h), and of other writers, is plainly this, whether according
to the knowledge and intention of the manslayer or not, whether he knows
it to be a city of refuge or :not, and whether he purposely came thither
for safety or not,) and he that enters into them is safe; but the rest
of the cities of the Levites do not receive, but according to knowledge
(when the manslayer knowingly and designedly came thither for shelter);
and a manslayer that dwells in a city of refuge gives no more for his
house, but he that dwells in the other cities of the Levites gives more
(or pays for it) to the owner of the house;''but though this is their
unanimous opinion, it rather seems, according to the letter of the
Scripture, that only six were cities of refuge, and the rest were for
the Levites to dwell in by themselves.

\(b\) , Sept. (c) "receptus", Junius & Tremellius; "collectionis",
Piscator; R. Sol. Ohel Moed, fol. 82. 1. "proprie significat
collectionem vel retentionem", Munster. (d) Maimon. Hilchot Rotzeach, c.
8. sect. 5. (e) Misn. Maccot, c. 2. sect. 5. & Maimon. & Bartenora in
ib. (f) Maimon. ut supra, (d)) sect. 11. (g) De Jure Natarae & Gentium,
l. 4. c. 2. p. 489. (h) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Maccot, l. 2. sect.
4.

[Numbers 35:7](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 35:7</span></span>

So all the cities which ye shall give to the Levites shall be forty
eight cities,.... Of these forty eight cities, their names, and what
tribes they were in, and which of them were particularly cities of
refuge, an account is given in [Jos
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#010),

them shall ye give, with their suburbs; according to the dimensions
before prescribed.

[Numbers 35:8](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 35:8</span></span>

And the cities which ye shall give shall be of the possession of the
children of Israel,.... What shall fall by lot for their inheritance,
and they shall be possessed of; and though they are, shall not refuse,
nor grudge to give them, according to the direction of God, whose the
land is, they holding it under him:

from them that have many ye shall give many, but from them that have few
ye shall give few; which rule was observed; for out of Judah, whose lot
was large, and out of Simeon, whose inheritance was within that of
Judah, because it was so large, nine cities were given, whereas out of
the other tribes only four cities out of each were given, and out of one
of them but three, see [Jos 21:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#001),

everyone shall give of his cities unto the Levites, according to his
inheritance which he inheriteth; and the Levites, being thus dispersed
among the several tribes, were of great advantage to them, to instruct
them in the knowledge of divine things; so that though hereby Jacob's
curse on this tribe had its fulfilment, that it should be divided in
Jacob, and scattered in Israel, yet that became a blessing to the rest
of the tribes; see [Gen 49:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#007).

[Numbers 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 35:9</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... At the same time, or he continued his
speech unto him:

saying: as follows.

[Numbers 35:10](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 35:10</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel, and say unto them,.... Now, directly:

when ye come over Jordan into the land of Canaan; as they quickly would,
being now very near it, and of which there was the utmost certainty,
since the Lord had promised to bring them over that river, and put them
in possession of that land.

[Numbers 35:11](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 35:11</span></span>

Then ye shall appoint your cities to be cities of refuge for you,....
And, according to the Jewish writers (i), these were neither to be made
large nor little, but middling; and they appointed them where there were
markets and fairs, at which goods were to be sold; and where there was
plenty of water, and a multitude of people; and where there were but
few, they fetched others from other places; and they neither made nets
for hunting, nor twisted ropes in them, nor sold any warlike
instruments, lest the avenger of blood should use himself to come
thither, under pretence of buying such things, and kill the manslayer:

that the slayer may flee thither, which killeth any person at unawares;
or through error (k), or mistake, not on purpose, with design, or
through malice and enmity, as is afterwards more largely explained.

\(i\) Maimon. Rotzeach, c. 8. sect. 8. Vid. T. Bab. Maccot, fol. 10. 1.
(k) "per errorem", Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "per
imprudentiam", Tigurine version: Vatablus; "in ignorantia", Montanus.

[Numbers 35:12](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 35:12</span></span>

And they shall be unto you cities of refuge from the avenger,.... Or
near kinsman; for as the right of redemption of an estate that was
mortgaged belonged to such an one, so of revenging the blood of any one
that was killed:

that the manslayer die not; by the hand of the avenger, who in the heat
of his passion would, could he come at him, fall upon him, and slay him,
to avenge the death of his relation on him:

until he stand before the congregation in judgment; before the court of
judicature, to be examined, tried, and judged, whether the murder was
committed knowingly and willingly, or whether through mistake and at
unawares: this was done either before the court of judicature in the
city of refuge, who took cognizance of such cases directly, that they
might know whom to harbour and protect, and whom not; or before the
court in the place where the act was committed: interpreters are divided
about this; and Calmet (l) is of opinion that he was examined in both
courts, first more strictly in the city of refuge, and then more
slightly in the place where it was done, which is not improbable;
however, this seems manifest from [Num
35:25](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#025), that the court where it was
committed had power to fetch him from the city of refuge, and set him
before them, and examine into the case; and, if an innocent person,
restored him to the city of refuge, whither he had fled.

\(l\) Dictionary, on the word "Refuge".

[Numbers 35:13](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 35:13</span></span>

And of these cities which ye shall give,.... Of the forty eight cities
they were to give to the Levites, [Num
35:7](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#007),

six cities shall ye have for refuge; which, I think, makes it clear,
that not all the forty eight cities were for refuge, only six of them.

[Numbers 35:14](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 35:14</span></span>

Ye shall give three cites on this side Jordan,.... Which were Bezer in
the wilderness, out of the tribe of Reuben; and Ramoth in Gilead, out of
the tribe of Gad; and Golan in Bashan, out of the tribe of Manasseh,
[Jos 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#008),

and three cities shall ye give in the land of Canaan: which were Kadesh
in Galilee, in Mount Naphtali; Shechem in Mount Ephraim; and
Kirjatharba, or Hebron, in the mountain of Judah, [Jos
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/jos020.htm#007).

which shall be cities of refuge; the three on the other side Jordan, the
Jews say, were separated by Moses, and the three in the land of Canaan
by Joshua, but not one of them was a refuge until they were all
separated (m): it may seem strange that there should be as many in the
two tribes and a half on the other side Jordan, as in the nine tribes
and a half in the land of Canaan; let it be observed, what the Jewish
writers, say (n), Moses separated three cities beyond Jordan, and
opposite them Joshua separated three in the land of Canaan; and they
were like two rows in a vineyard, Hebron in Judea was opposite Bezer in
the wilderness; Shechem in Mount Ephraim was opposite Ramoth in Gilead;
Kadesh in Mount Naphtali was opposite Golan in Bashan; and the three
were so disposed, that there was as much space from the south (of the
land of Israel) to Hebron as from Hebron to Shechem; and as much from
Hebron to Shechem as from Shechem to Kadesh; and as much from Shechem to
Kadesh as from Kadesh to the north beyond Jordan; and it should be known
that the land of the tribes beyond Jordan extended in length as far as
the land of Canaan, and was equal to it, running along it; so that those
in the land of Canaan could soon and easily get over Jordan to the
cities of refuge there, if there was occasion; besides, there is a
direction given, that if their coast should be enlarged, they were to
add three cities more in the land of Canaan, [Deu
19:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#008), hence the Jews have a notion,
that in the days of the Messiah those three cities will be added (o);
but the Messiah is come already, and is the antitype of them all.

\(m\) Misn. Maccot, c. 2. sect. 4. Maimon. Hilchot Rotzeach, c. 8. sect.
2. 3. & in Pirke, c. 4. sect. 2. & Jarchi in loc. (n) T. Bab. Maccot,
fol. 9. 2. (o) Maimon. Rotzeach, c. 8. sect. 4.

[Numbers 35:15](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 35:15</span></span>

These six cities shall be a refuge both for the children of Israel and
for the stranger,.... For an Israelite, and a proselyte of
righteousness, one that embraced the Jewish religion, and in all things
conformed to it, and to whom there was but one law in things civil and
religious:

and for the sojourner among you; the proselyte of the gate, who
renounced idolatry, and observed the commands of the sons of Noah, but
in other things did not comply with the Jewish ceremonies, yet had the
benefit of the cities of refuge equally with the other; though the Jews
say (p), such a proselyte or sojourner had only this privilege, who slew
a proselyte, but not if he slew an Israelite; but for this distinction
there is no foundation in the text:

that everyone that killeth any person unawares may flee thither; whether
an Israelite, or a proselyte of righteousness or of the gate.

\(p\) Misn. Maccot, c. 2. sect. 3.

[Numbers 35:16](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 35:16</span></span>

And if he smite him with an instrument of iron, so that he die,.... As
with an hatchet, hammer, sword, knife, &c.

he is a murderer; the instrument used by him, and with which he smote,
shows that he had a bad design, and intended to kill, or he would never
have smitten a man with such an instrument:

the murderer shall surely be put to death; be condemned to death, and be
executed, by the order of the civil magistrate, according to the law in
[Gen 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006) and not be allowed the
benefit of a city of refuge.

[Numbers 35:17](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 35:17</span></span>

And if he smite him with throwing a stone,.... "Or with a stone of the
hand" (q), which the Jews interpret of a stone so big as to fill a man's
hand, and so

wherewith he may die; at whom it is thrown; is sufficient to cause his
death, if struck with it; so the Targum of Jonathan paraphrases it of
a"stone of fulness of hands, which is sufficient that a man may die with
it,''or be killed by it:

and he die; by the blow he receives from it, either immediately or in a
short time after:

he is a murderer, and the murderer shall surely be put to death; as in
the above case.

\(q\) .

[Numbers 35:18](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 35:18</span></span>

Or if he smote him with an hand weapon of wood,.... A stick, or staff,
or club:

wherewith he may die, and he die; which is sufficient to kill a man, as
the same Targum explains it; and a man dies with the blow that is given
him by it:

he is a murderer, and the murderer shall surely be put to death; no
pardon given him, or the benefit of the city of refuge allowed him.

[Numbers 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 35:19</span></span>

The revenger of blood himself shall slay the murderer,.... Not only
shall have power to do it, but, as it seems, should be obliged to do it;
be the executioner of the murderer; but not before his case has been
heard, examined, tried, and judged; wherefore the Targum of Jonathan
adds,"in judgment,''that is, as Onkelos explains it,"when he is
condemned by judgment,''the court of judicature:

when he meeteth him he shall slay him; the first opportunity he has,
even though, as Jarchi says, if he meets him in the midst of one of the
cities of refuge, and no judgment is passed on him.

[Numbers 35:20](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 35:20</span></span>

But if he thrust him of hatred,.... Or, "and if" (r), since the
Scripture is still speaking of such that shall die for murder, though in
another instance, without having the privilege of a city of refuge; if
he thrusts him with a sword or knife, or rather, since, if anything of
that kind is included in the first instance of smiting with an
instrument of iron, push him down from an high place, as Aben Ezra; so
the men of Nazareth intended to have dispatched Christ in that way, [Luk
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/luk004.htm#029).

or hurl at him by lying in wait, that he die; as a bowing wall, as the
same writer instances in, push down that upon him as he passes along,
lying in wait for him; or throws anything at him, with an intention to
kill him, and does; or casts down anything upon him, a large stone, or
anything else, by which he dies.

\(r\) "et si", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Numbers 35:21](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 35:21</span></span>

Or in enmity smite him with his hand, that he die,.... Give him a blow
with his fist, on some part of his body where life is most in danger,
and which issues in death:

he that smote him shall surely be put to death, for he is a murderer;
and therefore, according to the original law, ought to die, without
reprieve or pardon; and notwithstanding this law made for cities of
refuge, which were to be denied him:

the revenger of blood shall slay the murderer when he meeteth him: that
is, when he is condemned, as both the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan
interpret it, after a hearing and trial of his case.

[Numbers 35:22](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 35:22</span></span>

But if he thrust him suddenly, without enmity,.... Push him from a
precipice, before he is aware, without any malicious design against his
life, but merely through accident:

or have cast upon him anything; from the top of a house, or from a
building he is pulling down, or pushes a bowing wall upon him, not
knowing that he is passing by it:

and without lying of wait: or having contrived to do it, just as he goes
along, or in any other similar way.

[Numbers 35:23](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 35:23</span></span>

Or with any stone wherewith a man may die,.... Which is sufficient to
kill a man, if thrown at him:

seeing him not; and so without intention: the Jews (s) from hence
gather, that a blind man is to be acquitted and dismissed, and not
banished and so stands in no need of a city of refuge; though others say
he is to be banished, and needs it, and ought to have the privilege of
it:

and cast it upon him that he die; casting, it upon another account, and
with another view, but yet falling upon a man, it kills him:

and was not his enemy, neither sought him harm; it was never known that
they were at variance, or that the slayer had ever by any overt act
discovered any malice and enmity against the deceased, by word or deed,
or ever sought to do him any injury, either to his person or property.

\(s\) Misn. Maccot, c. 2. sect. 3.

[Numbers 35:24](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 35:24</span></span>

Then the congregation,.... That is, the court of judicature, assembled
together to hear and try this cause:

shall judge between the slayer and the revenger of blood; shall hear
what both have to say, and pass sentence:

according to these judgments; these judicial laws and rules of judgment
before delivered, exemplified in various cases.

[Numbers 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 35:25</span></span>

And the congregation shall deliver the slayer out of the hand of the
avenger of blood,.... Put him under the care of proper persons, to
conduct him to one of the cities of refuge, or put him in the way to it;
and restrain the avenger of blood from pursuing him, until such time
that it may be judged he is safe arrived there:

and the congregation shall restore him to the city of refuge, whither he
was fled; so that it seems by this, when one had been guilty of
manslaughter, and fled to one of the cities of refuge, he might be taken
from thence and had before a court of justice, and there take his trial;
and if it appeared that the fact was committed by him, ignorantly,
unawares, and without design, then he was returned to his city of
refuge; but, if otherwise, he was put to death, notwithstanding he had
fled thither; and so it is said in the Misnah (t), that"at first, or
formerly, one that killed another ignorantly or presumptuously, they
sent him before to one of the cities of refuge, and the sanhedrim sent
and fetched him from thence: he who was condemned to death by the court,
they slew him; he that was not condemned was dismissed; he that was
condemned to banishment they returned him to his place, according to
[Num 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#025)."

and he shall abide in it, unto the death of the high priest, which was
anointed with the holy oil: and then he was to be set at liberty, and
return to his house and family and have his former possessions and
honours, if he had any, restored unto him, the commission or warrant for
his detainer there ceasing, being made void by the death of the high
priest; who was the prince of the priests and Levites, to whom those
cities belonged, and so under his jurisdiction: or so it was ordered,
because such was the general mourning for such a public loss as an high
priest, that all private revenges would subside, and the cause of them
be buried, in grief and forgetfulness; though, no doubt, this had a
respect to something which will be hereafter taken notice of: the Jews
say (u), that the mothers of the priests used to supply with a
sufficient quantity of food and raiment such who fled to the cities of
refuge, that they might not pray for the death of their sons; and
according to them, a man's case was very bad when there was no high
priest; for so they write (w)"he whose cause is finished (or his case
determined in a court of judicature), and there is no high priest; and
he that slays an high priest, or an high priest slays another, he never
goes out, no not so much as to bear testimony in any cause, and even in
what the congregation has need of him, but there are his dwelling, his
death, and his burial.''

\(t\) Misn. Maccot. c. 2. sect. 6. (u) Misn. Maccot. c. 2. sect. 3. (w)
Misn. Maccot, c. 2. sect. 7.

[Numbers 35:26](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 35:26</span></span>

But if the slayer shall at any time come without the border of the city
of his refuge,.... Which seems to be the three thousand cubits assigned
to every city of the Levites, and so to the cities of refuge; and which,
according to the Jewish writers, were a refuge, as the city itself; and
it is said (x),"he, that kills a man there, is killed for him, but
though the border is a refuge, the slayer does not dwell in it, as it is
said. [Num 35:25](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#025), "he shall abide in
it", but not in its borders:"

whither he was fled; on account of manslaughter.

\(x\) Maimon. Hilchot Rotzeach, c. 8. sect. 11. Misn. Maccot, c. 2.
sect. 7.

[Numbers 35:27](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 35:27</span></span>

And the revenger of blood find him without the borders of the city of
his refuge,.... Without the suburbs, fields, and vineyards belonging to
it:

and the revenger of blood kill the slayer; being exasperated against
him, and to avenge the blood of his relation on him:

he shall not be guilty of blood; or be reckoned murderer, or die for it.

[Numbers 35:28](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 35:28</span></span>

Because he should have remained in the city of his refuge until the
death of the high priest,.... Nothing could give him his liberty but his
death; so that though this was a merciful provision made in such cases
for such persons, and was a considerable benefit and privilege, yet it
carried in it some appearance of a punishment; since such a person was
confined within the boundaries of one of the cities of refuge as long as
the high priest lived; and this was done to make persons cautious how
they were any way accessory to the death of another, though without
design:

but after the death of the high priest the slayer shall return into the
land of his possession; to that part of the land, and to that tribe to
which he belonged, to his house and family, and to his possessions and
inheritances, whatever he had, and to all the honours and privileges he
before enjoyed, and under no danger from the avenger of blood
henceforward: a custom somewhat like this has prevailed in some parts of
Africa, as Leo Africanus (y) relates, that if a man happened to kill
another, all the friends of the deceased conspired to kill him, but if
they could not effect it, then the guilty person was proclaimed an exile
from the city, for the whole space of seven years; and at the expiration
of the whole seven years, when he returned from his exile, the chief men
of the city invited him to a feast, and so he was restored to his
liberty: temples, groves, altars, and statues, were common among other
nations for asylums or refuges, but whole cities very rarely with the
ancients; it seems there were some (z).

\(y\) Descriptio Africae, l. 2. p. 135, 136. (z) Vid. Marmor. Oxon. &
Not. in ib. p. 25. & Rittershusium de Jure Asylorum, c. 2.

[Numbers 35:29](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 35:29</span></span>

So these things shall be for a statute of judgment unto you,.... A
judicial law, according to which they were to proceed in all the above
cases:

throughout your generations in all your dwellings; throughout all ages,
as long as they dwelt in the land of Canaan, even unto the times of the
Messiah, in whom the things figured hereby had their accomplishment: the
cities of refuge were types of Christ: hence a divine person, even the
Messiah, is often spoken of as the refuge of his people, [Psa
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#009) with which compare [Heb
6:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#018) these were places to flee to, as
the word is rendered by the Greek version; to Christ sensible sinners
flee for shelter and safety, which supposes danger in themselves from
the law and justice of God; a sense of that danger which makes them flee
from wrath to come; a view of Christ, as a place of refuge, and that no
other but he will serve their purpose, and therefore make all the haste
and speed they can unto him. The word properly signifies cities of
gathering, or of reception. There was a gathering of the elect of God to
Christ at his death; and there is another at effectual calling, which is
an act of God's grace, and a distinguishing one, when souls gather to
Christ as their Saviour for righteousness, peace, pardon, rest, and
everlasting life; and when Christ receives them, though sinners, into
his arms, and into his heart, and into open fellowship with him, so as
to dwell in him, where they dwell pleasantly and safely; he receives
them into his house here, and into heaven hereafter; and by, and in
Christ, those that flee to him, and are received by him, are retained
and preserved from Satan, law, hell and death. The cities of refuge were
of God's appointing; so Christ, as a Saviour, and rock of refuge to his
people, is appointed and foreordained of God; they were well known for
refuges, as the Lord is in the places of Zion; they were open for all,
at all times, as Christ is for all sinners, even the chief of sinners,
Jews or Gentiles; they are all one in Christ, the Israelite, and the
stranger and sojourner; all impediments were removed out of the way of
them, and plain directions to them given, as are in the Gospel, and by
the ministers of it; and there is always room in Christ for such that
flee to him, as there was in those cities; and being in him, they are
safe from the curse and condemnation of the law, from wrath to come, and
from the second death; and their redemption and atonement, peace and
reconciliation, liberty, life and salvation, are owing to the death of
Christ, their high priest. Abendana (a) observes, that the death of the
high priest atoned for the offence (of manslaughter), which was the
reason the manslayer continued in the city of refuge till his death, and
then was released: however, certain it is, that the death of Christ, our
high priest, atones for every sin of those that flee to him, and by
which they are reconciled to God. In some things there is a difference
between these cities of refuge and Christ; they were six, he but one;
they were for such only who shed blood ignorantly, he for such that were
enemies to him, and lived in malice towards others, and guilty of the
most enormous crimes: to be in these cities of refuge was a kind of
exile and imprisonment, but they that are in Christ are freemen; it was
possible that such might die that were in them, and at most were only
delivered from temporal death, but they that flee to Christ for refuge
are saved with an everlasting salvation.

\(a\) Not. in Miclol Yophi in ver. 25.

[Numbers 35:30](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 35:30</span></span>

Whoso killeth any person,.... Willingly, and through enmity and malice:

the murderer shall be put to death by the mouth of two witnesses; which
is repeated partly to show, that this law concerning the cities of
refuge was not designed to screen a murderer, who was guilty through
malice prepense; and partly for the sake of what is added to it, that
two witnesses are required in such a case, where a man's life is at
stake, to prove the fact against him; which shows how careful the Lord
is, and men should be, of the lives of his creatures, that no man suffer
wrongfully; which is repeated again and again, that it might be
observed, see [Deu 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#006) but one
witness shall not testify against any person, to cause him to die; which
looks as if in other cases, in pecuniary matters, and the like, where
life is not concerned, one witness may be sufficient; though it is
always best and safest to have more if they can be had, that at the
mouth of two or three witnesses everything may be established, [Deu
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu019.htm#015).

[Numbers 35:31](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 35:31</span></span>

Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for the life of a murderer,....
Though he would give all his wealth and substance, all his estates and
possessions, and whatever he is worth in the world; for all that a man
has he will give for his life; but these are not to be taken, nor
anything, and everything his friends may offer for him; all is to be
rejected, the life of such a man is not to be saved on any
consideration:

which is guilty of death; as he is who kills a man willingly and
purposely; but one may be guilty of killing another, and yet not be
deserving of death, when it is done ignorantly and accidentally with
respect to him, for which reason this clause is added: but he shall be
surely put to death; by the order of the civil magistrate; and if this
is not done either through want of evidence, or the fault of the judge,
or the criminal clemency of the chief governor, God sooner or later will
take vengeance on such a person.

[Numbers 35:32](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 35:32</span></span>

Moreover, ye shall take no satisfaction for him that is fled to the city
of his refuge,.... Though for killing a man unawares:

that he should come again to dwell in the land, until the death of the
priest; the high priest; such a man's liberty was not to be purchased
with money, nor even his life to be bought off, should he be taken
without his city; a great ransom could not deliver him from the avenger,
because he was guilty of this law, which so wisely and mercifully
provided for him; and consequently guilty also of great ingratitude to
God, as well as of a breach of his law, and of disrespect to his high
priest, under whom he was protected.

[Numbers 35:33](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 35:33</span></span>

So ye shall not pollute the land wherein ye are,.... The land of Canaan,
as it had been by the old inhabitants of it, by idolatry, adultery, and
murder:

for blood it defileth the land: the shedding of innocent blood defiles a
nation, and the inhabitants of it, brings guilt thereon, and subjects to
punishment:

and the land cannot be cleansed of the blood that is shed therein, but
by the blood of him that shed it; or "there can be no expiation" (b), or
"atonement made" for it in any other way; the blood of the murderer is
required at his hands, and nothing short of it will satisfy law and
justice, see [Gen 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006).

\(b\) "non posset expiatio", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; to the same
sense Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version.

[Numbers 35:34](../../../bib/kjv/num035.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 35:34</span></span>

Defile not therefore the land which ye shall inherit,.... By the
commission of such atrocious crimes, or suffering them to go unpunished,
or by taking a compensation for the life of the guilty person:

wherein I dwell; which is added to strengthen the exhortation, and as
giving a reason why care should be taken not to pollute it, because the
Holy God dwells there; as he did in the tabernacle erected for him, and
in such a peculiar manner as he did not in other lands:

for I the Lord dwell among the children of Israel; he now dwelt among
them as their God, and their King; his tent or tabernacle being pitched
in the midst of the camps of Israel; and so he would continue to dwell
among them when they were come to the land of Canaan, so long as they
observed his laws, statutes, and ordinances; and therefore it behoved
them to be careful that they did not pollute themselves and their land,
and cause him to depart from them.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 36](num036)

</div>
