<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num003)  [Next](num005) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 4

This chapter relates an order to number the Levites fit for business,
and gives an account of the time and age when they should enter into
service, and how long they should continue therein, [Num
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#001); what their particular service
should be; and first of the Kohathites, [Num
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#004); next of the Gershonites, [Num
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#021); and then of the Merarites, [Num
4:29](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#029); after which Moses and Aaron,
with the chief of the congregation, numbered each of them, even as many
as were at the age fit for service, as the Kohathites, [Num
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034); the Gershonites, [Num
4:38](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#038); the Merarites, [Num
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#042); the sum total of which is given,
[Num 4:46](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#046).

[Numbers 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 4:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses, and unto Aaron,.... After they had taken
the number of the Levites, and made an exchange of the firstborn of
Israel for them; and now they are ordered to number them a second time,
and take out from them such as were fit for service:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 4:2</span></span>

Take the sum of the sons of Kohath from among the sons of Levi,.... They
were to begin with them first, and number them:

after their families, by the house of their fathers; as many as were of
the age after mentioned; and the reason why they began with Kohath, and
not Gershon, the eldest son, as in the former numbering, was; not as
Aben Ezra suggests, because of Moses and Aaron, who sprung from him, for
that, if it had any strength in it, would have held good before; but
rather, as Chaskuni and others, because the Kohathites carried the ark
and other holy things; though the true reason seems to be, because of
the order observed in taking down the tabernacle, and removing the parts
of it, and the things in it; and it was most proper and reasonable, when
they were about to take it down, first to take out the ark, table, &c.
which was the business of the Kohathites to carry; next to take down the
curtains, coverings, and hangings for the tabernacle and court, and the
doors thereof, which were the charge of the Merarites; wherefore, in
this order the sum out of each of them fit for business were ordered to
be numbered.

[Numbers 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 4:3</span></span>

From thirty years old and upward even until fifty years old,.... This is
the full time of the Levites service, and the prime season of man's life
for business; at thirty years of age he is at his full strength, and
when fifty it begins to decline: it is said in the Misnah (x),"a son of
thirty years for strength,''upon which one of the commentators (y) makes
this remark, that the Levites set up the tabernacle and took it down,
and loaded the wagons, and carried on their shoulders from thirty years
and upwards: thus both John the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, and
Christ himself, entered into their ministry at this age:

all that enter into the host; army or warfare; for though the Levites
were exempted from going forth to war, yet their service was a sort of
warfare; they were a camp of themselves about the tabernacle, and part
of their work was to watch and guard it, that it was neither defiled nor
robbed; in allusion to this, the ministry of the word is called a
warfare, and ministers of the Gospel good soldiers of Christ, and their
doctrines weapons of warfare, [Ti1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018); some interpret this of the
troop, company, or congregation of the Levites, which a man of thirty
years of age was admitted into for business:

to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation; not in the
sanctuary, either in the holy place or in the most holy place, where
they were never allowed to enter, or do any business in, such as
sacrificing, burning incense, &c. but in that part of it which was
called "the tabernacle of the congregation", or where the people
assembled on occasion, and that was the court, which was so called, as
Jarchi observes on [Exo 29:32](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#032).

\(x\) Pirke Abot, c. 5. sect. 21. (y) Bartenora in Pirke Abot, c. 5.
sect. 21.

[Numbers 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 4:4</span></span>

This shall be the service of the sons of Kohath, in the tabernacle of
the congregation,.... What follows, [Num
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#004),

about the most holy things; which Aben Ezra interprets only of the ark,
which was indeed a most holy thing, and stood in the most holy place;
but there were other holy things, in the care of which the service of
the Kohathites lay; as the shewbread table, the candlestick, and the
altars of incense and burnt offering, and the vail, and the ministering:
vessels, which Jarchi reckons with it, as more holy than all other
things.

[Numbers 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 4:5</span></span>

And when the camp setteth forward,.... Upon the cloud's removing and the
trumpets blowing:

Aaron shall come, and his sons; into the holy place:

and they shall take down the covering vail: the vail that divided
between the holy and the most holy place, which covered all in the holy
of holies out of sight:

and cover the ark of testimony with it; together with the mercy seat and
cherubim on it, that they might not be seen nor touched by the Levites
when they carried them. Now though the high priest himself might not go
into the most holy place but once a year, on the day of atonement, yet
on this occasion, when the tabernacle was to be taken down, and the
things in it to be removed, both he and his sons might enter without
danger; since, as Bishop Patrick observes, the divine Majesty was gone
from thence in the cloud which gave the signal for the motion of the
camp, and the taking down of the tabernacle.

[Numbers 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 4:6</span></span>

And shall put thereon the covering of badgers' skins,.... Not that which
covered the tabernacle, for that was committed to the Gershonites, [Num
4:25](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#025); but a covering made of these on
purpose for the present use, to preserve the ark from rain and dust; and
this covering was put not immediately upon the ark, but upon the other
coverings that were over the ark, and so preserved the vail as well as
the ark:

and shall spread over it a cloth wholly of blue; it is a matter of
question, whether this was over the covering of badgers' skins also; if
over the latter, as one would think it should be, by the order of the
text, how could that be a shelter from the rain and dust, which seems to
be the use of it, and therefore should be the outermost, as one of the
same kind was the outermost covering of the tabernacle? Aben Ezra
observes, there were some that say it was over the covering of badger's
skin, but it is right in mine eyes, says he, that it was spread over the
covering vail; if indeed it was for the sake of honour and dignity, the
first is right, but the badger's skin was on account of rain and dust:

and shall put in the staves thereof: having been removed while the ark
was covering, as Aben Ezra observes, or otherwise they always remained
in their rings, and were never taken out, [Exo
25:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#014); but on this occasion they
might, and then be put in again for the carrying of the ark, which was
the use of them; though he also remarks, that there are some that say
the sense is, they put the staves on the shoulders of them that carried
it, which is not a despicable sense; unless rather it is to be
understood of putting the staves through holes made in the coverings of
the ark, and disposing and fitting them in them, for the better carriage
of it.

[Numbers 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 4:7</span></span>

And upon the table of shewbread they shall spread a cloth of blue,....
That that also might not be seen nor touched by the Levites:

and put thereon the dishes, and the spoons, and the bowls, and the
covers to cover withal: all which belonged to the shewbread table; the
use of which; see Gill on [Exo 25:29](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#029);
these seem to be put not immediately upon the table, but upon the blue
cloth spread over the table:

and the continual bread shall be thereon: the shewbread is called
"continual", because it was always on the table; for while the one was
removing by a set of priests, which had stood a week, new loaves were
placed by another set of priests: this bread seems at this time to be
placed also upon the table, spread with the blue cloth; and from hence
it appears, that the Israelites had the shewbread in the wilderness; for
the making of which they might be supplied with corn from the
neighbouring countries, though they themselves needed not any, being
daily fed with manna.

[Numbers 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 4:8</span></span>

And they shall spread upon them a cloth of scarlet,.... Upon the dishes
and other vessels belonging to the shewbread table, and on the shewbread
itself:

and cover the same with a covering of badgers' skins; this was clearly
the outward covering, and seems to confirm the observation made in [Num
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#006); that the same sort of covering
was the outermost covering of the ark:

and shall put in the staves thereof; which belonged to the table, and
were made to carry it with on occasion, from place to place; see [Exo
25:27](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#027); and the same phrase being used
as here of the staves of the ark in [Num
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#006); seems to confirm the sense of
them there, that they were taken out and put in upon this occasion,
though otherwise fixed.

[Numbers 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 4:9</span></span>

And they shall take a cloth of blue, and cover the candlestick of the
light, and his lamps,.... Which had lamps in it, and were continually
lighted, and gave light in the holy place:

and his tongs, and his snuff dishes, and all the oil vessels thereof,

wherewith they minister unto it; by supplying the lamps with oil, and
snuffing and trimming them.

[Numbers 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 4:10</span></span>

And they shall put it, and all the vessels thereof, within a covering of
badgers' skins,.... Which here also was the outermost covering; the ark
and the shewbread table had three coverings, but the candlestick only
two, they being more sacred than that, especially the ark:

and shall put it upon a bar; the word "mot" perhaps signifies a kind of
mat or mattress, on which the candlestick and its vessels, bundled
together in the covering of the badgers' skins, were laid and carried
between men on staves; and so the Septuagint render the word "staves";
as does the Targum of Onkelos.

[Numbers 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 4:11</span></span>

And upon the golden altar they shall spread a cloth of blue,.... The
altar of incense, which was overlaid with gold, and therefore called a
golden one, to which the allusion is in [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003),

and cover it with a covering of badgers' skins; after the cloth of blue
was spread upon it:

and shall put to the staves thereof; into the rings, both made to bear
and carry it, upon occasion, from place to place.

[Numbers 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 4:12</span></span>

And they shall take all the instruments of ministry,

wherewith they minister in the sanctuary,.... The garments in which the
priests, ministered in the sanctuary, which were laid up in proper
places, and which they only wore when in service:

and put them in a cloth of blue, and cover them with a covering of
badgers' skins; all wrapped up in one bundle:

and shall put them on a bar; the same sort of carriage on which the
candlestick and its vessels were borne; see Gill on [Num
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#010).

[Numbers 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 4:13</span></span>

And they shall take away the ashes from the altar, and spread a purple
cloth thereon. Having cleared the holy of holies, and the holy place,
they were to come forth from thence into the court of the tabernacle,
where stood the altar of burnt offering, which is here meant, and on
which sacrifices being daily burnt, there were always ashes to be
removed; and which at this time was highly necessary to be done, when
the tabernacle was taken down, and all belonging to it to be carried
away; and though no mention is made of the fire, which was always
burning on it, it was doubtless preserved, and care was taken for the
carrying it along with the altar, or in a separate vessel from it.
Bishop Patrick supposes it might be carried upon the grate.

[Numbers 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 4:14</span></span>

And they shall put upon it all the vessels thereof,.... Upon the altar
covered with a blue cloth; on that were to be put everything belonging
to the altar:

wherewith they minister about it; the priests, when they offered
sacrifice on it:

even the censers, the fleshhooks, and the shovels, and the basins,

all the vessels of the altar; of which see [Exo
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#003),

and they shall spread upon it a covering of badgers' skins: to prevent
the rains falling upon them, which being all of brass, would be apt to
tarnish:

and put to the staves of it; which were made to bear and carry it on
such an occasion as this, [Exo 27:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#006).
No mention is made of the laver, though there is both in the Septuagint
and Samaritan versions, which add,"and they shall take a purple cloth
and cover the layer, and its base, and shall put it into a covering of
skin of a blue colour, and put it upon bearers:''but perhaps the reason
why this is not mentioned is, because it was carried uncovered; the
mystery of which, Ainsworth conjectures, was this, that it might be a
lively representation of the grace of God in Christ, continuing and
opened as an ever springing fountain, where always God's elect, having
faith in him, may wash and purge themselves in the blood of Christ unto
forgiveness of sin sanctification of the Spirit, and salvation; see [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001).

[Numbers 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 4:15</span></span>

And when Aaron and his sons had made an end of covering the
sanctuary,.... Not the holy place, nor the most holy place, for these
were not covered by them; but "the holy things" in them, as the
Septuagint version, the ark, shewbread table, &c. and all "the vessels
of the sanctuary"; all appertaining to those holy things, which are
before mentioned. Jarchi interprets the "sanctuary", or the "holiness",
of the ark and altar:

and all the vessels of the sanctuary; of the candlestick and the
instruments of ministry:

as the camp is to set forward; which made the covering of them
necessary, in order to their being carried as that moved:

after that the sons of Kohath shall come to bear it; or rather them, all
the holy things, and their vessels, and that upon their shoulders:

but they shall not touch any holy thing; even in bearing them, neither
the ark nor any other, only the staves and bar, on which they were
carried: lest they die; by the immediate hand of God:

these things are the burden of the sons of Kohath, in the tabernacle of
the congregation; the above things, the ark, &c. which they were to bear
on their shoulders, and not make use of wagons to carry them.

[Numbers 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 4:16</span></span>

And to the office of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,

pertaineth the oil for the light,.... The following things, to bear
them, according to some Jewish writers; but rather it was to give the
oil for the light, that is, the vessels, and so the vessels of the oil
to the sons of the Kohathites; agreeably to which are the Targums of
Onkelos and Jonathan, who paraphrase the words,"and that which was
delivered to Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest, the oil for the
light, &c.''And indeed the words, as they are in the Hebrew text, may be
rendered,"and the oversight of Eleazar, the son of Aaron the priest,
shall be, or "let it be", the oil for the light, &c. (z);''the same word
being so rendered in a latter clause of this same text: he had the
inspection of these, and on him lay to see to it, that these were
carried by the Kohathites, the oil for the light of the lamps in the
candlestick; of which see [Exo 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#020),

and the sweet incense: to burn on the altar of incense, [Exo
30:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#034),

and the daily meat offering; offered with the lambs morning and evening,
[Exo 29:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#040),

and the anointing oil; with which Aaron and his sons were anointed, the
tabernacle and all its vessels, [Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023),

and the oversight of all the tabernacle, and of all that therein is,

in the sanctuary, and in the vessels thereof: the former, the oil for
the light, &c. were his immediate oversight and care; but the oversight
of these by his brother Ithamar, according to the Jewish writers.

\(z\) So Montanus, Tigurine version, Piscator.

[Numbers 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 4:17</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses, and unto Aaron,.... And gave them a very
solemn and awful charge about this affair of the Kohathites, it being a
very hazardous one they were employed in:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 4:18</span></span>

Cut ye not off the tribe of the families of the Kohathites from among
the Levites. Or give no occasion, as the Targum of Jonathan; or be not
the cause of their cutting off, as Jarchi, through negligence or
inadvertency of theirs, in packing up the above things, and delivering
them to them.

[Numbers 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 4:19</span></span>

But thus do unto them,.... As after directed:

that they may live and not die; live long, and not die a sudden and
violent death:

when they approach unto the most holy things; the ark, the shewbread
table, &c. to take them up and carry them:

Aaron and his sons shall go in; into the holy and most holy places:

and appoint them in everyone to his service, and to his burden; what
everyone shall do, and how they shall take them up, and bear them.

[Numbers 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 4:20</span></span>

But they shall not go in to see when the holy things are covered,....
They were not to be present while they were packing up, test they should
see any of them with their eyes; they were not to go in until they were
quite covered out of sight; which may signify the hiding of the
mysteries of grace in those things under the former dispensation, when
even the Levites themselves were not admitted to a sight of them; see
[Eph 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#004),

lest they die; by the immediate hand of God.

[Numbers 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 4:21</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Though Aaron is not mentioned here,
he was concerned in taking the sum of the Gershonites, as well as of the
Kohathites, as appears from [Num 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#041),

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 4:22</span></span>

Take also the sum of the sons of Gershon,.... As well as of the sons of
Kohath; for though Gershon was Levi's eldest son, yet his posterity were
not excused from the service of the tabernacle, and bearing things of it
in journeying:

throughout the houses of their fathers, by their families; all in their
several houses, and in the several families in those houses, that were
of the age next mentioned, were to be numbered.

[Numbers 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 4:23</span></span>

From thirty years old and upward, until fifty years old,

shalt thou number them,.... Take an account how many there are of that
age, and so fit for service (a); See Gill on [Num
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003),

to do the work in the tabernacle of the congregation; as the rest of the
Levites; see [Num 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003);

\(a\) "ad militandum militiam", Montanus, Drusius.

[Numbers 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 4:24</span></span>

This is the service of the families of the Gershonites, to serve, and
for burdens. The former of these phrases Aben Ezra interprets of setting
up the tabernacle, making the bread (the shewbread), slaying (the
sacrifices), and keeping, that is, watching and guarding, the
tabernacle; and the latter of what they did when journeying, bearing and
carrying the things assigned to them, afterwards mentioned.

[Numbers 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 4:25</span></span>

And they shall bear the curtains of the tabernacle,.... The ten curtains
of fine linen, [Exo 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#001),

and the tabernacle of the congregation; the curtains of goats' hair made
for a tent over it, as Jarchi, see [Exo
26:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#007),

his covering the covering of rams skins dyed red, [Exo
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#014),

and the covering of the badgers' skins that is above upon it; over all
the rest:

and the hanging for the door of the tabernacle of the congregation; the
eastern vail, as Jarchi calls it, which was for the door of the tent
that led into the tabernacle, the holy place, [Exo
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#036).

[Numbers 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 4:26</span></span>

And the hangings of the court,.... Which made the great court that
surrounded the tabernacle, [Exo 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009),

and the hanging for the door of the gate of the court; the eastern gate
that led into the court, an hanging of twenty cubits, [Exo
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#016),

which is by the tabernacle, and by the altar round about; that is, which
hangings that formed the court, and were round about the tabernacle, and
the altar of burnt offering; See Gill on [Exo
26:36](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#036),

and their cords; which fastened the hangings to pins or stakes fixed in
the ground to keep them tight, that they might not be moved to and fro
with the wind:

and all the instruments of their service; in the court, as the tables on
which the sacrifices were laid, and the hooks, and cords, and pins, on
which they were hung and fastened, as Aben Ezra; see [Eze
40:39](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#039),

and all that is made for them; for the vessels of service, or for the
tabernacle, or the altar, as the same writer intimates:

so shall they serve; by bearing them and carrying them.

[Numbers 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 4:27</span></span>

At the appointment of Aaron and his sons,.... As they shall order and
direct:

shall be all the service of the sons of the Gershonites; everyone of
them was to take their share, as Aaron and his sons should appoint them:

in all their burdens, and in all their service; what each of them should
carry, and in what they should perform duty:

and ye shall appoint to them in charge all their burdens; charge them
carefully to keep all that were committed to them to bear, that none be
lost, not a pin nor a cord.

[Numbers 4:28](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 4:28</span></span>

This is the service of the families of the sons of Gershon,.... Which
they should execute when the camp and tabernacle were in motion:

in the tabernacle of the congregation in the court; where they should
take up their burdens, or which lie in things respecting the tabernacle;
this was the part they were to be employed in, namely, in taking care of
the hangings of the tabernacle, &c.

and their charge shall be under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the
priest; the things committed to their care were delivered by him to
them, and they were under his inspection and direction.

[Numbers 4:29](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 4:29</span></span>

As for the sons of Merari,.... The third and youngest son of Levi:

thou shalt number them after their families, by the house of their
fathers; which is the form of expression used of them all; See Gill on
[Num 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#002).

[Numbers 4:30](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 4:30</span></span>

From thirty years old and upward,.... The Septuagint version here, and
in [Num 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003), renders it, from twenty
five years old and upward, agreeable to [Num
8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024), at the which age the Levites
went into the tabernacle, to wait and to learn their business, but they
did not enter upon it till thirty:

even unto fifty years old shalt thou number them; at which age they were
discharged from business:

everyone that entereth into the service, to do the work of the
tabernacle of the congregation; See Gill on [Num
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#003).

[Numbers 4:31](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 4:31</span></span>

And this is the charge of their burden,.... What should be committed to
their care and charge, and they should bear and carry:

according to all their service in the tabernacle of the congregation;
which was assigned to them as their part, and which was very heavy and
cumbersome, and therefore they had wagons allowed them, [Num
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#008),

the boards of the tabernacle, and the bars thereof, and the pillars
thereof, and sockets thereof; all these belonged to the holy and to the
most holy place; see [Exo 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo026.htm#015).

[Numbers 4:32](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 4:32</span></span>

And the pillars of the court round about, and their sockets,

and their pins, and their cords,.... These belonged to the court of the
tabernacle; the pillars were what the hangings were hung upon, and the
sockets, into which the pillars were set, and the and cords, with which
the hangings were fastened; see [Exo
27:9](../../../bib/kjv/exo027.htm#009),

with all their instruments, and with all their service; whatever else
were used in, and served for the support of this part of the tabernacle:

and by name ye shall reckon the instruments of the charge of their
burden; everything, even the least that were committed to their charge,
and they were to bear and carry, either they themselves, or in wagons,
were to be mentioned by name; and not only every board, pillar, and
socket, were to be told out to them, and particularly named, how many
they were, to what they belonged, from whence they were taken, and where
to be replaced; but every pin, and cord, and the use of them, that so
when they came to set up the tabernacle again, there might be nothing
wanting in its place to secure it, and make it as firm as at first: such
particular notice and care does God take of all his people, and Christ
of all committed to him, and so should ministers of the word of all that
are their charge, who must one day give an account to God, [Heb
13:17](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#017).

[Numbers 4:33](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 4:33</span></span>

This is the service of the families of the sons of Merari,.... The
Mahlites and Mushites, namely, the service before observed, the
particulars of which are given:

according to all their service in the tabernacle of the congregation;
agreeably to what was allotted to them in that part of the tabernacle
they were concerned in:

under the hand of Ithamar the son of Aaron the priest; who had the
oversight of these as well as of the Gershonites, as Eleazar had of the
Kohathites; though as Eleazar was the chief of the tribe of Levi, it is
thought that Ithamar acted under him, [Num
3:32](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#032).

[Numbers 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 4:34</span></span>

And Moses and Aaron, and the chief of the congregation,

numbered the sons of the Kohathites,.... Perhaps these chiefs were the
same with those who were concerned with Moses and Aaron in numbering all
the tribes whose names were given, [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005); the Kohathites are begun with,
according to the divine direction, and then the Gershonites and
Merarites in their order; and in [Num
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034) is only an account of the
numbering of each of them, as ordered by the Lord, and this account is
expressed in the same terms in them all; there remains nothing to be
observed but the particular sums of each of them, the number of the
Kohathites from thirty years old even to fifty, men able and fit for
business, were 2750, [Num 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#036);
whereas their number from a month old were 8600, [Num
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#028); so that not a third part of them
were at an age for service: the number of the Gershonites were 2630,
[Num 4:40](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#040); whose number of males in
all were 7500, [Num 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#022); so that they
were rather more than a third part who were able-bodied then and fit for
business; and the number of the Merarites were 3200, [Num
4:44](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#044); and as the number of males of a
month old and upwards were 6200, [Num
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#034); there were more than half of
them able and fit men for service; in which, as Ainsworth observes, may
be seen the wisdom of divine Providence, that whereas the service of the
Kohathites and Gershonites were the lightest, and what was committed to
them the easiest of carriage, they had the fewer hands of able men to be
employed, though their numbers of individuals were the greatest; and the
Merarites, who had the smallest number of males, yet having the heaviest
work to do in carrying burdens, loading and unloading wagons, were
superior to the rest in their number of able bodied men; and thus God
makes good his promise, that as the day of his people is, their strength
shall be; whatever work and service God calls men to, he will fit them
for it: the sum total of the Levites, in the several divisions of them,
who were between: thirty and fifty years of age, in which they performed
their office, was 8580, [Num 4:48](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#048); a
small number, as the above writer observes, of such as warred the
spiritual warfare in the sanctuary of God, when the tribe of Judah
afforded 74,600 for the outward warfare.

after their families, and after the house of their fathers; See Gill on
[Num 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#002).

[Numbers 4:35](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 4:35</span></span>

From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old,.... See Gill
on [Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:36](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">num 4:36</span></span>

And those that were numbered of them by their families,.... See Gill on
[Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:37](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">num 4:37</span></span>

These were they that were numbered of the families of the
Kohathites,.... See Gill on [Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:38](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 4:38</span></span>

And those that were numbered of the sons of Gershon,.... See Gill on
[Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:39](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 4:39</span></span>

From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old,.... See Gill
on [Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:40](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 4:40</span></span>

Even those that were numbered of them,.... See Gill on [Num
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034);

[Numbers 4:41](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 4:41</span></span>

These are they that were numbered of the families,.... See Gill on [Num
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034);

[Numbers 4:42](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">num 4:42</span></span>

And those that were numbered of the families of the sons of Merari,....
See Gill on [Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034);

[Numbers 4:43](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">num 4:43</span></span>

From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old,.... See Gill
on [Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:44](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">num 4:44</span></span>

Even those that were numbered of them after their families,.... See Gill
on [Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:45](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">num 4:45</span></span>

These be those that were numbered of the families of the sons of
Merari,.... See Gill on [Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034);

[Numbers 4:46](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">num 4:46</span></span>

All those that were numbered of the Levites, whom Moses and Aaron and
the chief of Israel numbered,.... See Gill on [Num
3:34](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:47](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">num 4:47</span></span>

From thirty years old and upward even unto fifty years old,.... See Gill
on [Num 4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:48](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 4:48</span></span>

Even those that were numbered of them,.... See Gill on [Num
4:34](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#034).

[Numbers 4:49](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">num 4:49</span></span>

According to the commandment of the Lord, they were numbered by the hand
of Moses,.... Aaron and the chief of the congregation of Israel
assisting it:

everyone according to his service; called in [Num
4:47](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#047) "the service of the ministry", or
"service of service", which Jarchi interprets of that part of the
service of the Levites, which lay in singing the song with cymbals and
harps; which, he says, was a service to another service; though it seems
to be better explained, by Chaskuni, of their taking down and setting up
of the tabernacle, which was a service incumbent on all the Levites:

and according to his burden: called "the service of the burden", [Num
4:47](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#047); which the last mentioned writer
restrains to the ark, table, candlestick, and altars, which the
Kohathites carried on their shoulders; but may be extended to what each
of them bore and carried when journeying:

thus were they numbered of him, as the Lord commanded Moses; from thirty
years old to fifty, as Jarchi observes; for that was the order given to
Moses by the Lord, which he punctually attended to, as a faithful
servant in the house of God.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 5](num005)

</div>
