<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num000)  [Next](num002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 1

In this chapter orders are given to Moses to take the number of the
children of Israel, from twenty years old and upwards, [Num
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001); and the men that were to assist
in this work, one of each tribe are mentioned by name, [Num
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#004); all which was accordingly done,
[Num 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#017); and the particular numbers
of each tribe are recorded, as they were taken, [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020); and the sum total is given, [Num
1:45](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#045); the Levites being excepted, who
were employed about the tabernacle, and so not to be employed in
military service, [Num 1:47](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#047); they
encamped about that, while the Israelites pitched their tents every man
by his own camp and standard, [Num
1:52](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#052).

[Numbers 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 1:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai,.... Which is
different from the wilderness of Sin, [Exo
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001); and had its name from the
mountain so called, on which God gave the law of the decalogue, and
where the Israelites had been encamped eleven months, [Exo
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#001),

in the tabernacle of the congregation; which had now been set up a whole
month, and out of which the Lord had delivered to Moses the several laws
recorded in the preceding book in that space of time, [Exo
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#017),

on the first day of the second month; the month Ijar, as the Targum of
Jonathan, which answers to part of our April, and part of May, and was
the second month of the ecclesiastical year, which began with Abib or
Nisan:

in the second year after they were come out of the land of Egypt; that
is, the children of Israel, who had now been a year and half a month out
of it:

saying, as follows.

[Numbers 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 1:2</span></span>

Take ye the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel,....
Excepting the Levites; nor were any account taken of the mixed multitude
that came out of Egypt with the children of Israel, only of them; and
this account was taken, partly to observe the fulfilment of the divine
promise to Abraham concerning the multiplication of his seed, and partly
that it might be observed, that at the end of thirty eight years from
hence, when they were numbered again, there were but three left of this
large number, their carcasses falling in the wilderness because of their
sins; and chiefly, as Aben Ezra observes, this sum was now taken to fix
their standards, and for their better and more orderly journeying and
encampment; for on the twentieth of this month they set forward on their
journey from hence, [Num 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011); the
word for the order is in the plural number, take ye, being given both to
Moses and Aaron, who were to take the number, and did, [Num
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#003),

after their families; into which their tribes were divided:

by the house of their fathers; for if the mother was of one tribe, and
the father of another, the family was according to the tribe of the
father, as Jarchi notes, a mother's family being never called a family,
as Aben Ezra observes:

with the number of their names; of every particular person, whose name
was inserted in a list or register:

every male by their poll; or head (b); for none but males were numbered:
the Lord's spiritual Israel are a numbered people, written in the book
of life, placed into the hand of Christ, and exactly known by him, even
by name; yea, all that belong to him are numbered, and the very airs of
their heads,

\(b\) "per capita sua", Pagninus, &c,

[Numbers 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 1:3</span></span>

From twenty years old and upwards,.... All that had entered into their
twentieth year, or, as it should rather seem, who were full twenty years
of age, and all that were above it without any limitation; though some
limit it to fifty, and others to sixty years, when men may be reasonably
excused going to war; for to know who were fit for it seems to be a
principal design of this order, as follows:

all that are able to go forth to war in Israel; who being about to
journey, might expect to meet with enemies, with whom they would be
obliged to engage in battle; and therefore it was proper to know their
strength, and whom to call out upon occasion: Aben Ezra observes, that
the phrase "in Israel" excepts the mixed multitude; those were not of
Israel, and so not numbered, and perhaps not to be trusted or depended
upon in war; nor were they mustered and marshalled by the standards of
the several tribes; in a mystical sense, those numbered may signify the
valiant of Israel, the same as the young men in [Jo1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#014); see [Sol
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#007),

thou and Aaron shall number them by their armies; each tribe making a
considerable army; see Gill on [Exo
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#004); these people were now typical of
the church of God in its militant state in the wilderness, for which
they are provided, and prepared, and accoutred.

[Numbers 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 1:4</span></span>

And with you there shall be a man of every tribe,.... Excepting Levi, of
which Moses and Aaron were, to assist in taking the account, and to see
that it was an exact and perfect one:

everyone head of the house of his fathers; and prince of the tribe he
belonged to, as appears from [Num 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#016)
and [Num 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#002), where an account is
given of the same persons as princes of the tribes that offered at the
dedication of the altar, who here assisted in the taking this account;
the Targum of Jonathan calls them each a prince, as Prince Elizur, &c.

[Numbers 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 1:5</span></span>

And these are the names of the men that shall stand with you,.... Be
present with Moses and Aaron when numbering the people; not merely as
spectators of the affair, and inspectors of the accounts, but as
assistants in the work; each man in his tribe, being best acquainted
with the families and houses in it; and these men were not pitched upon
by Moses and Aaron, nor chosen by their respective tribes, but were
appointed and named by the Lord himself, which was doing them great
honour:

of the tribe of Reuben: or "for Reuben" (c), for the taking the number
of men in this tribe; and so of all the rest, see [Num
1:44](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#044),

Elizur the son of Shedeur; from [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005) the names of those several men are
given, which were very proper for Moses and Aaron to know, though of
little importance to us; nor the signification of their several names,
given by Ainsworth and others; only, as Bishop Patrick observes, most of
them show how much God was in the thoughts of those who, imposed these
names on their children, several of them having in them "El" or "Eli",
"God" or "my God", and "Shaddai", "Almighty" or "all-sufficient": to
which may be added, that in some of them they seem to respect the
Messiah, as Elizur, signifying "my God the rock"; and Shelumiel may be
rendered, "God my peace"; and Zurishaddai, "my rock the Almighty", or
"all-sufficient"; and Pedazhur, "the rock redeemeth": nor is there
anything of any moment to be remarked, unless the order in which the
several tribes are placed; and first the children of Leah, beginning
with Reuben, the firstborn; and the rest, Simeon and Judah, are ranked
according to their birth; Levi being omitted, because that tribe was not
now numbered, and besides, Moses and Aaron were of it; and then Issachar
and Zebulun; after those the children of Rachel, because of her honour
and glory above the handmaids, as Aben Ezra remarks; who further
observes, that it begins with Ephraim, following Jacob our father, that
is, because of the blessing of Jacob, who preferred Ephraim the younger
to Manasseh the elder; and here Ephraim and Manasseh are set before
Benjamin, because they were in the place of Joseph; and after that the
account goes on with Dan, because, he was the firstborn of the
handmaids; and after him Asher, though the second son of Zilpah, is
placed before Gad, the first son, because, says the same Aben Ezra, the
Lord knew that he would be the head of those that encamped by the
standard of Dan, and so is placed next to him; and after him Gad, who
was the firstborn of Leah's handmaid; and Naphtali last of all, the
second son of Bilhah: this order seems to be designed to suit with their
encampments, and the form of them.

\(c\) "pro Ruben", Samar. vers. "ipsi Reuben", Montanus.

[Numbers 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 1:6</span></span>

Of Simeon; Shelumiel the son of Zurishaddai. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 1:7</span></span>

Of Judah; Nahshon the son of Amminadab. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 1:8</span></span>

Of Issachar; Nethaneel the son of Zuar. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 1:9</span></span>

Of Zebulun; Eliab the son of Helon. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 1:10</span></span>

Of the children of Joseph: of Ephraim; Elishama the son of Ammihud: of
Manasseh; Gamaliel the son of Pedahzur. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 1:11</span></span>

Of Benjamin; Abidan the son of Gideoni. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 1:12</span></span>

Of Dan; Ahiezer the son of Ammishaddai. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 1:13</span></span>

Of Asher; Pagiel the son of Ocran. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 1:14</span></span>

Of Gad; Eliasaph the son of Deuel. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 1:15</span></span>

Of Naphtali; Ahira the son of Enan. See Gill on [Num
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#005).

[Numbers 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 1:16</span></span>

These were the renowned of the congregation,.... The most famous and
eminent among the people, for their birth and pedigree, or for their
excellent qualities of wisdom, courage, and the like; or "the called of
the congregation" (d), whom God had called by name and selected from the
rest of the congregation to the above service, whereby great honour was
done them: Aben Ezra says, the sense is, that the congregation did
nothing until they had called them; with which agrees the note of
Jarchi,"who were called to every business of importance in the
congregation:"

princes of the tribes of their fathers; as Elizur was prince of the
children of Reuben, [Num 7:30](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#030); the
same is there said of the rest in their respective tribes:

heads of thousands in Israel; the congregation of Israel being divided
into thousands, hundreds, fifties, and tens, by the advice of Jethro,
[Exo 18:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo018.htm#021); each of these divisions
had a ruler over them, and thousands being the highest number, these
princes were chiliarchs, rulers or heads of thousands.

\(d\) "convocati coetus", Montanus, Drusius; "convocati e coetu", Junius
& Tremellius, Piscator.

[Numbers 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 1:17</span></span>

And Moses and Aaron took these men,.... They doubtless sent for them,
and acquainted them with the nomination of them, by the Lord himself,
for such a service; and they took them with them to the place where the
number of the people was to be taken:

which are expressed by their names: in [Num
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#016), and that as declared by the
mouth of God himself.

[Numbers 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 1:18</span></span>

And they assembled all the congregation together on the first day of the
second month,.... The month Ijar, as the Targum of Jonathan, answering
to part of April and May: this was done on the selfsame day the Lord
spake unto Moses about this affair, [Num
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001); so expeditious were he and Aaron
in doing the will of God:

and they declared their pedigrees; either Moses and Aaron, according to
Aben Ezra, who inquired when they were born, because of the computation
of twenty years; and then their birth was wrote down, as he says; or
rather the people declared their pedigrees, of what tribe, family, and
house they were, who their parents, when born, and so, of course, how
old they were; Jarchi interprets it, they brought the books of their
genealogies, and witnesses to confirm the birth of everyone of them, to
show their genealogy according to their tribe; nor is it at all unlikely
that every family and house, or master thereof, kept a register of those
born to him in it, whereby their age could be ascertained as well as
pedigree:

after their famines, by the house of their fathers, according to the
number of their names, from twenty years old and upwards, by their poll:
that is, every tribe gave an account of the families in it, every family
what houses were in it, and every house what number of males were in it,
and of what age; and such were numbered who were twenty years old and
upward.

[Numbers 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 1:19</span></span>

As the Lord commanded Moses,.... In this Moses and David differed in
numbering the people of Israel; the one did it by an express command
from God, and in obedience to it; the other without one, and against his
will, [Ch1 21:17](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#017),

so he numbered them in the wilderness of Sinai; where they now were when
this order was given, [Num 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001); and
from whence they removed the twentieth day of this month, [Num
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#011); so that in less than three
weeks time, perhaps much sooner, this affair was finished; and it may
be, that the place of numbering them at this time is expressly observed,
to distinguish it from another numbering of them, recorded in this book,
which was done in the plains of Moab, [Num
26:2](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#002).

[Numbers 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 1:20</span></span>

And the children of Reuben, Israel's eldest son,.... Were numbered
first, and next to them those of Simeon and Gad, for they were numbered
according to the order in which they were to be encamped; for under
Reuben's standard were Simeon and Gad, and under Judah's Issachar and
Zebulun, and under Ephraim's Manasseh and Benjamin, and under Dan's
Asher and Naphtali; and according to their order were the tribes
numbered:

by their generations: or "their generations", the birth, descent, and
pedigree of them:

after their families, by the house of their fathers: according to the
families and houses to which they belonged:

according to the number of the names by their polls, every male from
twenty years old and upward; their names were taken down, the number of
them counted by their heads, even all the males that were above twenty
years of age:

all that were able to go forth to war; which phrase, as it suggests that
before this age they were not reckoned able bodied men for war, in
common, though some might; so it seems to except all infirm persons, by
reason of age and otherwise: now in all the other account of the
numbering of the rest of the tribes, the same forms of expression are
used as here, only the tribe of Simeon, which is the next, these words
are left out, "by their polls, every male", which being twice observed,
need not be repeated, since by these instances it might be sufficiently
known that the number was taken by a poll, and only of males; so that in
[Num 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#023), there is nothing material
to observe, or anything different from what is in this verse, but the
particular sums of each tribe numbered, which stand thus: of the tribe
of Reuben 46,500; of the tribe of Simeon, 59,300; of the tribe of Gad,
45,650; of the tribe of Judah, 74,600; of the tribe of Issachar, 54,400;
of the tribe of Zebulun, 57,400; of the tribe of Ephraim, 40,500; of the
tribe of Manasseh, 32,200; of the tribe of Benjamin 35,400; of the tribe
of Dan, 62,700; of the tribe of Asher 41,500; of the tribe of Naphtali,
53,400; in which may be observed the various increase of the tribes,
agreeably to divine predictions, and according to the sovereign will and
infinite wisdom of God: Reuben, the firstborn, did not excel in number,
six of the tribes having more in number than he: Judah had by far the
greatest increase of them all, from whom the chief ruler was to come,
and even the King Messiah; and in process of time was to become a
kingdom of itself; Ephraim, the younger son of Joseph, was much more
fruitful than Manasseh, his elder, more than eight thousand being
numbered of the former than of the latter, all which agree with Jacob's
prophecies, [Gen 49:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#004); nor had they
always the greatest number who had the most sons at their going down
into Egypt; for though Simeon, who had then more sons than Reuben, had
at this time a larger posterity; yet Gad, who had more than Simeon, had
now fewer descendants; and Dan, who had but one son at that time, had
now almost double the number of Benjamin, who then had ten sons: and it
may be observed of other tribes, that their increase was not in
proportion to the number of the sons of the patriarchs then; see [Gen
46:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#008).

[Numbers 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 1:21</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Reuben, were
forty and six thousand and five hundred. 46,500 men. See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 1:22</span></span>

Of the children of Simeon, by their generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 1:23</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Simeon, were
fifty and nine thousand and three hundred. 59,300 men. See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 1:24</span></span>

Of the children of Gad, by their generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 1:25</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Gad,

were forty and five thousand six hundred and fifty. 45,650 men. See Gill
on [Num 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 1:26</span></span>

Of the children of Judah, by their generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 1:27</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Judah, were
threescore and fourteen thousand and six hundred. 74,600 men. See Gill
on [Num 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 1:28</span></span>

Of the children of Issachar, by their generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:29](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 1:29</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Issachar, were
fifty and four thousand and four hundred. 54,400 men. See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:30](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">num 1:30</span></span>

Of the children of Zebulun, by their generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:31](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">num 1:31</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Zebulun, were
fifty and seven thousand and four hundred. 57,400 men. See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:32](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">num 1:32</span></span>

Of the children of Joseph, namely, of the children of Ephraim, by their
generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:33](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">num 1:33</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Ephraim, were
forty thousand and five hundred. 40,500 men. See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:34](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">num 1:34</span></span>

Of the children of Manasseh, by their generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:35](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 1:35</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Manasseh, were
thirty and two thousand and two hundred. 32,200 men. See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:36](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">num 1:36</span></span>

Of the children of Benjamin, by their generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:37](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">num 1:37</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Benjamin, were
thirty and five thousand and four hundred. 35,400 men. See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:38](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 1:38</span></span>

Of the children of Dan, by their generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:39](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">num 1:39</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Dan,

were threescore and two thousand and seven hundred. 62,700 men. See Gill
on [Num 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:40](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">num 1:40</span></span>

Of the children of Asher, by their generations,.... See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:41](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">num 1:41</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Asher, were forty
and one thousand and five hundred. 41,500 men. See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:42](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">num 1:42</span></span>

Of the children of Naphtali, throughout their generations,.... See Gill
on [Num 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:43](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">num 1:43</span></span>

Those that were numbered of them, even of the tribe of Naphtali, were
fifty and three thousand and four hundred. 53,400 men. See Gill on [Num
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#020).

[Numbers 1:44](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">num 1:44</span></span>

These are those that were numbered,.... Or, as the Targum of Jonathan,
these are the sums of the numbers; namely, those before given of the
several respective tribes:

which Moses and Aaron numbered, and the princes of Israel, being twelve
men; for though the tribe of Levi was not numbered, yet Joseph having a
double portion, his two sons are reckoned as distinct tribes; so that
one out of each tribe made up the number twelve:

each one for the house of his fathers; for the tribe he belonged to,
with which it might reasonably be supposed he was best acquainted, and
could more readily take the number of them.

[Numbers 1:45](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">num 1:45</span></span>

So were all those that were numbered of the children of Israel,.... Of
all the tribes, excepting Levi, that is, all the sums of the number of
the children of Israel; all put together made the sum total given in the
next verse:

by the house of their fathers, from twenty years old and upward, all
that were able to go forth to war in Israel; all in every tribe, family,
and house, that were above twenty years of age, healthful and strong,
and fit for war.

[Numbers 1:46](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">num 1:46</span></span>

Even all they that were numbered,.... Of whom an account was taken, and
their names set down in a book or register: were 603,550; which was
exactly the number of them, when taken about seven months before this,
when they were assessed for defraying the expenses of the tabernacle,
[Exo 38:26](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#026); so that it should seem not
one person had died during that time; for though there were three that
died a violent death in that compass of time, yet two of them were of
the tribe of Levi, not now numbered; and the other was not an Israelite
by the father's side; see [Lev 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev010.htm#001);
but it is not very probable, among such a vast number of people, that
not one above twenty years of age should die in that time: some
therefore are of opinion, that the tribe of Levi was numbered before,
though not now; and that there was such an increase in that time among
the other tribes as to equal the number of males of twenty years and
upwards, in that tribe taken into the service of God, by which they were
no losers.

[Numbers 1:47](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">num 1:47</span></span>

But the Levites,.... The tribe of Levi were excepted from this muster,
they being employed in a kind of warfare, and therefore not to be
engaged in another:

after the tribe of their fathers, were not numbered among them: the rest
of the tribes; the reason follows.

[Numbers 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 1:48</span></span>

For the Lord had spoken unto Moses,.... Not to number the Levites, when
he gave him the orders to number the rest of the tribes: this is
observed, lest it should be thought that this was what Moses did of
himself, out of affection to the tribe he was of, and to spare it, that
it might not be obliged to go forth to war when others did; not that
they were forbid to engage in war, or that it was unlawful for them so
to do, for when necessity required, and they were of themselves willing
to engage in it, they might, as appears in the case of the Maccabees,
but they might not be forced into it; they were, as Josephus (e) says,
exempted from it; and so all concerned in religious service, both among
Heathens and Christians, have always been excused bearing arms:

saying; as follows.

\(e\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 12. sect. 4.

[Numbers 1:49](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">num 1:49</span></span>

Only thou shall not number the tribe of Levi,.... That is, along with
the other tribes, for it might be numbered by itself, as it afterwards
was, [Num 3:43](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#043),

neither take the sum of them among the children of Israel; which
confirms what is before observed: now this being the declared will of
God clears Moses from all partiality to his own tribe, he doing nothing
but what he had a command of God for it.

[Numbers 1:50](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">num 1:50</span></span>

But thou shalt appoint the Levites over the tabernacle of testimony,....
So called from the ark in it, in which was the law of God, which was a
testimony of the will of God to his people:

and over all the vessels thereof; the candlestick, table: and altars, as
Aben Ezra notes:

and over all things that belong to it; the vessels of vessels, as the
same writer calls them; for the candlestick, shewbread table, and the
two altars of incense and burnt offering had vessels appertaining to
them:

they shall bear the tabernacle, and all the vessels thereof; carry them
from place to place when needful:

and they shall minister unto it; by taking care of the instruments of it
and the vessels in it, but not by doing any part of the priestly office
in it, as offering sacrifice, burning incense, and the like:

and shall encamp round about the tabernacle; they were a sort of camp or
army of themselves, and their station was around the tabernacle, which
was a kind of royal palace to God the King of kings; so that as they
were the king's legion, and to be numbered alone, as Jarchi observes, in
[Num 1:49](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#049), so they were a guard about
his palace, and were placed between that and the camp of Israel.

[Numbers 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">num 1:51</span></span>

And when the tabernacle setteth forward,.... Or was about to set
forward; that is, the congregation were about to journey, and take the
tabernacle with them, as they always did, when and wherever they
journeyed:

the Levites shall take it down; unpin it, take the boards and pillars
out of their sockets, and the bars out of their places, and the whole
into pieces, in order to be put into wagons prepared to carry them, of
which mention is made in a following chapter:

and when the tabernacle is pitched, the Levites shall set it up; at
whatsoever place the congregation encamped and took up their abode for
any time: the tabernacle was pitched in the manner as tents are, when
the Levites put the several parts together, laid the sockets, put in the
boards and the bars, and also the pillars of the court and elsewhere,
and hung the hangings upon them; and set the candlestick, tables,
altars, ark, and all the vessels of the sanctuary in their proper
places:

and the stranger that cometh nigh; to meddle with or touch the above
things, to assist in taking down or setting up the tabernacle, or
bearing any of the vessels of it: by a stranger is meant, not one of
another nation, nor a proselyte, whether of the gate or of
righteousness; but, as Aben Ezra interprets it, one that is a stranger
from the sons of Levi, who is not of that tribe, even though an
Israelite:

shall be put to death; either the sanhedrim or court of judicature shall
condemn and put him to death, as the same writer observes; or he shall
die by the hand of heaven, as Jarchi; that is, by the immediate hand of
God, or with flaming fire from before the Lord, as the Targum of
Jonathan; as Uzzah was smote, and died by the ark of God for touching
it, [Sa2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006).

[Numbers 1:52](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">num 1:52</span></span>

And the children of Israel shall pitch their tents, every man by his own
camp,.... There were four, unless every tribe was a camp, and so then
there were twelve camps, besides the camp of the Levites: the Targum of
Jonathan is,"by the house of his troop,''the regiment to which he
belonged, every tribe or camp having various troops or regiments in it:

and every man by his own standard throughout their hosts; there were
four standards, and three tribes to each standard, which were placed
east, west, north, and south of the tabernacle, as is at large described
in the following chapter.

[Numbers 1:53](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">num 1:53</span></span>

But the Levites shall pitch round about the tabernacle of testimony,....
Between the tabernacle and the camps of Israel, to guard the tabernacle
and preserve the things in it, and to keep persons from going into it
that should not, to pollute or plunder it: these were placed in like
manner as the four living creatures round the throne, [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006); where the allusion seems to be to
this situation of the Levites:

that there be no wrath upon the congregation of the children of Israel;
that is, from the Lord, should any of them approach too near, or meddle
with and touch what they had nothing to do with, or go where they should
not; such wrath as came upon Uzzah for his error and transgression
before observed:

and the Levites shall keep the charge of the tabernacle of testimony;
the several things in it committed to their charge; see [Num
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/num003.htm#008).

[Numbers 1:54](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">num 1:54</span></span>

And the children of Israel did according to all the Lord commanded
Moses,.... Pitched their tents by their own camps and standards; did not
come near the tabernacle but kept at a proper distance from it, and did
not meddle with things they had no concern, with, and which were
peculiar to the Levites:

so they did; which is repeated to show how readily, punctually, and
perfectly they observed the command of God with respect to this affair.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 2](num002)

</div>
