<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num018)  [Next](num020) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 19:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 19

This chapter contains a law for making a water for purification for sin,
the ingredients of which are the ashes of a red heifer burnt, about
which many things are observed, [Num
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001); the use of the water made of
them, to purify such as were unclean by the touch of a dead body, [Num
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011); some rules are given, by which
it might be known who were unclean on account of a dead body, [Num
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#014); the manner of purifying such
persons, [Num 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#017); and the
punishment of those that should neglect purification, [Num
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#020).

[Numbers 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 19:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses, and unto Aaron,.... Not at this time,
after the business of the spies, and the affair of Korah, but before the
children of Israel departed from Sinai; and so Aben Ezra observes, that
this was spoken in the wilderness of Sinai, when the Lord commanded to
put unclean persons out of the camp, and when some were defiled with a
dead body, and unfit for the passover, [Num
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/num005.htm#002); and mention is made of the "water
of purifying", [Num 8:7](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#007),

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 19:2](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 19:2</span></span>

This is the ordinance of the law which the Lord hath commanded,.... By
which it appears, that this law was not of the moral, but of the
ceremonial kind, being called an ordinance, a statute, a decree of God,
the King of kings; and which was founded not on any clear plain reason
in the thing itself, but in the will of God, who intended it as a type
and shadow of the blood and sacrifice of Christ, and of the efficacy of
that to cleanse from sin; and it also appears by this, that it was not a
new law now made, but which had been made already: "which the Lord hath
commanded": as is plain from what has been observed; see Gill on [Num
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001); and the Jews (q) say, that the
red heifer was slain by Eleazar the day after the tabernacle was
erected, even on the second day of the first month of Israel's coming
out of Egypt; and it was now repeated both on account of the priests and
people, because of the priest to whom it belonged, as Aben Ezra
observes, Aaron being now established in the priesthood; and because of
the people, who were afraid they should die if they came near the
tabernacle; now hereby they are put in mind of a provision made for the
purification of them, when under any uncleanness, which made them unfit
for coming to it:

saying, speak unto the children of Israel; whom this law concerned, and
for whose purification it was designed; and it was at the expense not of
a private person, but of the whole congregation, that the water of
purifying was made; and that, as the Jews say (r), that the priests
might have no personal profit from it:

that they bring thee a red heifer; or "young cow", for so the word
properly signifies; one of two years old, as the Targum of Jonathan, and
so says the Misnah (s); though some of the Rabbins say one of three
years, or of four years, or even one of five years old, would do. This
instance, with others, where females are ordered to be slain, see [Lev
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev003.htm#001); confutes the notion of such, who
think the laws of Moses were made in conformity to the customs of the
Egyptians, this being directly contrary to them; if they were the same
in the times of Moses, they were in the times of Herodotus, who
expressly says (t), male oxen the Egyptians sacrifice; but it is not
lawful for them to sacrifice females, for they are sacred to Isis.
Indeed, according to Plutarch (u) and Diodorus Siculus (w), the
Egyptians in their times sacrificed red bullocks to Typhon, who they
supposed was of the same colour, and to whom they had an aversion,
accounting him the god of evil; and because red oxen were odious to
them, they offered them to him; as red-haired men also were slain by
them for the same reason, at the tomb of Osiris, who they say was
murdered by the red-haired Typhon; but these were superstitions that
obtained among them after the times of Moses, and could not be retorted
to by him; a better reason is to be given why this heifer or cow was to
be of a red colour:

without spot, wherein is no blemish; the first of these, without spot,
the Jews understand of colour, that it should have no spots in it of any
other colour, black or white, nor indeed so much as an hair, at least
not two of another colour; and so the Targum of Jonathan, in which there
is no spot or mark of a white hair; and Jarchi more particularly,"which
is perfect in redness; for if there were in it (he says) two black
hairs, it was unfit;''and so Ben Gersom, with which agrees the Misnah
(x); if there were in it two hairs, black or white, in one part, it was
rejected; if there was one in the head, and another in the tail, it was
rejected; if there were two hairs in it, the root or bottom of which
were black, and the head or top red, and so on the contrary; all
depended on the sight: and it must be owned, the same exactness was
observed in the red oxen sacrificed by the Egyptians, as Plutarch
relates (y); for if the ox had but one hair black or white, they
reckoned it was not fit to be sacrificed; in which perhaps they imitated
the Jews: it being without blemish was what was common to all
sacrifices, such as are described in [Lev
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev022.htm#022),

and upon which never came yoke; and so among the Heathens in later
times, very probably in imitation of this, they used to offer to their
deities oxen that never had bore any yoke; as appears from Homer,
Horace, Virgil, Ovid, and Seneca, out of whom instances are produced by
Bochart (z). Now, though this red cow was not properly a sacrifice for
sin, yet it was analogous to one, and was a type of our Lord Jesus
Christ, in whom all these characters meet, and are significant. It being
a female may denote the infirmities of Christ's human nature, to which
it was subject, though sinless ones; he was encompassed with, and took
on him, our infirmities; and may have some respect to the woman, by whom
the transgression came, which brought impurity on all human nature,
which made a purification for sin necessary; and the red colour of it
may point at the flesh and blood of Christ he partook of, and the sins
of his people, which were laid upon him, and were as crimson and as
scarlet, and the bloody sufferings he endured to make satisfaction for
them; and its being without spot and blemish may denote the perfection
of Christ in his person, obedience, and sufferings, and the purity and
holiness of his nature; and having never had any yoke upon it may
signify, that though he was made under the law, and had commands
enjoined him by his father as man, yet was free from the yoke of human
traditions, and from the servitude of sin, and most willingly engaged,
and not by force and compulsion, in the business of our redemption and
salvation.

\(q\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 7. p. 22. (r) Misn. Shekalim, c. 7. sect. 7.
& Maimon, in ib. (s) Misn. Parah, c. 1. sect. 1. (t) Euterpe, sive, l.
2. c. 41. (u) De lside. (w) Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 79. (x) Parah, c. 2.
sect. 5. (y) Ut supra. (Bibliothec. l. 1. p. 79.) (z) Hierozoic. par. 1.
l. 2. c. 33. vol. 322.

[Numbers 19:3](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 19:3</span></span>

And ye shall give her unto Eleazar the priest,.... The son of Aaron; the
Sagan of the priests, as the Targum of Jonathan calls him, the second or
deputy priest; it was not to be given to Aaron, that he might not be
defiled, though but for a small time, that so he might not be hindered
in his office at all; but to Eleazar, to inure him to his office, and to
confirm him in it:

that he may bring her forth without the camp; without the camp of
Israel; Jarchi says, without the three camps, as afterwards without
Jerusalem; it used in later times to be burnt on the mount of Olives; it
was brought forth as impure, and was a type of Christ, having the sins
of his people on him, and who in conformity to this type suffered
without the gates of Jerusalem, see [Heb
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#011),

and one shall slay her before his face; the Targum of Jonathan says,
another priest; but it was not necessary that it should be slain by a
priest, any man might do it. Jarchi says, a stranger slew, and Eleazar
looked on; though it was not slain by him, yet it was slain before him,
that it might look like a sacrifice, though not offered on the altar;
and slaying of it denotes the putting of Christ to death, which was done
in the presence, and with the approbation, of the priests and elders of
the people.

[Numbers 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 19:4</span></span>

And Eleazar the priest shall take of her blood with his finger,.... He
took the blood in his left hand, and sprinkled it with the finger of his
right hand, as Maimonides says (a); and so the Targum of Jonathan, which
says, he did not receive it into a vessel, but into the palm of his
hand, and from thence sprinkled it with his finger (b): which Ainsworth
thinks signified the Spirit of Christ, our high priest, called "the
finger of God", [Luk 11:20](../../../bib/kjv/luk011.htm#020); who takes
the blood of Christ, and sprinkles it on the hearts of his people,
whereby they are freed from an evil conscience:

and sprinkle of her blood directly before the tabernacle of the
congregation seven times; or "towards the tabernacle", so Noldius (c);
as sprinkling of the blood was the principal action in sacrifices, this
was to be done directly before the tabernacle, from whence its purifying
virtue was expected, though it was not shed in it, that it might have
all the appearance of a sacrifice it could have; and being done seven
times, denotes the perfection of it: the priest, when he sprinkled,
stood on the east side, with his face to the west. When the temple was
built at Jerusalem, this affair was transacted on the mount of Olives,
which was east of Jerusalem. Jarchi says, the priest stood in the east
of Jerusalem, and placed himself so that he might see the door of the
temple at the time of sprinkling the blood. Now it appears, as
Maimonides says (d), that the floor of the temple was higher than the
floor of the eastern gate of the mountain of the house twenty two
cubits, and the height of the gate of the mountain of the house was
twenty cubits; wherefore one that stood over against the eastern gate
could not see the door of the temple, therefore they made the wall,
which was over the top of this gate (the battlement of it), low, so that
he (the priest), that stood on the mount of Olives, might see the door
of the temple, at the time he sprinkled the blood of the cow over
against the temple; otherwise he could only have seen the eighth step of
the porch of the temple, as the same writer observes (e), with which
agrees the Misnah (f), that all the walls there (about the mountain of
the house) were high, except the eastern wall, that so the priest that
burnt the cow might stand on the top of the mount of Olives, and look
and behold the door of the temple, when he sprinkled the blood.

\(a\) Hilchot Parah Adumah, c. 3. sect. 2. (b) Vid. Misn. Parah, c. 3.
sect. 7. (c) P. 81. No. 379. (d) Hilchot Beth Habechirah, c. 6. sect. 2.
(e) In Misn, Middot, c. 2. sect. 4. (f) Misn. ib.

[Numbers 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 19:5</span></span>

And one shall burn the heifer in his sight,.... Another priest, as the
Targum of Jonathan, Eleazar looking on, as that expresses it; the Jews
say (g), that when the priest came to the mount of Olives, accompanied
by the elders of Israel, before he burnt the cow, he dipped himself in a
dipping place there; and the wood being laid there in order, wood of
cedar, ash, fir, and fig trees, made in the form of a tower, with holes
opened in it (to put in the fire, and that it might burn the quicker),
and its aspect being to the west, he bound the cow, and laid her upon
the pile, with her head to the south, and her face to the west; and then
having slain it, and sprinkled its blood, as before related, he set fire
to it by the help of some small wood: the burning of it may signify the
dolorous sufferings of Christ, when the wrath of God was poured forth
like fire upon him; the same was signified by roasting the passover
lamb:

her skin, and her flesh, and her blood, with her dung, shall he burn;
which may denote the extent of Christ's sufferings, reaching to all
parts of his body, skin, flesh, and blood, and the shame and reproach
that attended them, signified by dung; as well as how impure and
accursed he was accounted when he was made sin for his people, bore
their sins and suffered for them, even not in body only, but in his soul
also; for his soul as well as his body were made an offering for sin.

\(g\) Misn. Parah, c. 3. sect. 7, 8, 9.

[Numbers 19:6](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 19:6</span></span>

And the priest shall take cedar wood, and hyssop, and scarlet,....
Another priest, according to the Targum of Jonathan; but it seems to
design Eleazar the priest, and so, in later times, the same priest that
burnt the cow took these things; the Jews say (h), when he took them he
said, is this cedar wood? is this hyssop? is this scarlet? so he said
three times for everyone of them, and he was answered, yes, three times
to each of them: these were the same that were used at the cleansing of
the leper, [Lev 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev014.htm#004),

and cast it into the midst of the burning of the heifer; these were
rolled or bound up together, as the Jews say (i), and made one bundle
of, that they might the more easily be cast into the fire; the hyssop
was wrapped about the cedar wood with the scarlet wool: the true reason
of the use of these, Maimonides says (k), was never clear to him; but
the cedar wood, being durable, may denote the continued efficacy of
Christ's sufferings; the hyssop, being purgative and of a good smell,
the purging nature of Christ's sacrifice, who by himself purged away our
sins, and the sweet odour thereof ascended to the Lord; and the scarlet,
the sins of his people destroyed thereby.

\(h\) Misn. Parah, c. 3. sect. 10. (i) Misn. Parah, c. 3. sect. 11. &
Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. (k) Moreh Nevochim, par. 3. c. 47.

[Numbers 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 19:7</span></span>

Then the priest shall wash his clothes,.... The Targum of Jonathan has
it,"he that slew the cow,''and Aben Ezra, the priest that burnt it; but
it seems to mean Eleazar, the priest that sprinkled the blood, and by
touching that was defiled and needed washing; and so the Jews (l) say,
all that were employed about it, from the beginning to the end, were
defiled in their garments; not only he that slew it, and burnt it, and
sprinkled its blood, but he that took and cast in the cedar wood, &c. as
we find also he that gathered the ashes of it as well as burnt it: this
creature was reckoned so impure, though its ashes were for purifying,
that whoever had anything to do with it was unclean, as the scapegoat,
which had the sins of all Israel on it; and this as that was typical of
Christ, made sin for his people, that he might cleanse them from sin: it
may point at the sin of the priests and people of Israel, in putting
Christ to death, and yet there was cleansing from that sin, in the
precious blood of Christ, as well as from all others:

and he shall bathe his flesh in water; in forty seahs of water, as the
Targum of Jonathan; not his clothes only, but his body was to be dipped
in water:

and afterward he shall come into the camp: when his clothes and flesh
are washed, but not before:

and the priest shall be unclean until the even; though washed, and
therefore, though he is said to go into the camp upon washing, this is
to be understood, after the evening is come: so Jarchi directs to
interpret the passage, transpose it, says he, and so explain it; and he
shall be unclean until the evening, and after that he may come into the
camp, not only the camp of Israel, but the camp of the Shechinah, as the
same writer.

\(l\) Misn. Parah, c. 4. sect. 4.

[Numbers 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 19:8</span></span>

And he that burneth her shall wash his clothes in water,.... In forty
seahs of water, as the Targum of Jonathan: this shows that one different
from this is designed in [Num 19:7](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#007);
and that this is one distinct from him that sprinkled the blood, [Num
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#004),

and bathe his flesh in water: in a like quantity, as the above Targum:

and shall be unclean until the even: and, though washed, might not go
into the camp until that time: this may signify, as before, that though
the crucifixion of Christ was a very great sin, and done by wicked
hands, yet was pardonable through the very blood that was shed by them,
[Act 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#023).

[Numbers 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 19:9</span></span>

And a man that is clean shall gather up the ashes of the heifer,.... A
man, a clean priest, as the Targum of Jonathan; in later times great
care was taken that the priest concerned in the burning of the red cow
should be pure; he was separated from his own house seven days before
the time, and every day he was sprinkled with the blood of all sin
offerings then offered, that it might be sure he was free from any
pollution by a grave, or a dead body; and for the same reason they made
a causeway on double arches from the temple to the mount of Olives, over
the valley of Kidron, lest any unseen grave should be in the way; and
when he came thither he was obliged to wash or dip himself, as before
observed (m); and so he that gathered up the ashes was to be clean from
all ceremonial pollution: the Jews say (n), that they pounded the ashes;
if there were any black coal in them or bone, they did not leave it in
them, but sifted them in stone sieves; and not the ashes of the heifer
only they took, but the ashes of the cedar wood, &c. mixed with them;
and these they put, as the Targum of Jonathan says, into an earthen
vessel enclosed in a covering of clay:

and lay them up without the camp in a clean place; they were divided
into three parts, according to the Targum of Jonathan, one part was put
in the Chel (or the enclosure of the court of the tabernacle), another
in the mount of Olives, and the third part was divided among all the
wards of the Levites, with which the Misnah (o) agrees; Jarchi makes
mention of the same division, and of the use of each; that the wards had
was without the court, that the citizens might take of it, and all that
needed to be purified; that in the mount of Olives was for the priests,
to sanctify other heifers with it; and that in the Chel was for a
reserve:

and it shall be kept for a reserve for the congregation of Israel; as
ashes may be kept a long time, if well taken care of, because they are
not subject to any corruption or putrefaction; and so was, as Bishop
Patrick observes from Dr. Jackson, a figure of the everlasting efficacy
of Christ's blood: and, according to the Jews, these ashes of the first
heifer must last more than a thousand years; for they say (p) the second
that was burnt was in the time of Ezra, though they reckon seven more
afterwards before the destruction of the second temple, in all nine; and
the tenth they expect in the days of the Messiah, which are past; he,
being come, has put an end to this type by fulfilling it in himself: and
the use of them was

for a water of separation; being put into water, and mixed with it, was
for the cleansing of such as were separated from others for their
uncleanness, and was a purification of them for it, as follows:

it is a purification for sin: or "it is sin" (q), not an offering for
sin, properly speaking; the heifer, whose ashes they were, not being
sacrificed in the tabernacle, nor on the altar, and wanted other rites;
yet it answered the purposes of a sin offering, and its ashes in water
were typical of the blood of Christ, which purges the conscience from
dead works, when this only purified to the sanctifying of the flesh,
[Heb 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013); and is the fountain set
open for sin and uncleanness, [Zac
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac013.htm#001); where both the words are used
which are here, and in the preceding clause: ashes are known to be of a
cleansing nature, and so a fit emblem of spiritual purification by
Christ; and the duration of them of the perpetuity of it.

\(m\) Misn. Parah, c. 3. sect. 1. 6. 7. (n) Ib. sect. 11. (o) lbid. (p)
Ib. sect. 5. (q) "peccatum ipsa", Montanus; "peccatum enim est",
Tigurine version.

[Numbers 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 19:10</span></span>

And he that gathereth the ashes of the heifer shall wash his
clothes,.... Whom the Targum of Jonathan calls a priest, though it does
not seem necessary he should be one:

and be unclean until the even; See Gill on [Num
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#007),

and it shall be unto the children of Israel, and unto the stranger that
sojourneth among them, for a statute for ever; until the Messiah came,
whose sufferings and death are for the expiation of, and purification
for the sins of Jews and Gentiles, of all the people of God throughout
the world, signified by the burning of this heifer; see [Jo1
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#002).

[Numbers 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 19:11</span></span>

He that toucheth the dead body of any man,.... A man and not a beast, as
Aben Ezra observes; for he that touched the dead body of a beast was
unclean only until evening, [Lev
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#024); any man, Jew or Gentile, as the
same writer notes: this is instanced in, as being the principal
pollution, though not the only one, yet so some think, for which the
water of purification made of the ashes of the burnt heifer was
appointed:

shall be unclean seven days; the reason of which is, because death is
the fruit of sin, which is of a defiling nature, and to show that all
that are dead in sins are defiled and defiling, and are not to be
touched, or to have communion and fellowship held with them but to be
abstained from.

[Numbers 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 19:12</span></span>

He shall purify himself with it,.... That is, with the ashes of the
water of purification made of them: and this was to be done first

on the third day; from the time of his touching the dead body. Aben Ezra
intimates, that there is a secret or mystery in this and the following
number seven; it may respect the third day of Christ's resurrection,
who, as he shed his blood for the expiation and purification of sinners,
so he rose again the third day for the justification of them:

and on the seventh day he shall be clean; which may denote the perfect
state, or sabbath of rest, which remains for the people of God, when all
Christ's purified and justified ones shall be clear of all sin, and be
the spirits of just men made perfect:

but if he purify not himself the third day, then the seventh day he
shall not be clean; whoever is not cleansed from his sins by the blood
of Christ, shed for the remission of them, and is not justified from
them by him that rose from the dead the third day, will never be
cleansed in the world to come, or in the eternal sabbath; but it will
then be said, "let him that is filthy be filthy still", [Rev
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#011).

[Numbers 19:13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 19:13</span></span>

Whosoever toucheth the dead body of any man that is dead, and purifieth
not himself,.... With the ashes of the heifer, or water of purification,
and so neglects the means which God has appointed for his cleansing:

defileth the tabernacle of the Lord; that is, if he goes into it in his
uncleanness, which it was not lawful for him to do: from the Jews the
Assyrians seem to have borrowed some customs of theirs, as related by
Lucian (r), who upon burying a dead cock reckoned seven days, see [Num
19:11](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#011); and then went into the temple,
for before they might not go in, nor perform holy service; such laws
they use, that if anyone sees a dead carcass, he may not go that day
into the temple; but he goes in the day following, after he has purified
himself:

and that soul shall be cut off from Israel; either be excommunicated
from the church, or die by the hand of the civil magistrate, or by the
immediate hand of God; that is, if he knew he had touched a dead body,
and wilfully neglected the means of his purification, and so sinned
presumptuously; otherwise, if all this was done ignorantly, an atonement
was made for it, [Lev 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev005.htm#003).

because the water of separation was not sprinkled upon him, he shall be
unclean; as all are who are not sprinkled with the blood of Christ:

his uncleanness is yet upon him; and will remain, nothing can remove it;
as nothing can remove the stain and blot of sin but the blood of Christ;
and where that is not applied it will remain marked before God, and will
lie upon the sinner to his utter condemnation and ruin; see [Jer
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#022).

\(r\) De Dea Syria.

[Numbers 19:14](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 19:14</span></span>

This is the law when a man dieth in a tent,.... A tent is only
mentioned, because the Israelites now dwelt in tents, as Aben Ezra
remarks; otherwise the law holds equally good of an house as of a tent:

all that come into the tent, and all that is in the tent, shall be
unclean seven days; the meaning of which is, that all persons that come
into a tent or house where a dead body is are equally unclean as those
that were in it when it died; and the same is to be supposed of all
vessels brought into it, as well as those that are in it, that is, open
ones, as appears by what follows.

[Numbers 19:15](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 19:15</span></span>

And every open vessel,.... An earthen one, as the Targum of Jonathan;
and so Jarchi interprets it; and Maimonides (r) observes, that this is
only to be understood of an earthen vessel:

which hath no covering bound upon it; a linen or a woollen cloth wrapped
and tied about it:

is unclean; the air of the house getting into it by its being uncovered.

\(r\) In Misn. Cholin, c. 1. sect. 6.

[Numbers 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 19:16</span></span>

And whosoever toucheth one that is slain with a sword in the open
fields,.... That is killed by another, that dies a violent death, either
by the sword or other means; one that touched such an one was unclean,
or that touched the sword with which he was slain, as the Targum of
Jonathan adds: "or a dead body": that dies a natural death, or suddenly,
or in any way:

or a bone off a man; dug out of a grave, and lying by itself:

or a grave; the Targum adds, either the covering or side of a grave:

shall be unclean seven days; all which has respect to the defiling
nature of sin, which is the cause of death and the grave.

[Numbers 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 19:17</span></span>

And for an unclean person,.... Defiled by any of the above means:

they shall take of the ashes of the burnt heifer of purification for
sin; from the place where they were laid up for this use; See Gill on
[Num 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#009) and some have thought that
they were laid up in various cities and places in the country, as well
as at Jerusalem, that they might be come at easily upon occasion;
otherwise they could not be had without great trouble and expense, and
in some places not so soon as the law required for their purification,
namely, on the third day after their defilement:

and running water shall be put thereto in a vessel; the Targum Jonathan
is,"fountain water in the midst of earthen vessel;''for no water but
fountain, spring, or river water, was made use of; and it should seem by
what is said that ashes were first put into the vessel, and then the
running water was put to them; and yet the Jewish writers say (s), that
if the ashes were put in first, and then the water, it was not right;
and the meaning of what is said here is, that the water and ashes should
be mixed together; for it is urged from the words: "running water in a
vessel", that it is plain, that the water is put in the vessel and not
to the ashes; and therefore that which is said, "shall be put thereto",
is to caution the person, that after he has put the ashes upon the
water, that he mixes them well with his finger, and cause the water
below to rise above (t).

\(s\) Maimon. Milchot, Parah Adumah, c. 9. sect. 1. (t) Bartenora in
Misn. Temurah, c. 1. sect. 5.

[Numbers 19:18](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 19:18</span></span>

And a clean person shall take hyssop, and dip it in the water,.... Three
stalks of hyssop bound together, as the Targum of Jonathan, and this man
was to be a clean priest, according to the same; but it does not seem
necessary that he should be a priest, but that anyone free from
ceremonial pollution might do it:

and sprinkle it upon the tent; where there was a dead body: but this, we
are told, is to be understood not of a tent made of wood, or stone, or
clay, but made of anything woven, as linen: or of skins (u):

and upon all the vessels; in such a tent, that is, open ones, as before
observed:

and upon the persons that were there: when the man died in it, or came
into it since, and while the dead body was in it:

and upon him that touched a bone; of a dead man, or, as the Targum of
Jonathan, the bone of a living man that is separated from him:

or one slain, or one dead; slain with a sword, or dead of the
pestilence, as the same Targum, or of any other disease, or in any other
way:

or a grave; or the covering or side of one, as the same Targum adds.

\(u\) Maimon. in Misn. Sabbat, c. 2. sect. 3.

[Numbers 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 19:19</span></span>

And the clean person shall sprinkle upon the unclean,.... The clean
priest shall sprinkle upon the unclean man, as the Targum of Jonathan;
that is, he shall sprinkle the water of purification upon him that is
unclean in any of the above ways:

on the third day, and on the seventh day; See Gill on [Num
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#012),

and on the seventh day he shall purify himself; either the unclean
person, who shall perfect his purification, as Jarchi interprets it,
that is, by doing what follows; or else the clean person, who becomes in
some measure unclean, by sprinkling and touching the water of
separation, as appears from [Num 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#021)
as the priest that sprinkled the blood of the heifer, and the man that
burnt it and gathered its ashes, [Num
19:7](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#007).

and wash his clothes, and bathe himself in water, and shall be clean at
even; in like manner as the man that let go the goat into the
wilderness, [Lev 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/lev016.htm#026).

[Numbers 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 19:20</span></span>

But the man that shall be unclean,.... By touching any dead body, bone,
or grave:

and shall not purify himself; with the water of purification:

that soul shall be cut off from among the congregation: See Gill on [Num
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#013).

because he hath defiled the sanctuary of the Lord: by going into it in
his uncleanness:

the water of separation hath not been sprinkled upon him, he is unclean;
and will remain so, for nothing else could purify him, see [Num
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#013).

[Numbers 19:21](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 19:21</span></span>

And it shall be a perpetual statute unto them,.... To the children of
Israel, throughout their generations, unto the coming of the Messiah,
when the ceremonial law, which stood in divers washings and
purifications, was abolished:

that he that sprinkleth the water of separation shall wash his clothes;
the priest that sprinkled, according to the Targum of Jonathan, or any
other person that did it; so that the same purifying water, which made
an unclean person clean, defiled a clean one; for though it was
purifying, it had uncleanness in it; having the ashes not only of the
cow itself, but of its skin, blood, and dung; and so a lye made of ashes
is impure in itself, and yet serves to scour cloth: Ainsworth thinks
this signifies the imperfection and insufficiency of legal rites, which,
in their greatest virtue, only sanctified to the purifying of the flesh,
and left the purifier himself in uncleanness he had not before; by
consideration of which, the people might be led to Christ, and his
Spirit, for cleansing, [Heb 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#013) but
it rather signifies, that the blood of Christ, which cleanses from all
sin, and answers to this purifying water, that its cleansing virtue is
owing to Christ being made sin for his people; and that some may be
instruments of directing souls to the blood of Christ for cleansing, and
yet be defiled themselves: it does not appear that this man, thus
unclean, was to have the water of purification sprinkled on him, but was
only to wash his clothes; see [Rev
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#014).

and he that toucheth the water of separation shall be unclean until
even: but was not clean until he had washed, as Aben Ezra observes,
though not expressed; for if one that only sprinkled it had need to be
washed, much more one that touched it, and which was unavoidable, if,
when he mixed the water and ashes together, he stirred them with his
finger; see Gill on [Num 19:17](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#017), though
Maimonides (t) understands this of sprinkling and touching the water
when there was no necessity for it, when a person was not employed in
doing the duty of this law.

\(t\) Hilchot Parah Adumah, c. 15. sect. 1.

[Numbers 19:22](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 19:22</span></span>

And whatsoever the unclean person toucheth shall be unclean,.... Not the
person unclean by sprinkling, or touching the water of purification, but
the unclean person spoken of throughout the chapter, that was unclean by
touching a dead body, bone, or grave; whatever that man touched, any
vessel or thing, that was unclean also; or "whomsoever", any person, man
or woman, for it respects both persons and things:

and the soul that toucheth it; that which the unclean person hath
touched; or "him", the unclean person, whether the unclean person
touched him, or he the unclean person, or touched anything he had
touched, he was unclean; denoting the spreading and infectious nature of
sin, and how much sin and sinners are to be avoided; see [Lev
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#004).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 20](num020)

</div>
