<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Numbers Index](num.md)  
  [Previous](num019)  [Next](num021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001.md)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 20:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 20

In this chapter is an account of the children of Israel coming to the
wilderness of Zin, where Miriam died, and where wanting water they
murmured, [Num 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001.md), upon which Moses
and Aaron applied to the Lord, who ordered Moses to speak to a rock,
which should give forth water, and which being smitten by him,
accordingly did, [Num 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#006.md), but Moses
and Aaron, in their conduct of this affair, displeased the Lord, [Num
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012.md), after this, Moses sent to the
king of Edom to desire a passage through his country, which request was
refused, [Num 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014.md), upon Israel's
coming to Mount Hor, Aaron, by order, went up to the mount, and, when
stripped of his clothes, which were put on his son Eleazar, he died,
lamented by all the people, [Num
20:22](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#022.md).

[Numbers 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 20:1</span></span>

Then came the children of Israel, even the whole congregation,.... Not
immediately after the transaction of the above things, recorded in the
preceding chapters; as the sending of the spies into the land of Canaan,
and their report of it; the business of Korah, and the giving of several
laws respecting the priesthood, and the purification of the people; but
thirty eight years after: nor was this the congregation that came out of
Egypt; their carcasses, by this time, had fallen in the wilderness, as
had been threatened, excepting some few, so that this was a new
generation: what passed during this time we have very little account of,
excepting their journeyings from place to place, in [Num
33:1](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#001.md), by which it appears, there were
eighteen stations between the place they encamped at when the spies were
sent, and this they now came to; and that the place from whence they
came hither was Ezion Geber; from hence they journeyed:

and came unto the desert of Zin; which is different from the wilderness
of Sin, [Exo 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#001.md) as appears by their
names, which are different, and by the stations of the Israelites, [Num
33:11](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#011.md), hither they came

in the first month; the month of Nisan, on the tenth day of it,
according to the Targum of Jonathan, which was the first month of the
fortieth year of their coming out of Egypt, so Aben Ezra; with which
agrees the Jewish chronologer (u), which says, this was the fortieth
year, and the beginning of the month Nisan:

and the people abode in Kadesh: which is by some thought to be different
from Kadeshbarnea, from whence the spies were sent, and lay to the south
of the land of Canaan, whereas this was upon the borders of Edom; but
Doctor Lightfoot (w) shows them to be the same: it is supposed to be
eight hours north or northnorth-west of Mount Sinai, which may be
computed to be about twenty miles (x); here the Israelites abode about
four months, see [Num 33:38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#038.md) the above
Jewish chronologer says three months, wrongly:

and Miriam died there, and was buried there; the Jews say (y) she died
there the tenth day of the month Nisan, which was ten days after the
Israelites came to this place; though, according to the Targum of
Jonathan, it was the same day they came thither: Patricides, an Arabian
writer, says (z) she died on the seventh day of Nisan, aged one hundred
and twenty seven; no mention is made of the people mourning for her as
for Aaron, [Num 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#029.md) and for Moses,
[Deu 34:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu034.htm#008.md) perhaps because of their
distress for want of water, as follows.

\(u\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 9. p. 25. (w) Chorograph. Cent. in Matt. c.
7. p. 8, 9. (x) Pococke's Travels, p. 157. (y) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol.
7. 2. Schulchan Aruch, par. 1. c. 580. sect. 2. (z) Apud Hottinger.
Smegma Oriental. l. 1. c. 8. p. 457.

[Numbers 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 20:2</span></span>

And there was no water for the congregation,.... Which was so ordered,
for the trial of this new generation, to see whether they would behave
any better than their fathers had done in a like circumstance, the first
year they came out of Egypt, [Exo
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#001.md).

and they gathered themselves together against Moses and against Aaron;
just as their fathers had done before them, being of the like temper and
disposition.

[Numbers 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 20:3</span></span>

And the people chode with Moses,.... Contended with him in a wrangling
and litigious manner, showing no reverence nor respect unto his person
on account of the dignity of his office, and the many favours they had
received from him; and this at a time, when, instead of quarrelling with
him, they should have condoled him on the loss of his sister, and
bewailed their own loss also of one who had been a prophetess to them,
and a leader of them, [Mic 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#004.md).

and spake, saying, would God that we had died when our brethren died
before the Lord; either at Taberah by fire, or as Korah and his company
in like manner, or as the fourteen thousand and seven hundred by a
pestilence, [Num 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/num011.htm#001.md) which they
thought a much easier death, either of them, than to die of thirst: they
might well call them brethren, not only because of the same nation, and
nearly related to them, but because they were of the same temper and
disposition, and indeed brethren in iniquity; and they seem to use this
appellation, as being of the same sentiments with them, and in
vindication of them, and adopt almost their very language; see [Num
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#002.md).

[Numbers 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 20:4</span></span>

And why have ye brought up the congregation of the Lord into this
wilderness,.... The wilderness of Zin, whither by various marches and
journeys, and through different stations, they were at length come:

that we and our cattle should die there? with thirst; they seem to
represent it, as if this was the end, design, and intention of Moses and
Aaron in bringing them thither; their language is much the same with
their fathers on a like occasion; which shows the bad influence of
example, and how careful parents should be of their words and actions,
that their posterity be not harmed by them; see [Exo
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#003.md).

[Numbers 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 20:5</span></span>

And wherefore have ye made us to come up out of Egypt,.... They
represent that affair in such a light, as if they were forced out of
Egypt by Moses and Aaron against their wills; or at least were
overpersuaded by them to do what they had no inclination to, namely, to
come out of Egypt; though they were in the utmost bondage and slavery,
and their lives were made bitter by it, and they cried by reason of
their oppression, and the hardships they endured; but this was all
forgot. Aben Ezra says, it is a strange word which is here used, which
shows the confusion they were in:

to bring us unto this evil place; dry and barren, where there were
neither food nor drink, as follows:

it is no place of seed; or fit for sowing, as the Targum of Jonathan,
any sort of seed, as wheat, barley, rye, rice, &c.

or of figs, or vines, or pomegranates; it is not a soil fit to plant
such trees in, nor would they grow were they planted:

neither is there any water to drink; for them and their cattle, and
therefore must be a miserable place for so large a body of people to
subsist in.

[Numbers 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 20:6</span></span>

And Moses and Aaron went from the presence of the assembly,.... Like
fugitives, as Aben Ezra; they fled from them through fear, lest they
should rise and fall upon them, and stone them, as their fathers were
ready to do in a like case, [Exo 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004.md).
It is very likely this assembly gathered about the tents of Moses and
Aaron, who went from thence unto the door of the tabernacle of the
congregation; where the Lord had promised to meet Moses, and speak unto
him, [Exo 29:42](../../../bib/kjv/exo029.htm#042.md).

and they fell upon their faces; to pray, as Aben Ezra, that God would
forgive the sin, of the people, and not break forth in his wrath against
them, as he sometimes had done, and as their sin deserved, and that he
would grant them what was needful for them. In the Vulgate Latin version
the following words are added as their prayer,"and they cried unto the
Lord, and said, Lord God, hear the cry of this people, and open to them
thy treasure, the fountain of living water, that they being satiated,
their murmuring may cease.''But they are not neither in the Hebrew text,
nor in the Greek version, nor the Chaldee paraphrases:

and the glory of the Lord appeared unto them; either to Moses and Aaron,
to encourage them to expect their prayers would be answered; or to the
people, to terrify them, and silence their murmurings; see [Num
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#019.md).

[Numbers 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 20:7</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... Out of what was the token of his
glory, which perhaps was the cloud, with an uncommon lustre and
brightness in it: saying; as follows.

[Numbers 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 20:8</span></span>

Take thy rod,.... The rod of miracles, as the Targum of Jonathan; not
the rod of Aaron, miraculous for its blossom and fruit, as some Jewish
writers think; but the rod of Moses, with which he had done many wonders
in Egypt, and at the Red sea, and in the wilderness, and particularly by
smiting the rock at Horeb, when the Israelites wanted water, as they did
now:

and gather thou the assembly together, thou, and Aaron thy brother; not
only the heads of the people, but the body of them, as many as could be
got together to see the miracle, and to receive the benefit of it:

and speak ye unto the rock before their eyes; which was near, but a
little way off, within sight, and might be pointed to: it was not the
same rock that was smote before; that was in Horeb, this in the
extremity of the land of Edom, as Aben Ezra observes; this was to be
spoken to, and by a word speaking it would give out water; which was a
trial of the faith of Moses and Aaron, as well as of the people, before
whom, in a public manner, the rock was to be addressed, as if it was
intelligent and all-sufficient:

and it shall give forth his water; not as though there was a fountain of
water in it, but that water should flow from it, or God by it give
water:

and thou shalt bring forth to them water out of the rock; by speaking to
it: so thou shalt give the congregation and their beasts drink;
sufficient for them both.

[Numbers 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 20:9</span></span>

And Moses took the rod from before the Lord..... Which was laid up
somewhere in the sanctuary, as well as the rod of Aaron, [Num
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#007.md),

as he commanded him; being always faithful and obedient to him that
appointed him.

[Numbers 20:10](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 20:10</span></span>

And Moses and Aaron gathered the congregation together before the
rock,.... To which they were directed, and were to speak unto; before
this they gathered not only the elders of the people, but as many of the
congregation as could be well assembled together:

and he said unto them; Moses, who was bid to take the rod, and was the
principal person concerned in this affair:

hear now, ye rebels; such their fathers had been, and such they now
were, a rebellious generation ever since they were known by him; not
only rebellious against him their chief magistrate, but against the Lord
himself, murmuring against him, being discontented and disobedient, see
[Deu 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#023.md),

must we fetch you water out of this rock? not only signifying their
unworthiness of having such a miracle wrought for them, and as showing
some degree of reluctance to attempt it, but as expressing diffidence
about it; not of the power of God to bring water out of the rock, but of
his will to do it for such a rebellious people; or else their
unreasonableness to expect any such thing should be done for them: when
they were so wicked, how could they think that such a miracle should be
wrought for them? so the Targum of Jonathan,"out of this rock is it
possible for us to fetch out water for you?''so Aben Ezra, have we power
to bring out water to you from it? This was said in a passion, as the
manner of speaking shows; see [Psa
106:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#032.md) many of the congregation as
could be well assembled together:

[Numbers 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 20:11</span></span>

And Moses lifted up his hand, and with his rod he smote the rock
twice,.... At first it only brought out some drops, as Jarchi
conjectures, and therefore Moses smote again, when it brought forth
water plentifully: the Targum of Jonathan says,"at the first time it
dropped blood, at the second time came out much water.''Could this be
credited, it would make the agreement between this rock and Christ
appear very manifest, from whom, when his side was pierced with a spear,
there came out blood and water, [Joh
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#034.md) for justification and
sanctification. In what respect this rock was a type of Christ, as the
other at Horeb, and the smiting of it an emblem of Christ being smitten
with the rod of justice, according to the law of God, and of the
abundance of water flowing from it, as typical of the abundance of
grace, and the blessings of it, as coming through a smitten wounded
Saviour; see Gill on [Exo 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006.md), where
the same things are said of another rock as of this, and both types of
Christ:

and the water came out abundantly, and the congregation drank, and their
beasts also; there was enough for them and their cattle; for it came out
in great quantities, in large streams, so that it ran down like a river,
and which gave them drink as out of the great depths, [Psa
78:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015.md), where the Psalmist makes
mention of rocks in the plural number, for there were two that were
smitten in two different places, and at two different times; the one was
at Rephidim, the other, as here, in Kadesh; the one was in the first
year of Israel's coming out of Egypt, this in the fortieth year of it;
that was struck but once, this twice; of this second stone no mention is
made by any traveller but one (a), who coming from Mount Sinai, says,"we
passed by a large rock on our left hand, in which, as in the other rock
which Moses struck with his rod, appear, from the bottom to the top,
openings where water hath gushed out.''

\(a\) See a Journal from Cairo to Mount Sinai, 1722. p. 42, 43. Ed. 2.

[Numbers 20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 20:12</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron,.... Out of the cloud, where his
glory appeared, and still continued:

because ye believed me not, to sanctify me in the eyes of the children
of Israel; that Moses and Aaron committed an evil which was displeasing
to the Lord is certain, but what that was is variously represented. Some
say their sin was, that the order was to speak to the rock, whereas it
was smitten, and not spoken to; but why then was Moses bid to take the
rod with him, if it was not to smite with it, as he had done before at
Horeb? and besides, this would only have been the sin of Moses, and not
of Aaron; others think, that what provoked the Lord was, that the
Israelites were called "rebels"; but this is a name the Lord himself
gave them, [Num 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/num017.htm#010.md), and was what
they justly deserved; and what after this Moses says of them, which, had
this been the case, he would have been careful to have abstained from,
[Deu 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu009.htm#024.md). Others are of opinion, that
what was displeasing to the Lord was, that the bringing the water out of
the rock was ascribed to themselves, and not to him; "must we fetch you
water", &c. Others suppose the sin was in smiting the rock twice, and in
anger; but this could only be the fault of Moses at most. Dr. Lightfoot
(b) thinks the particular fault was this, that Moses expressed his
displeasure and resentment to the Israelites, that on their murmuring a
new rock was opening, which portended a new and long stay in the
wilderness, as the opening of the first rock at Horeb did when he and
Aaron were in expectation of being soon out of the wilderness, and now
they feared they were beginning anew their abode in it; but it is
certain from the text that unbelief was their sin; they were diffident
about the will of God to bring water out of the rock for such a
rebellious people, and they did not put them in mind of the miracles God
had wrought in former time, to encourage their faith; and so the Lord
was not sanctified by them before the people, as he ought to have been:

therefore ye shall not bring this congregation into the land which I
have given them; the land of Canaan, a grant of which was made to their
fathers, and particularly to this generation, and into which they would
certainly be brought; but not by Moses and Aaron, who were excluded
because of their unbelief, and accordingly both died before the entrance
of the people into the land. This, according to the Targum of Jonathan,
and Jarchi, was said with an oath; see [Heb
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#018.md).

\(b\) See his Works, vol. 1. p. 36.

[Numbers 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 20:13</span></span>

This is the water of Meribah,.... Or "strife": this is the name by which
the water had in this place, and from this rock, was called; and which
is the same name given to the place at Horeb, where a rock had been
smitten, and water had flowed, as now, the first year they came out of
Egypt; and to distinguish this from that, this is sometimes called
Meribah-Kadesh, [Deu 32:51](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#051.md), this being
at Kadesh, as that was at Rephidim:

because the children of Israel strove with the Lord: for their chiding
and striving with Moses was interpretatively striving with the Lord
himself, whose ministers and servants they were:

and he was sanctified in them; that is, the glory of his divine
perfections was displayed in them; either in the waters fetched out of
the rock, which was a proof of the almighty power of God, and of his
truth and faithfulness to his promises; or in the children of Israel, in
whose sight, and for whose sake this miracle was wrought: the Targum of
Jonathan expressly says, in Moses and Aaron, in not sparing these his
saints, but expressing severity towards them for their sin; so Jarchi
and Aben Ezra interpret it.

[Numbers 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 20:14</span></span>

And Moses sent messengers from Kadesh unto the king of Edom,.... This
country was sometimes governed by kings, and sometimes by "dukes", see
[Gen 36:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#014.md). At the time of the passage
of the Israelites through the Red sea, we read of the dukes of Edom,
[Exo 15:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#015.md), and here, thirty nine
years after, of a king of Edom, but who he was is not certain. Bishop
Usher takes him to be the same with Hadar, the last of the race of kings
mentioned in [Gen 36:39](../../../bib/kjv/gen036.htm#039.md), to him Moses
sent messengers with a request, which follows after a preamble to it;
who were the messengers is not said; the place from whence they were
sent is Kadesh, a city on the borders of the land of Edom; but not
Kadeshbarnea, Aben Ezra says, though some are of opinion it is the same,
see [Num 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#001.md),

thus saith thy brother Israel; the Israelites and Edomites springing
from two men, Jacob and Esau, who were twin brothers, and is observed to
ingratiate themselves to the Edomites, and gain their request, pleading
relation to them:

thou knowest all the travail that hath befallen us; what an
uncomfortable condition they had been in for many years, which was well
known to Edom, a neighbouring country, as is reasonable to suppose;
since the fame of the children of Israel coming out of Egypt, passing
through the Red sea, and being so long in the wilderness, was spread
everywhere; this was said to move their pity.

[Numbers 20:15](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 20:15</span></span>

How our fathers went down into Egypt,.... Jacob and his twelve sons,
with their children:

and we have dwelt in Egypt a long time; even the space of four hundred
and thirty years, [Exo 12:40](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#040.md).

and the Egyptians vexed us and our fathers; used them ill, brought them
into bondage, and made their lives bitter, laid heavy tasks and burdens
upon them, as well as slew their male children, see [Exo
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#007.md).

[Numbers 20:16](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 20:16</span></span>

And when we cried unto the Lord,.... By reason of their bondage, and to
be delivered from it, [Exo 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#024.md),

he heard our voice; their prayer to him, as the Targum of Jonathan, for
help and deliverance, [Exo 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#024.md),

and sent an angel, and hath brought us forth out of Egypt; one of the
ministering angels, as the same Targum, and so Aben Ezra; though he
observes that some interpret it of Moses, as do Jarchi, Ben Gersom, and
Ben Melech, which is not likely; since Moses is the person that sent
this message to the king of Edom, who would not easily understand it of
him, if so he meant; nor would the mention of it be of any consequence
and avail with him; whereas to understand it of some divine and heavenly
agent, sent by the Lord on so important an affair, might make it the
more remarkable, and to be regarded by him: and indeed no other is meant
than the Angel of God's presence, who appeared to Moses in the bush, and
sent him to Pharaoh to demand the dismission of the children of Israel;
and who, by him, wrought the wonders in Egypt, and brought Israel from
thence, and went before them in a pillar of cloud and fire:

and, behold, we are in Kadesh, a city in the uttermost of thy border;
not that they were properly in the city, but near it, for they dwelt in
tents in the wilderness; nor would that, or anyone city, hold so large a
number as they consisted of.

[Numbers 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 20:17</span></span>

Let us pass, I pray thee, through thy country,.... That being the
nearest and shortest way to the land of Canaan, from the place where
they now were:

we will not pass through the fields, or through the vineyards; to harm
them, and injure any man in his private property, by gathering the fruit
of them, if the season of the year for it, or by trampling them down:

neither will we drink of the water of the wells; which private persons
had dug, for the watering of their fields and vineyards, and for other
uses, at least without paying for it; or only of the waters of the
rivers, common to all passengers; from hence it appears, that the
country of Edom was not then such a barren country as in later times,
and as travellers (c) now report it is; See Gill on [Mal
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#003.md).

we will go by the king's highway; not the way in which the king used to
walk, or which he should order them to walk in, as Aben Ezra; but the
public roads, common to all his subjects, and travellers to walk in by
his allowance; and such roads are now called by us the king's highway:

we will not turn to the right hand, or to the left; to do any injury to
any person's property, but go straight forward:

until we have passed thy borders; from one to another, and got quite
through the country.

\(c\) See Shaw's Travels, 4. 438. Ed. 2.

[Numbers 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 20:18</span></span>

And Edom said unto him,.... The king of Edom replied to Israel,
represented by the messengers sent in their name:

thou shall not pass by me; through my country:

lest I come out against thee with the sword; or with those that use the
sword, as the Targums of Onkelos and Jonathan; that is, with an army of
soldiers with their drawn swords in their hands, to slay them as
enemies.

[Numbers 20:19](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 20:19</span></span>

And the children of Israel said unto him,.... The messengers sent by the
children of Israel made answer to the king of Edom:

we will go by the highway; we desire no other favour but that of the
public road; we propose not to go through any part of the country that
is enclosed and cultivated, to do any damage to it:

if I and my cattle drink of thy water, then I will pay for it; as it was
usual, and still is, to buy water in those countries near the Red sea,
where it is scarce. We are told (d), that at Suess, a city on the
extremity of the Red sea, there is no water nearer than six or seven
hours journey towards the north east, which is brought from thence on
camels; and a small vessel of it is sold for three or four medinas, and
a larger vessel for eight or ten, according to the demand for it; a
medina is an Egyptian piece of money, worth about three halfpence of our
English money:

I will only (without doing anything else) go through on my feet; as fast
as I can, without saying anything to the inhabitants to terrify and
distress them, and without doing them any injury. Some render it, I will
only go "with my footmen" (e); foot soldiers, an army on foot, as Israel
were.

\(d\) See a Journal from Cairo to Mount Sinai, p. 10, 11. Ed. 2. (e)
"cum meo exercitu pedestri"; so some in Fagius & Vatablus.

[Numbers 20:20](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 20:20</span></span>

And he said, thou shall not go through,.... Which is an absolute and
peremptory denial:

and Edom came out against him with much people, and with a strong hand;
the king raised the militia of his country, and came at the head of a
powerful army to hinder their passing into it; being fearful and
jealous, lest such a large body as they were should seize on his
country, or spoil it, not relying on their promises; and this might
arise also from the old grudge of Esau against Jacob, and which
continued in his posterity, and might now be revived upon their going to
Canaan to possess the earthly blessing conferred on Jacob and his seed:
however, it seems, though the Edomites would not let Israel pass through
their country, yet they furnished them with food and drink for their
money, [Deu 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/deu002.htm#028.md).

[Numbers 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 20:21</span></span>

Notwithstanding their near relation to each other, and the fair promises
Israel made:

wherefore Israel turned away from him: patiently bearing the refusal,
and not resenting it; being ordered, as the Targum of Jonathan expresses
it, by the Word of heaven, not to make war with them, because the time
was not yet come to take vengeance on Edom by their hands; and to the
same purpose the Targum of Jerusalem.

[Numbers 20:22](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 20:22</span></span>

And the children of Israel, even the whole congregation, journeyed from
Kadesh,.... Not directly, but after they had continued there some time,
and had furnished themselves with provisions for their journey, which
they bought of the Edomites, see [Jdg
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#017.md), "the whole congregation" is
observed to Journey from hence, not one of them being lost by the king
of Edom's coming out against them; these went out complete and perfect,
safe and sound:

and came unto Mount Hor; which, according to Bunting (f), was forty
eight miles from Kadesh; this had not its name from the Horim or
Horites, nor they from that, their name being written with a different
letter, but from Harar, a mountain, for the word itself signifies a
mountain; wherefore it may be rendered, "a mountain of the mountain",
which Jarchi interprets a mountain on the top of a mountain. Josephus
(g) says, that here stood a city, formerly called Arce, since Petra,
surrounded with an high mountain, where Aaron went and died; and Pliny
says (h) of Petra, that it is encompassed with inaccessible mountains.

\(f\) Travels of the Patriarchs, &c. p. 83. (g) Antiqu. l. 4. c. 4.
sect. 7. (h) Nat. Hist. l. 6. c. 28.

[Numbers 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 20:23</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses and Aaron in Mount Hor,.... When they were
at the foot of that mountain, in the valley adjoining to it:

by the coast of the land of Edom; which they were still upon the borders
of, and were going round it, not being permitted to go through it:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 20:24](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">num 20:24</span></span>

Aaron shall be gathered unto his people,.... That is, shall die, for
this phrase is a periphrasis of death, and is used in common both of
good and bad men, and designs death in general, without regard to
persons and places men go to at death:

for he shall not enter into the land which I have given unto the
children of Israel; the land of Canaan; and Aaron the priest, and so
Moses the lawgiver, not being suffered to enter into that land, show the
weakness and imperfection of the law, and of the Levitical priesthood,
and the insufficiency of them, and of obedience to them to bring men to,
and give them an entrance into the heavenly glory; that is done by
another person, the antitype of Joshua, even Jesus:

because ye rebelled against my word at the water of Meribah; that is,
you Moses and Aaron; their unbelief is called a rebelling against the
word of the Lord, for which it was threatened them, that they should not
bring the people of Israel into the land of Canaan, and now the
threatening begins to take place, see [Num
20:12](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#012.md).

[Numbers 20:25](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">num 20:25</span></span>

Take Aaron and Eleazar his son,.... His eldest son, who was to succeed
him in the priesthood, and did:

and bring them up unto Mount Hor; to the top of it, they being now at
the foot of it, where the people of Israel lay encamped.

[Numbers 20:26](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 20:26</span></span>

And strip Aaron of his garments,.... His priestly garments, as the
Targum of Jonathan, and so Jarchi:

and put them upon Eleazar his son; thereby declaring him to be high
priest in his father's stead:

and Aaron shall be gathered unto his people, and shall die there; the
phrase of gathering to his people is here explained of his dying.

[Numbers 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">num 20:27</span></span>

And Moses did as the Lord commanded,.... Though it must be very cutting,
distressing, and afflicting to him, to part with a brother so dear to
him, and who had been so many years a companion of him, and a partner
with him in the care and government of the people of Israel; but it
being the Lord's will, he submits unto it, and faithfully and readily
obeyed his orders, as he always did:

and they went up into Mount Hor, in the sight of all the congregation;
that is, Moses, Aaron, and Eleazar, and perhaps there might be some
others that went with them as servants, to attend them and assist them
in some things to be done, particularly in the burial of Aaron; they all
saw Aaron go up, but he came down no more, and so it was ordered in this
public manner, that they might be witnesses of the translation of the
priesthood from Aaron to Eleazar, who, after this affair was over, came
down with Moses.

[Numbers 20:28](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 20:28</span></span>

And Moses stripped Aaron of his garments,.... His priestly garments,
which, very probably, were put on at the foot of the mountain, on
purpose for the transaction of this affair, since they were not in
common worn, but only when in service; the same hands that clothed Aaron
with them at first, stripped him of them, and both were done at the
command of God; as the stripping of those garments was a divesting Aaron
of his office, so it was a figure of the disannulling of his priesthood,
when the Messiah should come, a priest after another order:

and put them upon Eleazar his son; which was an investing him with the
office of high priest in his father's room; and which, as it must give
Aaron pleasure and satisfaction to see his son put into his office
before he died, so it signified the continuance of it in succession in
his posterity, and was a confirmation of it; and it must be pleasing to
Moses and the people of Israel to observe the care and faithfulness of
God in providing for the succession of the priesthood:

and Aaron died there in the top of the mount; quietly, comfortably, and
contentedly, without the least murmuring or repining: this was on the
first day of the fifth month, as appears from [Num
33:38](../../../bib/kjv/num033.htm#038.md), that is, of the month Ab, as
the Targum of Jonathan here says; and in this the Jewish writers (k)
agree in general, which month answers to part of July and part of
August; and in this same place where he died he was buried, as is
evident from [Deu 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#006.md), wherefore no
credit is to be given to the Arabs, who show a stone not far from Mount
Sinai, about two feet high from the ground, on which are seen some
unknown characters, which, they say, were engraven by Jeremiah the
prophet, in honour of Moses and Aaron, who were buried there (l):

and Moses and Eleazar came down from the mount; after Aaron was dead and
buried.

\(k\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 10. p. 29. Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 7. 2.
Schulchan Aruch, par. 1. c. 580. sect. 2. (l) Journal from Cairo to
Mount Sinai, p. 40. Ed. 2.

[Numbers 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/num020.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">num 20:29</span></span>

And when all the congregation saw that Aaron was dead,.... Not that they
saw his dead body, but they perceived by the relation of Moses, and by
various circumstances, as not seeing Aaron come down, whom they saw go
up, and seeing Eleazar with Aaron's garments on him, and perhaps by
tokens of mourning in Moses and Eleazar; so the Targums of Jonathan and
Jerusalem say, they saw them come down from the top of the mountain,
with their garments rent, and ashes on their heads, weeping and
lamenting:

they mourned for Aaron thirty days; the whole month out; so long public
mourning with the Jews lasted, as Josephus (m) relates:

even all the house of Israel; men and women, as the Targum of Jonathan,
and so Jarchi: no doubt it was for the amiable virtues and abundant
grace that were in him, and the many services he had done for them, both
before and since he was invested with the priestly office; and
oftentimes the memory of such things is revived after the death of a
good man, which are not so much taken notice of in his life, nor he be
thanked for them, or have honour and respect shown him on account of
them; but when dead, he, and what he has done, are spoken well of, and
his loss lamented.

\(m\) De Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 8. sect. 5.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 21](num021.md)

</div>
