<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num008)  [Next](num010) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 9

In this chapter the command for keeping the passover is repeated, and it
was accordingly kept, [Num 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001); but
some persons being defiled and disqualified for observing it, Moses
inquires of the Lord, on their solicitation, what should be done in such
a case, [Num 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006); when it was ordered
to be kept by such, and those on journeys, on the fourteenth day of the
second month, but not by others, who were to observe it according to its
first appointment, [Num 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#009); and an
account is given of the appearance of the cloud by day, and fire by
night, upon the tabernacle, which directed the children of Israel when
to journey, and when to pitch their tents, [Num
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015).

[Numbers 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 9:1</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses in the wilderness of Sinai,.... While the
people of Israel were encamped there, before they took their journey
from thence:

in the first month of the second year, after they were come out of the
land of Egypt: the following order was given some time in the first
month of the second year of Israel's departure out of Egypt; the precise
day is not mentioned, it must be in the beginning of the month before
the fourteenth day of it, in which the passover is ordered to be kept,
according to the first institution of it; very probably immediately
after the setting up of the tabernacle, and the consecration of Aaron
and his sons; and it must be before the numbering of the people the
fixing of their standards, the appointment of the Levites, and the
dedication of them; since the order for the numbering of the people was
on the first day of the second month, [Num
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001), but the account of them was
postponed to this time, in order to give a relation of an affair which
was not finished until the second month, and therefore the whole is laid
together here:

saying, as follows.

[Numbers 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 9:2</span></span>

Let the children of Israel also keep the passover,.... Though this
ordinance was enjoined the people of Israel, and observed by them at the
time of their coming out of Egypt, and had been since repeated, [Lev
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#005); yet without a fresh precept, or
an explanation of the former, they seemed not to be obliged, or might
not be sensible that they were obliged to keep it, until they came into
the land of Canaan, [Exo 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#025); and
therefore a new order is given them to observe it:

at his appointed season; and what that season is is next declared.

[Numbers 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 9:3</span></span>

In the fourteenth day of this month,.... The first month, the month
Nisan or Abib, answering to part of our March:

at even ye shall keep it, in his appointed season: between the two
evenings, [Exo 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006); and even if it
fall on the sabbath day, as Jarchi; and this was a sabbath day,
according to the Jewish writers (y):

according to all the rites of it, and according to all the ceremonies
thereof shall ye keep it; the former of these, according to Jarchi,
respects the lamb, and the requisites of it, that it should be without
blemish, a male, and of the first year; and the latter, according to him
and others, the removal of the leaven, and the seven days of unleavened
bread, and the eating of the lamb with bitter herbs: they take in no
doubt all that were prescribed by the original law, except the
sprinkling of the blood on the doorposts, and also eating the passover
in haste, with their loins girt, and shoes on their feet, and staves in
their hands; though some think these latter might be observed at this
time, when they were unsettled.

\(y\) Seder Olam Rabba. c. 7.

[Numbers 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 9:4</span></span>

And Moses spake unto the children of Israel, that they should keep the
passover. The time now drawing nigh for the observation of it, it being
now almost a year since their coming out of Egypt.

[Numbers 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 9:5</span></span>

And they kept the passover on the fourteenth, day of the first month at
even in the wilderness of Sinai,.... No mention is made of keeping the
feast of unleavened bread seven days, only of the passover, which indeed
was only enjoined at this time, though the feast of unleavened bread
used to follow it, and did in later times; but perhaps it would not have
been an easy matter to have got the flour to make it of, sufficient for
so large a body of people, for seven days together in the wilderness;
though they might be able to furnish themselves with what was enough for
one meal from the neighbouring countries, and especially from Midian,
where Jethro, Moses's father, lived, and which was not very far from
Sinai, where the Israelites now were:

according to all that the Lord commanded Moses, so did the children of
Israel; which is observed to their honour; though Jarchi gives this as a
reason why this book does not begin with this account, as the order of
things seems to require, because it was to the reproach of the
Israelites, that all the forty years they were in the wilderness they
kept but this passover only; the reason of which was, because of the
omission of circumcision during that time, through the inconveniences of
travelling, and the danger of circumcision in it, without which their
children could not eat of the passover, [Exo
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048).

[Numbers 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">num 9:6</span></span>

And there were certain men who were defiled by the dead body of a
man,.... The Targum of Jonathan adds,"who died by them
suddenly,''whereby pollution was contracted, see [Num
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#009); though perhaps this was a whole
house or family, one of which was dead, and so all were defiled, being
in the place where the dead body was, or had touched it, or been
concerned however in the burying of it, and on account of which were
unclean seven days, and so might not eat of any holy things, as the
passover; and though at the first institution there was no such law, yet
since that time there was, which obliged them, see [Lev
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#020); and it is said (z), that the
section concerning the red heifer, and so of defilement by a dead body,
was delivered on the day the tabernacle was erected, even on the first
day of the first month; and though recorded in [Num
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/num019.htm#001); yet was given out before this;
and indeed otherwise it is not easy to conceive how these men should
know that the dead body of a man was defiling:

that they could not keep the passover on that day; as others did, the
fourteenth of Nisan, it being, according to the Targum of Jonathan, the
seventh day of their defilement:

and they came before Moses, and before Aaron, on that day; on the
selfsame day the passover was kept, and they were sensible of their
pollution, which disqualified for it; and therefore it should rather
seem to be the first day of their pollution than their last; since
otherwise they would doubtless have inquired about this matter before
the passover came; unless the time of their pollution was so near out,
that they thought they might eat it safely, on which they desired
advice.

\(z\) Chaskuni in loc.

[Numbers 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">num 9:7</span></span>

And those men said unto him,.... To Moses, who was the chief magistrate,
though Aaron was the high priest. Jarchi says, they were both sitting
together when the men came, and put the question to them, but it was not
proper to speak to one after another; for if Moses knew not, how should
Aaron know? says he; the more difficult matters were brought to Moses,
and he gave answers to them:

we are defiled by the dead body of a man; they had touched it, or had
been where it was, or at the funeral of it, and so were defiled: this
they knew was their case by a law before mentioned, and which they speak
of, not as a sin purposely committed by them, but as what had unhappily
befallen them, and they could not avoid; and express their concern, that
upon this account they should be deprived of the ordinance of the
passover and as this confession shows an ingenuous disposition, so what
follows, a pious, religious, and devotional frame of mind:

wherefore are we kept back, that we may not offer an offering of the
Lord in his appointed season among the children of Israel? they speak
very honourably of the ordinance of the passover, they call it "an
offering of the Lord", the passover lamb being a slain sacrifice; and
this offered to the Lord, by way of thanksgiving, for, and in
commemoration of, their wonderful deliverance out of Egypt, and done in
faith of Christ the passover, to be sacrificed for them; and it gave
them much uneasiness that they were debarred by this occasional and
unavoidable uncleanness, that was upon them, from keeping it; and what
added to it was, that they could not observe it on the day which the
Lord had appointed, and when the whole body of the children of Israel
were employed in it; for it is no small pleasure to a good man to
observe every ordinance of God in the manner and at the time he directs
to, and his people in general are attending to the same; and the rather
they were urgent in their expostulations, because it is said (a), this
was the seventh and last day of their pollution, when they should be
clean at evening, and the passover was not to be eaten until the
evening, and therefore so earnestly expostulate why they should be kept
back from it.

\(a\) Maimon. in Misn. Pesachim, c. 7. sect. 6.

[Numbers 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 9:8</span></span>

And Moses said unto them, stand still,.... Where they were; Aben Ezra
says, at the door of the tabernacle of the congregation:

and I will hear what the Lord will command concerning you; as it was a
singular case, of which there had been no instance before, Moses would
not determine anything about it himself, but would inquire of the Lord
his mind and will concerning it; and for that purpose, very probably,
went into the most holy place, where the Lord had promised to meet him
and commune with him, from off the mercy seat, about any matter of
difficulty he should inquire about, [Exo
25:22](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#022).

[Numbers 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 9:9</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... From between the cherubim, after he
had laid the case before him, and he gave him an answer:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 9:10</span></span>

Speak unto the children of Israel, saying,.... Not to the men only that
came to Moses for advice, but to the body of the people; for the answer
of the Lord concerned them all, and carried in it a rule to be observed
in the like case, and others mentioned, in all succeeding ages, as long
as the passover was an ordinance of God:

if any man of you; or "a man, a man", or any private man; for, according
to the Jewish writers, this law only respects private persons, as those
were who were the occasion of its being made:

or of your posterity; or "in your generations" (b), or "ages"; which
shows that this law respected future times, and not the present case
only:

shall be unclean by reason of a dead body; see [Num
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#006); Maimonides (c) says, this only
respects uncleanness by a dead body, and not uncleanness by any creeping
thing; for such as were unclean by them might sacrifice, though a
private person, and eat the passover at evening with purity, when he had
been cleansed: yet he says elsewhere (d), that such that had issues, and
menstruous women, and those that lay with them, and women in childbed,
were unclean, and were put off to the second passover; and so the Targum
of Jonathan here adds,"or that has an issue, or a leprous person:"

or be in a journey afar off; which, according to Ben Gersom, was fifteen
miles; so in the Misnah (e), and the commentators on it:

yet he shall keep the passover of the Lord; not the first, but second,
according to the directions given in [Num
9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011).

\(b\) "generationibus vestris", Pagninus, Montanus; "in aetatibus
vestris", Drusius. (c) In Misn. ut supra, (c. 7. sect. 6.) T. Bab.
Pesachim, fol. 93. 2. (d) Hilchot Corban Pesach, c. 6. sect. 1. (e)
Pesachim, c. 9. sect. 2. Maimon. & Bartenora in ib.

[Numbers 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 9:11</span></span>

The fourteenth day of the second month at even they shall keep it,....
The mouth Ijar, as the Targum of Jonathan, which answers to part of our
April and part of May; so that there was a month allowed for those that
were defiled to cleanse themselves; and for those on a journey to return
home and prepare for the passover, which was not to be totally omitted,
nor deferred any longer; and it was to be kept on the same day of the
month, and at the same time of the day the first passover was observed;
still the more to keep in mind the saving of their firstborn; and their
deliverance out of Egypt at that time: an instance of keeping such a
passover we have in [Ch2 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2030.htm#001), &c.

and eat it with unleavened bread and bitter herbs; in the same manner as
the first passover was eaten, [Exo
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#008); only no mention is made of
keeping the feast of unleavened bread seven days, which some think those
were not obliged unto at this time, only to keep the feast of the
passover.

[Numbers 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 9:12</span></span>

They shall leave none of it unto the morning,.... None of the flesh of
the passover lamb, what was left was to be burnt with fire, [Exo
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#010),

nor break any bone of it; the same was enjoined; see Gill on [Exo
12:46](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#046),

according to all the ordinances of the passover they shall keep it: as
when observed in its time, excepting the feast of unleavened bread,
which followed the first passover, and those rites which were peculiar
to the passover, as kept at their first coming out of Egypt; as the
sprinkling the blood of the lamb on the doorposts, eating it in haste,
&c.

[Numbers 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">num 9:13</span></span>

But the man that is clean,.... Free from any pollution by a dead body,
or the like:

and is not in a journey; in a distant country; for if he was on a
journey in his own nation, he ought to return and attend the passover,
which all the males from the several parts of the land were obliged
unto; wherefore the Vulgate Latin version of [Num
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#010); is a wrong one; "or in a way
afar off in your nation"; for at whatsoever distance they were in their
own nation, they were bound to appear:

and forbeareth to keep the passover; the first passover in the first
month, the month Nisan, wilfully, through negligence, or not caring to
be at the expense and trouble of it, or on any pretence whatsoever: Ben
Gersom interprets it of one that will not keep neither the first nor the
second passover:

even the same soul shall be cut off from his people; either be
excommunicated from them, or cut off by death by the immediate hand of
God:

because he brought not the offering of the Lord in his appointed season:
this is the ground and reason of the resentment; it was a breach of the
divine command, which required this offering; ingratitude to God, being
a thank offering for a singular deliverance; and this aggravated by its
not being brought at the appointed time, which was the fit ti me for it:

that man shall bear his sin; be chargeable with the guilt of it, and
bear the punishment of it; he on himself, as Aben Ezra notes, he, and he
only; not his wife and family, for he being the head and master of the
family, it lay upon him to provide the passover lamb for himself and his
house.

[Numbers 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">num 9:14</span></span>

And if a stranger shall sojourn among you, and will keep the passover
unto the Lord,.... Then he must become a proselyte of righteousness, and
be circumcised, or otherwise be might not eat of the passover, [Exo
12:48](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#048); Ben Gersom interprets this of
the second passover, and of a proselyte that was not obliged to the
first, he not being then a proselyte, but became one between the first
and the second; and so Aben Ezra understands it of a second passover,
though he observes, that some say the first is meant:

according to the ordinance of the passover, and according to the manner
thereof, so shall he do; according to the several rites and ceremonies,
whether of the first or second passover, that an Israelite was obliged
to observe, the same a proselyte was to observe, and what they were has
been already taken notice of:

ye shall have one ordinance, both for the stranger and for him that was
born in the land: for a proselyte, and a native of Israel; see [Exo
12:49](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#049).

[Numbers 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 9:15</span></span>

And on the day that the tabernacle was reared up,.... Which was the
first day of the first month in the second year of the people of
Israel's coming out of Egypt, [Exo
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#001),

the cloud covered the tabernacle, namely, the tent of the testimony;
that part of the tabernacle in which the testimony was, that is, where
the ark was, in which the law was put, called the testimony; and this
was the most holy place; and over the tent or covering of that was this
cloud, which settled upon it, as Ben Gersom thinks, after the seven days
of the consecration of Aaron and his sons; on the eighth day, when it
was said unto the people of Israel, "today will the Lord appear unto
you", [Lev 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#001); "and the glory of the
Lord shall appear unto you", [Lev 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#006);
and here the Targum of Jonathan calls this cloud the cloud of glory,
because of the glory of God in it; of which see [Exo
40:34](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#034),

and at even there was upon the tabernacle, as it were, the appearance of
fire until the morning; the same phenomenon, which looked like a cloud
in the daytime, appeared like fire in the same place in the nighttime,
throughout the whole of it until morning light, when it was seen as a
cloud again: this was a token of the presence of God with the people of
Israel, of his protection of them, and being a guide unto them by night
and day, while in the wilderness; and was a figure of his being the same
to his church and people, in the present state of things; see [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005).

[Numbers 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">num 9:16</span></span>

So it was alway,.... Night and day, as long as the people of Israel were
in the wilderness, see [Exo 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021),

the cloud covered it by day: the phrase, "by day", is not in the text,
but is easily and necessarily supplied from [Exo
40:38](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#038); and as it is in the Targum of
Jonathan, and in the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic
versions, and which the following clause requires:

and the appearance of fire by night; when as a cloud it could not be
because of the darkness of the night; as in the daytime it could not be
discerned as a body of fire or light, because of the light of the sun;
but being seen under these different forms, was serviceable both by day
and night, for the following purposes.

[Numbers 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">num 9:17</span></span>

And when the cloud was taken up from the tabernacle,.... Or went up from
it, higher than it was before, yet not out of sight, but hung as it were
hovering in the air over the tabernacle, but at some distance from it;
this was done by the Lord himself:

then after that the children of Israel journeyed; as soon as they saw
the cloud moving upwards, the Levites took down the tabernacle, and each
took their post assigned them in the carriage of it, and the priests
blew their trumpets mentioned in [Num
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#002), and the whole camp moved and
marched on in their journey:

and in the place where the cloud abode, there the children of Israel
pitched their tents; when it stopped and remained without any motion, it
was a signal to the children of Israel to stop also, and to set up the
tabernacle, and pitch their tents about it by their standards, and
according to the order of encampment which had been given them.

[Numbers 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">num 9:18</span></span>

At the commandment of the Lord the children of Israel journeyed,.... Or
"mouth of the Lord"; not that there was any command in form given, or
any audible voice heard, directing when to march; but the removal of the
cloud was interpretatively the order and command of God for them to move
also:

and at the commandment of the Lord they pitched; their tents; when the
cloud stopped, they understood that as a signal to them, as a token of
the will of God that they should stop likewise; it was to them as an
authoritative command, which they obeyed:

as long as the cloud abode upon the tabernacle, they rested in their
tents; whether a longer or a shorter time, as is after expressed.

[Numbers 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 9:19</span></span>

And when the cloud tarried long upon the tabernacle many days,.... Or
years, for days are sometimes put for years, and in some places the
cloud tarried several years; or however, if it stayed but a month or a
year in any place, as in [Num 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#022),

then the children of Israel kept the charge of the Lord, and journeyed
not; they not only kept watching when it would move, or set sentinels
for that purpose to observe it, but they kept the charge, order, or
commandment, which the tarrying of the cloud was a token of, and did not
attempt to proceed in their journey until they had an intimation so to
do by its motion; and all this while, likewise, the tabernacle being up,
they observed all the precepts and ordinances of the Lord in the service
of it.

[Numbers 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">num 9:20</span></span>

And so it was, when the cloud was a few days upon the tabernacle,.... Or
"days of number", which were so few that they might be easily numbered:
the Targum of Jonathan interprets them of the seven days of the week, as
if the sense was, when the cloud rested a week on the tabernacle:

according to the commandment of the Lord they abode in their tents;
during these few days, be they a week, or more, or less:

and according to the commandment of the Lord they journeyed; when it
removed from the tabernacle.

[Numbers 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">num 9:21</span></span>

And so it was when the cloud abode from even unto the morning,.... The
whole night, during which time they rested in their beds:

and that the cloud was taken up in the morning, then they journeyed;

whether it was by day or night that the cloud was taken up, they
journeyed; whether at morning or midnight; for sometimes, as Aben Ezra
observes, they travelled in the night; whensoever their sentinels gave
notice that the cloud was taken up, even though at midnight, they arose
and prepared for their journey; and by this it is evident, that the
appearance by day and night was the same body called the cloud, though
beheld in a different view, in the daytime as a cloud, in the nighttime
as fire.

[Numbers 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">num 9:22</span></span>

Or whether it were two days, or a month, or a year, that the cloud
tarried upon the tabernacle,.... Sometimes it tarried but half a day,
sometimes a whole day, sometimes two days, at other times a whole month,
and even a year; a full year, as the Targum of Jonathan and Aben Ezra;
or a longer time, as the Vulgate Latin version, for in one place it
tarried eighteen years, as Maimonides says (g); some say (h) nineteen
years, as in Kadeshbarnea:

remaining thereon, the children of Israel abode in their tents, and
journeyed not; so that, as the same writer observes, it was not because
the children of Israel lost their way in the wilderness and wandered
about, not knowing where they were, or which way they should go; hence
the Arabians call the wilderness, the wilderness of wandering, nor that
they were so long wandering in it as forty years, but because it was the
will of God that should stay so long at one place, and so long at
another, whereby their stay in it was protracted to such a length of
time, according to his sovereign will:

but when it was taken up they journeyed; though they had continued ever
so long, and their situation ever so agreeable.

\(g\) Moreh Nevoch. par. 2. c. 50. p. 512. (h) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 8.
p. 24.

[Numbers 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/num009.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 9:23</span></span>

At the commandment of the Lord they rested in their tents,.... Though
ever so disagreeable:

and at the commandment of the Lord they journeyed; though the
circumstances might be such, that they could have liked a continuance;
but whether agreeable or disagreeable, they were obedient to the divine
will: this, or what is equivalent to it, is frequently observed in this
paragraph, to show that the Israelites, though they were an obstinate
and perverse people, and must in general be desirous of getting as soon
as they could into the land of promise, yet in this case, in all their
stations and journeys, were submissive and obedient to the divine will,
as all good men should be with respect to happiness; and happy are they
who have God to be their guide through it, even unto death:

they kept the charge of the Lord, at the commandment of the Lord by the
hand of Moses; observed the rest or motion of the cloud, the order and
command of God signified thereby, as it was made known unto them by the
ministry and means of Moses.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 10](num010)

</div>
