<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Numbers Index](num)  
  [Previous](num025)  [Next](num027) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Numbers Chapter 26](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#001)

[Numbers](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">num 26:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO NUMBERS 26

In this chapter an order is given to number the people of Israel a
second time, [Num 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#001) and the account
begins with Reuben, the firstborn, and the families that sprung from
him, and the number of them, [Num 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#005)
and Dathan and Abiram being of this tribe, the affair of them and Korah
is afresh related, [Num 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#008), then the
tribe of Simeon, its families and number, [Num
26:12](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#012), next the tribe of Gad, and
their families and number, [Num 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#015),
after that the tribe of Judah, its families and number, [Num
26:19](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#019) then follows the tribe of
Issachar, its families and number, [Num
26:23](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#023), next to that the tribe of
Zebulun, its families and number, [Num
26:26](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#026) then the sons of Joseph, and
first Manasseh, his families and number, [Num
26:28](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#028) and then the tribe of Ephraim,
its families and number, [Num 26:35](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#035),
after that the tribe of Benjamin, its families and number, [Num
26:38](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#038) next the tribe of Dan, its
families and number, [Num 26:42](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#042) and
which is followed by the tribe of Asher, its families and number, [Num
26:44](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#044), and the muster is closed with
the tribe of Naphtali, its families and number, [Num
26:48](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#048), and the sum total of all the
numbers is given, [Num 26:51](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#051) and then
follows another order to divide the land of Canaan by lot, when
conquered, to the several tribes, according to their names and number,
[Num 26:52](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#052) and an account is given of
the number of the Levites and their families, their number being taken
not with the other tribes, but by themselves, and which is summed up,
[Num 26:57](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#057) and the chapter is
concluded with observing, that it appeared upon this numbering of the
people, that there were but two persons living of those that were first
numbered among the children of Israel, [Num
26:63](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#063).

[Numbers 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">num 26:1</span></span>

And it came to pass after the plague,.... Related in the preceding
chapter; how long after is not certain, perhaps before the war with
Midian, exhorted to in the latter part of the foregoing chapter, and of
which an account is given, [Num 31:1](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#001),

that the Lord spake unto Moses; out of the tabernacle, or out of the
cloud:

and unto Eleazar the son of Aaron the priest; the Lord had been used to
speak to Moses and to Aaron; but now Aaron being dead, and Eleazar his
son succeeding him in the priesthood, is joined with Moses, and the
order here given is directed to them both:

saying: as follows.

[Numbers 26:2](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">num 26:2</span></span>

Take the sum of all the congregation of the children of Israel,....
Excepting the Levites, who were to be numbered by themselves, and at a
different age; this sum was to be taken, that it might appear that all
of the old generation that came out of Egypt, of the age at which this
sum was taken, were now dead, excepting two, as the Lord had threatened;
and partly that as they were now about to enter the land of Canaan, it
might be divided to them according to their number; as well as to show
the faithfulness of God to his word and promise, that he would multiply
and make them fruitful, notwithstanding all their provoking sins and
transgressions:

from twenty years old and upwards, throughout their father's house; all
of that age in every tribe, house, and family:

all that are able to go to war in Israel; for which they must prepare,
being about to enter the land of Canaan, and dispossess and drive out
the inhabitants of it.

[Numbers 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">num 26:3</span></span>

And Moses and Eleazar the priest spake with them,.... With the children
of Israel, with the heads of them, their chief and principal, to assist
in taking the number of the people; as when they were numbered thirty
years ago, when a prince out of each tribe was taken to be with Aaron
and Moses in doing that business; but those princes were now all dead,
and another race succeeded, who were now employed in this service; so
the Targum of Jonathan says, they spoke with the rulers, and ordered
them to number them:

in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, near Jericho: or of Jericho, as the
same Targum, on the other side of Jordan to that on which Jericho stood;
for as yet the children of Israel had not passed that river, nor entered
into the land of Canaan, in which Jericho was, but they were now
opposite it; See Gill on [Num 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/num022.htm#001),

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 26:4](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">num 26:4</span></span>

Take the sum of the people, from twenty years old and upward,.... At the
same age at which the sum was taken before, [Num
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#003) so that there could not be one
that was more than sixty years of age, of all those that went into the
land of Canaan, except Joshua and Caleb, and besides some few in the
tribe of Levi, which did not come into either of these musters:

and the Lord commanded Moses, and the children of Israel, which went
forth out of the land of Egypt; as Moses had a command to number the
people before, so he had now. The sin of David was, that he numbered the
people when he had no command for it; Moses, when he brought the people
out of Egypt, had them committed to him by number; and now being about
to die, he delivers them up as it were by number again, as Jarchi
observes.

[Numbers 26:5](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">num 26:5</span></span>

Reuben, the eldest son of Israel,.... the number of his tribe is taken
first on that account; there were four families that descended from him,
the Hanochite, Palluite, Hesronite, and Carmite, and the number of men
from twenty years old and upwards, fit for war, were 43,730; so that,
since the last numbering, this tribe was decreased 2770; which may in
part be accounted for by the families of Dathan and Abiram being cut off
for their rebellion, who were this tribe, and whose affair is briefly
related in the following verses, and it may be to point out this unto
us.

[Numbers 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">num 26:8</span></span>

And the sons of Pallu,.... Or son, the plural for the singular, Pallu
having but one son, whose name was Eliab, the father of Dathan and
Abiram; [Num 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#009).

[Numbers 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">num 26:9</span></span>

And the sons of Eliab; Nemuel, and Dathan, and Abiram,.... Of Nemuel we
nowhere else read either he died without children, or he and his family
perished with his brethren, being concerned with them in the conspiracy;
or the family of the Palluite was in his line; one of the same name may
be observed in the tribe of Simeon:

this is that Dathan and Abiram, which were famous in the congregation;
either before their rebellion, for their power and authority, being
heads of their fathers' houses; or for their parts and abilities, being
men of great wisdom and sense; or for their zeal, activity, and
usefulness; or after it, and became famous, or rather infamous, on
account of it, see [Num 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#002).

who strove against Moses and against Aaron in the company of Korah, when
they strove against the Lord; who joined with Korah and his company, and
quarrelled with Moses and Aaron about the priesthood; with Moses for
putting Aaron into it, and with Aaron for accepting it, and officiating
in it; and so with the Lord himself, by whose orders he was invested
with it.

[Numbers 26:10](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">num 26:10</span></span>

And the earth opened her mouth, and swallowed them up,.... Not only
Dathan and Abiram, but their wives and children, their houses and tents,
and all their goods, see [Num 16:32](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#032)
together with Korah; the words being thus rendered, and standing in such
close connection with the preceding, some have concluded from hence that
Korah was swallowed up with them in the earth; whereas he seems rather
to have been at that time with the two hundred and fifty men that had
censers at the door of the tabernacle, and was consumed by fire with
them, see [Num 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#016) and, indeed, it
is suggested here, for the phrase may be rendered, "and the things of
Korah" (m); what appertained unto him, his men, tents, goods, and
substance, which agrees with [Num
16:32](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#032) or, "and as for Korah" (n); with
respect to him: "when that company died": he was at the head of, he died
also, the same death they died, by fire, as follows:

what time the fire devoured two hundred and fifty men; which was the
number his company consisted of, who took censers, and offered incense,
and were consumed by fire, [Num 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#002),
and with whom, in all probability, he perished:

and they became a sign, were made an example of, to deter others from
the like practices, and particularly usurping any part of the priest's
office: some connect the words with the following, and take the sense to
be, that this was the sign or miracle, that when they perished, Korah's
sons died not, but were preserved; which sense is countenanced by the
Vulgate Latin, but the other sense is best.

\(m\) "et quae erant, Korachi", Junius & Tremellius. (n) So Pool,
Patrick; "deinde et Corah (qui periit) in morte congregationis",
Tigurine version.

[Numbers 26:11](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">num 26:11</span></span>

Notwithstanding, the children of Korah died not. Neither of the
pestilence, nor by fire, nor by the swallowing up of the earth; they not
being in the counsel of their father, but followed the doctrine of Moses
the prophet, as the Targum of Jonathan; they either disliked their
father's scheme, or, if they engaged with him in it, they repented and
departed from him, and were not present when the judgments of God came
upon him and his company; there were several of his posterity who were
singers in the times of David, and to whom many of the psalms were sent
to be sung.

[Numbers 26:12](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">num 26:12</span></span>

The sons of Simeon, after their families,.... This tribe was next
numbered, not only because Simeon was next to Reuben by birth, but
because his tribe was under the standard of Reuben; two of his sons are
a little differently named here than they are in [Gen
46:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#010), there the eldest is called
Jemuel, here Nemuel; there the youngest but one is named Zohar, here
Zerah; and one of them is here omitted, namely Ohad, perhaps because he
died without children, and so no family sprang from him; wherefore the
families of Simeon were but five, and the number of them were 22,200; by
which it appears there was a very great decrease in this tribe since the
last muster, even 37,100 which in some measure is to be accounted for by
the great number of this tribe supposed to have died of the plague, on
account of fornication and idolatry, made mention of in the preceding
chapter; a prince in this tribe having set a bad example, it is probable
he was followed in it by many of it, for which great numbers were cut
off. Jarchi, from Tanchuma, says, that all the 24,000 that died of the
plague was of the tribe of Simeon; and so says the Samaritan Chronicle
(o); but that is not likely.

\(o\) Apud Hottinger. ut supra. (Smegma Oriental, l. 1. c. 8. p. 448.)

[Numbers 26:15](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">num 26:15</span></span>

The children of Gad, after their families tribe was numbered next to
Simeon,.... because it lay encamped with that under the standard of
Reuben. There is a little variation in the names of two or three of his
sons, from those by which they are called [Gen
46:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#016), instead of Ziphion, here
Zephon; and for Haggai, here Haggi; and what is much wider, for Ezbon,
here Ozni. Seven families sprang from Gad, whose number now was 40,500;
they were diminished since their last numbering 5150; it is probable
this tribe, being a warlike tribe, suffered very much in their attempt
to enter the land of Canaan contrary to the will of God, and were
repulsed and defeated by the Amalekites, [Num
16:40](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#040).

[Numbers 26:19](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">num 26:19</span></span>

And the sons of Judah were Er and Onan,.... And besides these he had
Shelah, Pharez, and Zerah, from whom families sprang, but none from the
two first: for

Er and Onan died in the land of Canaan; where they were born; and that
because of their sins, as the Targum of Jonathan adds, see

Ge 38:7-10 so that there were but three families sprang from Judah, the
Shelanites, Pharzites, and Zarhites; only the family of the Pharzites
was divided into two families, the Hesronites and the Hamulites, so
called from two sons of Pharez; the number of these families amounted to
76,500, so that there was an increase of 1900 since the last muster,
which answers to Jacob's blessing, that he should be a praise among his
brethren, [Gen 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#008).

[Numbers 26:23](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">num 26:23</span></span>

Of the sons of Issachar, after their families,.... This tribe was
numbered next to Judah, because it was under his standard. Two of his
sons are a little differently named than they are [Gen
46:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#013) instead of Phuvah one is called
Pua, and instead of Job another is called here Jashub; this tribe
consisted of four families, and the number of warlike men in it was
64,300; their increase since the last numbering of them is 9900.

[Numbers 26:26](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">num 26:26</span></span>

Of he sons of Zebulun, after their families,.... This is numbered next
to Issachar, because it was encamped under the standard of Judah; it
consisted of three families, whose numbers were 60,500, so that this
tribe was increased 3100.

[Numbers 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">num 26:28</span></span>

The sons of Joseph, after their families, were Manasseh and Ephraim.
Manasseh is here mentioned first, though Ephraim was preferred to him by
Jacob, and the standard belonged to him; not because he was the
firstborn, but because he had now the greater increase, though he had
but one son, Machir, of whom was the family of the Machirites, and a
grandson, whose name was Gilead, from whom was the family of the
Gileadites, and who had six sons; of whom were the families of the
Jeezerite, Halekite, Asrielite, Shechemite, Shemidaite, and Hepherite.
Hepher, of whom was the last, had a son named Zelophehad, but he had no
son, only five daughters, whose names are given; the number of men in
this tribe, of twenty years old and upwards, fit for war, was 52,700, so
that the increase was 20,500, a large increase indeed!

[Numbers 26:35](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">num 26:35</span></span>

These are the sons of Ephrain, after their families,.... Which were but
three, the Shuthalhite, the Bachrite, and the Tahanite, only from the
former sprung another family, called the Eranite; the number of the
whole was 32,500; there was a decrease in this tribe of 8000.

[Numbers 26:38](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">num 26:38</span></span>

The sons of Benjamin, after their families,.... This tribe was numbered
next to Ephraim, being under his standard. Five of the sons of Benjamin
are omitted, perhaps because they died without issue, and so no families
sprang from them; the names of the five sons mentioned vary a little
from the names of them in [Gen 46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021)
instead of Ehi, it is here Ahiram; and instead of Huppim and Muppim, it
is here Shupham and Hupham; from these last five were the families of
the Belaite, Ashbelite, Ahiramite, Shuphamite, and Huphamite; and from
the eldest of them sprang two other families, the Ardite and Naamite,
from Ard and Naaman, two sons of Bela; the number of men in these
families was 45,600, so that here was an increase of 10,200.

[Numbers 26:42](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">num 26:42</span></span>

These are the sons of Dan, after their families,.... Though he had but
one son, the plural being put for the singular; or by sons are meant his
posterity; his son's name was Shuham, and by transposition Hushim, in
[Gen 46:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#023) from him was the family of
the Shulamite; and yet, though but one, consisted of 64,400 men; there
was an increase of 1700 in this tribe.

[Numbers 26:44](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">num 26:44</span></span>

Of the children of Asher, after their families,.... This tribe was
numbered next to Dan, because it was under his standard; one of his sons
is omitted, very probably dying childless, and so had no family; from
the rest sprang the families of the Iimnite, Jesuite, and Benite; and,
from the latter, two others, the Heberite and Malchielite; and it is
remarked that Asher had a daughter named Serah, and who also is
particularly mentioned as a sister of Asher's sons in [Gen
46:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#017) no doubt but she was a
remarkable woman, either for religion, or for wisdom and prudence, or
some amiable virtue or grace or another, that she is so particularly
taken notice of: according to Maimonides (p) she was an heiress; for
though Asher had many sons, this was his wife's daughter by another man,
who had no sons, and the inheritance was his daughter's, and therefore
is so particularly mentioned; she inheriting as the daughters of
Zelophehad did: the number of persons in this tribe was 53,400, the
increase was 11,900.

\(p\) Apud Abendana in loc.

[Numbers 26:48](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">num 26:48</span></span>

Of the sons of Naphtali, after their families,.... This tribe, which is
the last of them, was numbered next to Asher, because it was with that
under the standard of Dan; it had four families in it, the Jahzeelite,
Gunite, Jezerite, and Shillemite, and its number was 45,400, being less
by 8000 than it was when first numbered.

[Numbers 26:51](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">num 26:51</span></span>

These were the numbered of the children of Israel,.... The twelve
tribes, consisting of so many families, as above named; and the sum
total of persons in them of twenty years old and upwards, and fit for
war, was

six hundred and one thousand and seven hundred and thirty; so that
though all those that were numbered thirty years ago were now dead,
excepting Joshua and Caleb, yet there wanted but 1820 of that number; so
mindful was the Lord of his promise, and so faithful to keep it,
notwithstanding the provocations of these people, to increase and
multiply them, that they had pretty near the number to go into the land
of Canaan which they had when they came out of Egypt.

[Numbers 26:52](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">num 26:52</span></span>

And the Lord spake unto Moses,.... After the sum of the people of Israel
had been taken:

saying; as follows.

[Numbers 26:53](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">num 26:53</span></span>

Unto these the land shall be divided for an inheritance,.... That were
numbered, and to none else:

according to the number of their names; and for this end was the number
of them now taken, that the land might be equally divided among them;
women and minors, or such as were under twenty years of age, had no
share in it; and even only those who were at that age at this time; so
Jarchi says, it was not divided to any that were less than twenty years
of age, even though they came to be full twenty before the division of
the land; for they were seven years subduing it, and seven years
dividing it, yet none took any part of it but these 601,730: nay, he
says, if a man had six children they took but their father's part only.

[Numbers 26:54](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">num 26:54</span></span>

To many thou shalt give the more inheritance, and to few thou shalt give
the less inheritance,.... To a tribe more numerous, and consisting of
more and larger families, a greater part of the land was to be given to
them to possess; and to a smaller tribe, and of the fewer families and
persons in them, a lesser share of it: this direction is given to Moses,
but is not designed for him personally, for he never entered the land,
but died before Israel went into it; but for the chief ruler that would
be then in being, namely, Joshua, his successor:

to everyone shall his inheritance be given, according to those that were
numbered of him; that is, to every tribe, and so to every family in it,
according to the number of men in it, that were of the above age when
the sum of them was taken: because it is in the original text, "to a man
according to those numbered of him", &c. (q); hence the Jewish writers
(r) gather, that the land was distributed not to women, but to men only.

\(q\) "viro", Montanus. (r) Vid. T. Bab. Bava. Bathra, fol. 122. 1.

[Numbers 26:55](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">num 26:55</span></span>

Notwithstanding, the land shall be divided by lot,.... That the division
might appear to be according to the determination and will of God, and
not left to the judgment and discretion of the chief magistrate, though
bound by the above rule:

according to the names of the tribes of their fathers they shall
inherit; that is, according as to whatsoever name of a tribe such a part
or portion of the land comes up by lot, that shall their inheritance be:
Jarchi says, the names of the twelve tribes were written on twelve
scrolls of parchment, and twelve borders or limits of land on twelve
others, and they were mixed together in an urn, and the prince put his
hand into it and took two scrolls; a scroll came up with the name of a
tribe, and a scroll with a border or limit expressed on it; and the lot,
he says, was by the Holy Ghost, for Eleazar, at the same time, was
clothed with Urim and Thummim (s); so that the people were certain that
the disposition and division of the land was of God; but there were but
nine tribes and a half, among whom the land of Canaan was divided, two
tribes and a half settled on the other side Jordan, namely, the tribes
of Reuben and Gad, and half the tribe of Manasseh.

\(s\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Biccurim, c. 1. sect. 5.

[Numbers 26:56](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">num 26:56</span></span>

According to the lot shall the possession thereof be divided,.... It was
by the determination of the lot that the land was divided by
inheritance, and that was by the Lord, according to [Pro
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#033).

between many and few; it was so ordered of the Lord by the lot, that the
many should have a larger share, and the few a lesser.

[Numbers 26:57](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">num 26:57</span></span>

And these are they that were numbered of the Levites, after their
families,.... And they were numbered not with the rest of the tribes of
Israel, but by themselves, as they were at the first numbering of the
tribes; the three principal families of which were, the Gershonite, the
Kohathite, and Merarite, so called from the three sons of Levi; but all
their sons are not mentioned, of the sons of Gershon only Libni, from
whom was the family of the Libnites; not Shimei, because, as Aben Ezra
conjectures, either he had no sons, or, if he had, they died without
any, and so there was no family from them; and of the sons of Kohath no
mention is made of Uzziel, nor of Izhar, but in the Korhites, only of
the Hebronite family from Hebron; and of Amram, whose wife Jochebed is
spoken of as a daughter of Levi, whom Levi's wife, as Jarchi rightly
supplies it, bore to him in Egypt, and which Jochebed was the mother of
Aaron, Moses, and Miriam; and it is observed that Aaron had four sons,
Nadab, Abihu, Eleazar, and Ithamar, the two first of which died for
offering strange fire to the Lord, and the two last were now living:
from Merari, another son of Levi, sprang two families, the Mahlite, and
the Mushite; and the whole number of the Levites at this time taken was
23,000 males of a month old and upward; so that here was an increase of
1,000 males since the former numbering of them: the reason why they were
not numbered with the other tribes was, because they had no part of the
land of Israel divided to them, and had no inheritance in it.

[Numbers 26:63](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#063)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_063">num 26:63</span></span>

These are they that were numbered by Moses and Eleazar the priest,....
That is, these were the Levites, their families, and the number of males
in them, which was taken by Moses and Eleazar, who might be only
concerned in numbering the Levites, of which tribe they were: and

who also numbered the children of Israel; all the tribes of them, with
the assistance of their princes:

in the plains of Moab, by Jordan, near Jericho; as they were commanded
by the Lord.

[Numbers 26:64](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#064)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_064">num 26:64</span></span>

But among these there was not a man of them whom Moses and Aaron the
priest numbered..... About thirty eight years before this time: this, as
Aben Ezra observes, respects the numbering of the Israelites, not of the
Levites; for there were some of the tribe of Levi numbered then who were
living, as Eleazar, and very probably Ithamar, and perhaps some few
more, though it may be Eleazar, being now a numberer, was not reckoned
among the numbered:

when they numbered the children of Israel in the wilderness of Sinai;
see [Num 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/num001.htm#001) for as there were none of
the tribe of Levi among the spies, there might be but few of them among
the murmurers.

[Numbers 26:65](../../../bib/kjv/num026.htm#065)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_065">num 26:65</span></span>

For the Lord had said of them, they shall surely die in the
wilderness,.... This was threatened them, [Num
14:32](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#032) and now it was fulfilled:

and there was not left a man of them, save Caleb the son of Jephunneh,
and Joshua the son of Nun; the only two of the spies that brought a good
report of the land of Canaan; all the rest of them, and those that
murmured on the ill report of theirs, were now dead.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Numbers Chapter 27](num027)

</div>
