<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2.md)  
  [Previous](pe1005)  [Next](pe2001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

[2 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe2 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 PETER

Though there was, among the ancients, a doubt concerning the authority
of this epistle, which is first mentioned by Origen (a), and afterwards
by Eusebius (b) and Jerom (c), yet it prevailed not among the churches,
nor hindered the diligent reading and use of it, together with other
Scriptures; it appearing to be useful and profitable, as Eusebius
declares; and in process of time this doubt was entirely removed, and it
was universally received by fathers and councils into the canon of the
Scriptures, where it is justly retained, it having plain signatures of
its divine original. Nor is there anything in it unworthy of so great an
apostle, whose name it bears; but the whole of it is agreeable to the
analogy of faith, to the rest of the sacred writings, particularly to
the epistle of Jude, between which, and the second chapter of this,
there is a great likeness. The only reason of the doubt of the
genuineness of this epistle, and whether it was written by the Apostle
Peter, is the difference of its style from the former; but the Holy
Ghost, the dictator of the sacred writings, is not limited to a man's
natural style, but could vary it as he pleased: besides, a man's style
is not the same at different times, and when writing on different
subjects; add to which, that this objection can only regard the second
chapter, for the first and third agree with the former epistle. And some
have thought that the second chapter is an extract out of some ancient
Hebrew book, describing the characters of the old false prophets; which
book Peter and Jude having before them, took the characters of the old
prophets, and, under divine direction, applied them to the false
teachers of the present age; and if so it is not to be wondered at that
the style of the epistle should differ from the former, and even from
itself in this part. But that it was written by the Apostle Peter, not
only the inscription shows, which, if false, would indeed discredit the
genuineness of the book, but the account that is given of the writer of
it, as one that was with Christ at his transfiguration, [Pe2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md). Now there were only the three
following disciples there, Peter, John, and, James. The last of these
had been dead some time when this epistle was written, and it was never
ascribed by any to the Apostle John, and therefore it remains that Peter
must be the writer of it. As for Simeon, bishop of Jerusalem, that
succeeded James, whom Grotius would suggest as the author of it, the
character does not agree with him; he was not with Christ on the holy
mount, nor heard the voice from heaven, asserting the sonship of Christ,
and the divine complacency in him: moreover, this epistle is called a
"second epistle", [Pe2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001.md) and
supposes a first, and manifestly refers to the former epistle of
Peter's, about which there never was any doubt, as the authors before
mentioned observe. It was written by the apostle in his old age, when
upon the decline of life, just as he was about to put off his
tabernacle, [Pe2 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#013.md) a little before
his martyrdom, in the year 68, though Dr. Lightfoot places it in 66; and
it is sent to the same persons as his first, namely, to the believing
Jews scattered throughout several parts of Asia, he being the minister
of the circumcision; see [Pe1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#001.md)
compared with [Pe2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001.md). The scope and
design of it are, to put them upon a concern for a larger increase of
grace and spiritual knowledge; to confirm and establish them in the
present truth of the Gospel; to warn them against false teachers, which
he largely describes; and he puts them in mind of the dissolution of all
things, and of what will precede and follow it; from whence he draws
several useful hints and inferences.

\(a\) Apud Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 6. c. 25. (b) Ib. l. 3. c. 3. 25. (c)
Catalog Script. Eccles. sect. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 1](pe2001.md)

</div>
