<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2.md)  
  [Previous](pe2000)  [Next](pe2002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

INTRODUCTION TO 2 PETER 1

In this chapter, after the inscription and salutation, the apostle takes
notice of gifts of grace bestowed; and exhorts to the exercise of
holiness and good works; and gives the reasons why he was so pressing to
them; and endeavours to establish the saints in the Gospel that had been
preached among them. In the inscription, the writer of the epistle
describes himself by his names, the one given him by his parents, the
other by his Lord and master, and by his character and office; and the
persons to whom he writes are described as having faith, and that of the
same kind with the apostles, and which they obtained through the
righteousness of Christ, [Pe2 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md). The
salutation is the same with that in the former epistle, only here is
added a wish for an increase of divine knowledge, [Pe2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#002.md) and which might be expected,
since, by the power of living grace, everything necessary to a spiritual
and godly life bad been given them in the effectual calling, through the
knowledge of Christ; even exceeding great and precious promises, whereby
they partook of the divine nature, and escaped the vices which prevailed
in the world, [Pe2 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#003.md) upon which he
exhorts not to rest where they were, but to go on in the exercise of
grace, and performance of duties, many of which he enumerates, [Pe2
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005.md) to enforce which he adds several
arguments, as that through an abounding in these things they would
appear not to have a superficial and speculative knowledge of Christ,
[Pe2 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008.md) or otherwise it would be
evident that they were blind and ignorant, and in an unrenewed state,
[Pe2 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#009.md) whereas by these things they
would make their calling and election sure and manifest to men, and
would never fall totally and finally, and in the issue have an abundant
entrance into the everlasting kingdom of Christ, [Pe2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010.md) and then he gives the reasons of
his conduct, why he so much urged a regard to these things, and put them
in mind of them; namely, the usefulness of them for their establishment,
the duty of his office, which required it, the short time he had to
live, and the profitableness of such exhortations to them, after his
decease, [Pe2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012.md) and in order to
establish them in the truths of the Gospel, and particularly in that
which concerns the coming of Christ in power and glory, on which he
enlarges in the latter part of this epistle; he observes, that this was
not a cunningly devised fable, but was what he and others were
eyewitnesses of, even of that which was an emblem and pledge of it;
namely, the transfiguration of Christ on the mount, when they saw the
glory he received from God his Father, and heard the voice from heaven
which declared him to be his well beloved Son, [Pe2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md), and besides, they had a surer
proof of the certainty of his coming; namely, the prophecies concerning
it, which should be regarded and given heed to, being as a lamp to
direct in the present state of darkness and imperfection, until the
illustrious day of Christ's coming appears, [Pe2
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019.md) and the rather this should be
attended to, since no scriptural prophecy is an invention and device of
men; nor was it formerly given out at the pleasure of men, but by
saints, who were influenced and moved unto it by the Holy Ghost, [Pe2
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020.md).

[2 Peter 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 1:1</span></span>

Simon Peter, a servant, and an apostle of Jesus Christ,.... The writer
of this epistle is described first by his names, Simon Peter; the first
of these was the name by which he was called from his infancy by his
parents, and by which he was known when Christ called him to be a
disciple and follower of him, and is the same with Simeon; and so it is
read in most copies; see [Act 15:14](../../../bib/kjv/act015.htm#014.md) a
name common with the Jews; the latter is what was given him by Christ at
his conversion, [Joh 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#004.md), and answers
to Cephas in the Syriac language; and both signify a rock or stone,
because he was built upon Christ, the rock and foundation, and chief
corner stone, and with a view to his future solidity, firmness, and
constancy: and he is next described by his character as a servant, not
of sin, nor Satan, nor man, but Jesus Christ, whose servant he was, not
only by creation, but by redemption and grace; and not merely a servant
of his, in common with other believers, but in a ministerial way, as a
preacher of the Gospel, which this phrase sometimes designs. The use of
it shows the apostle's humility, his sense of obligation to Christ, and
acknowledgment of him as his Lord, and that he esteemed it an honour to
stand in such a relation to him: but to distinguish him from a common
servant of Christ, and an ordinary minister of the word, it is added,
"an apostle of Jesus Christ": one that was immediately sent by Christ,
had his commission and doctrine directly from him, and a power of
working miracles, in confirmation of his mission and ministry being
divine, and an authority at large to go everywhere and preach the
Gospel, plant churches, and put them in due order, and place proper
persons over them. This is said to give weight and authority to his
epistle: and further, in this inscription of the epistle, the persons
are described to whom it is written, as follows,

to them that have obtained like precious faith with us; they were
believers in Christ, who had a faith of the right kind; not a faith of
doing miracles, which was not common to all, nor was it saving; nor an
historical faith, or a mere assent to truths, nor a temporary one, or a
bare profession of faith; but that faith which is the faith of God's
elect, the gift of his grace, and the operation of his power; which sees
the Son, goes to him, ventures on him, trusts in him, lives upon him,
and works by love to him. This is said to be "precious", as it is in its
own nature, being a rich and enriching grace, of more worth and value
than gold that perisheth, or than thousands of gold and silver; it is
not to be equalled by, nor purchased with the riches of the whole world;
it is precious in its object, it being conversant with the precious
person, precious blood, and precious righteousness and sacrifice of
Christ, and is that grace which makes Christ, and all that is his,
precious to souls; it is precious in its acts and usefulness; it is that
grace by which men go to God and Christ, receive from them, and give all
glory to them, and without which it is not possible to please God: to
which add the durableness of it; it is an abiding grace, and will never
fail, when the most precious things in nature do: and it is "like
precious" with that the apostles had; for there is but one faith, and
which is called a common faith, even common to all the elect; and which
is the same in all, not as to degrees, for in some it is strong, and in
others weak; or as to the actings of it, which are not in all alike, nor
in the same persons at all times; in some it is only a seeing of the
Son, his glory, fulness, and suitableness, and longing for views of an
interest in him; in others a reliance on him, and trusting in him; and
in others a holy confidence, and full assurance of being his: but then
it is alike with respect to its nature, as it is the substance of things
hoped for, and the evidence of things not seen; and as it works by love
to Christ and his people; it springs from the same cause, the love and
favour of God, and has the same object, Jesus Christ, and is followed
with the salvation; for though it is but as a grain of mustard seed,
yet, being genuine, the person that has it shall certainly be saved:
wherefore, for the comfort and encouragement of these scattered
believers, the apostle assures them, that their faith was the same as
their brethren that dwelt at Jerusalem and in Judea, who believed in
Christ, and even with them that were the apostles of Christ; and this he
says they had obtained, not by their own merits or industry, but by the
grace of God; for faith is not of a man's self, it is the gift of God,
and the produce of his grace and power. Some have rendered it, "obtained
by lot"; not by chance, but by the all wise, good, and powerful
providence of God, ordering, directing, assigning, and giving this grace
unto them. And which came to them

through the righteousness of God, and our Saviour Jesus Christ; or "of
our God, and Saviour Jesus Christ", as the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic
versions read; that is, of Christ Jesus, who is our God and Saviour: so
that here is a testimony of the deity of Christ, as well as of his
character as a Saviour, who is an able and a willing one, a full,
complete, suitable, and only Saviour: and the reason why he is so is
because he is truly and properly "God"; and why he is so to us, because
he is "our" God: wherefore by "righteousness" here, cannot be meant the
goodness and mercy of God, as some think, though faith undoubtedly comes
through that; nor the faithfulness of God making good his purpose and
promise of giving faith to his elect, as others think: but the
righteousness of Christ, which is not the righteousness of a creature,
but of God; that is wrought out by one that is God, as well as man, and
so answerable to all the purposes for which it is brought in. Now faith
comes "in", or "with" this righteousness, as the phrase may be rendered;
when the Spirit of God reveals and brings near this righteousness to a
poor sensible sinner, he at the same time works faith in him to look to
it, lay hold upon it, and plead it as his justifying righteousness with
God: or it comes "through" it; hence it appears that faith and
righteousness are two distinct things; and that faith is not a man's
righteousness before God, for it comes to him through it; as also that
righteousness is before faith, or otherwise faith could not come by it;
and, moreover, is the cause and reason of it; faith has no causal
influence upon righteousness, but righteousness has upon faith: the
reason why a man has a justifying righteousness is not because he has
faith; but the reason why he has faith given him is because he has a
justifying righteousness provided for him, and imputed to him.

[2 Peter 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 1:2</span></span>

Grace and peace be multiplied unto you,.... By a multiplication of grace
may be meant a larger discovery of the love and favour of God; which
though it admits of no degrees in itself, being never more or less in
God's heart, yet, as to the manifestations of it, it is different, and
capable of being increased, and drawn out to a greater length; or else
an increase of the internal graces of the Spirit of God, as to the
actings and exercise of them; or a larger measure of the gifts of the
Spirit, for greater usefulness among them; or a clearer view, and a more
enlarged knowledge of the Gospel of the grace of God, and the truths of
it; and indeed, the word grace may take in all these senses: and by a
multiplication of peace, which the apostle in this salutation also
wishes for, may be designed an affluence of all kind of prosperity,
temporal, and spiritual, external and internal; and more especially an
increase of spiritual peace, a fulness of joy and peace in believing,
arising from a sense of free justification by Christ's righteousness,
and full pardon and atonement by his blood and sacrifice:

through the knowledge of God, and of Jesus our Lord; which is to be
understood, not of a natural, but of a spiritual and evangelical
knowledge; of a knowledge of God, not as the God of nature and
providence, but as the God of all grace, as in Christ, and a covenant
God in him, and of the person, offices, and grace of Christ; and which
designs true faith in him, by which means larger discoveries of the
grace of God are made, and a greater enjoyment of spiritual peace is
had: or it may be rendered, "with the knowledge of God", &c. and the
sense then is, that the apostle prays, as for a multiplication of grace
and peace, so along with it, an increase of spiritual and evangelical
knowledge; which in the best is imperfect, but may be increased by the
blessing of God on those means which he has appointed for that end, such
as the word and ordinances. The Syriac version renders this clause,
"through the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ", leaving out the word
"God", and the copulative "and", and adding the word "Christ"; and the
Ethiopic version reads, "in the knowledge of our God, Christ Jesus our
Lord", without any distinction. After the inscription and salutation
begins the epistle, with an account of various special favours bestowed
upon these persons; and are mentioned by the apostle to encourage his
faith and theirs, in expectation of enjoying what he here wishes unto
them, since already such great and good things had been bestowed upon
them.

[2 Peter 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe2 1:3</span></span>

According as his divine power,.... Meaning either the power of God the
Father, to whom belong eternal power and Godhead; and he is sometimes
called by the name of power itself; see [Mat
26:64](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#064.md) being all powerful and mighty;
or rather the power of Christ, since he is the next and immediate
antecedent to this relative; and who, as he has the fulness of the
Godhead in him, is almighty, and can do all things; and is "El-shaddai",
God all-sufficient, and can communicate all things whatsoever he
pleases, and does, as follows: for he

hath given unto us all things that pertain unto life and godliness;
referring not so much to a temporal life, though he gives that and
preserves it, and furnishes with all the mercies and comforts of it; and
which come to us, from him, in a covenant way, as his left hand
blessings, and in great love; but rather a spiritual life, which he is
the author and maintainer of, all the joys, pleasures, blessings, and
supports of it, being given by him; as also eternal life, for that, and
everything appertaining to it, are from him; he gives a meetness for it,
which is his own grace, and a right unto it, which is his own
righteousness; and he has power to give that itself to as many as the
Father has given him, and he does give it to them; and likewise all
things belonging to "godliness", or internal religion; and which is the
means of eternal life, and leads on to it, and is connected with it, and
has the promise both of this life, and of that which is to come; and
everything relating to it, or is in it, or it consists of, is from
Christ: the internal graces of the Spirit, as faith, hope, and love,
which, when in exercise, are the principal parts of powerful godliness,
are the gifts of Christ, are received out of his fulness, and of which
he is the author and finisher; and he is the donor of all the fresh
supplies of grace to maintain the inward power of religion, and to
assist in the external exercise of it; all which things are given

through the knowledge of him that hath called us to glory and virtue.
The call here spoken of is not a bare outward call, by the ministry of
the word, but an internal, special, and powerful one, which springs from
the grace, and is according to the purpose of God, and is inseparably
connected with justification and glorification; and is either of God the
Father, who, as the God of all grace, calls to eternal glory by Christ;
or rather of Christ himself, who calls by his Spirit and grace; and
hence the saints are sometimes styled, the called of Jesus Christ, [Rom
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#006.md) what they are called unto by him
is, "glory and virtue"; by the former may be meant, the glorious state
of the saints in the other world, and so answers to "life", eternal
life, in the preceding clause; and by the latter, grace, and the
spiritual blessings of grace here, and which answers to "godliness" in
the said clause; for the saints are called both to grace and glory, and
to the one, in order to the other. Some render it, "by glory and
virtue"; and some copies, as the Alexandrian and others, and so the
Vulgate Latin version, read, "by his own glory and virtue"; that is, by
his glorious power, which makes the call as effectual, and is as
illustrious a specimen of the glory of his power, as was the call of
Lazarus out of the grave; unless the Gospel should rather be intended by
glory and virtue, which is glorious in itself, and the power of God unto
salvation, and is the means by which persons are called to the communion
of Christ, and the obtaining of his glory: so then this phrase, "him
that hath called us to glory and virtue", is a periphrasis of Christ,
through a "knowledge" of whom, and which is not notional and
speculative, but spiritual, experimental, fiducial, and practical, or
along with such knowledge all the above things are given; for as God, in
giving Christ, gives all things along with him, so the Spirit of Christ,
which is a spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of him, when
he makes him known in the glory of his person, grace, and righteousness,
also makes known the several things which are freely given of God and
Christ: and this is what, among other things, makes the knowledge of
Christ preferable to all other knowledge, or anything else.

[2 Peter 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 1:4</span></span>

Whereby are given unto us,.... Or "by which", that is, glory and virtue;
by the glorious power of Christ, or by the glorious and powerful Gospel
of Christ; and so the Arabic version renders it, "by both of which"; or
"by whom", as the Vulgate Latin version reads; that is, by Christ; for
as in him are all the promises of God, so they are at his dispose, and
by him are given unto the saints:

exceeding great and precious promises; meaning the promises of the new
and everlasting covenant, of which Christ is the Mediator, surety, and
messenger; and which are "exceeding great", if we consider the author of
them, who is the great God of heaven and earth, and who was under no
obligation to make promises of anything to his creatures; and therefore
must arise from great grace and favour, of which they are largely
expressive, and are like himself; are such as become his greatness and
goodness, and are confirmed by his oath, and made good by his power and
faithfulness: and they are also great, as to the nature and matter of
them; they are better promises than those of the covenant of works; they
are not merely temporal ones, nor are they conditional and legal; but as
they relate to things spiritual and eternal, to grace here and glory
hereafter, so they are absolute, free, and unconditional, and are
irreversible and unchangeable; and they answer great ends and purposes,
the glory of God, and the everlasting good and happiness of his people;
and therefore must be "precious", of more value and worth than thousands
of gold and silver, and to be rejoiced at more than at the finding of a
great spoil, being every way suited to the cases of God's people, and
which never fail. The end of giving them is,

that by these you might be partakers of the divine nature; not
essentially, or of the essence of God, so as to be deified, this is
impossible, for the nature, perfections, and glory of God, are
incommunicable to creatures; nor, hypostatically and personally, so as
the human nature of Christ, in union with the Son of God, is a partaker
of the divine nature in him; but by way of resemblance and likeness, the
new man or principle of grace, being formed in the heart in
regeneration, after the image of God, and bearing a likeness to the
image of his Son, and this is styled, Christ formed in the heart, into
which image and likeness the saints are more and more changed, from
glory to glory, through the application of the Gospel, and the promises
of it, by which they have such sights of Christ as do transform them,
and assimilate them to him; and which resemblance will be perfected
hereafter, when they shall be entirely like him, and see him as he is:

having escaped the corruption that is in the world through lust; not the
corruption and depravity of nature, which is never escaped by any, nor
got rid of so long as the saints are in the world; but the corrupt
manners of the world, or those corruptions and vices which, are
prevalent in the world, and under the power and dominion of which the
world lies; and particularly the sins of uncleanness, adultery, incest,
sodomy, and such like filthy and unnatural lusts, which abounded in the
world, and among some that called themselves Christians, and especially
the followers of Simon Magus. Now the Gospel, and the precious promises,
being graciously bestowed and powerfully applied, have an influence on
purity of heart and conversation, and teach men to deny ungodliness and
worldly lusts, and to live soberly, righteously, and godly; such are the
powerful effects of Gospel promises, under divine influence, as to make
men inwardly partakers of the divine nature, and outwardly to abstain
from and avoid the prevailing corruptions and vices of the times.

[2 Peter 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 1:5</span></span>

And besides this, giving all diligence,.... "Or upon this", as the
Syriac and Arabic versions read, bestow all your labour, diligence, and
care; namely, on what follows, and that from the consideration of what
goes before; for nothing can more strongly animate, and engage to the
diligent exercise of grace and discharge of duty, than a consideration
of the high favours, and free grace gifts of God, and the exceeding
great and precious promises of his Gospel:

add to your faith virtue; or "with your faith", so the Arabic version
renders it, and the like, in the following clauses. They had faith, even
like precious faith with the apostles, not of themselves, but by the
gift of God, and which is the first and principal grace; it leads the
van, or rather the "chorus", as the word rendered "add" signifies; and
though it is in itself imperfect, has many things lacking in it, yet it
cannot be added to, or increased by men; ministers may be a means of
perfecting what is lacking in it, and of the furtherance and joy of it,
but it is the Lord only that can increase it, or add unto it in that
sense, and which is not the meaning here: but the sense is, that as it
is the basis and foundation of all good works, it should not stand
alone, there ought to be virtue, or good works along with it, by which
it may be perfected, not essentially, but evidentially, or might appear
to be true and genuine; for by virtue may be either meant some
particular virtue, as justice towards men, to which both the grace and
doctrine of faith direct; and indeed pretensions to faith in Christ,
where there is not common justice done to men, are of little account;
or, as others think, beneficence to men; and so the Ethiopic version
renders it, "proceed to bounty by your faith"; and faith does work by
love and kindness to fellow creatures and Christians; but this seems
rather designed by brotherly kindness and charity, in [Pe2
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#007.md) or boldness, courage, constancy,
and fortitude, which ought to go along with faith. Where there is true
faith in Christ, there should be a holy boldness to profess it, and
constancy in it, and courage to fight the good fight of faith, and
firmness of mind to stand fast in it, notwithstanding all difficulties
and discouragements; or virtue in general here meant, not mere moral,
but Christian virtues, which are the fruits of the Spirit of God, and of
his grace; and differ from the other, in that they spring from the grace
of God, are done in faith, by the assistance of the Spirit of Christ,
and by strength received from him, and in love to him, and with a view
to the glory of God; whereas moral virtues, as exercised by a mere moral
man, spring from nature, and are performed by the mere strength of it,
and are destitute of faith, and so but "splendida peccata", splendid
sins, and proceed from self-love, from sinister ends, and with selfish
views:

and to virtue, knowledge; not of Christ, mentioned [Pe2
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008.md) and which is included in faith,
for there can be no true faith in Christ, were there not knowledge of
him; but of the will of God, which it is necessary men should be
acquainted with, in order to perform it; or else though they may seem
zealous of good works, their zeal will not be according to knowledge;
they ought to know what are virtues or good works in God's account, and
what are the nature and use of them, lest they should mistake and
misapply them; or of the Scriptures of truth, and of the mysteries of
the Gospel, which should be diligently searched, for the increase and
improvement of knowledge in divine things, and which has a considerable
influence on a just, sober, and godly living; or by knowledge may be
meant prudence and wisdom, in ordering the external conversation aright
towards those that are without, and in showing good works out of it, to
others, by way of example, and for the evidence of the truth of things,
with meekness of wisdom.

[2 Peter 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe2 1:6</span></span>

And to knowledge, temperance,.... Avoiding all excess in eating and
drinking, and all impure and unclean lusts; for it signifies nothing
what a man knows, or professes to know, if his life is a scene of
intemperance and debauchery: this seems to be levelled against the
followers or Simon Magus, who ascertained salvation to knowledge, though
the life was ever so impure, Moreover, this may include abstinence, not
only from hurtful lusts, but from the use of things indifferent, when
the peace and comfort of a weak brother are endangered; for then to
knowledge must be added love, otherwise that knowledge will not be
right, at least not rightly used; see [Co1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#001.md),

and to temperance, patience; which is necessary to the running of the
Christian race, which is attended with many difficulties and exercises;
and under affliction from the hand of God, that there be no murmuring
nor repining; and under reproaches and persecutions from men, that they
faint not, and are not discouraged by them; and in the expectation of
the heavenly glory: this is proper to be superadded to the former,
because there may be intemperance in passion, as well as in the use of
the creatures; a man may be inebriated with wrath and anger, and
overcome with impatience, as well as with wine and strong drink:

and to patience, godliness; either internal, which is distinguished from
bodily exercise, or outward worship, and lies in the inward and powerful
exercise of grace, as faith, hope, love, fear, &c. and the Syriac
version here renders it, "the fear of God": or rather external, and
intends the whole worship of God, as prayer, praise, hearing of the
word, and attendance on all ordinances.

[2 Peter 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe2 1:7</span></span>

Without which, godliness, or external worship, or a profession of
religion, is a vain show; for this is both the evidence of regeneration,
and of the truth and power of real godliness; and also the beauty,
comfort, and security of Christian society and worship, and without
which they cannot be maintained with peace, profit, and honour:

and to brotherly kindness, charity: or "love"; that is, to all men,
enemies, as well as to the household of faith; and to God and Christ, to
his house, worship, ordinances, people and truths. Charity is more
extensive in its objects and acts than brotherly kindness or love. As
faith leads the van, charity brings up the rear, and is the greatest of
all.

[2 Peter 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 1:8</span></span>

For if these things be in you,.... Are wrought in you by the Spirit of
God, and exercised and performed by his assistance, who works in his
people both to will and do:

and abound; increase in their acts and exercises by the frequent
performance of them: they make you; both by way of influence and
evidence,

that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in the knowledge of our
Lord Jesus Christ. There is a knowledge of Christ which is barren and
fruitless; and those that have it are so in their conversations, and it
will be of no avail to them another day: and this is a mere notional and
speculative knowledge, such as is not attended with any inward
experience and application of Christ to themselves, or any fruits of
righteousness in their lives, and is a bare theory of things relating to
his person, offices, and works; but there is a knowledge of him that is
spiritual and experimental, by which a soul not only approves of Christ,
but places its trust and confidence in him, and appropriates him to
himself, and practically observes his commands and ordinances in the
faith of him; and in love to him he performs the above duties, and
exercises the above graces; from whence it appears, that he is neither
barren nor unfruitful himself in the profession of his knowledge of
Christ; "or in the acknowledgment of him", as it may be rendered; nor is
that a vain, empty, and useless thing: he is not like the barren fig
tree, or the earth that bears briers and thorns, and is nigh to cursing
and burning, but like a tree planted by a river of water, and is green,
flourishing, and fruitful. This is used as an argument to enforce the
foregoing exhortation, to add to, that is, to exercise and perform the
above graces and duties, in conjunction with each other.

[2 Peter 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 1:9</span></span>

But he that lacketh these things,.... Or in, and with whom, they are
not; that is, these virtues, as the Arabic version reads, as faith,
virtue, knowledge, temperance, patience, godliness, brotherly kindness,
and charity; where the principles of those things are not, and they are
not exercised and performed, such an one

is blind: let him boast ever so much of his light and knowledge, and
value himself upon it, and expect to be saved by it, let him live as he
will; for he has no true knowledge of God, as in Christ, as the God of
all grace, as his covenant God and Father; nor does he know what it is
to have communion with him in Christ; he only professes to know him in
words, while in works he denies him; nor has he any right knowledge of
Christ, only notional and general, not spiritual, experimental,
particular, and practical; he does not see the Son, so as truly to
believe in him; he has no true sight of his beauty, suitableness, and
fulness, and of him for himself; nor any experience of the work of the
Spirit of God upon his heart, whom he neither receives, sees, nor knows
spiritually, any more than the world itself does; nor does he see the
plague of his own heart, the corruptions of his nature, and the
exceeding sinfulness of sin; nor has he any true spiritual light into
the Gospel, and the doctrines of it, only a form of godliness, without
the power of it: and therefore, whatever natural understanding of things
he has, he is spiritually blind,

and cannot see afar off: at least, not the good land that is afar off,
the kingdom of heaven; the invisible glories of the other world; things
that are not seen, which are eternal, which one that has true faith has
a glimpse and sight of; nor Christ, who is in heaven at the right hand
of God, and the things of Christ, his blood, righteousness, and
sacrifice, carried within the vail; nor even what is within himself, the
sins of his heart, the pollution of his nature, and the evil that dwells
there; he sees not that he is poor, and wretched, and miserable, but
fancies himself to be rich, and in need of nothing; he sees nothing but
outward things, the things of time and sense, worldly and earthly
things, which are near him, and all around him, which he minds, on which
his heart is set, and he pursues with rigour. The Vulgate Latin version
renders it, "trying with the hand", as blind men do, feeling and groping
to find the way; see [Act 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#027.md),

and hath forgotten that he was purged from his old sins; not by baptism,
from the sins committed before it, for that does not purge from any
sins, old or new, but that which it leads the faith of believers to, for
pardon and cleansing, even the blood of Christ; but this also, and
purification by it, is not meant here, though generally interpreters
give this as the sense, and understanding it of the sin of ingratitude
in such a person, who had received so great a benefit by Christ, and was
unmindful of it; since it cannot be thought that one so described as
above should ever have had his conscience purged by the blood of Christ
from his old sins, or those before conversion, unless it be by
profession; and then the sense is, that he has forgotten that he once
professed to have been purged from all his sins by Christ; which, if he
had, would have made him zealous of good works, and put him upon
glorifying Christ both in body and spirit. The Ethiopic version renders
it, "and he hath forgot to purge himself from old sins"; which he would
have been concerned for, had he had a true and spiritual knowledge of
Christ, and his Gospel, and an application of the exceeding great and
precious promises of it, or had been made a partaker of the divine
nature through them; see [Co2 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2007.htm#001.md), but
the words are better rendered agreeably to the original text, "and hath
forgotten the purification of his old, or former sins"; or "sins of
old"; as they are rendered by the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic
versions; that is, he does not consider, nor think of it, that he was a
sinner of old, a sinner in Adam, that he was conceived and shapen in
sin, and went astray, and was called a transgressor from the womb; he
does not think that he stands in any need of being purged from former
sins; and is entirely unmindful of, and neglects, the purification of
them by the blood of Christ.

[2 Peter 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 1:10</span></span>

Wherefore the rather, brethren, give diligence,.... To exercise the
afore mentioned graces, and to perform the above duties, since this is
the way

to make your calling and election sure; by calling is not meant a call
to any office in the church, nor an external call, either by the voice
of nature, or by the ministry of the word; but an internal and effectual
call by special grace, to grace here, and glory hereafter; instead of
"calling", the Alexandrian copy reads, "comfort": and by "election" is
meant, not a national, nor church election, but a particular and
personal one, since scattered saints, and particular believers, are here
written to, and each called upon to be diligent to make their own, and
not another's, calling and election sure; nor is a choice of persons to
an office designed, seeing the apostle writes not to officers of
churches in particular, but to believers in common; nor a separation of
persons from the world by the effectual calling, since these two are
both mentioned here, and as distinct from each other, and to be made
sure; but an election of particular persons to eternal life and
salvation is here intended, which is an eternal act of God, arises from
his free grace and favour, and is according to his sovereign will and
pleasure; and is absolute, and independent of any condition, foreseen,
or required in men, as faith, holiness, and good works; all which are
fruits and effects, and not causes and conditions of electing grace.
These may be made "sure", not in themselves, or with respect to God, for
in this sense they cannot be made surer than they are: effectual calling
is according to the purpose of God, which cannot be frustrated, and is,
without repentance, irreversible, and irrevocable, and is inseparably
connected with eternal glory; and election stands not upon the foot of
works, but upon the free grace of God, which cannot be made void, and
upon the will of God, which cannot be resisted; and is also closely
connected with glorification; see [Rom
8:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#030.md) nor are those to be made sure by
saints, with respect to themselves; for though they may sometimes be at
a loss about them, and may have some scruples and doubts in their minds
concerning their interest in them, and an assurance of their being both
called and chosen, may be after all attained unto by them; yet this is
not their work, but it is the work of the Spirit of God, to certify and
make sure unto them, or assure them of their calling and election of
God: but the sense is, that diligence is to be used by the saints, to
make their calling and election sure to others; not their election by
their calling only, which is to themselves; for both are to be made
sure, and that to others, and by some third thing; either to their
fellow Christians, which they may do by giving them an account of the
work of God upon their souls, joined with a testimony of their good
lives and conversations; or rather to the world "by good works", as the
Vulgate Latin version and two copies of Beza's read; or "by your good
works", as the Alexandrian copy and the Syriac and Ethiopic versions
read; or by the exercise of the graces, and the discharge of the duties
before mentioned, whereby the men of the world may be certified and
assured, by the best evidence the saints are capable of giving to them,
or they of receiving, that they are the called and chosen of God, they
profess themselves to be; and which is a reason why those things should
be done: and another follows,

for if ye do these things, ye shall never fall; or "sin", as the Vulgate
Latin and Arabic versions render it; not that they should never fall at
all, or in any sense, for in many things we all offend or fall; or
should ever commit any act of sin, or fall into sin, for there is no man
that lives, and sins not; or that they should not fall from a degree of
the lively exercise of grace, or from a degree of steadfastness in the
doctrine of faith, but that they should never sin the sin against the
Holy Ghost, or fall totally and finally; for though they fall, they
should rise again by faith and repentance, through the grace and power
of Christ, who is able to keep them from falling: and besides, while
they were exercising those graces, and doing those duties, they should
not fall; for these are the means of final perseverance, and therefore
the rather to be regarded. Another argument, strengthening the
exhortation, follows:

[2 Peter 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe2 1:11</span></span>

For so an entrance shall be ministered unto you abundantly,.... An
abundant supply of grace and strength shall be freely afforded, to carry
you through all the duties and trials of life; and when that shall be
ended, an admission will be granted

into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ;
meaning, not the Gospel dispensation, or the spiritual kingdom of
Christ, which is not of this world, but lies among his people, who are
called out of it, in whom he reigns by his Spirit and, grace, according
to laws of his own enacting; nor his personal kingdom on earth with his
saints, which will last only a thousand years, and not be for ever; but
the kingdom of heaven, or the ultimate glory, which will be everlasting;
and is called a kingdom, to denote the glory and excellency of that
state; and an everlasting one, because it will never end; and the
kingdom of Christ, because it is in his possession, for his people; it
is prepared by him, and he will introduce them into it, when they shall
be for ever with him, and reign with him for ever and ever. Some copies
read, "the heavenly kingdom". There is an entrance of separate souls
into this kingdom at death; and which may be said to be ministered
"abundantly" to them, or "richly" as the word signifies, when they
depart out of this world with joy and comfort; triumphing over death,
and the grave, in a full view by faith of their interest in the love of
God, the grace of Christ, and the glories of another world; and there is
an entrance into it at judgment, and which will be abundantly, when all
the saints together, in their souls and bodies, shall be introduced by
Christ into the full joy of their Lord. As the saints enter the kingdom
through many tribulations, the gate is strait, and the way is narrow,
and they are scarcely saved, and many of them so as only by fire; but
when the abundant grace given unto them by the way to heaven, the great
consolation many enjoy in their last moments, and especially the free
and full admission of them, both at death and at judgment, to eternal
happiness, are considered, the entrance ministered may be said to be
abundantly; or, as the Arabic version renders it, "with a breadth"; the
entrance is large and broad.

[2 Peter 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 1:12</span></span>

Wherefore I will not be negligent,.... The apostle having made use of
proper arguments to excite the saints he writes to regard the
exhortation he had given, to the diligent exercise of grace, and
discharge of duty, proceeds to give the reasons of his own conduct, why
he gave such an exhortation to them, and pressed it, and continued to do
so, and determined for the future to go on with it, as particularly the
usefulness and profitableness of it; and therefore, seeing it would be
attended with so many advantages before mentioned, he was resolved that
he would not be careless, nor omit any opportunity that should offer:

to put you always in remembrance of these things; of the exercise of the
above graces, and the performance of the above duties, which saints are
too apt to forget, and therefore should be reminded of; and it is the
duty and business of the ministers of the word frequently to inculcate
those things:

though ye know them, and be established in the present truth; for those
that know the most, know but in part; and may have their knowledge
increased; and those that are the most established in the truths of the
Gospel, may be confirmed yet more and more. This the apostle mentions as
an apology for himself, and to prevent an objection that might be made,
as if he had suggested that they were ignorant and unstable; or which
might insinuate that there was no necessity of such frequent putting in
remembrance; since they were both knowing and stable: by "the present
truth" may be meant, either the whole scheme of the Gospel, which was
now come by Christ, in opposition to the exhibition of it under the
former dispensation, by promise and type; and it being so called, shows
that it is always now, and new; that there will be no alteration in it,
nor addition to it, it being like the author of it, the same yesterday,
today, and for ever, and will not give place to another scheme of
things; or else the particular truth of the coming of Christ, either to
take vengeance on the Jewish nation, or to judge the world in
righteousness, and introduce his own people into the new heavens, and
new earth, [Pe2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001.md).

[2 Peter 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 1:13</span></span>

Yea, I think it meet,.... Or "just". This is the apostle's other reason
for his conduct, taken from the duty of his place and office; judging it
to be what became him as an apostle and elder, and the minister of the
circumcision, and was what was due to God and Christ, whom he served,
and the souls of men under his care:

as long as I am in this tabernacle: or "body", as the Syriac and
Ethiopic versions render it, and so some copies; for the body is as a
tabernacle for the soul to dwell in, pitched for a time, and, ere long,
to be taken down; See Gill on [Co2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/co2005.htm#001.md),

to stir you up; to the lively exercise of grace, and constant
performance of duty: by putting you in remembrance: of the said things;
for saints are apt to be forgetful of their duty, and backward to it,
and sluggish and slothful in it.

[2 Peter 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 1:14</span></span>

Knowing that shortly I must put off this my tabernacle,.... Which is
another reason why the apostle was so pressing in this case, and so much
urged the exhortation, and was so diligent in reminding the saints of
it, and stirring them to observe it, because he knew he had but a little
time to live, and which therefore he was willing to improve for their
good. He sets forth his death in a very easy and familiar way, it being
not at all terrible and distressing to him; it was but like the putting
off of a garment, or unpinning of a tabernacle, or a removing from a
tent to a palace. Saints are pilgrims here, they dwell in tents or
tabernacles, at death they remove to their own country, and Father's
house. Death is not a destruction of man, an annihilation of him,
neither of his soul nor body: the soul is not mortal, it dies not with
the body; it only removes from this world to another, from a cottage to
a kingdom; and the body though it dies, it is not reduced to nothing, it
is only like a tabernacle put off, or taken down, which will be put
together again in better order than now it is.

Even as our Lord Jesus hath showed me; by some special revelation lately
made to him; or by some strong impulse upon his mind; just as the
Apostle Paul knew that the time of his departure was at hand, [Ti2
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#007.md) or this may have respect to the
words of Christ to Peter, above thirty years before, in [Joh
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/joh021.htm#018.md), which both signified what kind
of death he should die, and when it should be; namely, when he was old,
as now he was.

[2 Peter 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe2 1:15</span></span>

Moreover, I will endeavour,.... He signifies, that he should not only
use all diligence to stir them up to, and put them in remembrance of the
necessary duties of their calling while he was alive, but should make it
his study to concert some measures, and take some steps,

that you may be able after my decease: or Exodus, meaning his going out
of this world by death, in allusion to the Israelites going out of
Egypt, and marching for Canaan's land; this world being, like Egypt, a
place of wickedness, misery, and bondage; as heaven, like Canaan, a
place and state of rest and happiness.

To have these things always in remembrance; by which they might be
always put in mind of them, or by recurring to which they might have
their memories refreshed; and what he means is, to leave these
exhortations and admonitions in writing, which they might read, and be
of use to them when he was dead and gone; and indeed by this, and his
former epistle, though being dead, he yet speaketh.

[2 Peter 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 1:16</span></span>

For we have not followed cunningly devised fables,.... Such as Jewish
fables, cautioned against [Tit 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014.md)
which their traditionary and oral law, their Talmud, and other writings,
mention; as concerning the temporal kingdom of the Messiah, the
sumptuous feast, and carnal pleasures and entertainments, of that state,
with many other things; some of which indeed are not very cunningly put
together, but weak enough: or Gentile fables concerning the theogony and
exploits of their deities; and which may be meant by fables and endless
genealogies in [Ti1 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004.md), and
especially reference may be had to the metamorphoses of their gods, and
their fables relating to them, devised by Ovid, and others, since the
apostle is about to speak of the metamorphosis, or transfiguration of
Christ; and also other fables with which their poets and histories
abound; and likewise the prophecies of the Sibyls, and the oracles at
Delphos, and elsewhere: or the fabulous accounts of the followers of
Simon Magus concerning God, angels, the creation of the world, and the
several Aeones; or the more artful composures of the false teachers, set
off with all the cunning, sophistry, wit, and eloquence they were
masters of. Now in order to set forth the nature, excellency, and
certainty of the doctrine the apostle taught, especially that part of it
which respected the coming of Christ; and to show that it was worth his
while to put them in mind of it, and theirs to remember it; he observes,
that he and his fellow apostles did not proceed in their account of it
on such a foundation, but upon an evidence which they had received, both
with their eyes and ears, and also on a word of prophecy surer than
that:

when we made known unto you the power and coming of our Lord Jesus
Christ; not his first coming, though that, and the benefits arising from
it, were the subject of their ministry; and that was attended with
divine power, which appeared in the incarnation of Christ itself, which
was owing to the power of the Highest; and was seen in his doctrine and
ministry, which were with great authority; and in the miracles which he
wrought, which proved him to have power equal with God, his Father; and
in the work of redemption, which he came about and finished; in doing
which he made an end of sin, and saved his people from it, redeemed them
from the curse of the law, overcame the world, destroyed Satan, and
abolished death; and especially in his resurrection from the dead, when
he was declared to be the Son of God with power: but notwithstanding his
first coming was in great humility, in much meanness and imbecility, he
grew up as a tender plant, and was encompassed with infirmities, and at
last was crucified through weakness. This therefore was to be understood
of an after coming of his, which the apostle had wrote of, and made
known in his former epistle, [Pe1 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#007.md)
and which he puts them in mind of in this, [Pe2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001.md), nor is the word used of any other
coming of Christ, and this will be with power; and it designs his more
near coming to take vengeance on the Jewish nation, and deliver his
people from the afflictions and persecution they laboured under, and
which was with great power; see [Mat
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#003.md), or more remote, namely, at the
last day, when there will be a great display of power in raising the
dead, gathering all nations before him, separating them one from
another, passing the final sentence on each, and executing the same in
the utter destruction of the wicked, and the complete glorification of
the saints.

But were eyewitnesses of his majesty; meaning, not of the glory of his
divine nature by faith, and with the eyes of their understanding, while
others only considered him as a mere man; nor of the miracles he
wrought, in which there was a display of his glory and majesty, of all
which the apostles were eyewitnesses; but of that glory and greatness
which were upon him, when he was transfigured on the mount before them;
then his face was as the sun, and such a glory on his whole body, that
it darted through his clothes, and made them glitter like light, and as
white as snow, and so as no fuller on earth could whiten them; at which
time also Moses and Elijah appeared in glorious forms: and now this was
a prelude and pledge of his power and coming, of his kingdom coming with
power, and of his coming in his own, and his Father's glory, and in the
glory of the holy angels. This was a proof that notwithstanding his
meanness in his incarnate state, yet he was glorified, and would be
glorified again; and this was a confirmation of it to the apostles, and
might be to others: see [Mat 16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027.md).

[2 Peter 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 1:17</span></span>

For he received from God the Father honour and glory,.... Not as an
inferior from a superior, for he was equal in glory with the Father, and
was, and is, the brightness of his Father's glory; nor essentially,
having the same glory as his Father, and to which nothing can be added;
but declaratively, God the Father testifying of his glory, declaring the
honour that belonged to him, as the Son of God, at the same time that an
external glory was put on him, and received by him, as the son of man:

when there came such a voice to him from the excellent glory; from the
bright cloud which overshadowed Jesus, Moses, and Elijah and was a
symbol of the glory and presence of God, as the cloud in the tabernacle
and temple were, [Exo 40:35](../../../bib/kjv/exo040.htm#035.md), or from
heaven, the habitation of the holiness and glory of God, and where he
displays the glory of his being and perfections; or from himself, who is
the God and Father of glory, and is glorious in himself, in all his
attributes and works. So "glory", with the Cabalistic Jews, signifies
the Shechinah, or divine presence (d); and every number in the
Cabalistic tree is called by the name of "glory"; the second number,
which is "wisdom", is called "the first glory"; and the third number,
"understanding", is called , "the supreme", or "chief glory" (e): so the
first path, which is the supreme crown, is sometimes called the first
glory, as the Father is here the most excellent glory; and the second
path, which is the understanding enlightening, the second glory (f). And
this voice was not that at his baptism; for though that was from heaven,
and from God the Father, and expressed the same words as here; yet it
was not on a mount, nor from a cloud, nor was it heard by the apostles,
who, as yet, were not with Christ, nor called by him; nor that of which
mention is made in [Joh 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028.md), for
though that also was from God the Father, and from heaven, and which
declaratively gave honour and glory to Christ, yet did not express the
words here mentioned; but that voice which came from the cloud, when
Christ was transfigured on the mount, and which was heard by his three
disciples, Peter, James, and John, when the following words were
articulately pronounced, "this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well
pleased": See Gill on [Mat 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#005.md). The
Vulgate Latin version adds here, as there, "hear ye him".

\(d\) Guido. Dictionar. Syr. Chald. p. 92. (e) Lex. Cabalist. p. 464.
(f) Sepher Jetzirah, p. 1. 4.

[2 Peter 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 1:18</span></span>

And this voice, which came from heaven, we heard,.... Peter, who wrote
this epistle, and James and John, the favourite disciples of Christ; and
who were a sufficient number to bear witness of what they then saw and
heard:

when we were with him; and saw his glory, and the glory of Moses and
Elias, and were so delighted with his company, and theirs, and with
communion with him, that Peter, in the name of the rest, desired to stay
there:

in the holy mount; the Ethiopic version reads, "in the mountain of his
sanctuary"; and so Grotius understands it of Mount Moriah, on which the
temple was built, called the holy hill, and the holy hill of Zion; and
supposes that this voice was heard in the temple, and that it refers to
[Joh 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#028.md), but without any
foundation; for the mount on which Christ was transfigured is here
meant; and which was either, as is generally said, Tabor, a mountain in
Galilee; or it may be Lebanon, which was near Caesarea Philippi, in the
parts of which Christ then was: and it is called "holy", from his
presence or transfiguration on it, who is the Holy One; just as the land
on which Moses was, and the city and temple of Jerusalem, and Mount
Sion, and Sinai, are called "holy", from the presence of the holy God
there, [Exo 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#005.md). Now such a
declaration of the honour and glory of Christ, as the Son of God, being
made by God the Father, in a voice from heaven, which the apostles heard
with their ears, at the same time that they saw with their eyes his
human body glorified in an amazing manner, was to them a confirming
evidence that he would come again in power and glory; and upon this
evidence they declared, and made known to the saints, the power and
coming of Christ; though not on this evidence only, but also upon the
more sure word of prophecy, which entirely agrees with it.

[2 Peter 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pe2 1:19</span></span>

Though this word of prophecy is generally understood of the writings and
prophecies of the Old Testament concerning Christ, yet different ways
are taken to fix the comparison: some think the sense is, that they are
more sure than the cunningly devised fables, [Pe2
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#016.md) but as these have no certainty
nor authority in them, but are entirely to be rejected, the apostle
would never put the sacred writings in comparison with them: and it is
most clear, that the comparison lies between this word of prophecy, and
the testimony of the apostles, who were eye and ear witnesses of the
majesty and glory of Christ; but how prophecy should be a surer evidence
of Christ, and the Gospel, than such a testimony, is difficult to
understand; and is a sense which all agree to reject, by different
methods: some think that a comparative is used for a positive, and that
the meaning is, that besides the testimony of the apostles, prophecy is
a very sure evidence; and this is countenanced by the Syriac version,
which renders it, "and we have also a firm", or "true word of prophecy";
to which the Arabic agrees, "and we have a word of prophecy very true":
others choose to retain the comparison, and which indeed ought not to be
thrown out; but these are divided about it; some are of opinion that it
is to be understood of the Jews to whom the apostle writes, and he
himself was one, and the sense to be this; not that prophecy in itself
was surer than an apostolical testimony, but that it was surer to the
Jews, and more valid with them, who had been trained up in, and long
used to the prophetic writings; and who had a greater esteem for the
prophets of the Old Testament than for the apostles of the New; but it
is scarcely credible that the apostle, who had been an eye and ear
witness in the holy mount, would put himself in among them, and say, "we
have", &c. for whatever prophecy was to them, it could not be surer to
him than what he had seen with his eyes, and heard with his ears. Others
suppose that the meaning is, that prophecy was "now" surer to the
Christians than it was "before", it being confirmed and established by
facts and events, and also by miracles, and even by the attestation of
this voice heard on the mount, and by the majesty of Christ seen there;
but if this had been the sense of the apostle, he would have used these
words, "now" and "before"; and besides, this puts the comparison quite
out of its place, which manifestly stands between former prophecy, and
the present testimony of the apostles: but the truth of the matter is,
that this word of prophecy is not to be understood of the prophetic
writings of the Old Testament; for though these are the word of God, and
do testify of Christ, and are to be taken heed, and attended to, as
proofs and evidence of Gospel truths, and are a light to direct and
guide in matters both of faith and practice, yet they are not the only
light, and are far from being the clearest, and what are only to be
attended to; for the Gospel that came by Christ, and is preached by his
apostles, and is contained in the writings of the New Testament, is a
much clearer light, and at least equally to be attended to: nor are the
prophecies of the Old Testament, which particularly relate to Christ,
designed; there are many of this kind, which, put together, may very
well be called the word of prophecy, and which were to the Jews a light
in a dark place, until Christ came in the flesh; and though they are to
be attended to, and compared with facts, to show the truth of the divine
revelation, yet they are not a surer evidence, nor so sure an evidence,
as the evangelical testimony is, which is of facts, and these supported
by miracles; for now the dayspring from on high hath visited us, and
Christ, the bright and morning star, has appeared: but the word of
prophecy, concerning Christ's second coming, is here intended, whether
it lies in the words of the prophets of the Old Testament, as in [Psa
96:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#013.md) or in the words of Christ, [Mat
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat016.htm#027.md), which latter is most likely.
The Ethiopic version understands this of some particular prophecy, and
as if the words were a citation of some prophet, rendering the words
thus, "and we have a voice more ancient than this of a prophet, saying,
ye do well who take heed", &c. Sir Isaac Newton is of opinion, that the
apostle refers to the book of the Revelation of St. John, which would
not be unlikely, could it be proved that it was then written. Now this
prophecy or prediction, concerning Christ's coming again with power and
great glory, was a surer evidence of it than what the apostles saw with
their eyes, and heard with their ears upon the mount; nothing was surer
to them, nor could anything make it surer to them, that he was honoured
and glorified, than what they saw and heard: but then this did not so
certainly prove that he would hereafter be glorified, or come again in
glory. What they saw and heard was a presumptive proof that it "might"
be so, and was a confirming pledge and evidence to them that so it
"would" be, and was a glorious representation of it; but Christ's
prophecy or prediction, that so it "should" be, more strongly
ascertained it, since he said it, to whom all things were known from the
beginning, and whose counsel shall stand, and not one word of his shall
ever fail.

Whereunto ye do well, that ye take heed as unto a light that shineth in
a dark place, until the day dawn, and the day star arise in your hearts.
The prophecy concerning Christ's second coming is as "as a light"; it is
a revelation of that which was in the dark, lay hid as a secret and
mystery in the heart of God; and which could not be known by men, had it
not been foretold by God; and it is made as prophecy in all other cases
is, by throwing light, as to this affair, into the mind of him, or them,
to whom it is revealed; and is a light to them to whom it is delivered,
and which they should attend unto, as to a lamp or torch to guide and
direct them; though in some sense it is but a feeble one, and is as a
light "that shineth in a dark place"; meaning not the world, which is a
place of darkness, ignorance, and error; nor merely the state of the
saints in general in this life, who, at most and best, see but through a
glass darkly; but has a particular respect to the darkness which attends
the saints, concerning the second coming of Christ, and which will
especially attend them a little before that time. Prophecy holds out
clearly that Christ will come again; that he will come in great glory,
in his Father's, and in his own, and in the glory of his angels, and
with great power, to raise the dead, and judge mankind; and though it
gives hints, that, upon this, the saints shall be with Christ in the
air, on earth, and in heaven; and that there will be new heavens, and a
new earth; and that the saints shall reign here with Christ a thousand
years, after which the Gog and Magog army will attack them without
success; yet these are not so clear, as for saints to be agreed in the
sense of them; and much more are they in the dark about the time of his
coming. Now prophecy is the surest evidence and best light the saints
have concerning this matter, "until the day dawn"; not the Gospel day,
so much spoken of by the prophets, that had dawned already; rather a
more clear knowledge of Christ, and Gospel truths, which will be in the
spiritual kingdom and reign of Christ hereafter; or else the latter day
glory, at the personal coming of Christ, when the light of the moon
shall be as that of the sun, and that of the sun shall be sevenfold as
the light of seven days; yea, when there will be no need of sun or moon,
but Christ shall be come, and be the light of his people; see [Isa
30:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#026.md) after which will follow the
everlasting day of glory, when all darkness will be gone, and saints
shall see face to face, and know as they are known:

and the day star arise in your hearts; or "the sun", as the Syriac
version renders it; not Christ, the morning star, the dayspring from on
high, and the sun of righteousness, who was already risen upon them; nor
the grace of God implanted in their hearts, by which they were already
called out of darkness, and made light in the Lord; but as the day star
is the bringer of light, as the word used signifies, or the forerunner
of the day, so it here intends the immediate signs and forerunners of
the coming of Christ; which when observed in their hearts, and by their
understandings, as being come to pass, they may lift up their heads with
joy, because their redemption draws near, [Luk
21:28](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#028.md) and so the Ethiopic here renders
it, "and redemption, arise for you in your hearts". Now till this time
the sure word of prophecy concerning Christ's second coming is to be
"taken heed unto", as a lamp, light, and torch, to direct us to it, to
encourage us to love it, long for it, and hasten to it: and in so doing
we shall "do well"; it will be well for the glory of God and Christ,
this being setting our seals to them as true; and well for ourselves to
keep up our faith, hope, and expectation of it, unmoved.

[2 Peter 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pe2 1:20</span></span>

Knowing this first,.... Especially, and in the first place, this is to
be known, observed, and considered;

that no prophecy of the Scripture, that is contained in Scripture, be it
what it will,

is of any private interpretation: not that this is levelled against the
right of private judgment of Scripture; or to be understood as if a
private believer had not a right of reading, searching, examining, and
judging, and interpreting the Scriptures himself, by virtue of the
unction which teacheth all things; and who, as a spiritual man, judgeth
all things; otherwise, why are such commended as doing well, by taking
heed to prophecy, in the preceding verse, and this given as a reason to
encourage them to it? the words may be rendered, "of one's own
interpretation"; that is, such as a natural man forms of himself, by the
mere force of natural parts and wisdom, without the assistance of the
Spirit of God; and which is done without comparing spiritual things with
spiritual; and which is not agreeably to the Scripture, to the analogy
of faith, and mind of Christ; though rather this phrase should be
rendered, "no prophecy of the Scripture is of a man's own impulse",
invention, or composition; is not human, but purely divine: and this
sense carries in it a reason why the sure word of prophecy, concerning
the second coming of Christ, should be taken heed to, and made use of as
a light, till he does come; because as no Scripture prophecy, so not
that, is a contrivance of man's, his own project and device, and what
his own spirit prompts and impels him to, but what is made by the
dictates and impulse of the Spirit of God; for whatever may be said of
human predictions, or the false prophecies of lying men, who deliver
them out how and when they please, nothing of this kind can be said of
any Scripture prophecy, nor of this concerning the second coming of
Christ; and this sense the following words require.

[2 Peter 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pe2 1:21</span></span>

For the prophecy,.... The whole Scripture, all the prophetic writings;
so the Jews call the Scriptures "the prophecy" (g), by way of eminence,
and from the subject matter of the sacred word:

came not in old time by the will of man; was not brought into the world
at first, or in any period of time, as and when man would, according to
his pleasure, and as he thought fit: neither Moses, nor David, nor
Isaiah, nor Jeremiah, nor Ezekiel, nor Daniel, nor any other of the
prophets, prophesied when they pleased, but when it was the will of God
they should; they were stirred up to prophesy, not by any human impulse,
but by a divine influence: with this agrees what R. Sangari says,

"that the speech of the prophets, when the Holy Spirit clothed them, in
all their words was directed by a divine influence, and the prophet
could not speak in the choice of his own words,''

or according to his will:

but holy men of God; such as he sanctified by his Spirit, and separated
from the rest of men to such peculiar service; and whom he employed as
public ministers of his word: for so this phrase "men", or "man of God",
often signifies, [Sa1 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#027.md).

spake, as they were moved by the Holy Ghost; who illuminated their
minds, gave them a knowledge of divine things, and a foresight of future
ones; dictated to them what they should say or write; and moved upon
them strongly, and by a secret and powerful impulse stirred them up to
deliver what they did, in the name and fear of God: which shows the
authority of the Scriptures, that they are the word of God, and not of
men; and as such should be attended to, and received with all affection
and reverence; and that the Spirit is the best interpreter of them, who
first dictated them; and that they are to be the rule of our faith and
practice; nor are we to expect any other, until the second coming of
Christ.

\(g\) R. Eliahu in Adderet apud Trigland. de Sect Karaeorum, c. 10. p.
153.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Peter Chapter 2](pe2002.md)

</div>
