<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Peter Index](pe2)  
  [Previous](pe2002)  [Next](jo1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Peter Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001)

[2 Peter](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pe2 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 2 PETER 3

In this chapter the apostle makes mention of the end and design of his
writing this second epistle; foretells that there would be scoffers at
the coming of Christ in the last days; describes the coming of Christ
and the burning of the world; and closes with the use saints should make
of these things. The end of his writing both this and the former epistle
was to put the persons he writes unto in mind of the doctrines and
ordinances of the Gospel, delivered by the prophets and apostles, [Pe2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001); and then, agreeably to what the
prophets had said, he predicts that there would be scoffers in the last
day; who are described by their sinful course of life, and by their
words, what they would say concerning the coming of Christ, and their
reasoning about it, [Pe2 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003); which
arose from their ignorance of the creation of the heavens and the earth,
and of the situation of them; and is refuted by showing that things have
not remained as they were from the creation; that the earth standing in
and out of the water, as it was capable of being overflowed with a
flood, so it perished by one; and that the present heavens and earth are
reserved and prepared for a general burning at the day of judgment, in
which wicked men will be destroyed, [Pe2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005); but let these men scoff as they
will, the length of time since the promise of Christ's coming was made
should be no objection with the saints to the performance of it; since
the longest term of time is nothing with God, however considerable it
may be with men, [Pe2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008); besides,
the reason of the coming of Christ being deferred, is not owing to any
dilatoriness in the performance of the promise, but to the longsuffering
of God towards his elect, being unwilling that anyone of them should be
lost, but that all should be brought to repentance, [Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009); but as for the coming of Christ,
that is certain, and will be sudden; at which time will be the general
conflagration, which is described in a very awful manner, [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010); and the use to be made of such a
tremendous dispensation by the saints is to live a holy and godly
conversation, [Pe2 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#011); to be eagerly
looking for the coming of Christ, [Pe2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012), and to expect, according to his
promise, new heavens and a new earth, in which will dwell righteous
persons, [Pe2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013); and to be diligent
to be found in peace at that day, [Pe2
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#014); and to account the longsuffering
of God salvation; and the whole of this account, and the use of it, is
strengthened by the testimony of the Apostle Paul, of whom, and of his
epistles, a character is given, [Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015); and the epistle is concluded
with some cautions and exhortations to the saints, to beware lest they
should be carried away with the errors of wicked men, and so fall from
any degree of steadfastness in the faith; and to be concerned for a
growth in grace, and in the knowledge of Christ Jesus, to whom glory is
to be ascribed for ever and ever, [Pe2
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#017).

[2 Peter 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pe2 3:1</span></span>

This second epistle, beloved, I now write unto you,.... This is a
transition to another part of the epistle; for the apostle having
largely described false teachers, the secret enemies of the Christian
religion under a profession of it, passes on to take notice of the more
open adversaries and profane scoffers of it; and from their ridicule of
the doctrine of Christ's second coming, he proceeds to treat of that,
and of the destruction of the world, and the future happiness of the
saints: he calls this epistle his "second epistle", because he had
written another before to the same persons; and that the author of this
epistle was an apostle, is evident from [Pe2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#002); and which, compared with [Pe2
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#018) shows him to be the Apostle
Peter, whose name it bears, and who was an eyewitness to the
transfiguration of Christ on the mount, [Mat
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat017.htm#001), he addresses these saints here,
as also in [Pe2 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008), under the
character of "beloved"; because they were the beloved of God, being
chosen by him according to his foreknowledge, and regenerated by him,
according to his abundant mercy; and were openly his people, and had
obtained mercy from him, and like precious faith with the apostles; and
were also the beloved of Christ, being redeemed by him, not with gold
and silver, but with his precious blood; for whom he suffered, and who
were partakers of his sufferings, and the benefits arising from them,
and who had all things given them by him, pertaining to life and
godliness, and exceeding great and precious promises; and were likewise
beloved by the apostle, though strangers, and not merely as Jews, or
because they were his countrymen, but because they were the elect of
God, the redeemed of Christ, and who were sanctified by the Spirit, and
had the same kind of faith he himself had. The Syriac and Arabic
versions read, "my beloved"; and the Ethiopic version, "my brethren":
his end in writing both this and the former epistle follows;

in both which I stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance; that this
was his view both in this and the former epistle, appears from [Pe1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#013); he calls their minds pure; not
that they were so naturally, for the minds and consciences of men are
universally defiled with sin; nor are the minds of all men pure who seem
to be so in their own eyes, or appear so to others; nor can any man, by
his own power or works, make himself pure from sin; only the blood of
Christ purges and cleanses from it; and a pure mind is a mind sprinkled
with that blood, and which receives the truth as it is in Jesus, in the
power and purity of it, and that holds the mystery of the faith in a
pure conscience. Some versions, as the Vulgate Latin and Arabic, render
the word "sincere", as it is in [Phi
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#010); and may design the sincerity of
their hearts in the worship of God, in the doctrines of Christ, and to
one another, and of the grace of the Spirit of God in them; as that
their faith was unfeigned, their hope without hypocrisy, and their love
without dissimulation, and their repentance real and genuine; but yet
they needed to be stirred up by way of remembrance, both of the truth of
the Gospel, and the duties of religion; for saints are apt to be
forgetful of the word, both of its doctrines and its exhortations; and
it is the business of the ministers of the word to put them in mind of
them, either by preaching or by writing; and which shows the necessity
and usefulness of the standing ministry of the Gospel: the particulars
he put them in mind of next follow.

[2 Peter 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pe2 3:2</span></span>

That ye may be mindful,.... This is an explanation of the above
mentioned end of his writing this and the other epistle; which was, that
those saints might be mindful of two things more especially:

of the words which were spoken before by the holy prophets; that is, the
prophets of the Old Testament, who were holy men of God, and therefore
their words are to be regarded, and retained in memory; the Gospel
itself was spoken by them, and so was Christ, and the things relating to
his person and offices, and to his incarnation, sufferings, and death,
and the glory that should follow; and indeed the apostles said no other
than what they did, only more clearly and expressly; and particularly
many things, were said by them concerning the second coming of Christ to
judge the world, and destroy it, and to prepare new heavens and a new
earth for his people, which is what the apostle has chiefly in view; see
[Jde 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014);

and of the commandment of us the apostles of the Lord and Saviour; that
is, Jesus Christ, as [Jde 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#017)
expresses it, and the Ethiopic version adds here; and which likewise,
and also the Syriac version, and some ancient copies, read, "our Lord
and Saviour", and omit the us before the apostles; by whom are meant the
twelve apostles of Christ, of which Peter was one, and therefore says,
"us the apostles"; though the Vulgate Latin and Arabic versions, and the
Complutensian edition, read "your apostles", and so the Alexandrian
copy; but the former is the received reading: now "the commandment" of
these intends either the Gospel in general, so called because it was the
commandment of our Lord to his apostles to preach it; and therefore the
word "commandment", in the original, stands between "us the apostles",
and "the Lord and Saviour", as being the commandment of the one to the
other; unless it can be thought any regard is had to the new commandment
of love, or that of faith, inculcated both by Christ and his apostles;
[Joh 13:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh013.htm#034); or rather, particularly
the instructions, directions, and predictions of the apostles concerning
the second coming of Christ, and what should go before it, as appears
from the following words, and the parallel place in [Jde
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#017), the words of the prophets and
apostles being here put together, show the agreement there is between
them, and what regard is to be had to each of them, and to anything and
every thing in which they agree.

[2 Peter 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pe2 3:3</span></span>

Knowing this first,.... In the first place, principally, and chiefly,
and which might easily be known and observed from the writings of the
apostles and prophets; see [Ti1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001);

that there shall come in the last days scoffers, or "mockers"; such as
would make a mock at sin, make light of it, plead for it, openly commit
it, and glory in it; and scoff at all religion, as the prejudice of
education, as an engine of state, a piece of civil policy to keep
subjects in awe, as cant, enthusiasm, and madness, as a gloomy
melancholy thing, depriving men of true pleasure; and throw out their
flouts and jeers at those that are the most religious, for the just,
upright man, is commonly by such laughed to scorn, and those that depart
from evil make themselves a prey; and particularly at the ministers of
the word, for a man that has scarcely so much common sense as to
preserve him from the character of an idiot, thinks himself a wit of the
age, if he can at any rate break a jest upon a Gospel minister: nor do
the Scriptures of truth escape the banter and burlesque of these
scoffers; the doctrines of it being foolishness to them, and the
commands and ordinances in it being grievous and intolerable to them;
yea, to such lengths do those proceed, as to scoff at God himself; at
his persons, purposes, providences, and promises; at Jehovah the Father,
as the God of nature and providence, and especially as the God and
Father of Christ, and of all grace in him; at Jehovah the Son, at his
person, as being the Son of God, and truly God, at his office, as
Mediator, and at his blood, righteousness, and sacrifice, which they
trample under foot; and at Jehovah the Spirit, whom they do despite
unto, as the spirit of grace, deriding his operations in regeneration
and sanctification, as dream and delusion; and, most of all, things to
come are the object of their scorn and derision; as the second coming of
Christ, the resurrection of the dead, a future judgment, the torments of
hell, and the joys of heaven; all which they represent as the trifles
and juggles of designing men: such as these, according to the prophets
and apostles, were to come in "the last days"; either in the days of the
Messiah, in the Gospel dispensation, the times between the first and
second coming of Christ; for it is a rule with the Jews (s), that
wherever the last days are mentioned, the days of the Messiah are
intended; see [Heb 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001); when the
prophets foretold such scoffers should come; or in the last days of the
Jewish state, both civil and religious, called "the ends of the world",
[Co1 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#011); a little before the
destruction of Jerusalem, when iniquity greatly abounded, [Mat
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#011); or "in the last of the days";
as the words may be rendered; and so answer to , in [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002), and may regard the latter part of
the last times; the times of the apostles were the last days, [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018); they began then, and will
continue to Christ's second coming; when some time before that, it will
be a remarkable age for scoffers and scorners; and we have lived to see
an innumerable company of them, and these predictions fulfilled; from
whence it may be concluded, that the coming of Christ is at hand: these
scoffers are further described as

walking after their own lusts; either after the carnal reasonings of
their minds, admitting of nothing but what they can comprehend by
reason, making that the rule, test, and standard of all their
principles, and so cast away the law of the Lord, and despise the word
of the Holy One of Israel; or rather, after their sinful and fleshly
lusts, making them their guides and governors, and giving up themselves
entirely to them, to obey and fulfil them; the phrase denotes a
continued series of sinning, a progress in it, a desire after it, and
pleasure in it, and an obstinate persisting in it; scoffers at religion
and revelation are generally libertines; and such as sit in the seat of
the scornful, are in the counsel of the ungodly, and way of sinners,
[Psa 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001).

\(s\) Kimchi in Isa. ii. 2.

[2 Peter 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pe2 3:4</span></span>

And saying, Where is the promise of his coming?.... That is, of the
coming of the Lord and Saviour, [Pe2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#002); the object of their scorn and
derision, and whom they name not, through contempt; and the meaning is,
what is become of the promise of his coming? where the accomplishment of
it? The prophets foretold he would come; he himself said he would come
again, [Joh 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#003); the angels, at his
ascension, declared he would come from heaven in like manner as he went
up, [Act 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#011); and all his apostles
gave out that he would appear a second time to judge both quick and
dead, [Act 10:42](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#042) [Pe1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe1004.htm#005), and that his coming was at hand,
[Phi 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#005); but where is the fulfilment
of all this? he is not come, nor is there any sign or likelihood of it:

for since the fathers fell asleep; or "died": which is the language of
the Scriptures, and here sneered at by these men, who believe them so
fast asleep as never to be awaked or raised more; and by "the fathers"
they mean the first inhabitants of the world, as Adam, Abel, Seth, &c.
and all the patriarchs and prophets in all ages; the Ethiopic version
renders it, "our first fathers":

all things continue as they were from the beginning of the creation;
reasoning from the settled order of things, the constant revolution of
the sun, moon, and stars, the permanency of the earth, and the
succession of the inhabitants of it, to the future continuance of
things, without any alteration; and consequently, that Christ would not
come, as was promised, to raise the dead, judge mankind destroy the
world, and set up a new state of things: the fallacy of which reasoning
is exposed by the apostle in the following words.

[2 Peter 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pe2 3:5</span></span>

For this they willingly are ignorant of,.... Namely, what follows; for
as these men were such as had professed Christianity, and had the
advantage of revelation, and had the opportunity of reading the
Scriptures, they might have known that the heavens and the earth were
from the beginning; and that they were made by the word of God; and that
the earth was originally in such a position and situation as to be
overflowed with a flood, and that it did perish by a general inundation;
and that the present heavens and earth are kept and reserved for a
general burning; and it might be discerned in nature, that there are
preparations making for an universal conflagration; but all this they
chose not to know, and affected ignorance of: particularly

that by the word of God the heavens were of old: not only in the times
of Noah, but "from the beginning"; as the Ethiopic version reads, and
which agrees with the account in [Gen
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#001); by "the heavens" may be meant
both the third heaven, and the starry heavens, and the airy heavens,
with all their created inhabitants; and especially the latter, since
these were concerned in, and affected with the general deluge; and these
were in the beginning of time, out of nothing brought into being, and so
were not eternal, and might be destroyed again, or at least undergo a
change, even though they were of old, and of long duration: for it was
"by the word of God" that they at first existed, and were so long
preserved in being; either by the commanding word of God, by his
powerful voice, his almighty fiat, who said, Let it be done, and it was
done, and who commanded beings to rise up out of nothing, and they did,
and stood fast; and so the Arabic version renders it, "by the command of
God"; or by his eternal Logos, the essential Word of God, the second
Person in the Trinity, who is often in Scripture called the Word, and
the Word of God, and, as some think, by the Apostle Peter, [Pe1
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1001.htm#023), and certain it is that the
creation of all things is frequently ascribed to him; see [Joh
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#016); wherefore by the same Word they
might be dissolved, and made to pass away, as they will:

and the earth standing out of the water and in the water; that is, "by
the Word of God"; for this phrase, in the original text, is placed after
this clause, and last of all; and refers not only to the being of the
heavens of old, but to the rise, standing, and subsistence of the earth,
which is here particularly described for the sake of the deluge, the
apostle afterwards mentions: and it is said to be "standing out of the
water", or "consisting out of it"; it consists of it as a part; the
globe of the earth is terraqueous, partly land and partly water; and
even the dry land itself has its rise and spring out of water; the first
matter that was created is called the deep, and waters in which darkness
was, and upon which the Spirit of God moved, [Gen
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002); agreeably to which Thales the
Milesian asserted (t), that water was the principle of all things; and
the Ethiopic version here renders the words thus, "and the Word of God
created also the earth out of water, and confirmed it": the account the
Jews give of the first formation of the world is this (u);

"at first the world was , "water in water"; what is the sense (of that
passage [Gen 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#002);) "and the Spirit of
God moved upon the face of the waters?" he returned, and made it snow;
he casteth forth his ice like morsels, [Psa
147:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#017); he returned and made it earth;
"for to the snow he saith, Be thou earth", [Job
37:6](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#006), and the earth stood upon the
waters; "to him that stretched out the earth above the waters", [Psa
136:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#006);''

however, certain it is, that the earth was first covered with water,
when at the word, and by the command of God, the waters fled and hasted
away, and were gathered into one place, and the dry land rose up and
appeared; and then it was that it "stood out of the water"; see [Gen
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#009); moreover, the earth consists, or
is kept and held together by water; there is a general humidity or
moisture that runs through it, by which it is compacted together, or
otherwise it would resolve into dust, and by which it is fit for the
production, increase, and preservation of vegetables and other things,
which it otherwise would not be: and it is also said to stand "in the
water", or by the water; upon it, according to [Psa
24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002); or rather in the midst of it,
there being waters above the firmament or expanse; in the airy heavens,
in the clouds all around the earth, called the windows of heaven; and
water below the firmament or expanse, in the earth itself; besides the
great sea, a large body of waters is in the midst of the earth, in the
very bowels of it, which feed rivers, and form springs, fountains and
wells, called "the fountains of the great deep", [Gen
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#011); and in this position and
situation was the earth of old, and so was prepared in nature for a
general deluge, and yet was preserved firm and stable by the word of
God, for a long series of time; so the Arabic version renders it, "and
the earth out of the water, and in the water, stood stable, by the
command of God"; but when it was his pleasure, he brought the flood on
the world of the ungodly, of which an account follows.

\(t\) Vid. Laert. l. i. in Vit. Thaletis. (u) T. Hieros. Chagiga, fol.
77. 1.

[2 Peter 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pe2 3:6</span></span>

Whereby the world that then was,.... The old world, as it is called in
[Pe2 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#005); and as the Ethiopic version
here renders it; the world before the flood, that had stood from the
creation 1656 years:

being overflowed with water; by the windows of heaven being opened, and
the waters over the earth poured down upon it; and by the fountains of
the great deep being broken up in it; thus by these waters from above
and below, a general inundation was brought upon it; for that the deluge
was universal is clear from hence, and from the account by Moses; for as
the earth was filled with violence, and all flesh had corrupted its way,
God threatened a general destruction, and which was brought by a flood,
which overflowed the whole earth; for all the hills that were under the
whole heaven were covered with it, and everything that had life in the
dry land died, and every living substance was destroyed that was upon
the face of the ground; see [Gen 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#011);
and hence it follows, that hereby the then world

perished; not as to the substance of it, whatever alteration there might
be in its form and position; but as to the inhabitants of it; for all
creatures, men and cattle, and the creeping things, and fowls of the
heaven, were destroyed, excepting Noah and his wife, and his three sons
and their wives, and the creatures that were with him in the ark; see
[Gen 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen007.htm#023); and by this instance the
apostle shows the falsehood of the above assertion, that all things
continued as they were from the beginning of the creation; for the earth
was covered with water first, and which, by the command of God, was
removed, and, after a long series of time, was brought on it again, and
by it drowned; and from whence it also appears, that this sort of
reasoning used by those scoffers is very fallacious; for though the
heavens and the earth may continue for a long time, as they did before
the flood, in the same form and situation, it does not follow from
thence that they always will, for the contrary is evident from what
follows.

[2 Peter 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pe2 3:7</span></span>

But the heavens and the earth which are now,.... In being, in
distinction from, and opposition to the heavens that were of old, and
the earth standing in and out of the water, and the world that then was
when the waters of the flood overflowed it:

by the same word are kept in store; that is, by the word of God, as in
[Pe2 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005); and the Syriac, Arabic, and
Ethiopic versions read, "by his word"; by the same word that the heavens
and the earth were made of old, or in the beginning, are they kept,
preserved, and upheld in their being; or "are treasured up"; the heavens
and the earth are a rich treasure, they are full of the riches God, as
the God of nature and providence; and they are kept with care, as a
treasure is, not to be touched or meddled with at present, but must
continue in the same position and use; or they are laid up in the
stores, and scaled up among the treasures of divine wrath and vengeance,
and will be brought out another day, and made use of, to the destruction
of the ungodly inhabitants of the world, and to aggravate and increase
their misery and ruin: for it is further said of them, that they are

reserved unto fire; for though the world is, and has been preserved a
long time without any visible alteration in it, yet it will not be
always so preserved: and though it is, and will be kept from being
drowned by water again, through the promise and power of God, yet it is
kept and reserved for a general conflagration; see [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010). And as the old world was put
into a natural situation, so as to be drowned by water, there are now
preparations making in nature, in the present world, for the burning of
it; witness the fiery meteors, blazing stars, and burning comets in the
heavens, and the subterraneous fires in the bowels of the earth, which
in some places have already broke out: there are now many volcanos,
burning mountains and islands, particularly in Sicily, Italy, and the
parts adjacent, the seat of the beast, and where it is very likely the
universal conflagration will begin, as Aetna, Vesuvius, Strombilo, and
other volcanos; and even in our own island we have some symptoms and
appearances of these fires under ground, as fiery eruptions in some
places, and the hot waters at the Bath, and elsewhere, show; from all
which it is plain that the heavens and earth, that now are, are not as
they always were, and will be, but are reserved and prepared for
burning; and that things are ripening apace, as men's sins also are, for
the general conflagration. Josephus (w) relates, that Adam foretold that
there would be a destruction of all things, once by the force of fire,
and once by the power and multitude of water; and it is certain the Jews
had knowledge of the destruction of the earth by fire, as by water: they
say (x),

"that when the law was given to Israel, his (God's) voice went from one
end of the world to the other, and trembling laid hold on all the
nations of the world in their temples, and they said a song, as it is
said, [Psa 29:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#009), "and in his temple
doth everyone speak of his glory": all of them gathered together to
wicked Balaam, and said to him, what is the voice of the multitude which
we hear, perhaps a flood is coming upon the world? he said unto them,
"the Lord sitteth upon the flood, yea, the Lord sitteth King for ever",
[Psa 29:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#010). Thus hath the Lord swore,
that he will not bring a flood upon the world; they replied to him, a
flood of water he will not bring, but , "a flood of fire" he will bring,
as it is said, [Isa 66:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#016), "for by
fire will the Lord plead",''

or judge: and hence they speak (y) of the wicked being judged with two
sorts of, judgments, by water, and by fire: and, according to our
apostle, the heavens and earth are kept and reserved to fire,

against the day of judgment, and perdition of ungodly men; the time when
God will judge the world is fixed, though it is not known; and it is
called a "day", because of the evidence and light in which things will
appear, and the quick dispatch of business in it; and the "judgment"
spoken of is the future judgment, and which is certain, and will be
universal, righteous, and eternal, and when wicked and ungodly men will
be punished with everlasting destruction: the bodies of those that will
be alive at the general conflagration will be burnt in it, though not
annihilated, and will be raised again, and both soul and body will be
destroyed in hell.

\(w\) Antiqu. Jud. l. 1. c. 2. sect. 3. (x) T. Bab. Zebachim, fol. 116.
1. (y) Zohar in Gen. fol. 50. 4. & 51. 1.

[2 Peter 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pe2 3:8</span></span>

But, beloved, be not ignorant of this one thing,.... Here the apostle
addresses the saints he writes unto, and for whom he had a tender
affection and regard, and for whose welfare he was concerned, lest they
should be stumbled at the length of time since the promise of the coming
of Christ was given, and which these scoffers object; and therefore he
would have them know, observe, and consider this one thing, which might
be of great use to them to make their minds easy, and keep up their
faith and expectation of the coming of Christ:

that one day is, with the Lord as a thousand years, and a thousand years
as one day; referring either to [Psa
90:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa090.htm#004); or to a common saying among the
Jews, founded on the same passage, , "the day of the holy blessed God is
a thousand years" (z); suggesting, that though between thirty and forty
years had elapsed since the promise was given out that Christ would come
again, and should even a thousand, or two thousand years more, run off,
before the coming of Christ, yet this should be no objection to the
accomplishment of the promise; for though such a number of years is very
considerable among men, ye not "with God", as the Arabic and Ethiopic
versions read, with whom a thousand years, and even eternity itself, is
but as a day, [Isa 43:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#013). Unless this
phrase should be thought to refer, as it is by some, to the day of
judgment, and be expressive of the duration of that: it is certain that
the Jews interpreted days of millenniums, and reckoned millenniums by
days, and used this phrase in confirmation of it. Thus they say (a),

"in the time to come, which is in the last days, on the sixth day, which
is the sixth millennium, when the Messiah comes, for the day of the holy
blessed God is a thousand years.''

And a little after,

""the Lord hath created a new thing in the earth, a woman shall compass
a man". This is in the time of the Messiah which is in the sixth day.''

And elsewhere (b),

"the sixth degree is called the sixth day, the day of the holy blessed
God is a thousand years. And in that day the King Messiah shall come,
and it shall be called the feast of gathering, for the holy blessed God
will gather in it the captivity of his people.''

So they call the sabbath, or seventh day, the seventh millennium, and
interpret (c).

""the song for the sabbath day", [Psa
92:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001) title, for the seventh
millennium, for one day of the holy blessed God is a thousand years.''

To which agrees the tradition of Elias, which runs thus (d);

"it is the tradition of the house of Elias, that the world shall be six
thousand years, two thousand years void (of the law), two thousand years
the law, and two thousand years the days of the Messiah;''

for they suppose that the six days of the creation were expressive of
the six thousand years in which the world will stand; and that the
seventh day prefigures the last millennium, in which will be the day of
judgment, and the world to come; for

"the six days of the creation (they say (e)) is a sign or intimation of
these things: on the sixth day man was created; and on the seventh his
work was finished; so the kings of the nations of the world (continue)
five millenniums, answering to the five days, in which were created the
fowls, and the creeping things of the waters, and other things; and the
enjoyment of their kingdom is a little in the sixth, answerable to the
creation of the beasts, and living creatures created at this time in the
beginning of it; and the kingdom of the house of David is in the sixth
millennium, answerable to the creation of man, who knew his Creator, and
ruled over them all; and in the end of that millennium will be the day
of judgment, answerable to man, who was judged in the end of it; and the
seventh is the sabbath, and it is the beginning of the world to come.''

\(z\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 8. fol. 7. 3. Vajikra Rabba, sect. 19. fol.
160. 2. Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 14. fol. 216. 1. Shirhashirim Rabba, fol.
20. 1. Zohar in Exod. fol. 60. 1. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 157. 1. & Nishmet
Chayim Orat. 1. c. 5. fol. 12. 1. (a) Zohar in Gen. fol. 13. 4. (b) Ib.
fol. 16. 1. (c) Bartenora in Misn. Tamid, c. 7. sect. 4. (d) T. Bab.
Sanhedrin, fol. 97. 1. & Avoda Zara, fol. 9. 1. (e) Ceseph Misna in
Maimon. Hilchot Teshuva, c. 9. sect. 2.

[2 Peter 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pe2 3:9</span></span>

The Lord is not slack concerning his promise,.... The Syriac version
reads in the plural, "his promises", any of his promises; though the
words seem rather to regard the particular promise of Christ's coming,
either to take vengeance on the Jewish nation, of which coming there was
a promise made, and is often referred to by Christ, and his apostles;
see [Mar 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar009.htm#001) [Heb
10:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#037); and it now being upwards of
thirty years since it was given out, some men began to charge God with
slackness and dilatoriness; whereas the true reason of the delay of it
was, that there might be time for the gathering in of his elect among
them by his angels, or apostles and ministers, sent into the several
parts of Judea, that so none of them might perish, but be brought to
faith and repentance; and thus as the time of Christ's coming was
prolonged more than was thought it would, so when the days of
afflictions were come, they were shortened also for these elect's sake:
or this promise regards the second coming of Christ, to judge the quick
and dead at the last day, of which the former was a prelude, presage,
and pledge; that Christ would come again, and appear a second time in
person, was promised by himself, and often spoken of by his apostles;
and many of the primitive Christians thought it would be very soon, and
which might be occasioned by the hints that were given of his coming in
the other sense. Now this being deferred longer than was expected, the
scoffers or mockers take upon them to charge the Lord with slackness in
the fulfilment of his promise:

as some men count slackness; as if he had either changed his purpose, or
had prolonged it beyond the appointed time, or was unmindful of his
promise, and would never fulfil it; whereas he is in one mind, and none
can turn him, nor will he delay the fulfilment of his promise beyond the
set time; he has fixed a day for his coming, in which he will judge the
world in righteousness, and he will keep it: he is not dilatory,

but is longsuffering to us-ward: not to all the individuals of human
nature, for the persons intended by us are manifestly distinguished from
"some men" in the text, and from scoffers, mocking at the promise of
Christ's coming, in the context, [Pe2
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#003); and are expressly called beloved,
[Pe2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#001); and God's longsuffering
towards them is their salvation, [Pe2
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015), nor is it true of all men, that
God is not willing that any of them should perish, and that everyone of
them should come to repentance, since many of them do perish in their
sins, and do not come to repentance, which would not be the case, if his
determining will was otherwise; besides, a society or company of men are
designed, to which the apostle himself belonged, and of which he was a
part; and who are described, in his epistles, as the elect of God,
called out of darkness, into marvellous light, and having obtained like
precious faith with the apostles; and must be understood either of God's
elect among the Jews, for Peter was a Jew, and they were Jews he wrote
to; and then the sense is, that the delay of Christ's coming is not
owing to any slackness in him, but to his longsuffering to his elect
among the Jews, being unwilling that any of that number among them
should perish, but that all of them repent of their sins, and believe in
him; and therefore he waits till their conversion is over, when a nation
shall be born at once, and they that have pierced him look on him and
mourn, and so all Israel shall be saved; or rather of the elect in
general, whether among Jews or Gentiles, upon whom the Lord waits to be
gracious, and whose longsuffering issues in their conversion and
salvation. And upon account of these the Lord stays his coming till
their number is complete in the effectual calling; and for their sakes
he is longsuffering to others, and bears with a wicked world, with the
idolatry, superstition, heresy, profaneness, and impiety, with which it
abounds; but when the last man that belongs to that number is called, he
will quickly descend in flames of fire, and burn the world, and the
wicked in it, and take his chosen ones to himself. The Alexandrian copy
reads, "for you", or your sakes; and so the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and
Ethiopic versions. A passage somewhat like to this is met with in a book
of the Jews (f), esteemed by them very ancient.

"God prolongs or defers his anger with men; and one day, which is a
thousand years, is fixed, besides the seventy years he delivered to
David the king.--And he does not judge man by his evil works which he
continually does, for if so, the world would not stand; but the holy
blessed God defers his anger with the righteous, and the wicked, that
they may return, by perfect repentance, and be established in this
world, and in the world to come.''

And it is an observation of theirs (g), that when God is said to be
"longsuffering", it is not written , but , intimating, that he is
longsuffering both to the righteous and the wicked; but then he bears
with the latter, for the sake of the former: compare with this passage
[Rev 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009);

not willing that any should perish; not any of the us, whom he has loved
with an everlasting love, whom he has chosen in his Son, and given to
him, and for whom he has died, and who are brought to believe in him.
These, though they were lost in Adam, did not perish; and though in
their own apprehensions, when awakened and convinced, are ready to
perish; and though their peace, joy, and comfort, may perish for a
while, and they may fear a final and total perishing; yet they shall
never perish as others do, or be punished with everlasting destruction:
and that this is the will of God, appears by his choice of them to
salvation; by the provisions of grace for them in an everlasting
covenant; by the security of their persons in the hands of Christ; by
sending his Son to obtain salvation for them, and his Spirit to apply it
to them; and by his keeping them by his power, through faith, unto
salvation.

But that all should come to repentance; not legal, but evangelical,
without which all must perish; and which all God's elect stand in need
of, as well as others, being equally sinners; and which they cannot come
to of themselves, and therefore he not only calls them to it, in his
word, and by his spirit and grace, but bestows it upon them; he has
exalted Christ at his own right hand, to give it to them; and repentance
is a grant from him, a free gift of his grace; and the Spirit is sent
down into their hearts to work it in them, to take away the stony heart,
and give an heart of flesh; without which, whatever time and space may
be given, or means afforded, even the most awful judgments, the greatest
mercies, and the most powerful ministry, will be of no avail.

\(f\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 83. 3. (g) T. Hieros, Taanioth, fol. 65. 2. T.
Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 50. 2.

[2 Peter 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pe2 3:10</span></span>

But the day of the Lord will come as a thief in the night,.... That is,
the Lord will come in that day, which he has fixed, according to his
promise, than which nothing is more certain; and he will come as a thief
in the night: he will come "in the night", which may be literally
understood; for as his first coming was in the night; see [Luk
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#008); so perhaps his second coming may
be in the night season; or figuratively, when it will be a time of great
darkness; when there will be little faith in the earth, and both the
wise and foolish virgins will be slumbering and sleeping; when it will
be a season of great security, as it was in the days of Noah, and at the
time of the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah. The Vulgate Latin, Syriac,
and Ethiopic versions, leave out the phrase, "in the night": and the
Alexandrian copy uses the emphatic article, "in the night": and he will
come, "as a thief", in the dark, indiscernibly; it will not be known
what hour he will come; he will come suddenly, at an unawares, when he
is not expected, to the great surprise of men, and especially of the
scoffers; when the following awful things will be done:

in the which the heavens shall pass away with a great noise; not the
third heaven, the seat of angels and glorified saints, and even of God
himself; but the starry and airy heavens, which shall pass away, not as
to their matter and substance, but as to some of their accidents and
qualities, and the present use of them; and that with a great noise,
like that of a violent storm, or tempest; though the Ethiopic version
renders it, "without a noise"; and which is more agreeable to his coming
as a thief, which is not with noise, but in as still a manner as
possible; and some learned men observe, that the word signifies swiftly,
as well as with a noise; and, accordingly, the Syriac version renders it
"suddenly"; and the Arabic version "presently", immediately; that is, as
soon as Christ shall come, immediately, at once, from his face shall the
earth and heavens flee away, as John in a vision saw, [Rev
20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011);

and the elements shall melt with fervent heat: not what are commonly
called the four elements, earth, air, tire, and water, the first
principles of all things: the ancient philosophers distinguished between
principles and elements; principles, they say (h), are neither
generated, nor corrupted; "but the elements will be corrupted, or
destroyed by the conflagration"; which exactly agrees with what the
apostle here says: by the elements seem to be meant the host of heaven,
being distinguished from the heavens, as the works of the earth are
distinguished from the earth in the next clause; and design the
firmament, or expanse, with the sun, moon, and stars in it, which will
be purged and purified by this liquefaction by fire;

the earth also will be purged and purified from everything that is
noxious, hurtful, unnecessary, and disagreeable; though the matter and
substance of it will continue:

and the works that are therein shall be burnt up; all the works of
nature, wicked men, cattle, trees, &c. and all the works of men, cities,
towns, houses, furniture, utensils, instruments of arts of all sorts,
will be burnt by a material fire, breaking out of the earth and
descending from heaven, for which the present heavens and earth are
reserved: this general conflagration was not only known to the Jews, but
to the Heathens, to the poets, and Platonist and Stoic philosophers, who
frequently (i) speak of it in plain terms. Some are of opinion that
these words refer to the destruction of Jerusalem; and so the passing
away of the heavens may design the removal of their church state and
ordinances, [Heb 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#026), and the
melting of the elements the ceasing of the ceremonial law, called the
elements of the world, [Gal 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#003), and
the burning of the earth the destruction of the land of Judea, expressed
in such a manner in [Deu 29:23](../../../bib/kjv/deu029.htm#023), and
particularly of the temple, and the curious works in that, which were
all burnt up and destroyed by fire, though Titus endeavoured to prevent
it, but could not (k): which sense may be included, inasmuch as there
was a promise of Christ's coming to destroy the Jewish nation, and was
expected; and which destruction was a prelude of the destruction of the
world, and is sometimes expressed in such like language as that is; but
then this must not take place, to the exclusion of the other sense: and
whereas this sense makes the words to he taken partly in a figurative,
and partly in a literal way; and seeing the heavens and the earth are in
the context only literally taken, the former sense is to be preferred;
and to which best agrees the following use to be made of these things.

\(h\) Diog. Laert. l. 7. in Vita Zenonis. (i) Vid. Diog. Laert ib. & l.
9. in Vita Heraclit. & Hesych. de Philos. p. 36. Arrian. Epict. l. 3. c.
13. Phurut. de Natura Deorum, p. 39. Ovid. Metamorph, fab. 7. Min.
Felix, p. 37. & Justin. Martyr. Apol. 2. p. 66. (k) Vid. Joseph. de
Bello Jud. l. 3. c. 9, 10. & l. 7. c. 14, 16.

[2 Peter 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pe2 3:11</span></span>

Seeing then that all these things shall be dissolved,.... By fire; the
heaven with all its host, sun, moon, and stars, clouds, meteors, and
fowls of the air; the earth, and all that is upon it, whether of nature,
or art; and, since nothing is more certain than such a dissolution of
all things,

what manner of persons ought ye to be in all holy conversation and
godliness? not as the scoffers and profane sinners, who put away this
evil day far from them, but as men, who have their loins girt, and their
lights burning, waiting for their Lord's coming; being continually in
the exercise of grace, and in the discharge of their religious duties,
watching, praying, hearing, reading; living soberly, righteously, and
godly; guarding against intemperance and worldly mindedness, and every
worldly and hurtful lust.

[2 Peter 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pe2 3:12</span></span>

Looking for and hasting unto the coming of the day of God,.... The same
with the day of the Lord, [Pe2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010),
and so the Vulgate Latin and Arabic versions here read; and it intends
the day of Christ's second coming to judgment, and so is a proof of the
deity of Christ; and is called "the day of God", in distinction from
man's day, or human judgment, [Co1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#003), which is often fallacious;
whereas the judgment of God is according to truth; and because in that
day Christ will appear most clearly to be truly and properly God, by the
manifest display of his omniscience, omnipotence, and other glorious
perfections of his; and because it will be, as the day of God is, a
thousand years; and also the day in which God will finish all his works,
as on the seventh day the works of creation, on this the works of
Providence; when all his purposes, promises, and threatenings, relating
to the final state of all persons and things, will be fulfilled, and
every work be brought to light, and into judgment, and everything will
stand in a clear light; for the day will declare it, either respecting
God, or men; and there will be a display, as of his grace and mercy, to
his church and people; for it will be the day of his open espousals to
them, and of the gladness of his heart; so of his wrath and anger
towards the wicked: for this great and dreadful day of the Lord shall
burn like an oven, and destroy the wicked, root and branch: and it will
be the day of Christ's glorious appearing, and of his kingdom, in which
he will reign, before his ancients, gloriously; and when it is ended,
God, Father, Son and Spirit, will be all in all: now "the coming" of
this day saints should be "looking for" by faith; believing that it
certainly will come, since the patriarchs, prophets, Christ himself, the
angels of heaven, and the apostles of the Lamb, have all declared and
asserted the coming of this day; and they should look for it, and love
it, as with the strongest affection for it, and most vehement desire of
it, since they will then appear with Christ in glory; and they should
look out, and keep looking out for it, as what will be quickly; and
though it is not as soon as they desire and expect, yet should still
look wistly for it, and with patience and cheerfulness wait for it: yea,
they should be "hasting unto" it, or "hastening" it; for though the day
is fixed for the coming of Christ, nor can it be altered, as his coming
will not be longer, it cannot be sooner, yet it becomes the saints to
pray earnestly for it, that it may be quickly, and for the
accomplishment of all things that go before it, prepare for it, and lead
unto it; such as the conversion of the Jews, and the bringing in of the
fulness of the Gentiles; and by putting him in mind of, and pleading
with him, his promises concerning these things, and giving him no rest
till they are accomplished; there seems to be some reference to the
prayers of the Jews for the Messiah's coming, which they desire may be
"in haste"; which will show that they are in haste for the coming of
this day; and all which things God will hasten, though it will be in his
own time: and moreover, saints should be hasting to it by their
readiness for it, having their loins girt, and their lights burning, and
their lamps trimmed, and they waiting for their Lord's coming, and going
forth in acts of faith and love, and in the duties of religion, to meet
him, and not slumber and sleep:

wherein; in which day, as in [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010); or by which; by which coming of
Christ, or of the day of God,

the heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the elements shall
melt with fervent heat; at whose coming and presence, and from whose
face the heavens and earth shall flee away, just as the earth shook, and
the heavens dropped, and Sinai itself moved, when God appeared upon it;
see [Rev 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011). This is a repetition
of what is said in [Pe2 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010), exciting
attention to the exhortation given.

[2 Peter 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pe2 3:13</span></span>

Nevertheless we, according to his promise,.... Or promises, as the
Alexandrian copy, and the Vulgate Latin version; namely those in [Isa
65:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#017);

look for new heavens and a new earth; not figuratively, the world to
come in distinction from the Jewish world or state; a new church state,
the Gospel dispensation, with new ordinances, as baptism and the Lord's
supper, all legal ceremonies and ordinances being gone, and everything
new; for these things had taken place already, and were not looked for
as future: but these phrases are to be understood literally, as the
heavens and the earth are in every passage in the context, [Pe2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#005); and designs not new heavens and
earth for substance, but for qualities; the heavens and elements being
melted and dissolved, and so purged and purified by fire, and the earth
and its works being burnt up with it, and so cleared of everything
noxious, needless, and disagreeable, new heavens and a new earth will
appear, refined and purged from everything which the curse brought
thereon for man's sin: and such heavens and earth the saints look for by
faith and hope, and earnest expectation, and with desire and pleasure;
and therefore are not distressed, as they have no reason to be, with the
burning of the present heavens and earth, as awful as these things will
be; and they expect them not upon their own fancies and imaginations, or
the vain conjectures and cunningly devised fables of men, but according
to the promises of God recorded in the above passages, and in which they
may be confirmed by the words of Christ, and by the vision of John, [Rev
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#001). The Alexandrian copy reads, "and
his promises"; as if it respected other promises the saints looked for
besides the new heavens and earth; namely, the resurrection of the dead,
eternal life, the in corruptible inheritance, the ultimate glory and
happiness:

wherein dwelleth righteousness; meaning not the heavenly felicity,
called sometimes the crown of righteousness, and the hope of
righteousness, to which righteousness gives a right, and where it will
be perfect, for the apostle is not speaking of the ultimate glory of the
saints; nor the righteousness of Christ, as dwelling in the saints, as
if the sense was this, we in whom righteousness dwells, look for new
heavens and a new earth; for though the righteousness of Christ is unto
and upon them that believe, yet it is not in them; it is in Christ, and
dwells in him, and not in them; it is not inherent in them, but imputed
to them: by "righteousness" is meant righteous men; such as are so not
in and of themselves, or by the deeds of the law, or by works of
righteousness done by them, but who are made righteous by the obedience
of Christ, and are righteousness itself in him; see [Jer
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer033.htm#016); now these, and these only, will
be the inhabitants of the new heavens and the new earth; there will be
no unrighteous persons there, as in the present world, which lies in
wickedness, and is full of wicked men; and they will be stocked with
inhabitants after this manner; all the elect will now be gathered in,
and Christ, when he comes, will bring all his saints with him from
heaven, and will raise their bodies, and reunite them to their souls;
and those that are alive will be caught up to meet the Lord in the air,
and will make up together the general assembly and church of the
firstborn, whose names are written in heaven; and whereas, upon the
coming of Christ, the present heavens and earth will be burnt or
purified by fire, and so made new and fit for the spirits of just men
made perfect, who being again embodied, will fill the face of them, and
shall inherit the earth, and reign with Christ on it for a thousand
years, during which time there will not be a wicked man in them; for the
wicked that will be alive at Christ's coming will be burnt with the
earth, and the wicked dead shall not rise till the thousand years are
ended, and who being raised, will, together with the devils, make the
Gog and Magog army; wherefore none but righteous persons can look for
these new heavens and earth, for to these only are they promised, and
such only shall dwell in them; so the Targum on [Jer
23:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#023) paraphrases the words,

"I God have created the world from the beginning, saith the Lord, I God
will "renew the world for the righteous":''

and this will be, the Jews say, for the space of a thousand years;

"it is a tradition (they say (l)) of the house of Elias, that the
righteous, whom the holy blessed God will raise from the dead shall not
return to their dust, as is said, [Isa
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#003), and it shall come to pass, &c. as
the Holy One continues for ever, so they shall continue for ever; and if
you should say those years (some editions read, "those thousand years",
and so the gloss upon the place) in which the holy blessed God "renews
the world": as it is said [Isa 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#011),
and the Lord alone; &c. what shall they do? the holy blessed God will
make them wings as eagles, and they shall fly upon the face of the
waters:''

and this renovation of the heavens and the earth, they say, will be in
the seventh millennium;

"in the seventh thousand year (they assert (m)) there will be found new
heavens and a new earth;''

which agree with these words of Peter.

\(l\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 92. 1, 2. Ed. Coch. p. 317. (m) Zohar in
Gen. fol. 35. 3.

[2 Peter 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pe2 3:14</span></span>

Wherefore, beloved, seeing ye look for these things,.... For the burning
of the heavens and the earth, for the coming of Christ, and for the new
heavens and new earth,

be diligent that ye may be found of him; Christ, or "in him", as in [Phi
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009); for such as are in Christ will
have an undoubted right to the new heavens and the new earth, and will
certainly dwell in them, because they will be found not in their own
righteousness, but in the righteousness of Christ: or "before him", as
the Arabic version renders it; before him the Judge of all, at whose
tribunal they must stand; but being clothed with his righteousness, and
so without spot and blemish, they will not be ashamed before him: or "by
him"; Christ first finds his in redemption, and next in the effectual
calling, and last of all at his coming, when all the elect will be
looked up, gathered in, and presented first to himself, and then to his
Father, complete and perfect, not one wanting: and thus to be found in
him, and before him, and by him, should be the concern of all that look
for the glorious things here spoken of, and particularly that they be
found in the following situation and circumstances: in peace; interested
in that peace Christ has made by the blood of his cross; for such as are
reconciled to God by his death, shall be saved by his life, and live
with him in the new heavens and new earth, and for ever in the ultimate
glory; and in enjoying that peace of conscience which he himself gives,
and which flows from his blood, righteousness, and atonement; so that
the day of his coming by death, or at judgment, will not be terrifying
to them, but they will look for these things with great delight and
satisfaction: or

in peace one with another; for peace makers and keepers are called the
children of God, and so heirs of God, and joint-heirs with Christ; or in
happiness and glory, expressed by peace, which is the end of the
righteous man, which he enters into at death, and will rest in to all
eternity:

without spot and blemish; no man is so in himself, sanctification is
imperfect, and many are the slips and falls of the saints, though their
desire is to be harmless and inoffensive, and to give no just occasion
for blame or scandal; but the saints are so in Christ Jesus, being
washed in his blood, and clothed with his righteousness, and will be
found so by him when he comes again, when he will present them to
himself a glorious church, without spot or wrinkle, and also before the
presence of his Father's glory, as faultless, with exceeding joy; and so
will they be fit and meet to be the inhabitants of the new heavens and
new earth, and reign with him therein, and be with him to all eternity.

[2 Peter 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pe2 3:15</span></span>

And account that the longsuffering of our Lord,.... Not his
longsuffering towards the wicked, and his forbearance with them, for
that is not the means of, nor the way to, nor does it issue in, their
salvation, but in their sorer punishment and greater damnation, see [Rom
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004); but towards the elect, as in [Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009); whom he bears much and long with
before conversion, while in their sins, and in a state of unregeneracy,
and waits to be gracious to them, as he is in their calling, and to make
known and apply his great salvation to them; and as with particular
persons, so with the whole body of them, till they are all gathered in,
and even with the world for their sakes; and particularly the Lord's
longsuffering here intends the deferring of his coming, or his seeming
slackness in the performance of his promise: the reason of which is,

salvation: the salvation of all his chosen ones, and in that it issues;
he waits, he stays, that none of them might perish, but that they might
be all brought to faith and repentance, and so be saved: wherefore the
apostle would have the saints consider it in this light, and not imagine
and conclude, with the scoffing infidels, that he is slack and dilatory,
and will not come, but that his view in it is the salvation of all his
people, which by this means is brought about: in confirmation of which,
and other things he had delivered, he produces the testimony of the
Apostle Paul;

even as our beloved brother Paul also; he calls him a "brother", both on
account of his being a believer in Christ, one that belonged to the same
family with him, and was of the household of faith, born of the same
Father, and related to the same Redeemer, the firstborn among many
brethren, and likewise on account of his being a fellow apostle; for
though he was not one of the twelve apostles, but his call and mission
were later than theirs, yet Peter does not disdain to put him among
them, and upon an equal foot with them, nor was he a whit behind the
chief of them: he styles him a "beloved" brother; expressing his
affection for him, which the relation between them called for, and which
he bore to him, notwithstanding his public opposition to him, and sharp
reproof of him, [Gal 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#011), and perhaps
loved him the more for it; see [Psa
141:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#005); and he makes mention of him,
and that under these characters, partly to show their agreement and
consent in doctrine; and partly to recommend him to the Jews, to whom he
writes, who had, upon report of his doctrine and ministry, entertained
an ill, at least a mean opinion, of him; as also to set us an example to
speak well of one another, both as ministers and private believers:

according to the wisdom given unto him, hath written unto you; meaning
not all his epistles, as being written for the general good of all the
saints, as well as for those particular churches or men to whom they
were sent; for what Peter speaks of is what was particularly written to
them, and is distinguished in [Pe2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016) from the rest of Paul's epistles;
nor does he intend the epistle of Paul to the Romans, for the
longsuffering of God spoken of in that, as in [Rom
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004), is his longsuffering to the
wicked, which issues in their destruction, and not his longsuffering to
his elect, which is salvation, as here; but he seems manifestly to have
in view the epistle to the Hebrews, for Peter wrote both his first and
second epistles to Jews; wherefore, since none of Paul's epistles but
that were written particularly to them, it should seem that that is
designed, and serves to confirm his being the author of it; in which he
writes to the Hebrews concerning the coming of Christ, and of the
deferring of it a little while, and of the need they had of patience to
wait for it, [Heb 10:36](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#036); and in it
also are some things difficult to be understood concerning Melchizedek,
the old and new covenant, the removing of the Aaronic priesthood, and
the abrogation of the whole ceremonial law, &c. things not easily
received by that nation; and the whole is written with great wisdom,
respecting the person and office of Christ, the nature of his
priesthood, and the glory of the Gospel dispensation; and in a most
admirable manner is the whole Mosaic economy laid open and explained: he
was indeed a wise master builder, and whatever he wrote was "according
to wisdom"; not fleshly wisdom, the wisdom of this world, nor with
enticing words of men's wisdom, but according to the divine wisdom,
under the influence of the spirit of wisdom and revelation; for he had
not this of himself naturally, nor did he learn it at Gamaliel's feet,
but it was what was "given to him"; it came from above, from God, who
gives it liberally; and as he himself always owned it to be a free grace
gift of God bestowed on him, and that all his light and knowledge were
by the revelation of Christ, so Peter ascribes it to the same, that God
might have all the glory, and all boasting in man be stopped.

[2 Peter 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pe2 3:16</span></span>

As also in all his epistles,.... From whence it appears, that the
Apostle Paul had, by this time, wrote several of his epistles, if not
all of them; and they were all written according to the same wisdom, and
under the influence of the same spirit, as his epistle to the Hebrews:

speaking in them of those things; of the same things, Peter had been
speaking of, of the coming of Christ, as that he should appear a second
time to them that look for him, and would come as a thief in the night,
and that the fashion, scheme, and form of this world should pass away,
and that saints should look and wait for his coming, and love it:
something of this kind is said in all his epistles; see [Heb
9:28](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#028); and also of mockers, scoffers,
seducers, and wicked men that would arise in the last days; see [Ti1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001),

in which are some things hard to be understood. The phrase, "in which",
refers either to the epistles, or the things spoken in them. The
Alexandrian manuscript, and three of Robert Stephens's copies, read ,
"in which" epistles, but the generality of copies read , "in", or "among
which things", spoken of in them, concerning the subject here treated
of, the coming of Christ; as the time of Christ's coming, which is
sometimes represented by the apostle, as if it would be while he was
living; and the manner of his coming in person with all his saints, and
his mighty angels, with a shout, the voice of the archangel, and trump
of God, things not easily understood; and the destruction of antichrist
at his coming, which will be with the breath of his mouth, and the
brightness of his coming; as also the resurrection of the dead, of the
saints that will rise first, and that with spiritual bodies; and
likewise the change of the living saints, and the rapture both of living
and raised saints together, in the, clouds, to meet the Lord in the air;
and the standing of them before the judgment seat of Christ, and the
account that everyone must give to him, [Th1
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#015) [Co1
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#044);

which they that are unlearned; untaught of God, who have never learned
of the Father, nor have learned Christ, nor have that anointing which
teacheth all things; who, though they may have been in the schools of
men, were never in the school of Christ; and though they have been ever
learning, yet will never come to the knowledge of the truth; for men may
have a large share of human literature, and yet be unlearned men in the
sense of the apostle; and very often it is, that such wrest and pervert
the Scriptures to the ruin of themselves, and others:

and unstable; unsettled in their principles, who are like children
tossed to and fro with every wind of doctrine; the root of the matter is
not in them; nor are they rooted and built up in Christ, and so are not
established in the faith; they are not upon the foundation Christ, nor
do they build upon, and abide by the sure word of God, or form their
notions according to it, but according to their own carnal reasonings,
and fleshly lusts; and so

wrest the word of God, distort it from its true sense and meaning, and
make it speak that which it never designed; dealing with it as innocent
persons are sometimes used, put upon a rack, and tortured, and so forced
to speak what is contrary to their knowledge and consciences; and so
were the words of the Apostle Paul wrested by ill designing men, as
about the doctrines of grace and works, so concerning the coming of
Christ; see [Rom 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008);

as they do also the other Scriptures; the writings of Moses, and the
prophets of the Old Testament, the Gospels, the Acts of the Apostles,
and the other epistles of the apostles of the New Testament: and which
is eventually

unto their own destruction; for by so doing they either add unto, or
detract from the Scriptures, and so bring the curse of God upon them;
and they give into doctrines of devils, and into heresies, which are
damnable, and bring upon themselves swift destruction, which lingers
not, and slumbers not. Now from hence it does not follow, that the
Scriptures are not to be read by the common people; for not all the
parts of Scripture, and all things in it, are hard to be understood,
there are many things very plain and easy, even everything respecting
eternal salvation; there is milk for babes, as well as meat for strong
men: besides, not the Scriptures in general, but Paul's epistles only,
are here spoken of, and not all of them, or anyone whole epistle among
them, only some things in them, and these not impossible, only difficult
to be understood; and which is no reason why they should be laid aside,
but rather why they should be read with greater application and
diligence, and be followed with fervent prayer, and frequent meditation;
and though unlearned and unstable men may wrest them to their perdition,
those that are taught of God, though otherwise illiterate, may read them
to great profit and advantage.

[2 Peter 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pe2 3:17</span></span>

Ye therefore, beloved, seeing ye know these things before,.... As that
there will be such mockers and scoffers in the last days, and such
unlearned and unstable men that will deprave the Scriptures, and wrest
them in such a miserable manner:

beware lest ye also, being led away with the error of the wicked; from
the simplicity of the Gospel, along with such wicked men, that wax worse
and worse, deceivers and being deceived, by giving into any of their
errors which respect the grace of God, or the person and offices of
Christ, or particularly his second coming; be upon the watch and guard
against them, having previous notice of them, for they lie in wait to
deceive: lest ye

fall from your own steadfastness; which was proper to them, and which,
by the grace of God, they had, and retained, both in the faith of Christ
and doctrine of the Gospel; for though the saints can never finally and
totally fall into sin, or from the truth, yet they may fall from their
steadfastness, both as to the exercise of the grace of faith, and as to
their profession of the doctrine of faith; and to be fluctuating,
hesitating, and doubting in either respect, must be very uncomfortable
and dishonourable.

[2 Peter 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pe2 3:18</span></span>

But grow in grace,.... In the gifts of grace, which, under a divine
blessing, may be increased by using them: gifts neglected decrease, but
stirred up and used, are improved and increase. And though men are to be
thankful for their gifts, and be contented with them, yet they may
lawfully desire more, and in the use of means seek an increase of them,
which may be a means of preserving themselves, and others, from the
error of the wicked. Moreover, by "grace" may be meant internal grace.
The work of grace is gradual; it is like a grain of mustard seed, or
like seed cast into the earth, which springs up, it is not known how,
first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the ear; saints are
first babes, and from children they grow to young men, and from young
men to fathers. There is such a thing as growth in grace, in this sense;
every grace, as to its act and exercise, is capable of growing and
increasing; faith may grow exceedingly, hope abound, love increase, and
patience have its perfect work, and saints may grow more humble, holy,
and self-denying: this is indeed God's work, to cause them to grow, and
it is owing to his grace; yet saint, should show a concern for this, and
make use of means which God owns and blesses for this purpose, such as
prayer, attending on the word, and looking over the promises of God, for
an increase of faith; recollecting past experiences, and looking to the
death and resurrection of Christ for the encouragement of hope, and to
the love of God and Christ, for the stirring up of love to both, and to
the saints; considering the sufferings of Christ, the desert of sin, and
the glories of another world, to promote patience and self-denial, and
the pattern of Christ, to excite to humility; though "grace" may also
intend the Gospel, the knowledge of which is imperfect, and may be
increased in the use of means, and which is a special preservative
against error, a growth in which saints should be concerned for:

and in the knowledge of our Lord and Saviour Jesus Christ; of his
person, office, and grace, than which nothing is more valuable, and is
to be preferred to everything; it is the principal thing in grace, and
is the beginning and pledge of eternal life, and will issue in it; for
an increase of which, and a growth in it, the word and ordinances are
designed; and nothing can be a greater security against error than an
experimental growing knowledge of Christ. The Syriac version adds, "and
of God the Father"; and so some copies read:

to him be glory, both now, and for ever; or "to the day of eternity";
that is, to Christ, who is truly God, or otherwise such a doxology would
not belong to him, be ascribed the glory of deity, of all divine
perfections; the glory of all his offices and work as Mediator; the
glory of man's salvation; and the glory of all that grace, and the
growth of it, together with the knowledge of himself, which saints have
from him; and that both in this world, and that which is to come.

Amen; so be it.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 John Introduction](jo1000)

</div>
