<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Philippians Index](phi)  
  [Previous](eph006)  [Next](phi001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philippians Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

[Philippians](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">phi 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PHILIPPIANS

Philippi was a Roman colony, and the chief city of one part of
Macedonia, [Act 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#012), it is by
Appianus called Datos which was its original name; and by Diodorus
Siculus it is called Crenidae (a), from, the fountains about it; and it
took its name Philippi, from Philip king of Macedon, father of Alexander
the great, who rebuilt and fortified it; near this place a famous battle
was fought, and a victory obtained by Augustus Caesar and Mark Antony,
over Brutus and Cassius; it is now called Chrixopolis, properly
Chrysopolis, from the plenty of golden mines near it: here the apostle
was directed by a vision, to go and preach the Gospel; and which was
succeeded, to the conversion of Lydia, and the jailer, and their
families; which laid the foundation of a Gospel church in this place, to
whom this epistle is written; and which was written by the apostle when
he was a prisoner at Rome, as many things in it show; for he more than
once makes mention of his bonds, and of these being made manifest in
Caesar's palace, and of some of Caesar's household sending their
Christian salutations to this church: Dr. Hammond makes the date of this
epistle to be the year 59, and Dr. Lightfoot places it in the year 60,
and the sixth of Nero; the occasion of it was this, the Philippians, to
whom the apostle was very dear, he being the first preacher of the
Gospel to them, and the instrument of their conversion, hearing that he
was a prisoner at Rome, send their minister and pastor Epaphroditus to
him, to visit him, and by him a present to support him under his
afflicted circumstances, and who related to him the case of this church;
and at his departure he sent by him this letter; the design of which is,
to express his love and affection to them; to give them an account of
his bonds, and the usefulness of them, and how he was supported under
them; to encourage them under all the afflictions and persecutions, they
endured for the sake of Christ; to excite them to love, unity, and
peace, among themselves; to caution them against false teachers,
judaizing Christians, that were for joining Moses and Christ, law and
Gospel, works and grace together, in the business of salvation; to
exhort them to a holy life and conversation, and to return them thanks
for their kind present.

\(a\) Vid. Ptolom. Geograph. l. 3. c. 13.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philippians Chapter 1](phi001)

</div>
