<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Philemon Index](plm.md)  
  [Previous](tit003)  [Next](plm001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Philemon Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

[Philemon](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">plm 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PHILEMON

This epistle was written by the Apostle Paul, when a prisoner at Rome,
as appears from its inscription and subscription; and seems to have been
written at the same time, in the year 60, and sent by the same hand, as
the epistle to the Colossians; seeing the same persons were with the
apostle at the writing of both, and send their Christian salutations in
the one, as in the other; compare [Plm
1:23](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#023.md) with [Col
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#010.md) and Archippus, the minister in
Colosse, is made mention of in both, [Plm
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/plm001.htm#002.md) and it is very probable that
Philemon, to whom it was written, was a Colossian, since Onesimus, his
servant, on whose account, and by whom it was sent, is said to be one of
the Colossians, [Col 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/col004.htm#009.md). Philemon is
said to be one of the seventy disciples, and afterwards Bishop of Gaza;
[Luk 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001.md). The occasion of the epistle
was this; Philemon's servant, Onesimus, having either embezzled his
master's goods, or robbed him, ran away from him, and fled to Rome,
where the apostle was a prisoner in chains in his own hired house, under
the custody of a soldier, and where he received all that came, and
preached the Gospel to them, [Act
28:30](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#030.md) and among those that went to
hear him, this fugitive servant was one, and was converted under his
ministry; and who not only received the grace of God, but had such gifts
bestowed on him as qualified him to be a preacher of the word. Now the
design of this epistle is to reconcile Philemon to his servant, and to
entreat him to receive him again, not only as a servant, but as a
brother in Christ; and the most proper and prudent methods and arguments
are used to engage him to it. The epistle, though it is a familiar one,
and short, is very instructive; it shows great humility in the apostle,
and that he did not think it below him to be concerned in doing such an
office as to reconcile a master to his servant, and which is worthy of
imitation; as also it teaches the right that masters have over their
servants, which is not lost by their becoming Christians, and even
ministers of the Gospel; and that recompense should be made unto them
for injuries done by them: it likewise displays the riches of the grace
of God, in the conversion of such a vile creature: and the wonderful
providence of God in overruling that which was sinful in itself, running
away from his master, to the greatest good, even the conversion of him;
and is an instance of surprising grace: and from hence may be learned,
that there is salvation in Christ for the chief of sinners; and that the
conversion of them is not to be despaired of. The authority of this
epistle was not questioned by the ancient writers, and stands always in
their catalogues of the canon of the Scripture; and Marcion the heretic,
who either rejected, or changed, or mutilated the rest of the epistles,
could not lay his hands on this, because of the brevity of it, as
Tertullian (a) and Jerom (b) observe.

\(a\) Advers. Marcion. l. 5. c. 21. (b) Proaem. in Philem.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Philemon Chapter 1](plm001.md)

</div>
