<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro003)  [Next](pro005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PROVERBS 4

In this chapter Solomon advises to seek after wisdom, to avoid bad
company, and to continue in the right paths of goodness and truth: he
excites attention to what he had to say, from the relation he stood in
to the persons addressed; from the nature of his instructions, which
were good and profitable; and from his own example, in attending to
those his parents gave him, [Pro 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001.md);
He exhorts above all things to get wisdom, from the superior excellency
of it, and from the preservation, promotion, and honour, to be had by
it, [Pro 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005.md); and he further enforces
big exhortations, from their being the means of a comfortable life, and
of the prolongation of it, and of leading in a right way without
straitness or stumbling, [Pro 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#010.md).
And then proceeds to caution against bad company, and going into a bad
way of life; which is enforced from the mischief done by those that walk
in it, and from the darkness of it, to which the path of the just is
opposed, [Pro 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014.md). And the
exhortation to attend to and observe his instructions, and keep them, is
repeated, from the consideration of their being life and health to them,
[Pro 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#020.md); and that they might be
preserved, and not departed from, direction's are given about ordering
the heart, mouth, lips, eyes, and feet, [Pro
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#023.md).

[Proverbs 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 4:1</span></span>

Hear, ye children, the instruction of a father,.... Either of God their
father, as Gersom interprets it; or rather of Solomon their father: and
so he recommends his instruction from the relation he stood in to them;
for, since he was their father, he would give them no bad instruction;
and, since they were his children, they ought to receive it: by whom are
meant, not his children in a natural sense, or the children of his body;
but his disciples, such who applied to him for knowledge, and whom he
undertook to learn;

and attend to know understanding; what would serve to enlighten,
enlarge, improve, and inform their understandings; what would lead them
into the knowledge and understanding of things divine and spiritual, and
which would be worth knowing; and of having their understandings stored
and enriched with.

[Proverbs 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 4:2</span></span>

For I give you good doctrine,.... Whose author, matter, use, and
tendency, are good, and therefore should be received; so the Gospel is
called, [Ti1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006.md); and no other is here
meant: it is the doctrine concerning Wisdom or Christ, as the following
verses show; which serves to exalt him, and makes for the good and
welfare of immortal souls; and such is the doctrine of the Scriptures,
of Christ and his apostles, even all the doctrines and truths of the
Gospel;

forsake you not my law; or "doctrine" (o); not the law given on Mount
Sinai, as Gersom interprets it; but the doctrine of Christ, which goes
out from Mount Zion: this the children of Wisdom should not neglect,
relinquish, drop, or depart from; but should keep it, and abide by it.

\(o\) "doctrinam meam", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Amama;
"instructionem meam", Schultens.

[Proverbs 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 4:3</span></span>

For I was my father's son,.... Or, "a son to my father" (p); so Solomon
was to God, his heavenly Father, [Sa2
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014.md); which Jarchi observes, and gives
as the sense of this place: but his father David is meant, whose son he
was; though he was not his only one, he had others besides him. But the
sense is, that he was his darling, his beloved son, whom he loved above
the rest; as he was beloved of the Lord, and therefore his name was
called Jedidiah, so he was beloved of his father; and, because he had a
peculiar love for him, he took a particular care of his education;

tender and only beloved in the sight of my mother; his mother Bathsheba,
who had a most affectionate regard to him; and therefore in his tender
age, as soon as he was susceptible of instructions, gave them to him,
which being received, made deep and lasting impressions on him; see [Pro
31:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#001.md). The marginal reading is, "to the
sons of my mother"; for Bathsheba had more sons, [Ch1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#005.md); both readings may be retained,
"beloved in the sight of my mother's sons". Gersom interprets this of
the people of Israel, who were sons to God their Father; and were the
only nation that received the law, and which they received at the time
of their coming out of Egypt, in the days of their youth.

\(p\) "filius fui patri meo", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Gejerus,
Michaelis; so Cocceius, Schultens.

[Proverbs 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 4:4</span></span>

He taught me also, and said unto me,.... The Targum is,

"they taught me,''

his father and his mother; and so the Septuagint version,

"who said and taught me;''

and the Arabic version,

"they both taught me, and said unto me;''

but in the Hebrew it is singular, and is restrained to the father. He
taught him when he was very young, and also gave him instructions when
he was older, and a little before his own death; see [Ch1
28:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#008.md); he taught him by the several
psalms he wrote; some of which are called "maschil", instructive or
causing to understand; two of them particularly were written for him,
the seventy-second and the hundred twenty-seventh psalms; he taught him
in the following words. How far the words of David his father reach is
not agreed on, on all hands; some think they end with [Pro
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005.md); others with [Pro
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006.md), others with the [Pro
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#009.md), and the words of Solomon begin at
[Pro 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#010.md), some will have it that they
take in the whole chapter, which is not probable; nay, others say that
the whole of the book following is his, which can by no means be agreed
to: it seems most likely to me that they end at [Pro
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006.md), and at most are not to be carried
beyond [Pro 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#009.md);

let thine heart retain my words: says David to his son: the instructions
he gave him by word of mouth, concerning his moral behaviour, relating
to political things, the government of the people; and especially such
as concerned the everlasting welfare of his soul, or were about Wisdom
or Christ, and the knowledge of divine and spiritual things; these he
would have him lay up in his heart, and keep them there, as a rich
treasure, to have recourse unto upon all occasions;

keep my commandments, and live: which commandments may respect him both
in his private and public capacity, and in a religious and political
one; how he should behave as a man, a king, and one that feared God: as
well as they may respect his orders for the building of the temple, and
settling and establishing the worship of God in it; by observing which
he would live comfortably and honourably, and to a good old age.

[Proverbs 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 4:5</span></span>

Get wisdom, get understanding,.... Not only moral and political wisdom
and understanding, but that which is spiritual and evangelical; Christ,
and the knowledge of him; he being the only happy man that has an
interest in him, and is possessed of him by faith, which is the meaning
of getting him; See Gill on [Pro 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#013.md);
by which it appears, that what Solomon had before delivered, and
afterwards repeats and urges, was the same his father David, that wise,
great, and good man, taught him; and which he mentions, the more to
recommend the getting of wisdom and understanding to others;

forget it not; when gotten, keep it in remembrance; be continually
meditating on Wisdom, or Christ, his glories and excellencies; the
fulness of grace and truth in him; the blessings of goodness which come
by him; the great use and profit of having and enjoying him;

neither decline from the words of my mouth; the above instructions, and
all others he gave unto him.

[Proverbs 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 4:6</span></span>

Forsake her not, and she shall preserve thee,.... That is, Wisdom, or
Christ. Men may be said to forsake Christ when they forsake the assembly
of his church and people, which are his other self; when they forsake
his ministers, his ambassadors, and representatives; when they forsake
his word and ordinances; when they drop the doctrines of the Gospel, or
depart from them; when they quit the profession they have formerly made.
Nominal believers and formal professors may forsake him finally and
totally; true believers only partially and for a time, through the
weakness of the flesh, the temptations of Satan, the snares of the
world, and the prevalence of corruption; and therefore such an
exhortation is necessary, and ought to be regarded. To forsake Christ is
a very great evil; it is against a man's own interest, and is of
dangerous consequence, and therefore to be guarded against; to abide by
him, his truths and ordinances, is very commendable; such shall be
"preserved" by him safe to his kingdom and glory;

love her, and she shall keep thee; Christ is to be loved for the
excellencies and perfections of his nature; for the loveliness of his
person; for the love he has showed to his people; for what he in love
has done and suffered for them, and is now doing; for the fulness of his
grace and salvation, and the suitableness of them to them; for the
communion he indulges them in with himself; for the relations of an
head, husband, father, brother, and friend, he stands in to them: and
also under the character of Wisdom, he being the only wise God and their
Saviour, the Wisdom of God and Wisdom to them; and whose Gospel is the
Wisdom of God in a mystery. He is to be loved, all of him and that
belong unto him, and above all creatures and things, ardently,
sincerely, and constantly; and such lovers of him shall be "kept" by him
from the evil of the world; from the power and dominion of sin, and
condemnation by it; from being destroyed by Satan, and his temptations;
and from a final and total falling away, so as not to perish
everlastingly; they are kept in his own hands, in his Father's love and
his own, in the everlasting covenant; and in a state of grace, of
sanctification, justification, and adoption. Not that loving Christ, and
cleaving to him, are the causes of this preservation; but his love,
grace, and power; yet these are descriptive of the persons kept and
preserved: and the preservation and keeping of them is used as an
argument to love him, and cleave unto him.

[Proverbs 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 4:7</span></span>

Wisdom is the principal thing,.... Or principal, one; the principal of
persons and things; the principal of persons, angels or men: Christ is
superior to angels, having a more excellent name and nature than they;
he is the God, the Creator, and head of them, and is above them in the
human nature; he is superior to men, to the greatest of men, he is King
of kings and Lord of lords, and to the best of men the saints. Are they
kings? he is their King: are they priests? he is the great High Priest:
are any of them prophets, teachers, shepherds? he is the great Prophet
in Israel; a Teacher, that never any taught or spoke like him; the chief
Shepherd and Bishop of souls: is the church a family? he is the Master
of it: is it a body? he is the Head: is it a building? he is the
Foundation and Corner Stone; yea, the chief Master Builder. He is the
beginning and chief of all God's ways, and the chief in them; in
election, in the council of peace, and covenant of grace; in redemption
and salvation, in grace and glory; he is all in all. Or the words may be
rendered, "Wisdom is the beginning" (q); so Christ is called, [Col
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#018.md); a phrase expressive of his
eternity, and of his being the first cause and author of all things,
both in the old and new creation. Or thus, that which is "the beginning
of wisdom get" (r), &c. which is the fear of the Lord; see [Pro
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007.md);

therefore get wisdom; not an interest in Christ, but a knowledge of it;
and make use of all means to obtain a greater knowledge of him, and of
interest in him, which is what the apostle calls "winning" Christ; by
which he means, not getting an interest in him, that he had already, but
gaining a greater degree of knowledge of him, as the context shows, [Phi
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008); or, "buy wisdom" (s.md); that is,
without money and without price; so Christ advises to buy gold and white
raiment of him, his grace and righteousness, [Rev
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#018.md);

and with all thy getting get understanding; another name for Christ; see
[Pro 8:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#014.md); Or, "along with all thy
getting" (t), or "above all"; let not Christ be wanting; he is the one
thing needful, the good and better part and portion, which, if missing,
all other substance signifies little: or part with all for this pearl of
great price, Wisdom, and prefer it to all worldly substance; look upon
all but dross in comparison of Christ and the knowledge of him: all
other gettings or substance are only for the body, this for the soul,
and the eternal welfare of it; they are only for a time, this for
eternity; they are not satisfying, but, having this, a soul has enough,
has all things; Christ being his, all things are his; he possesses all
things, and all other things are not blessings without him.

\(q\) "principium sapientiae", Montanus, Mercerus, Gejerus. (r)
"Principium sapientiae est hoc, comparas sapientiam", Michaelis; "quae
est caput sapientiae eam acquire", &c. Junius & Tremellius. (s) "eme
sapientiam", Pagninus, Cocceius. (t) "in omne possessione tua", V. L.
"in omne acquisitione tua", Montanus; "prae universis quae possides",
Tigurine version, Vatablus.

[Proverbs 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 4:8</span></span>

Exalt her, and she shall promote thee,.... Christ is to be exalted in
his person, by asserting his proper deity; by ascribing all divine
perfections to him; by allowing him to be the author of all divine
works; by giving him divine worship and homage; by owning his divine and
eternal sonship, and distinct personality: he is to be exalted in all
his offices of Prophet, Priest, and King, and as the only Redeemer and
Saviour; by trusting in him, embracing his Gospel, and submitting to his
ordinances, and such that exalt him, he will "promote" them here and
hereafter; of which more in the next clause. According to the Talmudists
(u), the word for "exalt" signifies a diligent search, by turning things
about to find out what is sought; and so the Septuagint interpret the
word in the sense of "searching", [Jer
50:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#026.md);

she shall bring thee to honour, when thou dost embrace her: by faith:
for this is an act of faith, and a very considerable one, and is
expressive of great nearness to Christ, of much intimacy and familiarity
with him, of strong love and affection to him, of a good degree of
boldness used with him, and of joy and exaltation in him; for such an
action is used by persons near akin, and are very familiar with, and
have a very great affection for one another, and use much freedom with
each other, and rejoice at meeting together. Now such who embrace
Christ, in the arms of their faith, as their alone Saviour, such he
promotes and "brings to honour"; not to honour among men, for to embrace
Christ and exalt him is the way to disgrace, though the disgrace is an
honour, and will be before long rolled off; but to honour hereafter.
Such will be set at his right hand, and be owned by him before his
Father and his angels; and they will be placed on the same throne with
him, and will reign with him for ever and ever; see [Sa1
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030.md).

\(u\) T. Bab. Roshhashanah, fol. 26. 2.

[Proverbs 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 4:9</span></span>

She shall give to thine head an ornament of grace,.... This, and the
following clause, explain what that honour is Christ promotes and brings
his followers to here and hereafter: he gives them grace and more grace;
"an increase of grace", so the Vulgate Latin version renders it; and
some think James refers to this passage, [Pro
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#006.md). The grace that Christ gives is
very ornamental to his people: justifying grace greatly beautifies and
adorns them; it not only covers the nakedness of their souls, and all
their spots and imperfections, and through it all their sins are caused
to pass from them; but they are made exceeding beautiful, perfectly
comely through this comeliness, a perfection of beauty by it; and which
is often signified by that which is very ornamental, rich, and costly,
as fine linen, clothing of wrought gold, raiment of needlework, a
Wedding garment, stuck with jewels and precious stones: sanctifying
grace, which also is Christ's gift, is very ornamental; it is called
"the beauty of holiness"; it is that by which a man is made like to God,
and conformed to the image of Christ; it is the curious workmanship of
the Spirit of God; or what makes a man beautiful, and makes him meet for
heaven and happiness: every grace is ornamental; faith, hope, love,
humility, &c. these are like rows of jewels, and chains of gold, about
the neck. And when this ornament is said to be given "to the head", it
is not to be understood of the natural head of a man, but of his whole
person, it gives a comeliness to; and may denote the visibility of it,
as it appears in the life and conversation;

a crown of glory shall she deliver to thee; by which is meant eternal
glory and happiness, called a "crown", an ensign of royal dignity,
which, belongs to such as are made kings and priests unto God; and is
given to conquerors, even who are more than conquerors through Christ,
and as a reward of diligence and faithfulness, [Rev
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010.md). It is sometimes called a crown
of life, a crown of righteousness, an incorruptible and never-fading
one, and, as here, "a crown of glory"; the saints in heaven will have a
glory put upon them, both in soul and body; they will appear with Christ
in glory, and be crowned with glory and honour, as he is; they will be
clothed and surrounded with it: and so some render it,

"she will compass thee about with a crown of glory as with a shield''
(w);

see [Psa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#012.md). This Christ is said to
"deliver"; it is in his hands, laid up in him, and is safe with him; he
has power to dispose of it, and it may be expected from him; see [Ti2
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#008.md).

\(w\) , Sept. "proteget te", V. L. "muniet te", Montanus, Tigerine
version; "cinget te", Gejerus.

[Proverbs 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 4:10</span></span>

Hear, O my son, and receive my sayings,.... Some think David is still
speaking to his son Solomon, or Solomon continues relating what his
father said to him; though I rather think these are Solomon's words to
his son, to everyone of his children that came to him for instruction,
or he took upon him to teach; whom he advises to listen to what he had
further to say, and to embrace, and not reject, his doctrines;

and the years of thy life shall be many; see [Pro
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#001.md); long life here, and length of
days for ever and ever, or eternal life hereafter; which must be a very
forcible argument to engage attention to his sayings.

[Proverbs 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 4:11</span></span>

I have taught thee in the way of wisdom,.... In the way that leads to
it, or is concerning it; in the Gospel, which is the wisdom of God in a
mystery, the manifold wisdom of God, and which directs to Christ and the
knowledge of him, who is true wisdom; this is another reason or argument
why the wise man's instructions should be attended to;

I have led thee in right paths; in paths of righteousness, holiness, and
truth; in such as are agreeable to the will and word of God, and which
lead right on to the city of habitation; and therefore such teachings
and leadings should be followed, and such ways walked in.

[Proverbs 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 4:12</span></span>

When thou goest, thy steps shall not be straitened,.... By enemies, or
attended with difficulties and obstructions, or subject to dangers, but
be at freedom and liberty in walking; for though saints do not walk in
the broad road with sinners, yet they are brought into a large place,
and their steps are enlarged under them, and their hearts are enlarged
to run the way of God's commandments; and a wide field of truth and duty
such have to walk in, who are taught and led in the ways of wisdom and
righteousness, [Psa 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#019.md);

and when thou runnest, thou shall not stumble; such that make haste to
keep the commandments of God, that run with alacrity and cheerfulness in
their Christian race, and in the way of their duty, shall not stumble,
through the deceitfulness of sin, the snares of the world, and the
temptations of Satan, so as to fall and perish.

[Proverbs 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 4:13</span></span>

Take fast hold of instruction,.... Not the law, as Jarchi and Gersom
interpret it; but the instruction of wisdom, the doctrine of Christ or
the Gospel; see [Pro 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#001.md); which is an
instruction into the mind and will of God, concerning the salvation of
men; into the grace of God, showing that salvation, in all its branches,
is of pure grace; into the person and offices of Christ, and into the
business of salvation through him; into the doctrines of peace, pardon,
righteousness, and eternal life by him. This should be "taken fast hold
of"; in order to which, men should take heed unto it, attentively hear
it; they should come with a cordial affection to it, and an eager desire
after it, or they will never lay fast hold on it; for taking fast hold,
as it supposes a careful attention to the Gospel, so a reception of it
in the love of it, and an eagerness to be possessed of it: such may be
said to take fast hold on it, who receive it into their hearts, and not
into their heads only; head knowledge of the Gospel instruction is not
hold fast enough, it must be heart knowledge of it; it is taken fast
hold on when it is mixed with faith when heard; when it is digested and
incorporated as it were into men, and becomes the ingrafted word; when
men are led experimentally and practically into it, and are not hearers
only, but doers of it; and, being thus taken fast hold of,

let her not go; the instruction of wisdom, or the Gospel of Christ; do
not drop it, nor depart from it, nor waver about it; nor be languid in a
profession of it, nor indifferent to it: "be not remiss" (x), as the
word signifies; or let not thine hand be remiss, or let not thine hand
go; having, as it were with both hands, took fast hold of the Gospel,
hold it fast, neither drop it through negligence and carelessness, nor
suffer it to be taken from thee by fraud or force;

keep her, for she is thy life; which may be understood either of the
Gospel, Wisdom's instruction, which should be kept as a rich treasure,
and not parted with at any rate; since it is the means of quickening
dead sinners; of showing sensible ones the way of life by Christ; of
producing faith in them, by which they live upon him; and of maintaining
and supporting the spiritual life in them, and of reviving and
comforting them under the most drooping and afflictive circumstances; a
man would as soon part with his life surely as part with this! Or else,
seeing the feminine gender is here used, which does not agree with the
word translated "instruction", but with "wisdom", mentioned [Pro
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#011.md); so Aben Ezra; therefore Christ
may be here meant, who is to be kept as the pearl of great price, being
more precious than rubies and all desirable things, and especially since
he is the "life" of his people: he is the author and maintainer of their
spiritual life; he is their life itself, it is hid with him; and because
he lives, they live also: all the comforts and supplies of life are from
him, and he is their eternal life; it is given through him and by him,
and ties greatly in the enjoyment of him.

\(x\) "ne remittas", Tigurine version, Mercerus, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 4:14</span></span>

Enter not into the path of the wicked,.... Which leads to eternal death;
join not with them in their wicked ways and practices; have no
fellowship, keep no company, with them; do not set one foot in the path
they tread, lest thou shouldest be tempted to proceed to more
ungodliness; you do not know where and when there will be a stop, when
once you begin, therefore enter not. The Vulgate Latin version is, "do
not delight in the paths of the ungodly": but this supposes not only
entrance, but progress and continuance in them, whereas the first is
dehorted from in these words:

and go not in the way of evil men; if tempted and prevailed upon to take
a step and make a trial, do not proceed; withdraw at once, do not go on.
Some render it, seeing the word used has sometimes the signification of
blessedness in it, "do not esteem the way of evil men blessed" (y); nor
reckon thyself or them happy that walk in such ways; they are far from
it: hence the Targum, Septuagint, and Syriac versions are, "do not envy
the ways of wicked men"; their seeming pleasure will end in bitterness:
the Arabic version is, "do not imitate" them; do not follow their
example, and do as they do.

\(y\) "in via malorum ne te beatum existimes", Tiguriue version; "ne
beatam praedices viam malorum", Michaelis.

[Proverbs 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 4:15</span></span>

Avoid it,.... As dangerous and pernicious, as abominable and detestable;
or, "flee from it", as the Vulgate Latin version: Jarchi and Gersom
interpret it, "make it void"; cause it to cease, destroy it, do all you
can to hinder the wicked from accomplishing their designs;

pass not by it; do not come near it; keep at a distance from it, that
you may not be drawn into it; abstain from all appearance of evil, and
everything that may lead to it;

turn from it, and pass away; the Targum adds, "from them", from wicked
men. This heap of words is used to show the danger of bad company; to
dissuade from the least approach to it; and to express the vehement
desire of the wise man to preserve his son, and all well inclined
persons, from it.

[Proverbs 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 4:16</span></span>

For they sleep not, except they have done mischief,.... Or they cannot
sleep, as Jarchi and Gersom interpret it. Oftentimes they cannot sleep
on their beds for devising mischief, their thoughts are so intensely set
on contriving wicked schemes; and when they have so done, they cannot
sleep until they have executed them; they are continually restless and
uneasy day and night, like the troubled sea, constantly casting up mire
and dirt. Who would keep such company as these?

and their sleep is taken away, unless they cause some to fall; into the
snares and traps they lay for them, or into sin and calamity by it; the
former of which they endeavour by all means to draw men into, and the
latter is the unavoidable consequence of it. They imitate their father
the devil, both delight in sin, and in the ruin of their fellow
creatures; it is a sport to thereto do mischief, and they have no
pleasure without it; see [Pro 11:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro011.htm#023.md).
What company are such!

[Proverbs 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 4:17</span></span>

For they eat the bread of wickedness,.... Either that is gotten by
wicked and unlawful means, or wickedness itself is bread unto them; it
is that to their minds as bread is to their bodies; they feed upon it
with as much eagerness, appetite, gust, and pleasure; it is a sweet
morsel to them; it is meat, drink, sleep, and everything to them; they
take the highest satisfaction and the utmost delight in it;

and drink the wine of violence: either that which is obtained by rapine
and violence; or they as greedily commit such acts of oppression and
injury as a man drinks a glass of wine; they do not drink up iniquity
like water only, but even like wine, the most generous and delicious.
Wherefore all society with such men should be avoided.

[Proverbs 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 4:18</span></span>

But the path of the just is as the shining light,.... The "just" man is
one that is made righteous through the righteousness of Christ imputed
to him; and who is created anew in Christ, in righteousness and true
holiness; and, under the influence of divine grace, lives soberly,
righteously, and godly: the "path" he is directed to walk in, and does,
is Christ himself, the way, the truth, and the life; through whose
blood, righteousness, and sacrifice, he goes to God for grace and mercy,
for peace, pardon, and acceptance, for fresh supplies of grace, and in
order to enjoy communion with him; and who also is the way of salvation,
and to eternal life and happiness: and, besides this grand and principal
path, there are the paths of truth, righteousness, and holiness; the
path of duty and obedience; the way of the commandments of God, and
ordinances of Christ: and this path he walks in, whether of grace or
duty, is "as the shining light"; or of the morning, when the day first
dawns, or at least when the sun rises. Such is the light beamed in at
first conversion, which directs men to walk in the above mentioned
paths; it is a light after a night of darkness, as such is the state of
unregeneracy; which, though at first is but glimmering, yet afterwards
is clear and shining; especially when Christ the sun of righteousness
appears, or is revealed, as the hope of glory. The first grace in
conversion is a "true light that shines", [Jo1
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#008.md), by which a soul sees its own
vileness and filthiness, the insufficiency of its own righteousness; and
the fulness, suitableness, and ability Christ as a Saviour, and has some
discerning of Gospel truths;

that shineth more and more unto the perfect day; or "going and shining"
(z), or "enlightening": it shines clearer and clearer, so does true
grace; it grows and increases more and more, every grace does, faith,
hope, love, patience, humility, &c. the light of the knowledge of Christ
the way, though it is imperfect, yet capable of being increased, and is
increased by means of the ministry of the word and ordinances; which
increase God has promised, saints pursue after, and attain unto. Light
into the Gospel, and the doctrines of it, increases yet more and more;
whereby a soul walks pleasantly, comfortably, and safely, in right path,
"until the perfect day" of glory comes, a day without clouds; when there
will be nothing to interpose between God and them; when there will be no
more clouds of darkness, unbelief, doubts, and fears; when the sun will
always be seen, no more withdrawn, eclipsed, or set; even Christ, the
sun of righteousness, whose glory will always be beheld by the righteous
to all eternity: when there will be no more night of affliction,
desertion, and death; when the light of knowledge will be clear and
perfect, and saints shall see face to face, and know as they are known;
and when not only the light of the righteous shall be so clear,
distinct, and perfect, but they themselves shall shine as the sun in the
kingdom of God. The words may be rendered, "the prepared day" (a);
appointed in the decrees of God, and firmly established by them: the
invisible glories of the heavenly state, which make this everlasting
day, are things which God has prepared for his people; the kingdom and
glory itself, the inheritance of the saints in light, is prepared for
them from the foundation of the world. And, since such is the path of
the just, who would walk in the ways of the wicked? which are the
reverse of this, as the following words show.

\(z\) "vadens et illuminans", Montanus; "ambulans et lucens", Gejerus;
"pergens et lucens", Michaelis; "procedens et lucens", Schultens. (a)
"usque ad paratum diem", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Proverbs 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 4:19</span></span>

The way of the wicked is as darkness,.... They are in the darkness of
sin, ignorance, error, and unbelief; their works are works of darkness;
the way in which they are leads to eternal darkness, ruin, and misery,
and so must be most uncomfortable and dangerous;

they know not at what they stumble; they stumble at the word, which they
are ignorant of, and at Christ, whom they have no knowledge of; and
through the temptations of Satan and snares of the world, which they are
not aware of, nor upon their guard against.

[Proverbs 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 4:20</span></span>

My son, attend to my words,.... Which go before and which follow after,
his doctrines, instructions, cautions, and exhortations;

incline thine ear unto my sayings; stoop and bow the ear; listen
attentively to what is said, as being of the greatest moment and
importance.

[Proverbs 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 4:21</span></span>

Let them not depart from thine eyes,.... Commit them to writing,
frequently read them over; let them be always in sight, as a rule and
directory to steer the course of life by. Some understand this of the
wicked, as if the sense was, let not them, the wicked, cause them to
depart from thine eyes; nor thee to neglect them, by their bad advice,
solicitations to sin, and ill examples; See Gill on [Pro
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#021.md);

keep them in the midst of thine heart; lay them up there, and ponder
them; often meditate upon them, and do not forget them; show the most
affectionate regard unto them, and look upon them as a most inestimable
treasure, for which no place is so fit a repository as the heart.

[Proverbs 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 4:22</span></span>

For they are life unto those that find them,.... The words or doctrines
of Christ, whose type Solomon was, are to be found in the field of the
Scriptures, by diligent searching for them; and being found, they are
the means of spiritual life, and of maintaining it, and of showing the
way, and bringing unto eternal life; see [Joh
6:63](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#063.md);

and health to all their flesh; the whole man, soul and body, as they are
the means of preserving the body from many diseases, which intemperance,
lust, and luxury, lead unto, and are curbed by these; so of healing the
various diseases of the soul; and, however, of directing to a panacea
for them, to the blood of Christ, which is the true balm of Gilead, and
he the physician of souls. Moreover, the doctrines of the Gospel are the
wholesome words of our Lord Jesus; they are sound, salutary, and
healthful, and serve to keep the soul in good plight, and the body too.
The Septuagint render it, "to all flesh": that is, to all men; but this
is not true in fact; for to some the Gospel of Christ, through contempt
and rejection of it, is the savour of death unto death.

[Proverbs 4:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 4:23</span></span>

Keep thy heart with all diligence,.... The mind from vanity, the
understanding from error, the will from perverseness, the conscience
clear of guilt, the affections from being inordinate and set on evil
objects, the thoughts from being employed on bad subjects; and the whole
from falling into the hands of the enemy, or being the possession of
Satan: great diligence had need be used in keeping it, since it is
naturally so deceitful and treacherous; a strict eye is to be kept upon
it; all the avenues to it to be watched, that nothing hurtful enters, or
evil comes out; it is to be kept by all manner of means that can be
thought of, by prayer, hearing, reading, meditation; and, above all, by
applying to Christ for his grace and Spirit to sanctify, preserve, and
keep it. Or, "above all keeping, keep thine heart" (b); though other
things are to be kept, and care taken of them, as kingdoms and cities,
and towns and families, and treasures and riches; yet the heart above
all:

for out of it are the issues of life; of natural life: it is the seat of
it, from whence all actions of life are derived; it is, as philosophers
say, the first that lives, and the last that dies; and it is the seat of
spiritual life the principle of it is formed in it; from whence all
spiritual and vital actions flow, and which lead unto and issue in
eternal life: as is a man's heart, such is his state now, and will be
hereafter; if the heart is quickened and sanctified by the grace of God,
the man will live a life of faith and holiness here, and enjoy
everlasting life hereafter: and if the heart is right, so will the
actions of men be; they are regulated and denominated by it; they will
then spring from right principles, and be directed to right ends, and
performed with right views; great care therefore should be taken of the
heart, since so much depends upon it, and it is so well known to God the
searcher of it.

\(b\) "prae omni custodia", Vatablus, Baynus, Mercerus, Gejerus,
Michaelis, Schultens; so Aben Ezra and Ben Melech.

[Proverbs 4:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 4:24</span></span>

Put away from thee a froward mouth,.... A mouth speaking froward and
perverse things; things contrary to right reason, to the law of God, and
Gospel of Christ; blasphemies against God or men; every thing that is
untrue, unchaste, unjust, foolish, and filthy; all swearing, lying, and
everything that is repugnant to truth and justice. Some understand it of
men that are liars, blasphemers, and froward persons, who are to be
shunned and avoided, and to be debarred the houses and society of good
men;

and perverse lips put far from thee; do not make use of them thyself,
nor keep company with men of such a character. Much the same thing is
meant as before.

[Proverbs 4:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 4:25</span></span>

Let thine eyes look right on,.... To the path of truth and holiness,
without turning or looking to the right hand or left, as it is
afterwards expressed; to the word of truth, as the rule to walk by; to
Christ, the author and finisher of faith, from whom all grace, and the
supplies of it, are to be had; and to the mark, for the prize of the
high calling of God;

and thine eyelids look straight before thee; to the precepts of the
word, to observe them; to the promises of it for encouragement; to the
examples of the saints gone before, as motives to excite diligence, and
to exercise patience, faith, and hope; to the mercy of our Lord Jesus
Christ for eternal life, and to the blessed hope laid up in heaven.

[Proverbs 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 4:26</span></span>

Ponder the path of thy feet,.... Consider well what path it is, whether
right or wrong; or weigh it in the balances of thought, as Aben Ezra; or
rather in the balances of the word, and see whether it agrees with that
or not. The Septuagint version is, "make straight paths for thy feet";
to which the author of the epistle to the Hebrews seems to have respect,
[Heb 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#013.md);

and let all thy walls be established; so as to walk on steadily,
constantly, uniformly, and not be easily moved out of the ways of
religion and truth. Or, "let all thy ways be prepared", or "directed",
or "disposed" (c); according to the rule of the divine word. Some render
it as a promise, "and all thy ways shall be established" (d); when care
is taken to look well into them; see [Ch2
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#020.md).

\(c\) "dirigantur", Tigurine version, Mercerus; "recte apparentur aut
disponantur", Vatablus. (d) "Stabilientur", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus;
"constabilientur", Schultens.

[Proverbs 4:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 4:27</span></span>

Turn not to the right hand nor to the left,.... Either into the road of
immorality and profaneness, or into that of error, superstition, and
false worship; but attend to the way of holiness and truth, directed to
in the word of God; see [Isa 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#021.md);
nor be moved out of it by threatenings and menaces, nor by flatteries
and promises; neither be cast down with adversity, nor be lifted up with
prosperity; but keep on in an even way, attending to that which is just
and right; leaving all events with God, as knowing you are in the way of
your duty, and in which he would have you walk;

remove, by foot from evil; from walking in evil ways and along with evil
men, and from doing evil things; abstain from all appearance of evil,
keep at a distance from it; the evil of sin brings on the evil of
punishment. There are two verses added in the Septuagint, Arabic, and
Vulgate Latin versions, which are not in the Hebrew text;

"for the ways which are on the right hand God knoweth; but those that
are on the left are perverse. He will make thy paths right, and promote
thy goings in peace.''

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 5](pro005.md)

</div>
