<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro006)  [Next](pro008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PROVERBS 7

The sum of this chapter is to exhort men to attend to the doctrines and
precepts of Wisdom, in order to avoid the adulterous woman; the
exhortation to keep them with care, affection, and delight, in order to
answer the end, is in [Pro 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#001.md). A
story is told, of Solomon's own knowledge, of a young man ensnared and
ruined by a lewd woman; it begins [Pro
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#006.md). The young man is described as
foolish, and as throwing himself in the way of temptation, [Pro
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#007.md); the harlot that met him is
described by her attire, her subtlety, her voice, her inconstancy, her
impudence, and pretensions to piety, [Pro
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#010.md). The arguments she made use of to
prevail upon him to go with her are taken partly from the elegance of
her bed, the softness of it, and its sweet perfume, and satiety of love
to be enjoyed in it, [Pro 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#015.md); and
partly from the absence of her husband, who was gone a long journey, and
had made provision for it for a certain time, [Pro
7:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#019.md). By which arguments she prevailed
upon him to his utter ruin: which is illustrated by the similes of an ox
going to the slaughter, a fool to the stocks, and a bird to the snare,
[Pro 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#021.md). And the chapter is
concluded with an exhortation to hearken to the words of Wisdom, and to
avoid the ways and paths of the harlot, by which many and mighty persons
have been ruined; they being the direct road to hell and death, [Pro
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#024.md).

[Proverbs 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 7:1</span></span>

My son, keep my words,.... Doctrines and instructions; which, as a
father to a son, or a master to his scholars, he had delivered; these he
would have him observe and attend to;

and lay up my commandments with thee: as a treasure in his heart, to be
brought out upon occasion; to be kept as valuable, and made use of as an
antidote against and a preservative from sinning; see [Psa
119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011.md). The Septuagint and Arabic
versions add, what is not in the Hebrew text,

"son, honour the Lord, and thou shalt be strong;''

the Arabic adds,

"and he shall strengthen thee; and fear none besides him.''

[Proverbs 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 7:2</span></span>

Keep my commandments and live,.... Not the commandments of the law only,
but the commandments of Christ; and even the doctrines of Christ are so
called, as faith in him, and love to the saints, [Jo1
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#023.md); which is the way to live
comfortably, peaceably, pleasantly, and honourably;

and my law as the apple of thine eye; the doctrine of Christ, the law of
the Lord, that goes out of Zion; which should be as dear to men as the
apple of their eye, and as carefully preserved, that the least injury is
not done to it; it should be kept inviolate.

[Proverbs 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 7:3</span></span>

Bind them upon thy fingers,.... Let the above words and doctrines be as
ready and familiar as if they were at the fingers' ends; or let them be
always fresh in memory, as a piece of thread is tied about the fingers,
to put in mind of anything to be done; or let them be as rings upon the
fingers, both memorial and ornamental: or put into practice the things
taught and commanded; the fingers being the instruments of action, and
especially of doing things nicely and accurately;

write them upon the table of thine heart; that they may be strong in the
memory, deep in the affection, and abiding in the understanding and
will; see [Pro 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#003.md).

[Proverbs 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 7:4</span></span>

Say unto wisdom, Thou art my sister,.... Intimately acquainted, greatly
beloved, and highly delighted in: this may be understood both of the
Gospel, the wisdom of God in a mystery, which men should be conversant
with, be strongly affected to, and take delight and pleasure in; and of
Christ, the essential Wisdom of God, and who stands in the relation of a
brother to his people, and should be respected as such;

and call understanding thy kinswoman; or "kinsman" (a); such Christ is
in our nature, our "goel", our near kinsman, partaker of the same flesh
and blood, and therefore is not ashamed to call us brethren, nor should
we be ashamed to call him kinsman: moreover, his Word and Gospel, and
the understanding of it, should be familiar to us; it should be well
"known" (b) by us, as the word used signifies, and dwell richly in us.

\(a\) "cognatum", Piscator. (b) "Notam", Montanus, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 7:5</span></span>

That they may keep thee from the strange woman,.... Nothing has a
greater tendency than Christ and his Gospel, and an intimate
acquaintance with them, and a retention of them, to keep from all sin,
from all fleshly lusts, from the sin of uncleanness; and also from all
the errors, heresies, idolatry, superstition, and will worship, of the
whore of Rome; a stranger to God and true godliness, to Christ and his
truths, the Spirit and his operations;

from the stranger which flattereth with her words; See Gill on [Pro
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#016.md); see Gill on [Pro
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003.md), and see Gill on [Pro
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#024.md).

[Proverbs 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 7:6</span></span>

For at the window of my house,.... This is either an historical account
of a matter of fact known to Solomon, or a parable made by him, setting
forth the cunning artifices of an harlot, the folly and weakness of a
young man ensnared, and the ruin he is brought into by her. As Solomon
was a public magistrate, he is here represented as a private observer of
the behaviour of his subjects, as sitting in his palace at a window, at
the small windows of it, as the Targum, where he could see and not be
seen himself; near to which was an harlot's house; for they generally
get about the courts of princes, where they make their prey;

I looked through my casement; or "lattice" (c); the Septuagint, Syriac,
and Arabic versions: understand this of the harlot looking out of the
window of her house and through the casement, when she spied a young
man, as follows; but this agrees not with the Hebrew text, which carries
it to Solomon; though a greater than he may be designed, the omniscient
God, who looks through the windows and lattice of heaven, and beholds
all the actions of the children of men; those that are most private, and
done in the dark; and Christ the Son of God, whose "eyes are like unto
aflame of fire", to look through all the darkness of Popery, represented
by the Thyatirian church state; into all the intrigues of the Romish
harlot, and behold all the follies of those that commit fornication with
her, [Rev 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018.md).

\(c\) "per cancellum meum", Montanus; "per cancellos", Tigurine version,
Michaelis.

[Proverbs 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 7:7</span></span>

And beheld among the simple ones,.... Such as are easily persuaded and
drawn into sin; simple and foolish in things moral and spiritual, and
not arrived to any ripeness of understanding in things natural and
civil; have seen but little of the world, and know less of religion, and
are easily imposed upon and carried away with the company they keep;
such simple foolish creatures are the followers of antichrist; see [Ti2
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2003.htm#006.md);

I discerned among the youths; or "children" (d); at least in
understanding, the children Jezebel, [Rev
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023.md);

a young man void of understanding; or "wanting a heart" (e); to know and
fear the Lord, and not in the way to learn and improve; but in company
like himself, and so in a fair way to continue foolish and simple, and
destitute of the true understanding of things, and exposed to the snares
delusions of such that lie in wait to deceive.

\(d\) "inter filios", Pagninus, &c. (e) "carentem corde", Montanus,
Mercerus, Gejerus; "destitutum corde", Schultens.

[Proverbs 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 7:8</span></span>

Passing through the street near her corner,.... The house of the harlot
that stood in a corner to take in persons that came both ways; to come
near which is dangerous; this was putting himself in the way of
temptation; or the corner of the street where she stood to pick up young
men; it could be with no good design to walk the streets in the night,
and to go where harlots haunt, and where they dwell or stand; or,
however, it was exposing himself to danger, and, had he took the wise
man's advice, would not have done it, [Pro
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#008.md); we should abstain from all
appearance of evil, and from everything that leads to sin; and as to
immorality and uncleanness, so to false doctrine and false worship; the
synagogues of Satan and Popish chapels should be avoided;

and he went the way to her house; that led directly to her house, which
shows a bad intention; and if his design was not to commit fornication,
yet to gratify his lusts by looks, dalliances, and impure discourse with
her; and hither he went in a set, stately manner, as the word (f)
signifies; with an air pleasing to the harlot, as a beau and fop of the
town; and by which air and gait he was known by her to be a proper
person to attack.

\(f\) "intelligitur incessus, compositus et pomposus", Piscator; "magnis
et patheticis possibus", Michaelis; "est aliquid grande et audax in
verbo", Schultens.

[Proverbs 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 7:9</span></span>

In the twilight, in the evening, in the black and dark night. Which is
the usual time adulterers take to commit their works of darkness in, by
which they think to conceal them; they being such as they themselves do
not care should be seen and known, [Job
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/job024.htm#015.md); their works will not bear the
sun and daylight, therefore they take the twilight and when the sun is
set; and choose the night, and not light nights neither, but the
blackest and darkest nights, as fittest for their purpose; most likely
to meet with harlots, and less liable to be seen by their neighbours;
but always to be seen by the omniscient God, with whom the darkness and
the light are both alike. Perhaps these several words may express the
time from the young man's first setting out to his drawing nigh to the
harlot's house, and his being attacked and ensnared by her; when he
first set out from his own or his father's house, it was "twilight", the
sun was declining; by that time he had got good part of his way the sun
set, and then it was "evening"; and when he came near the harlot's house
it was "black and dark night": and this may represent the gradual and
progressive growth of Popery; there was first a "twilight", a decline of
the purity of Gospel light and knowledge, and then the sun of the Gospel
set, which brought on an "evening", and issued in the gross "darkness"
of Popery, represented by the Thyatirian church state, as before
observed; since that, the "morning star" of the Reformation has
appeared, but this is become obscure, we are in a twilight again; it is
neither day nor night with us as yet, but a dark black night is
hastening on; and it is easy to observe how many, like this foolish
young man, are marching on in a stately manner to the harlot's house, or
are verging to Popery, whether they design it or not.

[Proverbs 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 7:10</span></span>

And, behold, there met him a woman,.... A married woman, and an
adulteress, as the following account of her shows; as soon as ever she
discerned the young man before described, who she knew, by his air,
walk, and dress, was a fit person for her turn, she at once set out from
her house, or the corner where she stood, and met him; she did not wait
till he came up and made his suit to her, but she went out, and first
attacked him; wherefore the word "behold" is prefixed as a note of
admiration at the impudence of the woman, and as a note of attention to
observe the consequence of this affair. This woman represents the woman
on a scarlet-coloured beast, the mother of harlots, who, though she
pretends to be the spouse of Christ, is an arrant whore, [Rev
17:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#003.md);

with the attire of a harlot; not with her face veiled, as Tamar was,
[Gen 38:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#014.md); for though that might be
the sign of a harlot in the daytime, yet not in the night, as this was;
rather with showy gaudy garments, such as the Athenian whores wore, or
short ones, as the Romans; the word signifies one fitted to her body,
neat and well shaped, to recommend her: so the woman, the whore of Rome,
is said to be arrayed in purple and scarlet colour, and decked with
gold, and precious stones, and pearls; signifying the outward pomp and
splendour of the Romish religion, designed to captivate weak and unwary
minds; see Gill on [Rev 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#004.md);

and subtle of heart; mistress of all artful and intriguing methods to
seduce and ensnare (g); or, "reserved of heart" (h), cautious and wary
what she said, told everything that was encouraging, but kept back what
was discouraging; or she kept her own heart to herself, while she stole
the hearts of others; so the Targum renders it,

"which takes away the hearts of young men;''

and to the same purpose are the versions of the Septuagint, Syriac, and
Arabic: the subtlety of the popes, priests, jesuits, and other
emissaries of Rome, to deceive the hearts of the simple, is well known;
the coming of antichrist was after the working of Satan, with all
deceivableness of unrighteousness, [Th2
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#009.md).

\(g\) "Fallendique vias mille ministret amor", Tibullus ad Junonem, 6.
v. 12. (h) "cauta corde", Tigurine version, Mercerus: Gejerus; "retento
corde", Cocceius.

[Proverbs 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 7:11</span></span>

She is loud and stubborn,.... "Loud"; not that her voice may be heard,
and so be found by those that seek her in the dark, as Aben Ezra
interprets it; but rather clamorous, noisy, and talkative, when she has
got her gallant with her; pouring out foolish and unchaste words to
allure and entice him; unless it is to be understood of her bawling and
scolding, when within doors, at her husband, in order to get him out,
and be rid of him; to whom she is "stubborn" or "rebellious", as the
Targum, breaking covenant with him, and disobeying his commands; and
departing from him, declining out of the way, as Jarchi; speaking
rebellion, as Aben Ezra: all which agree with the whore of Rome, who is
rebellious against Christ, whose spouse she professes to be; is
perfidious to him, disobedient to his commandments; is gone out of the
way of his truths and ordinances, and publishes and encourages
everything that is contrary thereunto; as well as has a mouth speaking
blasphemies, [Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005.md);

her feet abide not in her house; to attend the business of it; but site
is gadding abroad to seek her lovers, and bring them in; it is the
character of good women that they are keepers at home, but it is the
sign of a harlot to gad abroad, which is enlarged upon in [Pro
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#011.md).

[Proverbs 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 7:12</span></span>

Now is she without,.... The word for whore is sometimes rendered in the
Targum (i) one that goes abroad, or without her house; sitting or
standing at the door of it, in an idle posture, and in order to invite
her lovers in; and if she can get none this way, or quickly, grows
impatient: she is

now in the streets; takes her walks abroad in the streets of the city,
to see who she can light of, to pick up and bring home;

and lieth in wait at every corner; of the street, where more ways meet,
sometimes at one corner, and sometimes at another, that she may take all
that comes; sometimes she is "without" in the fields, and in the
country, to see what she can meet with there; and sometimes in the
"streets" of the city, and in the populous places of it, in the markets,
and courts, and in every private corner, trying all ways to gain lovers,
and satisfy her lust (k): all which may represent the diligence and
industry, art and cunning, of the Romish emissaries to gain proselytes
to their idolatrous worship, who everywhere lie in wait to deceive.

\(i\) Targ. Onk. in Gen. xxxiv. 31. (k) "Mille modi veneris", Ovid de
Arte Amandi, l. 3. prope finem.

[Proverbs 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 7:13</span></span>

So she caught him, and kissed him,.... The young man that went near her
corner where she was plying, or in the way to her house, where she was
sitting, or standing, waiting and watching for such an opportunity, for
such a person, as a prey to fasten on; and no sooner she saw him, and
come up to him, but, without any ceremony or address, she laid hold upon
him, as the word (l) signifies, threw her arms about his neck, and
embraced him in them; and, what is unusual for women to do, kissed him,
in order to stir up wanton affections and impure desires in him;

and with an impudent face; or, "and she strengthened her face" (m);
rubbed her forehead, put on a brasen face, a whore's front; see [Jer
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#003.md). And

said unto him; accosted him in the following manner, without shame or
blushing.

\(l\) "apprehendit eum", Pagninus, Mercerus, Gejerus, Michaelis,
Schultens. (m) "et roboravit facies suas", Montanus; "vultumque suum
obfirmavit", Schultens, so Michaelis; "obfirmabat", Cocceius.

[Proverbs 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 7:14</span></span>

I have peace offerings with me,.... Meaning at her house. These peace
offerings were of the eucharistic kind; they were offered by way of
thanksgiving for favours received; the greatest part of which, all
excepting the fat on the kidneys, the rump of the sheep, the breast and
right shoulder, which were the priest's, were returned to the offerers
to feast upon with their friends, and were to be eaten the same day,
[Lev 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#011.md). This she said to show that
she was no common strumpet, or that prostituted herself for gain; that
she was a sufficient housewife, had a considerable affluence of life,
her substance greatly increased, for which she had made her thank
offering that day; that she wanted nothing of him but his company, and
the enjoyment of him; and that she had good cheer to regale him with.
She was properly "a holy" religious harlot, as the word sometimes
signifies; and such is the church of Rome, which makes great pretensions
to devotion and religion, yet is the mother of harlots, and abominations
of the earth, [Rev 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#005.md);

this day have I paid my vows; not on account of the young man, and for
his health, and for meeting with him; for those vows were not now made
to be paid, but were made and paid already: but her vows of peace
offerings and thanksgivings, which, as she had promised, she had
performed. Under this point may be reckoned the vows of virginity and
celibacy, through a show of which the most shocking iniquities are
committed by the members of the church of Rome.

[Proverbs 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 7:15</span></span>

Therefore came I forth to meet thee,.... Having so much good cheer at
home, and none to eat of it with her; and having so fond and
affectionate a regard to this young man, as she pretended; he being the
only person in her thoughts, whom she hoped to meet with, and whose
company she desired, and his only; though, had she met any other, she
would have said the same things to them. Aben Ezra, upon [Pro
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#014.md), says, she told him lies;
probably that might be true; but this was no doubt a lie; and it is no
unusual thing for the whore of Rome to speak lies in hypocrisy, [Ti1
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002.md);

diligently to seek thy face; which of all faces she desired to see,
being most lovely to her; with the comeliness of which she was
exceedingly taken and ravished, and got up betimes in the morning, as
the word (n) signifies, even before day, to seek for him;

and I have found thee; which she speaks with a rapture and ecstasy of
joy; blessing herself on this happy occasion, that she should come out
so opportunely, and find him so quickly; intimating, that it was a kind
providence, and that the thing was of God: so conversions to the
antichristian church, which are the artifice of hell, are ascribed to
the divine Being.

\(n\) "ad quaerendum mane", Montanus.

[Proverbs 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 7:16</span></span>

I have decked my bed with coverings of tapestry,.... Made use of by the
ancients (o) for bed clothes: beautiful ornaments, as Gersom; and
precious garments, as Jarchi. She had adorned her bed with curtains and
clothes, very delightful to the eye, and inviting; and had well corded
it, as some interpret it, with cords of fine linen, and all to allure
her lovers; she soon discovered her lustful inclinations, what her heart
was upon, and says this, and more, to fire the young man's lust, and
cause him to follow her: so the church of Rome adorns her places of
worship in the most pompous manner; which are the beds in which she
commits adultery, [Rev 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#022.md); and also
her images to strike the minds of people, and draw them into her
idolatrous worship;

with carved works; perhaps the bed's head, tester, and posts, were all
carved, and cut out of cedar wood and others, as Gersom observes; though
some think: this refers to the variety of work in tapestry, which look
like incisions and carvings, or the network, and agnet holes made
therein: this may be very well applied to the carved work, and carved
images, set up in the Romish churches;

with fine linen of Egypt; the sheets, pillows, and bolsters, made
thereof, and so soft to lie upon; which was reckoned the best and
finest, though not the strongest. Pliny says (p), of the linen of Egypt,
that it had less strength and firmness in it (it being so fine); but
bore the best price, and was the most gainful and profitable. The word
used is not what is elsewhere met with, even when the linen of Egypt is
mentioned, and indeed is nowhere else used: the Targum renders it, an
Egyptian covering; and so most of the Oriental versions interpret it of
bed coverings of tapestry painted, brought out of Egypt. The word is
used in the Chaldee language for cords; and may here signify threads of
linen twisted together, or linen cords, with which the harlot's bed was
corded, and looked beautiful. Pliny (q) says, there were four sorts of
linen in Egypt; Tanitic, Pelusiac, Butic, and Tenterytic; so called from
the names and provinces where they were cultivated; and perhaps the Etun
of Egypt may be the Tanitic: the fine linen, called "byssus", was
brought out of India into Egypt; and is said to grow upon a tree as high
as the poplar, and its leaves like a willow (r). Egypt is very properly
made mention of in this account; it being one of the names of the city
of Rome, of the great city, which is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt,
and equal to both for lust and luxury, [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008.md).

\(o\) Vid. Homer. Odyss. 4. c. 299. & Odyss. 7. prope finem. (p) Nat.
Hist. l. 19. c. 1. (q) Ibid. (r) Philostrat. Vit. Apollen. l. 2. c. 9.

[Proverbs 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 7:17</span></span>

I have perfumed my bed,.... As she had made it entertaining to the
senses of seeing and feeling, it being showy and gaudy, soft and easy;
so to the sense of smelling; and all to provoke lust, and draw into her
embraces; by censing it with incense, as Donesh in Jarchi; or by
sprinkling (s) a liquor, made of the following spices, on the head,
posts, and sides of the bed, to remove all ill scents, and make it more
acceptable; so the Targum, Vulgate Latin, Septuagint, and all the
Oriental versions, render it, "I sprinkled my bed": or, it may be, by
suffumigation, which women are said to use with their garments and bed
clothes (t). Even this the harlot did,

with myrrh, aloes, and cinnamon; all odorous, and of a sweet smell:
Horace (u) speaks of the anointed beds of such persons; and of the above
spices ointments were made, with which the harlot's bed might be
perfumed. Cinnamon, and odours, and ointments, and frankincense, are
reckoned among the wares of Babylon, or the church of Rome, [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013.md).

\(s\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 13. c. 1. (t) Clemens Alex. Paedagog. l. 2. c.
8. p. 177. (u) "Uctis cubilibus pellicum", Epod. Ode. 5. v. 69, 70.

[Proverbs 7:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 7:18</span></span>

Come, let us take our fill of love until the morning,.... Taking him by
the hand, and pulling him along, she says, "come"; let us not stand here
in the streets, but let us go within, and after supper to bed; and there
enjoy ourselves, till "inebriated" with love, as the word (w) signifies:
so the poet (x) speaks of "ebrios ocellos", "eyes drunk", that is, with
love; and so continue till the morning light, the night being the
fittest season for those works of darkness: this expresses the
insatiableness of her lust;

let us solace ourselves with loves; mutual love, not lawful, but
criminal; more properly lusts; denoting the abundance of it, and the
pleasure promised in it, which is very short lived, and bitterness in
the end.

\(w\) "inebriemur", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Piscator, Gejerus,
Michaelis, Schultens. (x) Catullus de Acme, Ep. 43. c. 11.

[Proverbs 7:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 7:19</span></span>

For the good man is not at home,.... Or, "for the man is not in his
house" (y). She does not say, "my man", or "my husband"; though the
Septuagint. Syriac, and Arabic versions so render it; lest this should
throw some difficulty in the young man's way, or remind herself of her
conjugal obligation; but "the man", by way of contempt, as disowning him
for her husband, or, however, having no regard for him in comparison of
others: and this she says to encourage the young man to go with her;
since her husband was gone, and show as alone, and mistress of the
house;

he is gone a long journey; or, "a way afar off" (z); into a distant
country, and therefore need not fears return of him that night; she was
prepared to answer all objections. The good man of the house may be
understood of Christ, who is gone into a far country, to heaven, to take
a kingdom to himself, and return, [Luk
19:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk019.htm#012.md); and in the mean while the
church of Rome, who professes herself the true church and spouse of
Christ, is committing fornication with the kings of the earth; and has
set up another in his room and stead, whom she calls Christ's vicar on
earth; and flatters herself and her lovers with impunity, from his
distance from her, and his vicar having a right to do as he pleases.

\(y\) "quia non est vir in domo suo", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, &c.
(z) "in via longinqua", Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Mercerus, Cocceius, Gejerus, Schultens; "in via a longinquo", Montanus.

[Proverbs 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 7:20</span></span>

He hath taken a bag of money with him,.... Or, "in his hand" (a); either
for merchandise, as Gersom; or for defraying: the charges of his
journey; and both suppose length of time: if for merchandise, it
required time to purchase goods, and see them packed up and sent away;
or if for his journey, since it was not a few pieces of money he put in
his pocket to defray expenses, but a bag of it he carried in his hand,
it shows that he should be out a considerable time;

and will come home at the day appointed; and not before: Aben Ezra
interprets it, at the beginning of the month, at the new moon, when the
moon is covered (b), which Horace (c) calls "tricessima sabbata": but
rather it is to be understood of the full moon, as Aquila and the
Vulgate Latin version render it; when it is light all night, and so a
proper time for travelling home again. Gersom takes it to mean the
beginning of the year, when the holy blessed God, parabolically
speaking, sits upon a throne to judge the world in righteousness: the
Targum calls it the day of the congregation; some fixed festival day,
when the congregation meets together; and at such a festival, or
appointed time, this good man had fixed for his return, and when, and
not before, he would. This she says to remove all fears from the young
man of being surprised and caught by her husband. There is an appointed
time for Christ's second coming, when he will certainly come, and not
before; and which is supposed to be at a great distance of time: and
therefore wicked men and seducers, and such as the apostate church of
Rome make use of to encourage themselves in their wickedness, in hopes
of impunity, put the evil day far away from them; but in the appointed
time Christ will come, and call his servants to an account, good and
bad.

\(a\) "in manu sua", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Gejerus, Michaelis.
(b) "in die plenae lunae", V. L. Michaelis; "novilunii", so some in
Vatablus, Piscator; "ad diem interlunii", Cocceius, Schultens. (c)
Satirar. l. 1. Sat. 9. v. 69.

[Proverbs 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 7:21</span></span>

With her much fair speech she caused him to yield,.... Or, "to decline"
from the right way: or, "inclined him" (d); his ear to listen to her,
and his heart to go after her and along with her. This she did, by using
a great many words, by her prolixity, and by some taking and striking
expressions; lewd women are generally very talkative (e). It may be
rendered, "by her much doctrine" (f), as the word is in [Pro
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#002.md); so Jezebel calls herself a
prophetess, and sets up for a teacher of men; and, by her false
doctrine, deceives some that are called the servants of Christ to commit
fornication, and eat things sacrificed to idols, [Rev
2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020.md);

with the flattering of her lips she forced him; to go along with her,
not against his will, but with it: though at first there was some
reluctance, conscience rose up and opposed; but her words, which were
smoother than oil, found a way into his heart, and prevailed upon him to
yield to her entreaties; he could no longer withstand her attacks, but
surrendered to her; her charming voice, and flattering lips, had more
effect upon him than her kisses; notwithstanding these he was reluctant,
but could stand it out no longer against her alluring words and soothing
language. With this compare the deceivableness of unrighteousness in
them that perish through antichrist, [Th2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010.md).

\(d\) "declinare facit eum", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Gejerus;
"flexit", Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Mercerus,
Michaelin; "inclinavit illum", Cocceius. (e) "Verbosa gaudet Venus
Ioquela", Catullus ad Camer. Ep. 53. v. 20. (f) "multitudine discipline
suae", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "doctrinae suae", Michaelis.

[Proverbs 7:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 7:22</span></span>

He goeth after her straightway,.... Or "suddenly" (g); and
inconsiderately, giving himself no time to think of what would be the
sad consequences of it;

as an ox goeth to the slaughter; as senseless and stupid as that; and as
ignorant of the issue as that is, led by the butcher, as if it was going
to a pasture, when it is going to the slaughter house. So such persons
as are ensnared by harlots; they follow them in a view of pleasure, but
it ends in ruin; if not in the loss of bodily life, by the revengeful
husband or civil magistrate; yet in the destruction of their immortal
souls;

or as a fool to the correction of the stocks; a drunken besotted fool,
who, while he is leading to the stocks, is insensible whither he is
going; but when he has been there awhile, and is come out of his drunken
fit, then he is sensible of his punishment and his shame. Or, "as the
stocks are for the correction of a fool" (h): or, as a man goes to "the
stocks, to the correction of a fool" (i); so the young man went after
the harlot: or, as "one fettered" (k), goes thither, bound hand and
foot; he cannot help himself, nor avoid the shame. It denotes both the
power of sin, there is no withstanding its allurements and
blandishments, when once given way to, and the shame that attends or
follows it. The Targum is,

"as a dog to a chain;''

and so the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions.

\(g\) "subito", Baynus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Gejerus,
Michaelis. (h) "sicut compes ad castigationem stulti", Pagninus,
Montanus, Baynus. (i) "Abiens post cam, quasi veniens ad compedes ad
castigationem stultorum", Gejerus. (k) "Velut compeditus", Junius &
Tremellius; "velut in compede ibat", Michaelis; "tanquam constricto ad
pedes capite", Schultens.

[Proverbs 7:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 7:23</span></span>

Till a dart strike through his liver,.... The fountain of blood, and so
of life; which, being pierced through and poured out, is certain death,
[Lam 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#011.md); the meaning is, till he is
slain either by the hand of God, or by the civil magistrate, or by the
jealous husband; and be thrust through by him, as Zimri and Cozbi were
by Phinehas. The "liver" may be particularly mentioned, not only for the
reason before given, but because it is the seat of lust (l); so he is
stricken in the part where his lust begins, where he has been smitten by
Cupid's darts: or this dart through the liver may denote some disease,
infecting the blood through sinful lust. The Targum is,

"as an hart into whose liver an arrow flies;''

or is wounded by an arrow in the liver, as the Septuagint, Syriac, and
Arabic versions: and so the meaning is, that this young man went as
swiftly after the harlot as a hart does when it is wounded;

as a bird hasteth to the snare; it has its eye upon the bait, and flies
swiftly to that, insensible of the snare that is laid for it;

and knoweth not that it is for his life; the bird knows not that the
snare is set for its life, as Jarchi; or the fool knows not that it is
for his soul; that it shall die, which hates correction, as Aben Ezra.
The man that goes after the harlot knows not, or does not consider, that
it is to the destruction of his precious and immortal soul; so the
Targum,

"he knows not that it tends to the death of his soul;''

and to the same sense the Syriac and Arabic versions; the second death,
which adulterers and idolaters shall have their part in, [Rev
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008.md). The souls of men, and the ruin
of them, are what the whore of Rome deals in, [Rev
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#013.md); she goes into perdition, into
the bottomless pit, herself, and carries all her worshippers with her,
[Rev 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008.md).

\(l\) "Spleu ridere facit, cogit amare jecur", Ovid. "Si torrere jecur
quaeris idoneum", Horat. Carmin. l. 4. Ode 1. v. 12. "Cum tibi flagrans
amor et libido saeviet circa jecur ulcerosum". lbid l. 1. Ode 25. v. 13,
15.

[Proverbs 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 7:24</span></span>

Hearken unto me now therefore, O ye children,.... The Septuagint,
Vulgate Latin, and Arabic versions, read, in the singular number, "my
son", in the same manner as the chapter begins; but it is in the plural
number in the Hebrew text; and so read the Targum and Syriac version,
"children", the children of Solomon; not only those of his own body, but
all such that put themselves under his instruction, or were willing to
take his advice: it may be extended to all the children of men, for all
are interested herein; especially such who profess to be the children of
God and of Christ, the followers of wisdom. This is the epilogue, or
application of the above story. Since this is the case, that young men
are in danger of being ensnared and brought to ruin by this harlot,
therefore take the advice of the wisest of men, even of Wisdom herself;

and attend to the words of my mouth; the doctrines of Christ; the best
preservative from the allurements of the whore of Rome.

[Proverbs 7:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 7:25</span></span>

Let not thine heart decline to her ways,.... Or turn not aside from the
right way, the path of truth and holiness, to those of the whorish
woman, that lead to ruin and destruction; do not so much as think of
going out of the one into the other; let there not be the least
wandering thought, affection, or disposition of the mind thereunto; stop
and check the first motion of the heart, which leads to a compliance
with her, and seems to be directed to her ways, or to betray any love
and liking of them;

go not astray in her paths; for whoever walks in her paths goes astray
from God and his law; from Christ and his Gospel; and from the true
church of God; and from the right paths of faith, duty and worship.

[Proverbs 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 7:26</span></span>

For she hath cast down many wounded,.... Wounded in their name,
character, and reputation; in their bodies by diseases; and in their
souls by guilt, shame, and horror, through a compliance with her sinful
lusts: these she "cast down" from the honours they were possessed of,
from the health they enjoyed, and from the peace and tranquillity of
mind they formerly felt within them. And not a single person, as the
young man instanced in, or a few only, but "many"; great multitudes,
hundreds and thousands, and those not weak, and foolish, and inconstant,
as he might be thought to be; but such as were "great" (m) and mighty,
as the word also signifies; men of great riches, and wisdom, and
courage; as soldiers (n), mighty men of war, such as wound and kill
others; which seems the true sense of the word here used: and therefore
none ought to trust in themselves, nor trust themselves in her company,
nor in the least decline to her ways; and especially such as are weak
and unskilful, and ignorant of her devices, as the "children" here
addressed;

yea, many strong men have been slain by her; men famous for martial
exploits, as Samson and others, have been overcome by her: some of great
fortitude of mind have not been able to withstand her, she has prevailed
over them; and others of robust constitutions have been weakened by
diseases, contracted through incontinency with her; and some have
suffered death by her means, either from her husband, or her gallants,
or the civil magistrate: and of these there have been "innumerable"
instances; so the word (o) for "strong men" sometimes signifies; and so
it is here rendered in the Septuagint and Arabic versions, "and
innumerable are they whom she has slain". All the world have wondered
after the whore of Rome; kings of the earth and mighty men have
committed fornication with her; high and low, rich and poor, have been
ruined by her; thousands have gone to hell by her means; and some of the
sycophants of Rome have even said, that if the pope of Rome should send
thousands to hell, of which they seem themselves to be conscious, no one
should say to him, What dost thou?

\(m\) "multos magnosque", Gejerus. (n) See Dr. Kennicott's Dissert. 1.
p. 110. (o) Sept. so Arab. "numerosi", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Amama, Cocceius, Michaelis, Schultens; so Bootius, Animadv. l. 4. c. 11.
s. 2.

[Proverbs 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 7:27</span></span>

Her house is the way to hell,.... Or "ways" (p); the broad highway to
it; either to the grave, as "sheol" often signifies; or to hell itself,
the place of the damned: to go into her house, and commit wickedness
with her, is to take a step to destruction, a large stride towards hell;
and, if grace prevent not, will bring a man thither. Who would go into
such a house, and much less dwell there, which is the very suburbs of
hell?

going down to the chambers of death; to enter her chamber, to step into
her bed, howsoever decked and adorned, entertaining and inviting it is,
not only leads to the chambers of the grave, as the Targum; but to the
lowest and innermost parts of hell; the apartments of the second death,
the lot of all unclean and idolatrous persons, without repentance and
faith. The Phoenicians called Pluto, the god of hell, by the name of
Moth (q), a word similar to this used here; and so those chambers are no
other than the chambers of hell. Plautus (r) also calls the gate of a
whore's house the gate of hell; which agrees with the first clause of
the verse.

\(p\) "viae", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, &c. (q)
Sanchoniatho apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 1. p. 38. (r) "Januam hane
orci", Bacchides, Act. 3. Sc. 1. v. 1.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 8](pro008.md)

</div>
