<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](psa150)  [Next](pro001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PROVERBS

This book is called, in some printed Hebrew copies, "Sepher Mishle", the
Book of Proverbs; the title of it in the Vulgate Latin version is,

"the Book of Proverbs, which the Hebrews call "Misle":''

in the Septuagint version it has the name of the writer, the Proverbs of
Solomon; and so in the Syriac version, with the addition of his titles,

"the son of David, king of Israel.''

This and Ecclesiastes are both of them by the Jews (a) called Books of
Wisdom: and it is common with the ancient Christian writers (b) to call
the book of Proverbs by the names of "Wisdom" and "Panaretos"; names
they give also to the apocryphal books of Ecclesiasticus and the Wisdom
of Solomon; and therefore this is to be carefully distinguished from
them. The author of this book was King Solomon, as the "first" verse,
which contains the inscription of it, shows; for he was not a collector
of these proverbs, as Grotius is of opinion, but the author of them, at
least of the far greater part; and not only the author, but the writer
of them: the Jews (c) say that Hezekiah and this men wrote them; it is
true indeed the men of Hezekiah copied some, [Pro
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#001); but even those were written by
Solomon. R. Gedaliah (d) would have it that Isaiah the prophet wrote
this book; but without any foundation. At what time it was written is
not certain; the Jewish writers generally say (e) it was written by
Solomon, as were the books of Ecclesiastes and the Song of Songs, in his
old age, when near the time of his death; though some think it was
written before his fall: and it may be it was not written all at once,
but at certain times, when these proverbs occurred unto him and were
spoken by him, and as occasion served: however, it is not to he doubted
but that they were written under the inspiration of God. The Jews once
thought to have made this book of Proverbs an apocryphal one, because of
some seeming contradictions in it; but finding that these were capable
of a reconciliation, changed their minds, as became them (f). Among
Christians, Theodore of Mopsuest, in the sixth century, denied the
divine authority of this book, and attributed it merely to human wisdom;
which opinion of his was condemned in the second council at
Constantinople: and in later times it has been treated with contempt by
the Socinians, and particularly by Father Simon and Le Clerc; but the
authority of it is confirmed by the writers of the New Testament, who
have cited passages out of it; see [Rom
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#020) from [Pro
25:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#021). The book consists of "five"
parts; "first", a preface or introduction, which takes up the first
"nine" chapters; the "second", the proverbs of Solomon, put together by
himself, beginning at the tenth chapter to the twenty-fifth; the
"third", the proverbs of Solomon, copied by the men of Hezekiah,
beginning at the twenty-fifth chapter to the thirtieth; the "fourth",
the words of Agur, the thirtieth chapter, the "fifth", the instruction
of Solomon's mother, Bathsheba, the thirty-first chapter.

\(a\) Gloss. in T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 14. 2. (b) Euseb. Eccl. Hist.
l. 4. c. 22. 26. (c) T. Bab. Ibid. fol. 15. 1. (d) Shalshalet Hakabala,
fol. 55. 1. (e) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 15. p. 41. (f) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol.
30. 2.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 1](pro001)

</div>
