<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro029)  [Next](pro031) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 30](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#001)

[Proverbs 30:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 30:1</span></span>

The words of Agur the son of Jakeh,.... Here begins, according to Aben
Ezra, the fourth part of this book; though, according to others, it is
the fifth; See Gill on [Pro 22:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#017); Who
this Agur was is a matter of doubt; some of the Jewish writers, as
Jarchi and Gersom, and likewise some Christian writers (f), take him to
be Solomon himself, who calls himself Agur, which is said to signify "a
gatherer"; and so the Vulgate Latin version renders it, "the words of
the gatherer, the son of the vomiter"; just as he calls himself
Koheleth, or "the caller", or "preacher", [Ecc
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#001). The reason given of this name is,
because he gathered wisdom and the law (g); or, as Jarchi, he gathered
wisdom, and vomited it; that is, delivered it out to others; so he did,
he sought after and attained to more wisdom than any before him, for he
was wiser than all men; and it may be added, that he "gathered" silver
and gold, and the treasure of kings, and increased in riches more than
any before him, [Ecc 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#013). But then
all this does not agree with the person whose words these are; for he
speaks of himself as being very ignorant, and as not having learned
wisdom, [Pro 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#002); and desires neither
poverty nor riches, [Pro 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008);
besides, the word "Agur" signifies not "a gatherer", but "gathered", as
Hillerus (h) renders it; and so Cocceius, who thinks also that Solomon
is meant, yet not for the above reasons, but translates the clause thus,
"the words of the recollected son of the obedient"; as if it described
Solomon the son of David, the obedient one, the man after God's own
heart, when he was restored by repentance; but it seems better, with
Aben Ezra, to understand this of some very good, knowing, and worthy
man, who lived in those times, either before the times of Solomon, or in
the same, whose pithy sayings and sentences he had a great regard for,
and joined them to his own; or who lived in the times of Hezekiah, or
before, whose proverbs were collected by his men, and added to those of
Solomon's they had copied in the preceding chapters; see [Pro
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro025.htm#001);

even the prophecy; or "burden" (i), as many of the prophecies are
called; it designs something received from the Lord, taken up and
carried to others; so Balaam is said to "take up his parable", [Num
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/num023.htm#007). Here it does not design a
prediction of future events, unless it can be thought that there is in
the following words a prophecy of the Messiah; but an instruction, a
declaration of things useful and profitable; so preaching in the New
Testament is called prophesying often, [Co1
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001). This is a part of the word of
God, of the prophecy which came not by the will of man, but by the
inspiration of God, [Pe2 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/pe2001.htm#019); which
prophecy

the man spake, this excellent good man Agur, who was divinely inspired;
see [Num 24:3](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#003);

unto Ithiel, even unto Ithiel and Ucal; who were either the children of
Agur, whom he instructed in the knowledge of divine things; or they
were, as Aben Ezra, either his companions with whom he conversed about
sacred things, or his disciples who inquired of him about these things,
and learned them of him. Some think (k) these are titles of God himself,
to whom Agur directs his speech, and acknowledges his ignorance of the
divine Being, whom he might justly call Ithiel and Ucal, that is, "God
with me", and "the mighty One"; and certain it is that Agur does direct
a prayer to God, [Pro 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#007); And some
read these words themselves as a prayer, "let God be with me, and one
shall prevail" (l), that is, over all mine enemies; for, if God is on
the side of his people, who shall be against them? or, "I shall be able"
to do all things through the Lord's strength, [Rom
8:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#031); But I rather think the words
should be read, as Jarchi observes, "concerning Ithiel and Ucal" (m);
that is, concerning the Messiah, to whom these names agree. Ithiel, or
"God with me", is very similar to a phrase used by Christ himself in the
days of his flesh, [Joh 8:29](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#029). God was
with him as the eternal Word, and his only begotten Son, from all
eternity, which denotes his co-existence, nearness of union, equality of
nature, and distinction of persons; he was with him as Mediator before
the world began, in the council of peace, which was between them both;
in the covenant of grace made with him, in which all things were agreed
upon respecting the salvation of his people; he was with him in the
beginning of time down to his incarnation; he was with him in the
creation of all things, in the sustentation of them; in the works of
providence, and in the government of the church; he was with him during
his state of humiliation; in his infancy, to protect him from the malice
of Herod; he was with him when disputing with the doctors in the temple,
to direct him; he was with him at his baptism, transfiguration, and
other times; he was with him throughout his public ministry, from the
beginning to the end of it; he did good and healed all manner of
diseases, and wrought amazing miracles, God being with him, [Joh
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#002), [Act
10:38](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#038); and he was with him in his
sufferings and at his death; and so he is with him in his exalted state;
he raised him from the dead, set him at his own right hand, and ever
attends to his prevalent intercession; and will be with him in raising
the dead and judging the world. "Ucal", which has the signification of
being able, strong, mighty, and powerful, agrees with Christ, who is the
mighty God the most mighty, the Almighty; and which appears by the works
he did before his incarnation, as the creation of all things out of
nothing, the preservation of all things, and the several wonderful
events in which he was; concerned, as the confusion of languages, the
burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, the conducting the children of Israel
through the wilderness, with others; also what he did when here on
earth, the mighty works and miracles done by him, and especially the
great work of man's redemption, and also the raising of himself from the
dead: moreover, what he now does and will do for his people show him to
be the mighty One; taking the care of all the churches and providing for
them; supplying all the wants of his people, bearing all their burdens,
supporting them under all their temptations, and delivering them out of
them; strengthening them for his service, protecting them from their
enemies, keeping them from falling, raising their dead bodies, and
bringing all the sons of God to glory: or if the word should be
rendered, as it may, "eaten" or "consumed" (n), it is true of Christ,
whose zeal ate him up, [Psa 69:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#009); and
who is the antitype of the sacrifice consumed by fire.

\(f\) De Dieu, Cocceius, Teelman. Specimen. Explicat. Parabot. p. 378.
(g) Jelammedenu apud Buxtorf. Lex. Rab. col. 26. (h) Onomastic. Sacr. p.
39. (i) "onus", Mercerus; "prophetia gravis", Tigurine version. (k)
Jermin in loc. (l) See Trapp in loc. (m) So Junius & Tremellius, Aamama,
Calovius, Cartwright. (n) Vid. Teelman. Specimen. Expliicat. Parabol. p.
391.

[Proverbs 30:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 30:2</span></span>

Surely I am more brutish than any man,.... "Every man is become brutish
in his knowledge"; man in his original state was a knowing creature but
sinning lost his knowledge, and "became like the beasts that perish";
hence we read of the "brutish among the people": but Agur thought
himself not only brutish among the rest, but more brutish than any. So
Plato (o) says of some souls living on earth, that they are of a brutish
nature; see [Jer 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#014). Or I think the
words may be rendered, "a brute am I rather than a man" (p); have more
of the brute than of the man, especially in the sight and presence of
God; a very beast before him, or in comparison of other wise, holy, and
good men; or with respect to the knowledge of spiritual, divine, and
heavenly things, [Psa 73:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#022); or "a
brute was I from the time", or "ever since I was a man" (q); as soon as
be was born, being born in sin, and like a wild ass's colt, [Job
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012);

and have not the understanding of a man; or "of Adam" (r); who was made
after the image of God, which consisted in knowledge as well as
holiness; who knew much of God, his nature, perfections, and persons; of
the creatures, and the works of his hands and of all things in nature;
but affecting more knowledge than he should lost in a great measure what
he had, and brought his posterity in and left them in a state of
blindness and ignorance, one of whose sons Agur was: or his meaning is,
that he had not the understanding, as not of Adam in innocence, and of
prophets and other eminent men of God, so not of ordinary men of those
who had, he least share of the knowledge of divine things. Aben Ezra,
who takes Ithiel and Ucal to be scholars or companions of Agur,
supposes, that they asked him questions concerning the divine Being,
nature, and perfections, to which he answers in this strain; showing his
insufficiency to give them any instruction or satisfaction in such
matters, or to discourse on such sublime subjects: or rather his view
was to show the blindness and ignorance of human nature with respect to
divine things he was about to treat of; and particularly to observe,
that the knowledge of a Saviour, and salvation by him, were not from
nature, and attainable by that; and that a man must first know himself,
his own folly and ignorance, before he can have any true knowledge of
Ithiel and Ucal, the mighty Saviour and Redeemer; of the need of him,
and of interest in him. Some think his view is to prove that his words,
his prophecy, or what he was about to say, or did say, must be owing
entirely to divine inspiration; since he was of himself; and without a
divine revelation, so very blind, dark, and ignorant; it could not be
owing to any natural sagacity of his, who was more brutish than any; nor
to any acquired knowledge, or the instruction of men, since he had none,
as follows; and so with which the words begin, may be rendered "for" or
"because" (s), as it usually is, "for I am more brutish, than any man",
&c.

\(o\) De Leg. l. 10. p, 959. (p) "bardus sum prae viro", Mercerus;
"brutus ego prae viro", Cocceius, Schultens. (q) "Nam brutus sum ex quo
vir sum", Junius & Tremellius, so Cartwright. (r) "Nec est mihi
intelligentia Adami", Cartwright. (s) "nam", Junius & Tremellius;
"quia", Pagninus, Montanus; "quoniam", Michaelis.

[Proverbs 30:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 30:3</span></span>

I neither learned wisdom,.... Natural wisdom or philosophy, so as to
understand the nature of things, and reason about them in a
philosophical manner; or political wisdom, so as to know how to govern
states, and manage the affairs of kingdoms; or in a lower sphere to
transact the affairs of life to any peculiar advantage; he had not a
polite or liberal education: or spiritual and evangelical wisdom; that
is, not of himself through the mere strength and force of his genius and
natural capacity, or of others; he was not the son of a prophet, nor
brought up in the schools of the prophets; he did not learn it, nor was
he taught it by men; for this is not acquired by human teaching; it is
what comes from above, from heaven, and by the revelation of God;

nor have the knowledge of the holy; or "holies" (s); either of holy
persons, such knowledge as holy men of God had; or of the holy angels,
not of their nature, capacities, influence and operations; nor such as
they have: or rather of the holy Persons in the Trinity, Father, Son and
Spirit; their nature modes of subsisting, perfections, purposes, and the
like; at least not a full and comprehensive one: or of holy things, of
the holy Scriptures, and the holy doctrines of them; however, not what
is perfect and complete. It may be rendered, "but I have the knowledge
of the holy" (t), though he had not the advantage of human literature,
nor had ever been under the instructions of men on one account or
another, and therefore what he knew, or was about to discourse of, was
from God. Some understand this verse and [Pro
30:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#002) of Ithiel, or Christ (u), as in
the esteem of men, [Co1 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#023).

\(s\) "sanctorum", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Mercerus, Gejerus, Cocceius, Schultens. (t) "ad
cognitionem sanctorum novi", Michaelis; "expers sum humanarnm artium, et
divinarum guarus sum", Vatablus in Gejerus. (u) Teelman. Specimen.
Explicat. Parabol. p. 391.

[Proverbs 30:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 30:4</span></span>

Who hath ascended up into heaven, or descended?.... That has been
thither to fetch knowledge of God and divine things, and has returned to
communicate it. Enoch was taken up to heaven before this time: and
Elijah, as is very probable, after; but neither of them returned again,
to inform mortals what was to be seen, known, and enjoyed there: since,
the Apostle Paul was caught up into the third heaven, and came back
again; but then the things he heard were such as it was not lawful for a
man to utter: and indeed, since the coming of Christ there is no need of
any further revelation to be made nor of any such expedition, in order
to obtain it, [Rom 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006). And, properly
speaking, there never was any besides him, whose names are Ithiel and
Ucal, that ever did this: he lay in the bosom of the Father, and was
privy to his whole mind and will; he descended from heaven to earth not
by local motion, but, by assumption of nature; and when he had made
known his Father's will, and done his work, he ascended far above all
heavens, and received gifts for men; to fill his churches and ministers
with them, in order to communicate and improve spiritual and divine
knowledge; and therefore, with great propriety and pertinence, he
applies these words to himself, [Joh
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#013);

who hath gathered the wind in his fists? not any mere creature; not any
man or set of men; it is not in the power of any, either men or angels,
to restrain or let loose the winds at pleasure; nor has Satan, though
called the prince of the power of the air, that is, of the devils in the
air, any such command of them; none but he that made them can command
them to blow, or be still; even he who brings them out of his treasures,
and his own son, whom the wind and seas obeyed; see [Psa
135:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#007); The Heathens (w) themselves are
so sensible of this, that the power of the winds only belongs to God,
that they have framed a deity they call Aeolus; whom the supreme Being
has made a kind of steward or store keeper of the winds, and given him a
power to still or raise them as he pleases (x);

who hath bound the waters in a garment? either the waters above, which
are bound in the thick clouds as in a garment which hold them from
pouring out; or the waters of the sea, which are as easily managed by
the Lord as an infant by its parent, and is wrapped about with a
swaddling band, [Job 26:8](../../../bib/kjv/job026.htm#008). But can any
creature do this? none but the mighty God; and his almighty Son the
Ithiel and Ucal, who clothes the heavens with blackness, and makes
sackcloth their covering: even he who is the Redeemer of this people,
and has the tongue of the learned, to speak a word in season to them
[Isa 50:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa050.htm#002);

who hath established all the ends of the earth? fixed the boundaries of
the several parts of the world, Europe, Asia, Africa, and America, and
the several countries in them? settled the foundations of the earth, and
secured the banks and borders of it from the raging of the sea? None but
these next mentioned; see [Job 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004);

what is his name, and what is his son's name, if thou canst tell? if
thou surest it is a mere man that does all these things tell his name;
or, if he be dead, say what is the name of his son or of any of his
family; so Jarchi and others interpret it: or rather, since it is the
Lord alone and his own proper Son, to whom these things can he ascribed
say what is his name; that is, his nature and perfections which are
incomprehensible and ineffable; otherwise he is known by his name
Jehovah and especially as his name is proclaimed in Christ and
manifested by him and in his Gospel: and seeing he has a son of the same
nature with him, and possessed of the same perfections, co-essential,
and co-existent, and every way equal to him, and a distinct person from
him, say what is his nature and perfections also; declare his generation
and the manner of it; his divine filiation, and in what class it is;
things which are out of the reach of human capacity, and not to be
expressed by the tongue of men and angels; see [Mat
11:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#027). Otherwise, though his name for
a while was a secret, and he was only called the seed of the woman and
of Abraham, [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); yet he had many
names given him under the Old Testament; as Shiloh, Immanuel, the
Wonderful, Counsellor, the mighty God, the everlasting Father, and
Prince of peace; the Lord our righteousness, and the Man, the Branch:
and under the New Testament, Jesus the Saviour, Christ the Anointed; the
Head of the church, the Judge of the world; the Word of God, and King of
kings, and Lord of lords. This Scripture is a proof of Christ's being
the eternal Son of God; of his equality with his divine Father as such,
their name and nature being alike ineffable; of his co-existence with
his Father as such; and of his omnipresence and omnipotence, expressed
by the phrases here used of ascending, &c. and of his distinct
personality from the Father; the same question being distinctly put of
him as of the Father. Some render the last clause, "dost thou know?" (y)
thou dost not know God and his Son, their being and perfections are not
to be known by the light of nature, only by revelation, and but
imperfectly.

\(w\) , &c. Homer. Odyss. 10. v. 21, 22. "Aeole, namque tibi divum pater
atque hominum rex, et mulcere dedit fluctus, et tollere vento", Virgil
Aeneid. l. v. 69, 70. (x) See a Sermon of mine, called "Christ the
Saviour from the Tempest", p. 17, 18. (y) "ad nosti?" Noldius, p. 393.
No. 1337.

[Proverbs 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 30:5</span></span>

Every word of God is pure,.... The whole word of God. "All Scripture",
given by inspiration of God, to which Agur directs, as giving the best
account of God, of his name, nature, and perfections; of his Son,
person, offices, and grace; being pure, very pure, "purified" (z) like
silver, purified in a furnace of earth. The whole of Scripture is pure,
free from all falsehood and error; coming from the God of truth, who
cannot lie, and therefore called "the Scriptures of truth": every
promise is pure as well as precious, made without dissimulation,
faithfully performed, and all yea and amen in Christ; every doctrine is
pure, free from the mixtures and inventions of men; the sincere milk of
the word; consistent and all of a piece, not yea and nay; and tending to
promote purity of heart and life; wholesome words, and doctrines
according to godliness; see [Psa 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006);

he is a shield unto them that put their trust in him; not the word, but
God, whose the word is; and which represents him as a proper object of
trust, both with respect to things temporal and spiritual, at all times;
and as a shield to protect such, by his power and grace, from all their
enemies, sin, Satan, and the world, and also from all errors and false
doctrines; see [Psa 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003).

\(z\) "purgatus", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Gejerus;
"purgatissimus", Junius & Tremellius; Heb. "conflatus", Piscator,
Mercerus, Cocceius, Schultens.

[Proverbs 30:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 30:6</span></span>

Add thou not unto his words,.... To the words of God; as the Jews did,
by joining their oral law, or the traditions of the elders, to the
written word, and preferring them before it; and as the Papists, by
making their unwritten traditions, and the sense and determinations of
their church, equal to the Scriptures; and as all enthusiasts do, who
set up their pretended dreams, visions, revelations, and prophecies,
upon a foot with the word of God, or as superior to it; whereas that is,
and that only, the rule and standard of faith and practice, and is a
sufficient and perfect one; see [Deu
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#002);

lest he reprove thee; that is, God; either by words or by blows, by
threatenings and denunciations of his wrath and displeasure; or by
chastisements and corrections for such daring pride, blasphemy, and
wickedness; those who add to his words, he threatens to add plagues unto
them, [Rev 22:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#018);

and thou be found a liar; a forger, speaker, and spreader of doctrinal
lies, such doctrines as are contrary to the word of truth; not being
built on that, but upon human inventions, and additions to it.

[Proverbs 30:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 30:7</span></span>

Two things have I required of thee,.... Or, "have asked of thee (a), O
God"; as may be supplied, for the words are addressed to him. The
following is a prayer made unto him, which contains the two requests
here referred to; his requests are not many, his words are few; he did
not make long prayers, or expect to be heard for much speaking;

deny me them not before I die; not that he thought he was near his end;
nor is it his sense that he desired some time or other, at least before
he died, that he might have these two requests granted him after
mentioned; for what are poverty and riches, or convenient food, to a man
just dying? but his meaning is, that he might be thus favoured as long
as he lived; that all the while he was in the world, he might be kept
from sin, and be free from anxious worldly thoughts and cares, having a
moderate competency of good things: faith in prayer will have no denial;
a wrestling Jacob will not let the angel go without a blessing;
importunity in prayer gets much from the hands of God; "the effectual
fervent prayer of the righteous man availeth much", [Jam
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#016).

\(a\) "postulavi a te", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Mercerus,
Gejerus; "peto ab te", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "petii a te",
Cocceius, Michaelis, Schultens.

[Proverbs 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 30:8</span></span>

Remove far from me vanity and lies,.... This is the "first" request, to
be preserved from sin, in general; which is a vain, lying, and deceitful
thing; promising pleasure, profit, liberty, and impunity, which it does
not give. Agur desires to have vain thoughts removed out of his mind,
vain words from his mouth, and vain actions from his life and
conversation; to have his eyes turned from beholding vanity, and his
feet from walking in it; and his affections taken off from the vain
things of the world, the lusts, pleasures, profits, and honours of it;
as well as to be kept from all errors and false doctrines, which are
lies in hypocrisy; with which men that lie in wait to deceive would, if
it were possible, deceive the very elect: Agur conscious of his own
weakness, and proneness to evil, desires the Lord would not lead him
into temptation, but deliver him from all evil, doctrinal and practical.
Some understand this of the forgiveness of sin; which is sometimes
expressed by a putting or removing it away, [Sa2
7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#013), [Psa
103:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#012);

give me neither poverty nor riches; this is the "second" request, not to
be extremely poor nor too rich; but to be in a middle state between
both, neither rich nor poor; which Horace (b) calls the golden mean, and
which Agur wisely judged to be the happiest state; most free from care,
least liable to temptation, and the best situation to serve the Lord in:
a like wish was made by Theognis (c), I neither love to be rich,

"nor desire it; but to live on a little, having no evil;''

so Martial (d). Both riches and poverty are of God; men are rich or
poor, as the Lord pleases; he suffers poverty in some, and gives riches
to others: Agur deprecates both, as having their separate, peculiar,
snares and temptations; though no doubt this request was made with
submission to the will of God; and not as considering either of them as
evils in themselves, but as they might be attended with bad
consequences, and what is next mentioned being more eligible;

feed me with food convenient for me; not merely what was agreeable to
his palate, suitable to his constitution, and sufficient for nature; nor
for him personally, but for his family also; and what was proper and
suitable to the condition and circumstances in which he was, and to the
rank and quality he held, whether in a more private or in a more public
capacity. Some render it, "the food of my allowance" (e); what is
allotted and appointed for me It seems to be the same which Job calls
his "necessary food", and Christ "our daily bread": it takes in both
food and raiment, which having, men should be contented with; see [Job
23:12](../../../bib/kjv/job023.htm#012). The allusion seems to be to the
stated measure of food allowed to servants by the day, or rather by the
month, called "demensum", and which was but small and scanty (f); yet
with this Agur could be content.

\(b\) Camin. l. 2. Ode 10. v. 5. (c) Sententiae, v. 1151, 1152. (d)
"Nunquam divitias deos rogavi, contentus modicis, meoque laetus;
paupertas, veniam dabis, recede", Epigr. l. 4. Ep. 65. (e) "panem
statuti mei", Montanus; "demensi mei", Tigurine version, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Mercerus, Cocceius, Michaelis, Schultens. (f) Vid.
Juvenal. Sat. 14. v. 126. & Not. in ibid.

[Proverbs 30:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 30:9</span></span>

Lest I be full, and deny thee,.... This is the dangerous consequence of
riches, and the temptation they expose men unto; who, being full of the
things of this world, are tempted to deny the Lord; not his being and
perfections directly, but chiefly his providence; to deny that what they
have, they have received of him, but attribute it to their own care,
diligence, and industry; and now think they can live without him,
without any dependence on his providence, having a large affluence of
the things of life: yea, they may be said to deny him, when they forget
the bounties of his providence; are not thankful to him for them; that
flatter themselves with a continuance of them, without any regard to
him, as if he had no concern in the affairs of life; see [Deu
32:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#015);

and say, Who is the Lord? as Pharaoh did, [Exo
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002). I am not obliged to him; I can
live without him, I have enough of my own;

or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the name of my God in vain; this
is the snare that attends poverty; men, for want of food and raiment,
are tempted to steal from their neighbours, which is a sin against the
law of God, the eighth command; and then to cover the theft, when an
oath is offered to purge them from the charge and suspicion of it, they
take it, and so are guilty of false swearing, or taking the name of God
not only in vain, but falsely, and so become guilty of the breach of the
third command. Agur, a good man, is desirous he might not be exposed to
temptations to such evils, and especially which so affected the honour
and glory of God.

[Proverbs 30:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 30:10</span></span>

Accuse not a servant unto his master,.... Wrongly, rashly, and without
any foundation, nor for any trifling thing; unless it be in a case of
moment and importance, when his master's business is sadly neglected, or
he is injured in his property by him: especially care should be taken
not to calumniate a servant, to abuse him with the tongue, as the word
(g) signifies; the circumstance he is in should be considered, as a
servant; and how severe masters are apt to be towards them, and
therefore little matters should be hid from them; and much less should
they be aggravated, and least of all should falsehoods be told of them.
So Doeg the Edomite accused David to Saul, and the Pharisees accused the
disciples of Christ to their Master, [Sa1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#009); the apostle's advice is good,
and agrees with Agur's, [Rom 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#004);

lest he curse thee, and thou be found guilty; or, "and thou shouldest
sin" (h); that is, afterwards; and so the curse come upon thee he has
wished for: or the sense is, lest he should curse thee before men, and
hurt thy character and reputation; or imprecate a curse from the Lord,
which he may suffer to come upon thee for sin. Aben Ezra interprets this
of a servant, that flies from Heathen countries to the land of Israel,
to be made a proselyte of; who should not be discovered, and returned to
his old master.

\(g\) "ne crimineris lingua", Montanus. (h) "et delinquas", Pagninus,
Montanus, Mercerus, Gejerus; "q. d. peccabis", Vatablus.

[Proverbs 30:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 30:11</span></span>

There is a generation that curseth their father,.... A sort of men that
neither fear God nor regard men; and are so inhuman as to be without
natural affections to their parents; have no reverence of them, love to
them, nor give them any honour or obedience; so far from it, that they
curse their father that begot them; imprecate on him all the evils in
life they can think of, and wish him out of the world;

and doth not bless their mother; cannot give her a good word, who bore
them, and brought them up in the most tender and indulgent manner; yea,
so unnatural as to curse her also, for that is intended by this way of
speaking; see [Pro 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017).

[Proverbs 30:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 30:12</span></span>

There is a generation that are pure in their own eyes,.... Not in the
eyes of God, who sees the heart, and all the impurities of it, as well
as of life and conversation; nor in the eyes of others, though such may
appear outwardly righteous before men; but in their own eyes, in their
own conceit and imagination, trusting in themselves that they are
righteous: but such have not their eyes opened or enlightened to see the
plague of their own hearts, the spirituality of the law of God, the
perfection of righteousness that requires; nor the righteousness and
holiness of God himself; nor the imperfection and insufficiency of their
own; did they, they would not seem pure and righteous to themselves. No
man is pure by nature, or through anything done by them; but by the
grace of God, and through the blood and righteousness of Christ; and
such are far from being pure in their own eyes, or as considered in
themselves: but those who are pure neither by nature nor by grace, yet
think they are so. There were some such in Agur's time, and such were
the Scribes and Pharisees in Christ's time; there were a generation of
them; and there are of the same sort in our days, as Papists,
Perfectionists, and all self-justiciaries; see [Luk
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#009);

and yet is not washed from their filthiness; their native, original, and
universal pollution by sin they have from their birth, and which is
increased by numerous actual transgressions; and from which none are or
can be washed but those who are born of water and of the Spirit, or are
washed with the washing of regeneration; and are washed from their sins
in the blood of the Lamb, whose blood cleanses from all sin; and are
arrayed with the fine linen, clean and white, the righteousness of the
saints, which is the righteousness of Christ imputed to them: whatsoever
is short of these leaves men unwashed from their filthiness, whatever
opinion they may have of themselves; see [Job
9:30](../../../bib/kjv/job009.htm#030), [Jer
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#022).

[Proverbs 30:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 30:13</span></span>

There is a generation, O how lofty are their eyes! and their eyelids are
lifted up. Above others, on whom they look with scorn and contempt; as
those do who have more riches than others, and boast of them; they
despise their poor neighbours, and disdain to look upon them: and such
also who have more knowledge and wisdom than others, or at least think
so; they are puffed up in their fleshly minds, and say of the illiterate
or less knowing, as the proud Pharisees did, "this people, who knoweth
not the law, are cursed": and likewise those who fancy themselves more
holy and righteous than others; these, in a scornful manner, say, "stand
by thyself, I am holier than thou"; and thank God they are not as other
men are, as publicans and sinners; see [Pro
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#004). Hence Pliny (i) says, that in
the eyebrows there is a part of the mind; those especially show
haughtiness; that pride has a receptacle elsewhere, but here it has its
seat; it is bred in the heart, but here it comes and here it hangs:
wherefore Juvenal (k) calls pride and haughtiness, "grande supercilium";
and proud haughty persons are said to be supercilious.

\(i\) Nat. Hist. 1. 11. c. 37. (k) Satyr. 6. v. 168.

[Proverbs 30:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 30:14</span></span>

There is a generation whose teeth are as swords,.... As sharp as swords;
like such the beasts of prey have; cruel, barbarous, and inhuman
creatures; see [Psa 57:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#004);

and their jaw teeth as knives; exceeding sharp and biting:

to devour the poor from off the earth, and the needy from among men: by
their tyranny, oppression, and cruelty, to deprive them of the little
they have; and even to take away their lives from them, and utterly
destroy them; of this disposition are all tyrants and persecutors: such
were Rome Pagan, compared to a red dragon in the times of the ten
Heathen persecutions; and such is Rome Papal, signified by a beast, like
a leopard, bear, and lion; and which has been drunk with the blood of
the saints.

[Proverbs 30:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 30:15</span></span>

The horse leech hath two daughters, crying, Give, give,.... Or "the
blood sucker" (l); so it began to be called in the times of Pliny (m),
to which the last generation of men may well be compared; blood thirsty
creatures, that never have enough, and are not satisfied with the flesh
of men, nor with their blood; and such particularly the Papists are: and
not only this generation of men, but there are three or four things
besides, which resemble the horse leech for its insatiableness; for the
horse leech has not two daughters only, but more. Some, by her two
daughters, understand the two forks of its tongue, which some
naturalists say it has; though later ones, and more diligent inquirers
into those things, find it has not; but either with its three teeth, or
by the compression of its mouth on all sides, sucks the blood, and will
not let go until it is filled with it (n): others have proposed the two
sorts of leeches as its daughters, the sea leech, and that which is
found in fenny and marshy places. But it is best, by its daughters, to
understand such that resemble it, and are like unto it; as those that
are of like nature and quality, and do the same things as others, are
called their children; see [Mat 23:31](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#031),
[Jo1 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/jo1003.htm#010); and so the number of its
daughters, which are always craving and asking for more, and are never
satisfied, are not only two, but more, as follows;

there are three things; or, "yea, there are three things"

that are never satiated: yea, four things say not, It is enough; not two
only, but three, and even four, that are quite insatiable and are as
follow. The Syriac version renders the whole thus,

"the horse leech hath three beloved daughters; three, "I say", they are,
which are not satisfied; and the fourth says not, It is enough.''

Some, as Abendana observes, interpret it of hell, by a transposition of
the letters; because everyone that perverts his ways descends thither.
Bochart (o) interprets it of fate, and so Noldius (p): and Schultens
renders the word, the most monstrous of evils; it signifying in the
Arabic language, as he observes, anything monstrous and dreadful; such
as wood demons, serpents, and dragons, which devour men and beasts.
Suidas (q), by the "horse leech", understands sin, whose daughters are
fornication, envy, and idolatry, which are never satisfied by evil
actions, and the fourth is evil concupiscence.

\(l\) "sanguisugae", V. L. Pagninus, Tigurine version. Mercerus,
Gejerus. (m) Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 10. (n) "Non missura cutem nisi plena
cruoris hirudo", Horat. de Arte Poet. fine. (o) Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 5.
c. 19. col. 801. (p) Concord. Ebr. Par. p. 467. No. 1425. (q) In voce

[Proverbs 30:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 30:16</span></span>

The grave,.... Which is the first of the four daughters, or insatiable
things, which resemble the horse leech: the grave is the house appointed
for all living; it stands ready for them, it is open to receive them
when dead; and though such multitudes have been put into it, since death
reigned in the world, yet it is not full, it waits for more; nor will
its mouth be shut till the last enemy, death, is destroyed; see [Pro
27:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro027.htm#020); This is an emblem of a covetous
man, who enlarges his desire as hell or the grave; and is never
satisfied with gold, silver, and increase of substance he has, but is
always craving more;

and the barren womb; the second daughter, that cries, Give, give, as
Rachel, "give me children, or I die", [Gen
30:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#001), barren women are oftentimes
impatient for children, as she was; and importunate, as Hannah; and as
the Israelitish women were before the coming of the Messiah, each hoping
he might be born of them; especially before it was so clearly known that
he should be born of a virgin: though it may be rather the barren womb
of harlots is here meant, and who are generally barren, and whose lust
is insatiable; and this may be an emblem of lust, which is never
satisfied; whether it be a lust of riches, or of honour, or of
uncleanness, or of sensual pleasures;

the earth that is not filled with water; which is dry and parched, and
opens and gapes; and though large quantities of rain may fall upon it,
which it greedily drinks in; yet is not seen, nor is it filled with it,
but it thirsts for more: this may be an emblem of good men, that have
received abundance of the grace of God; and though they thirst not after
sin, as they before did, and others do; yet thirst after God, more
knowledge of him, and communion with him, and for more grace, like the
dry and thirsty land, and cannot have enough of it; see [Joh
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#013); or rather of wicked men, who
drink up iniquity like water, and yet never have their fill of it to
their satisfaction. This is the third thing, and the fourth follows:

and the fire that saith not, It is enough; but let what fuel will be
cast into it, it devours it, and still wants more: by the Egyptians, as
Herodotus (r) relates, fire is reckoned an animated beast, which devours
all it can lay hold on; and when it is filled with food, it dies with
that which is devoured by it. Such is the fire of divine wrath, hell
fire, in which sinners are, as thorns and briers; and which is
unquenchable, everlasting, burns for ever and ever; the Tophet, ordained
of old, deep and large, the pile thereof is fire and much wood, kindled
by the breath of the Lord, like a stream of brimstone, [Isa
30:33](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#033). These are the four daughters of
the horse leech which resemble that in its insatiableness. Jarchi makes
mention of some that interpret the horse leech of "sheol", or the state
of the dead; and the two daughters, of paradise and hell; the one says,
"Give me the righteous"; and the other says, "Give me the wicked." Aben
Ezra applies these four to the four generations before spoken of; the
grave, into which are cast the generation of those that curse their
father, and die before their time; the barren womb, the generation of
those that are not washed from the filthiness of whoredom, and have no
children; the earth not filled with water, the proud and haughty, who
are humbled by famine; and the fire is that which descends from heaven,
to consume the generation that destroy the poor and oppress the needy,
as fire came down upon them in the days of Elijah. Jarchi takes notice
of a Midrash, which applies these four things to the four monarchies; as
it does also all the four things after mentioned.

\(r\) Thalia sive, l. 3. c. 16.

[Proverbs 30:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 30:17</span></span>

The eye that mocketh at his father,.... At his advice, admonitions, and
instructions; looks upon him with scorn and disdain, and treats him as a
weak, silly, old man: here Agur returns to the first generation he had
observed;

and despiseth to obey his mother; her orders and commands: or, "the
obedience of his mother" (s); her discipline and instruction, having no
regard to it. The word is rendered "gathering" in [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010); and Jarchi interprets it of the
gathering of wrinkles in her face: and so the Targum, Arabic, and Syriac
versions render it, "the old age of his mother"; despising her as an old
foolish woman; see [Pro 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro023.htm#022); in the
Ethiopic language, signifies to "grow old", from whence the word here
used, by a transposition of letters, may be derived; and Mr. Castell (t)
observes, that the royal prophet, among others, seems to have taken this
word from the queen of Sheba;

the ravens of the valley, shall pick it out, and the young eagles shall
eat it; it signifies, that such persons shall come to an untimely end,
and an ignominious death; either be drowned in a river, when floating
upon it, or cast upon the banks of it, the ravens that frequent such
places, and are most cruel and voracious, should feed upon them: or they
should be hanged on a tree, or be crucified (u), where birds of prey
would light upon them; and particularly pick out their eyes and eat
them, as being softest and sweetest to them; therefore first aim at
them, and of which birds, and especially ravens, are very fond (w); and
is a just retaliation for their scornful and disdainful looks at their
parent. This may figuratively design the black devils of hell, the posse
of them in the air, who are sometimes compared to the fowls thereof; to
whom such unnatural and disobedient children shall become a prey; see
[Mat 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#004).

\(s\) "obediantiam matris", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Michaelis; "doctrinam", Vatablus,
Tigurine version; "disciplinam", Castalio; "obsequium matris",
Schultens. (t) Lexic. col. 1960. (u) "Non pasces in cruce corvos",
Horat. Ep. 16. ad Quinctium, v. 48. (w) "Hic prior in cadaveribus oculum
petit", Isidor. Origin. l. 12. c. 7. "Effossos oculos vorat corvus",
Catullus ad Cominium, Ep. 105. v. 5.

[Proverbs 30:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 30:18</span></span>

There be three things which are too wonderful for me,.... Which were
above his reach and comprehension; what he could not find out, nor
account for, nor sufficiently admire;

yea, four things which I know not; the way of them; as follows.

[Proverbs 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 30:19</span></span>

The way of an eagle in the air,.... And so of any other bird; but this
is mentioned, because it flies swiftest, and soars highest: but the way
in which it goes is not known, nor can it be seen with the eye; it cuts
the air, and passes through it, but leaves no track behind it which may
be pointed to, and it may be said, that is the way the eagle took and
flew towards heaven out of sight;

the way of a serpent upon a rock; a smooth hard rock; and wonderful it
is that it should creep up it without legs; and where it leaves no
impression, no footsteps by which it can be traced, as it may in soft
and sandy places;

the way of a ship in the midst of the sea; it is marvellous that such a
vessel should be supported upon the sea; that it should weather the
storms and tempests of it; that it should be steered through the
trackless ocean to distant countries; and, particularly, though it makes
furrows in the waters, and divides the waves; yet these quickly close
again, and there is no path to be seen in which it goes; there is no
beaten road made by it, nor by the vast numbers which go the same way,
which a man can see with his eyes or follow;

and the way of a man with a maid; or "to a maid" (x); the many artful
ways and methods he uses to get into her company, who is kept recluse;
and to convey the sentiments and affections of his heart unto her, to
gain her love to him, and obtain her in an honourable way of marriage;
or to decoy and deceive her, and draw her into impure and unlawful
embraces: it may design the private and secret way of committing
fornication with her; which sense seems to be confirmed by [Pro
30:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#020). Some of the ancients,
particularly Ambrose (y), interpreted the whole of this verse of Christ:
"the way of an eagle in the air", of his ascension to heaven, with men
his prey, taken out of the jaws of the enemy; and which is such as is
beyond the comprehension of men, that one of so great majesty should
vouchsafe to come down from heaven, or ascend thither: "the way of a
serpent upon a rock" he understands of the temptations of Satan, the old
serpent, with which he attacked Christ, the Rock; but could imprint no
footsteps of his malice and wickedness on him; could find nothing in him
to work upon, nor leave any sign behind him, as upon Adam: "the way of a
ship in the midst of the sea" he interprets of the church; which though
distressed with storms and tempests of persecution and false doctrine,
yet cannot suffer shipwreck, Christ being in it: and the last clause he
renders as the Vulgate Latin version does, "and the way of a man in
youth"; which he explains of the journeys which Christ took, and the
ways of virtue he pursued, to do good to the bodies and souls of men,
which are so many as not to be numbered. But it may be better
interpreted of the wonderful incarnation of Christ, his conception and
birth of a virgin; which was a new and unheard of thing, and the way and
manner of it quite inscrutable, and more hard and difficult to be
understood than any of the rest; for the words may be rendered, "the way
of a man in a maid" or "virgin"; that is, the conception of Geber, the
mighty man, in the virgin; see [Jer
31:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer031.htm#022). Gussetius (z) gives the
mystical sense of the whole, as referring to the ascension of Christ;
his coming out of the stony grave; his conversation among the people,
like the tumultuous waves; and his incarnation of a virgin.

\(x\) "ad virginem", Glassius, Gejerus, Noldius, p. 144. No. 678. (y) De
Salomone, c. 2, 3, 4, 5. (z) Ebr. Comment. p. 195.

[Proverbs 30:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 30:20</span></span>

Such is the way of an adulterous woman,.... It is equally unknown as the
way of a man with a maid; it is difficult to detect her, she takes so
much care and caution, and uses so many artful methods to conceal her
wickedness from her husband; though she lives in adultery, it is in a
most private manner, and carried on so secretly and artfully that she is
not easily discovered;

she eateth, and wipeth her mouth; like one that eats what he should not,
wipes his mouth that it might not be known or suspected he had ate
anything; so such an adulteress commits the sin of adultery; and when
she has done looks as grave and demure, and carries it so to her husband
and all her friends, as if she was the chastest person upon earth. The
allusion may be to harlots, who after an impure congress used to wash
themselves (a), and had servants to wait upon them and serve them with
water, called from hence "aquarioli" (b);

and saith, I have done no wickedness; she says by her behaviour, by her
demure looks; and if suspected and challenged with it utterly denies it.
This is an emblem of the antichristian whore of Rome, who, though the
mother of harlots, and abominations of the earth; though guilty of the
foulest adultery, that is, the grossest idolatry, yet pretends to be the
pure and chaste spouse of Christ; and, under the guise of purity and
holiness, and with all deceivableness of unrighteousness, seduces the
minds of many; see [Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001).

\(a\) "Dedecus hoc sumpta dissimulavit aqua", Ovid. Amor. l. 3. Eleg. 6.
in fine. (b) Tertull. Apolog. c. 43. Vid. Turnebi Adversar. l. 14. c.
12.

[Proverbs 30:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 30:21</span></span>

For three things the earth is disquieted,.... The inhabitants of it are
made very uneasy;

and for four which it cannot bear; they are a load and burden upon it,
and are intolerable to those that dwell on it, and make them very
uncomfortable.

[Proverbs 30:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 30:22</span></span>

For a servant, when he reigneth,.... Being unfit for it through his
education, not having been trained up in and learned the arts of
government and maxims of it; and through the disposition of his mind,
which is mean, abject, and servile; and as he has been used himself when
a servant, so he will use others (c) and through his circumstances,
being poor, he will take oppressive methods to become rich; and being
raised from a low estate, he is the more imperious, proud, and haughty
(d); all which and more make his reign intolerable; see [Pro
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#010). This may be applied to
antichrist, the "servus servorum", who in a haughty, tyrannical, and
insolent manner, exalts himself above all that is called God: and reigns
over the kings of the earth, at least has done so, and that in such a
manner as was unbearable; deposing kings at pleasure, disposing of their
kingdoms, and trampling upon their necks, and making their subjects his
vassals; see [Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004);

and a fool, when he is filled with meat; as Nabal at his feast, when he
behaved so intolerably in his cups towards David and his messengers,
that he determined on his destruction, had not Abigail interposed, [Sa1
25:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#010); and there are many such fools,
who having their bellies full of food, and their heads full of liquor,
are very overbearing in company, and give their tongues such a loose as
is very disturbing: or this may intend such fools, or wicked men, who
are full of wealth and riches, and being purse proud, are exceeding
haughty and insolent; set their mouths against the heaven, and blaspheme
God that is in it; and their tongues walk through the earth, and spare
none, but lash all in an insufferable manner. These disquiet families,
neighbourhoods, communities, and commonwealths; see [Psa
73:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#007).

\(c\) "Nec bellua tetrior ulla est, quam servi rabies in libera colla
furentis", Claudian. in Eutrop. l. 1. v. 183, 184. (d) "Asperius nihil
est humili, cum surgit in altum", Claudian. ib. v. 181.

[Proverbs 30:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 30:23</span></span>

For an odious woman, when she is married,.... Odious for her person, her
ugliness, and the deformity of her body; or rather for the ill qualities
of her mind, which, while single, she endeavours to conceal, but, being
married, hides them no longer; but becomes imperious, proud, scornful,
and malicious, and behaves in an ill natured way to her husband and all
about her, to such a degree, that there is no bearing the place where
she is;

and an handmaid, that is heir to her mistress; that has got so much into
her affections that she leaves all she has to her when she dies, which
makes her insufferably proud and vain; or she marries her master after
the death of her mistress, and so coming into her place enjoys all she
had, but only her wisdom and humility; which being wanting, she behaves
in such a manner as to make the whole family uneasy. This might be
exemplified in the case of Hagar, the bondmaid of Sarah, a type of those
that are under the law of works, and seek the inheritance by it; and who
trust in themselves that they are righteous, and despise others, [Gen
16:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen016.htm#004).

[Proverbs 30:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 30:24</span></span>

There be four things which are little upon the earth,.... Small in bulk,
that have little bodies, are the lesser sort of animals;

but they are exceeding wise; show a great deal of art and wisdom in what
they do; or "but they are wise, made wise" (e) by the instinct of
nature, by the direction of Providence, by which they do things that are
surprising. Some versions, that have no regard to the points, read the
words, "but their are wiser than the wise" (f); than even wise men; wise
men may learn much from the least of creatures; see [Job
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#007).

\(e\) "sapientia, sapientia imbuta"; Heb. "sapientificata", Piscator,
Gejerus. (f) "Sapientiora sapientibus", so Sept. V. L. Arabic and Syriac
versions; "sapientia superant, vel prudentissimos", Tigurine version.

[Proverbs 30:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 30:25</span></span>

The ants are a people not strong,.... Far from it; what is weaker than
an ant? a multitude of them may be destroyed at once, with the crush of
a foot. Pliny calls it "minimum animal", the least animal; and the
Arabians use it as a proverb, to call a weak man one weaker than an ant:
and there is one sort of ants called "dsar", so small that one hundred
of them will not weigh more than a barley corn (g): they are called a
people, because they associate together in great numbers; though small
in bulk, and weak as to power and strength; and which is a figure
elsewhere used in the sacred Scriptures; see [Joe
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/joe001.htm#006); and by profane writers, as Homer
and Virgil, who speak of bees as a people and nation (h); and of nations
of flies, and of flying birds, geese, cranes, and swans (i);

yet their prepare their meat in the summer; build granaries with great
art and wisdom, carry in grains of corn with great labour and industry,
in the summer season, when only to be got, and lay them up against
winter. Phocylides (k) the poet says much the same things of them; he
calls them a tribe or nation, small but laborious, and says, they gather
and carry in their food in summer for the winter, which is a proof of
their wisdom. Cicero (l) says, the ant has not only sense, but mind,
reason, and memory. Aelianus (m) ascribes unspeakable wisdom to it; and
Pliny (n) discourse and conversation; See Gill on [Pro
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#006); see Gill on [Pro
6:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#007); See Gill on [Pro
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#008). It is a pattern of industry and
diligence both as to temporal and spiritual things, [Ecc
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/ecc009.htm#010).

\(g\) Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 4. c. 22. col. 598. (h) Iliad. 2.
v. 87. "Et populos et proelia dicam", Georgic. l. 4. v. 4, 5. (i) Iliad.
2. v. 459, 469. & 15. v. 690, 691. (k) Poem. Admon. v. 158, 159. (l) De
Natura Deorum, l. 3. (m) De Animal. l. 16. c. 15. (n) Nat. Hist. l. 11.
c. 30.

[Proverbs 30:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 30:26</span></span>

The coneys are but a feeble folk,.... Or "rabbits"; though some think
these creatures are not intended, because they are not so little as
those with which they are ranked, the ant, the locust, and spider; and
because of the places in which they burrow and make their houses, which
though in holes and caverns of the earth, yet not in rocky but sandy
places; rather therefore it is thought that the mountain mouse, or bear
mouse (o), as Jerom calls it, is meant; of which, he says (p), there
were great numbers in Palestine, and which had their habitations in the
holes of rocks; though if Spain has its name from as some say, because
of the multitudes of coneys in it; and hence that part of Spain called
Celtiberia is called by Catullus (q) Cuniculosa; the coney may be
thought to be meant by this word, and so it is translated in [Lev
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#005); the only places where it is
elsewhere used; and the word may be derived either from to "cover", by a
change of the letters and or from which has the signification both of
breaking, and of hiding and covering, [Gen
3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015); and this creature breaks the
earth and hides itself in it (r);

yet make they their houses in the rocks; it is usual with other writers
to call the receptacles of any creatures, beasts, birds, or insects,
their houses so we read of the house of the ant, and of the tortoise and
snail (s); and which, because it carries its house era its back, it is
called by Cicero (t) "domiporta"; see [Psa
104:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#017); the coneys make theirs in the
rocks, to cure themselves from their more potent enemies; and thus what
they want in strength is made up in sagacity, and by their wise conduct
they provide for their safety and protection. These are an emblem of the
people of God, who are a weak and feeble people, unable of themselves to
perform spiritual duties, to exercise grace, to withstand the
corruptions of their nature, resist the temptations of Satan, bear up
under afflictive providences, and grapple with spiritual enemies, or
defend themselves from them: but such heavenly wisdom is given them, as
to betake themselves for refuge and shelter to Christ, the Rock of
Israel; the Rock of salvation, the Rock that is higher than they; a
strong one, on which the church is built, and against which the gates of
hell cannot prevail: and here they are safe from the storms of divine
wrath, and the avenging justice of God; from the rage and fury of men,
and the fiery darts of Satan; here they dwell safely and delightfully,
and have all manner of provision at hand for them; they are the
inhabitants of that Rock, who have reason to sing indeed! see [Isa
33:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#016).

\(o\) , Sept. "choerogryllii", Vatablus; "mures montani", Junius &
Tremellius, Cartwright; "arctomyes", Schultens. (p) Epist. ad Sun. &
Fretelli, fol. 30, C. tom. 3. (q) Cuniculosa Celtiberia, Epigram. ad
Contubernales, 35. v. 18. (r) Gaudet "in effossis habitare cuniculus
antris", Martial. Epigr. l. 13. Ep. 58. (s) Phaedri Fab. 37, 80. (t) De
Divinat. l. 2. c. 64. and so by Hesiod and Anaxilas in Athenaei
Deipnosoph. l. 2. c. 22. p. 63.

[Proverbs 30:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 30:27</span></span>

The locusts have no king,.... These are small creatures also, yet very
devouring ones; and consume the fruits of the earth, wherever they come
and light; see [Exo 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo010.htm#013); they are
very numerous, and move in large bodies, and yet with great regularity
and order; which shows the wisdom there is in them by natural instinct,
though they have no king to command, guide, and direct them: in this the
mystical locusts differ from them, who have a king, whose name is
Abaddon, [Rev 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#011);

yet they go forth all of them by bands; the Targum is,

"they are all gathered together as one.''

They get together in one place; they associate and join themselves in
bands, and keep together, though they have no ruler over them; an emblem
of unity, concord, and harmony, let the form of government be what it
will, as the best security to a people: and these creatures, when they
move from place to place, they move in a body, in a very regular manner;
"in precise order" (u), as the words may be rendered, with great
exactness, everyone in his proper place, all in rank and file; and
though they have no general to marshal them, yet are in, and march in as
good order as the most regular army does. So the Arabic version,

"yet in their army, their affairs and manner are in a beautiful
disposition;''

indeed they are God's army, as they are called, [Joe
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#025); and it is he that gives them
their wisdom, instructions, directions, and commission. It is rendered
by some, "everyone cutting"; that is, as Kimchi (w) interprets it,
cutting the green grass and trees; or, "every one dividing" (x); that
is, to himself, the prey or spoils, as kings do; see [Isa
33:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#004).

\(u\) Vid. Hilier. Onomastic. Sacr. p. 187. (w) Sepher Shorash. rad. so
Stockius, p. 377. "exeidens omnia, herbas, scil. et fruges", Schindler.
col. 633. so Ben Melech. (x) "unaquaeque sibi dividens", Bochart; so
Schultens.

[Proverbs 30:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 30:28</span></span>

The spider taketh hold with her hands,.... On the thread she spins, or
on the flies and bees she catches in her web. This is a small creature,
yet very wise; what a curious thread does she spin! what a fine web does
she weave! with what exactness and proportion is it framed! as if she
understood the rules of mathematics and architecture;

and is in kings' palaces; as well as in the houses of poor people, and
in temples also; we read (y) of one in the temple of Ceres, which drew
its web over the face of the image: and though her webs are oftentimes
destroyed, especially in kings' palaces; yet such is her constancy and
assiduity, and her unwearied application to business, that, as fast as
they are destroyed, she attempts to restore them. This creature is an
emblem of diligence in things temporal and spiritual; which those that
use in the former sense shall stand before kings, and not before mean
men; and in the latter sense shall have the presence of the King of
kings, and dwell in his palace here and hereafter: also of worldly
minded men, who labour to be rich; spend their time, and take a great
deal of pains for mere trifles; weave curious webs, and, after all, only
catch flies; and those they cannot hold, uncertain riches, which make
themselves wings and fly away. Likewise this creature may resemble
hypocrites, whose hope and trust are as the spider's web, built upon
their own righteousness, spun out of their own hearts; a fine, thin,
slender thread, which cannot bear one stroke of the besom of divine
justice; such as these are in the palaces of Christ the King, are in his
churches, hypocrites in Zion; see [Job
8:13](../../../bib/kjv/job008.htm#013). Aben Ezra interprets it of the
ape: the same David de Pomis (z) observes, and Mr. Weemse (a), who seems
to incline to this sense; and this creature King Solomon, no doubt, had
in his palace, since his navy brought many of these, every three years,
from those parts to which it was sent, [Kg1
10:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1010.htm#022); and to these hands more
properly belong than to spiders, and are taken into king's palaces for
their pleasure and diversion; but to these there is one objection, that
this creature is not a little one. Others understand it of the "lizard",
that sort which is called "stellio"; but it is a question whether this
is to be found in king's palaces. Bellonius (b) makes mention of a kind
of lizard, which creeps into walls and catches flies, and is called by
the Greeks "samiamiton", a name very near the Hebrew word here used: and
Pliny (c) speaks of the "stellio", or lizard, as being in doors,
windows, and chambers; and as a very fraudulent and deceitful creature
to men, none more so; and also as poisonous, as this creature in the
text by its name seems to be: and Austin (d) makes mention of the lizard
as a domestic animal; which catches flies as the spider, with whom he
joins it. The Targum, Jarchi, and Gersom, take it to be the spider, as
we do; which may be thought most likely, since the creature here meant
seems to have its name from the Arabic word "sam", which signifies
poison (e); though it is affirmed (f) the spider is not poisonous; as is
well known by persons who have frequently swallowed them, without any
more harm than happens to hens, robin red breasts, and other birds, who
make them their daily food; and so men have been bit by them, without
any ill consequence: wherefore it is still thought by some that the
lizard is more probably meant; since some sorts of them are poisonous
(g), though not all, for some are eatable; See Gill on [Lev
11:30](../../../bib/kjv/lev011.htm#030).

\(y\) Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 12. c. 57. (z) Lexic. fol. 216. 1. (a)
Exercitat. l. 1. exercitat. 4. p. 31. (b) Apud Dieteric. Antiqu. Biblio.
p. 470. (c) Nat. Hist. l. 3o. c. 10. (d) Confess. l. 10. c. 35. (e)
Golius, col. 1208. Hottinger. Smegin Oriental. l. 1. c. 7. p. 199. (f)
Philosoph. Transact. abridged, vol. 2. p. 800. and vol. 5. part. 1. p.
24. (g) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 22. c. 25. & l. 29. c. 4.

[Proverbs 30:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 30:29</span></span>

There be three things which go well,.... In a very orderly and composed
manner; with constancy and cheerfulness, with great stateliness and
majesty, intrepidly, and without fear;

yea, four are comely in going; very beautiful and lovely to look at as
they walk.

[Proverbs 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 30:30</span></span>

A lion, which is strongest among beasts,.... For what is stronger than a
lion, or more courageous and undaunted? it walks with great majesty,
very slowly, step by step, the left foot first; shaking its shoulders as
it goes, as the philosopher (h) describes its going, and as here
intended, and this without fear;

and turneth not away for any; it does not go out of its way for any
creature it meets with; nor does it hasten its pace when pursued, nor
show the lest sign of fear; nor does it turn its back to any; which is
observed and confirmed by Aristotle (i), Aelianus (k), Pliny (l), and
other naturalists; particularly what Homer (m) and Virgil (n) say of
this animal agrees with this account of Solomon. This creature is an
emblem of Christ, the Lion of the tribe of Judah, who is stronger than
the strong man armed; who never turned his back to any of his enemies;
nor turned aside from the way of his duty, or the work of his office, on
account of any; not Herod the fox, who threatened to kill him; nor
Satan, the roaring lion, when he knew he was on the march to meet him;
nor any of those, who, though they had a band of soldiers, that came to
take him; see [Luk 13:31](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#031); and also it
is an emblem of righteous men, who are as bold as a lion; and cannot be
moved from their duty by anything they meet with, but remain steadfast
and constant in it; see [Pro 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro028.htm#001).

\(h\) Aristot. Hist. Animal. l. 2. c. 1. & Physog. c. 5. (i) Hist.
Animal. l. 9. c. 44. (k) De Animal. l. 4. c. 34. (l) Nat. Hist. l. 8. c.
16. (m) , &c. Iliad. 12. v. 299. (n) "Ceu saevum turba leonem", &c.
Aeneid. l. 9. prope finem.

[Proverbs 30:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 30:31</span></span>

A greyhound,.... So Gersom interprets the word; but Jarchi owns he does
not know what is meant; and Aben Ezra only says, it is the name of a
living creature, but does not say what; but observes, that some
interpret it of the "bee", and others of the "eagle". The words of the
original text only describe something "girt about the loins" (o): and
Kimchi (p) observes, that some say it is a hunting dog so called,
because it is thin about the loins, as if it was bound and girt; and
Aristotle (q) describes hunting dogs as well girded about their loins:
but others, as Kimchi in the same place observes, interpret it of the
leopard, which is small, and strong in its loins; and others of a bird
called the starling; but he owns he cannot understand the meaning of its
loins being girt: David de Pomis (r) interprets it of a cock; others, he
says, interpret it a hunting dog; others, a leopard; and some, a species
of an unclean bird; perhaps he means the starling, as before; and so the
word is used for that bird in the Talmud (s), and in the Arabic language
(t). Most likely the "horse" is meant; which is a very stately and
majestic creature in its going, and is very comely when it has its
harness girt on; and especially a war horse, with all its warlike
accoutrements, when it proceeds to battle, and stalks on in it; this
creature, one should think, could not be omitted among the four, which
is described in so magnificent a manner in [Job
39:19](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#019); and is called the goodly horse
in the battle, [Zac 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003); unless a
fine slender bodied race horse should be meant: the horse bids fairer
than any other creature named to be what is designed. The third creature
follows, which goes well, and is comely in going:

an he goat also; which with its long beard walks very gravely, and in a
stately manner, before the flock; and the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic
versions add, "going before the flock"; see [Jer
50:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#008). This stately walk of the goat is
very particularly taken notice of by, Aelian (u); he observes, that the
she goat disdains to be last in a flock of sheep, but declares by her
walk that she ought to be first; he adds, that the he goat goes before
the she goats, glorying in his beard; and, by a kind of wonderful
instinct in nature, judges the male is to be preferred to the female
(w). Kings, rulers, and governors, are compared to this creature; as
Alexander the great is in [Dan 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#005);
see [Zac 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003); especially such
resemble it who rule well, and set good examples to their subjects: and
to such, ministers of the Gospel are like; who go before their flocks,
guide and direct them, and are examples to them: and likewise all
believers; who strive to go before others in good works, and who then
are comely in their going. The fourth is,

and a king, against whom there is no rising up; no insurrection, no
opposition; who is not to be resisted or withstood; a lawful king, in
the lawful administration of government, who rules in the fear of God,
and according to his word, and the good and wholesome laws of a nation,
ought not to be resisted, [Rom 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom013.htm#001);
and a powerful, successful, and victorious king cannot be resisted,
withstood, and prevailed over; he drives all before him, and subdues all
under him, as David, Cyrus, Alexander, and others. But to none can this
better be applied than to Christ, the King of kings; against whom there
is no rising, before whom none can stand, against whom the gates of hell
can never prevail; who, even in his state of humiliation, conquered and
subdued all his and our enemies; destroyed the tyrant, sin; spoiled
Satan, and his principalities and powers; overcame the world; abolished
death, the last enemy; and delivered his people out of the hands of all,
and made them more than conquerors: and who went forth in the ministry
of the Gospel, into the Gentile world, conquering and to conquer;
bearing down all opposition before him, and subduing the people under
him; and who, in the latter day, will engage with his antichristian
enemies, the beast, false prophet, and kings of the earth, and shall
overcome them, and clear the world of them. And this is King who is
comely in his going; as he was in his goings of old from everlasting;
when he drew nigh to his divine. Father, and became the surety of his
people; and in his coming into this world, by the assumption of our
nature, to save lost perishing sinners: and so he is in his spiritual
visits to his saints; in his goings in the sanctuary, and walks he takes
amidst the golden candlesticks, his churches; as he will be also when he
comes a second time in the clouds of heaven: it will be a glorious
appearing; he will come with all the saints, and be attended with his
mighty angels; he will come in their glory, in his own, and in the glory
of his Father; and will be comely in his going indeed it will be with
great stateliness and majesty. The learned Dr. Pococke (x), from the use
of the word "alkum" in the Arabic language, renders the words thus, "and
a king with whom the people is"; who agree together; the one rules well,
and the other obey cheerfully; such a king walking with majesty is
comely to his people, and terrible to his enemies. The Targum is,

"and a king, who stands and speaks in the house of his people.''

\(o\) "accinctus lumbis equus", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Cartwright, Glassius, Bochart, Buxtorf; "infibulatus lumbos equus",
Schultens. (p) Sepher. Shorash. in voce (q) De Physiognom. c. 6. (r)
Lexic. fol. 28. 1. (s) T. Bab. Bava Kama, fol. 92. 2. (t) Golius, col.
1092. (u) De Animal. l. 7. c. 26. (w) "Dux pecoris hircus, duxerat
hircus oves", Tibullus, l. 2. Eleg. 1. v. 58. (x) Specimen. Arab. Hist.
p. 203. So "kuma" is used for people in the Alcoran, Surat. Joseph. v.
9.

[Proverbs 30:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 30:32</span></span>

If thou hast done foolishly in lifting up thyself,.... Against a king,
against whom there is no rising up; by speaking evil of him, or
rebelling against him; which is acting a foolish part, since it brings a
man into troubles and difficulties inextricable; or by
self-commendation, which is the height of folly, and the fruit of pride;
or carried it in such a haughty and overbearing manner to others, as to
provoke to wrath and anger;

or if thou hast thought evil; purposed and designed it, and contrived
the scheme of doing it, though not yet put in execution; though folly is
not actually committed, yet since the thought of it is rain, care should
be taken to prevent it;

lay thine hand upon thy mouth: think again before the thing resolved on
is done; as studious and thoughtful men put their hand to their mouth,
when they are deeply considering any affair before them: or put a stop
to the design, let it go no further; what has been thought of in the
mind, let it never come out of the mouth, nor be carried into execution;
stifle it in the first motion: or if this respects a foolish action
done, as it also may, since it stands connected with both clauses, then
the sense is, be silent; do not pretend to deny the action, nor to
excuse it; nor to say one word in the defence of it; nor to lay the
blame upon others; and much less to calumniate and reproach such who
faithfully reprove for it; take shame to thyself in silence, and repent
of the iniquity done. Aben Ezra thinks these words are said to Ithiel
and Ucal; but rather, to any and everyone, to all that should hear and
read these proverbs. The Targum is,

"do not lift up thyself, lest thou be foolish; and do not stretch out
thine hand to thy mouth.''

[Proverbs 30:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 30:33</span></span>

Surely the churning of milk bringeth forth butter,.... Or the pressing
of it. This is a thing well known and certain, that of milk, when
pressed out of the udder, and put into a churn, and there is shook
together, by a constant violent agitation or motion, called churning,
butter is produced; and cheese is sometimes called pressed milk (y), and
is pressed with the runnet, and by the hand also (z);

and the wringing of the nose bringeth forth blood: a too violent
compression of it, or forcible blowing of it, in order to purge it from
any impurity in it; instead of doing which it may break the tender skin,
and bring forth blood, which may be of bad consequence;

so the forcing of wrath bringeth forth strife; irritating the passions
of men, and provoking them by scurrilous and reproachful words to wrath
and anger, produce contentions, feuds, and lawsuits, which are not soon
and easily ended; and therefore such a conduct should be carefully
avoided. The same word is used in the three clauses, and signifies
pressing, squeezing, forcing.

\(y\) "Pressi copia lactis", Virgil. Bucolic. eclog. 1. v. 82. "Et
lactia massa coacti", Ovid. Metamorph. l. 8. v. 666. (z) "Causem bubulum
manu presssum", Sueton. in Octav. c. 76.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 31](pro031)

</div>
