<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro001)  [Next](pro003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">pro 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PROVERBS 2

This chapter directs to the means of attaining to the knowledge of
divine things, and shows the profit and advantage arising from thence.
The means are, embracing the doctrines of the Gospel, and retaining in
memory and affection the ordinances of it, [Pro
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001.md); and an inclination of the ear and
an application of the heart to the knowledge of these things, [Pro
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#002.md). An earnest and importunate
desire, expressed by prayer, after the same, [Pro
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#003.md); and a diligent and unwearied
search for them, as for silver and hid treasure, [Pro
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#004.md). The advantages are, that such
shall attain to the fear and knowledge of God; which may be concluded
from these being the gift of God to his people, and from their being
laid up for them, whom he carefully keeps and preserves, [Pro
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#005.md); and not only so, but such learn
to do that which is just and right among men, [Pro
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#009.md). And, besides, such is the nature
of divine wisdom, that, when it has once got a place in the heart and in
the affections, it will be a means of preserving both from the ways of
evil men, [Pro 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#010.md); who are
described, [Pro 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#013.md). And from the
evil woman, whose character is given, [Pro
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#016.md); whose vicious course of life,
and the ways she leads persons into, are represented as very dangerous,
[Pro 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#018.md). And, on the contrary, such
is the usefulness of true wisdom, that it leads into the way of good
men, who will be happy and safe, when the wicked shall be destroyed,
[Pro 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#020.md).

[Proverbs 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 2:1</span></span>

My son,.... These are either the continuation of the words of Solomon to
his son Rehoboam; or to anyone that came to him for instruction, or was
within the reach of being taught by him; whom he addresses in this
tender and affectionate manner, in order to gain his attention to what
he was about to say: or else they are the words of Wisdom, or Christ,
continued, thus bespeaking: his children and people; and giving them
some very wholesome counsel and advice, backed with the most powerful
and prevailing arguments;

if thou wilt receive my words; or doctrines: the doctrines of the
Gospel, relating to the person, office, and grace of Christ, and
salvation by him; such as the words of peace, pardon, righteousness, and
life; which are to be received, not as the word of man, but as the word
of God; and with all readiness of mind and willingness, as they were by
the Bereans; and most gladly, as by the three thousand pricked to the
heart under Peter's sermon; and as they are and will be by every
sensible sinner;

and hide my commandments with thee; in the heart; so as to have a high
esteem of them, and a hearty affection and value for them; retain them
in memory, and frequently think of them and meditate upon them, and
constantly observe them; see [Psa
119:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#011.md).

[Proverbs 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 2:2</span></span>

So that thou incline thine ear unto Wisdom,.... Hearken to Wisdom, that
is, Christ; or rather to the instruction of Wisdom, which is the Gospel;
so called, because it is the produce of divine wisdom, what the wisdom
of man could never have devised, and which it opposes; and in which
there is a most glorious display of the wisdom of God, in the
justification and salvation of his people by Christ, [Co1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006.md); and is worth listening unto with
the greatest attention, which is what is designed by this expression;

and apply thine heart to understanding; to a spiritual and experimental
understanding of the Gospel, and the truths of it: for an inclination of
the ear, without an application of the heart, which signifies the
intenseness of the mind, an earnest and hearty desire after knowledge,
will signify nothing; a hypocrite may seemingly hear with great
attention, and show much affection, and yet his heart be after the world
and the things of it, [Eze 33:31](../../../bib/kjv/eze033.htm#031.md); see
[Psa 119:112](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#112.md).

[Proverbs 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 2:3</span></span>

Yea, if thou criest after knowledge,.... Of God, Christ, and the Gospel;
not only bow the ear and bend the mind to these things, but
importunately and fervently pray for them; not only attend the ministry
of the word by men, but cry to God to give the Spirit of wisdom and
revelation in the knowledge of divine and spiritual things; which
supposes some sense of a want of it, an hearty desire for it, having
some apprehension of the worth and value of it; and that it is to be
had, as there is indeed great reason to hope for and expect it, [Jam
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005.md);

and liftest up thy voice for understanding; for Christ, who is
understanding as well as wisdom, [Pro
8:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#014.md); or rather for an understanding
of the Gospel and the mysteries of it, which men do not naturally
understand; and for which there must be an understanding given, or the
eyes of the understanding must be enlightened; or Christ, by his spirit
and grace, must open the understanding, that it may understand these
things; which is granted to those who lift up their voice in prayer for
it.

[Proverbs 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 2:4</span></span>

If thou seekest her as silver,.... That is, wisdom, knowledge, and
understanding; which all signify and relate unto one and the same thing,
expressed here by "her": namely, the doctrine of wisdom, or Christ; that
is, the Gospel, and a spiritual and experimental knowledge and
understanding of it, and the truths thereof; which are as desirable and
valuable as silver, and more so; and which may be fitly compared to it,
and be preferred before it, for their purity, solidity, and duration;
see [Psa 119:72](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#072.md); and are to be sought
after with as much and more eagerness, affection, and diligence, as
silver is by those who are most covetous of it, [Pro
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#010.md);

and searchest for her as for hid treasures; the Gospel is a treasure,
[Co2 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#007.md); an accumulation of riches.
It contains rich truths, things valuable for their antiquity; for being
far fetched and dearly bought, coming from heaven, and sealed by the
blood of Christ, and the holy martyrs of Jesus; and for the abundance of
them; there are treasures of wisdom and knowledge in the Gospel, and in
Christ the sum and substance of it, who is full of truth as well as
grace, [Col 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md). It contains rich
blessings of grace, such as are spiritual, solid, and substantial, sure
and irreversible; and a multitude of them, [Rom
15:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#029.md); and also rich promises,
exceeding great and precious ones; which are absolute and unconditional,
suited to the various cases of God's people, and sure to all the seed:
and it reveals the riches of God's goodness, his special goodness in
Christ; the unsearchable riches of Christ; and the riches both of grace
and glory. And under this notion of a treasure is it to be searched for,
and as an hid treasure; in allusion to what is laid up in the cabinets
of princes, or lies in the bowels of the earth, as precious stones:
Pliny (m) says, that "topazin", in the language of the Troglodytes, has
the signification of seeking, because "topazes" are diligently sought
for and searched after; See Gill on [Job
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/job028.htm#019.md). The Gospel, and the truths of
it, were greatly hid under the former dispensation from the Gentile
world, and very much from the Jews themselves; being wrapped up in dark
prophecies, obscure hints, and shadowy types and sacrifices; and are
now, and always were, entirely hid from the wicked and reprobate part of
the world, from them that are lost, and from God's own elect before
conversion. This is "the fellowship of the mystery" that was "hid in
God", in his heart, from all eternity, [Eph
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#009.md), the truths of it are the
"treasures of wisdom and knowledge hid" in Christ, [Col
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#003.md); and likewise the "treasure hid in
the field" of the Scriptures, [Mat
22:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#044.md); which therefore are to be
searched into for them, with like labour and resolution with which men
dig into the earth, to find the rich ore that is in the bowels of it:
and this should be done by diligent reading them; by frequent and deep
meditation on them; by constant hearing the truths of the Gospel
preached; by earnest prayer for the illumination of the divine Spirit to
understand them; and by all the help of the writings of good men, and
conversation with them, that can be had. These are things to be sought
for and searched after, in the first place, in the early time of life;
and with the utmost diligence and labour, as being of the greatest
moment and importance.

\(m\) Nat. Hist. l. 37. c. 8.

[Proverbs 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 2:5</span></span>

Then shalt thou understand the fear of the Lord,.... The grace of fear,
and the exercise of it: which is the beginning of wisdom and knowledge,
and is a treasure itself, [Pro 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#007.md). By
means of the Gospel the Lord works it in the hearts of his people by his
Spirit; and by the same leads them into the riches of his special grace
and "goodness", which they are influenced by to "fear", and the Lord for
the sake of it: and particularly they are led hereby to the pardoning
grace and mercy of God, which is with him, that he may "be feared"; and
it is the Gospel which induces and encourages a true filial fear of God,
by which men "depart from evil"; for that teaches them to deny all
manner of sin, and to live a godly life and conversation: so that
through a diligent search after the knowledge of the Gospel, and an
attaining it, men come to have a spiritual, experimental, and practical
understanding of the fear of God as a grace; and also, as it includes
the whole worship of God, by means of Gospel light, they come to
understand what sort of worship that is God is to be worshipped with;
that it is pure, spiritual, and evangelical, suited to his nature and
will: what the ordinances of divine service are; and that these are to
be kept as they were delivered, and in the exercise of faith, from a
principle of love, and with a view to the glory, of God, without
trusting to them or depending on them for salvation. And this is the
advantage arising from a diligent search after the doctrine of wisdom,
or the Gospel, and a knowledge and understanding of it; and is used as
an argument encouraging to it; and another follows;

and find the knowledge of God; such a knowledge of God as is not to be
found by the light of nature, in the whole volume of the creatures, and
in all the writings of the philosophers; no, nor in the law of Moses;
for though much of God and his perfections may be seen and known by the
things that are made, and much of the will of God by the law he gave;
yet by neither of these is the knowledge of God in Christ, which is
"life eternal". This only is to be found in the Gospel, and by means of
it; here only it is brought to light; and through this men not only find
it, but increase more and more in it: herein is a glorious display of
his persons and perfections, of his counsels and purposes, of his
covenant and promises, of his mind and will, with respect to doctrine
and worship; and of the way of peace, life, and salvation, by Jesus
Christ; which must serve greatly to engage and excite persons to a
diligent search and pursuit after it. And all that is here said is
designed to encourage a diligent search after divine things; for, as the
poet (n) says, there is nothing so difficult but by searching may be
found out.

\(n\) Terent. Heautont. Act. 4. Sc. 1.

[Proverbs 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 2:6</span></span>

For the Lord giveth wisdom,.... Natural wisdom in all its branches, with
all its improvements, and in its utmost latitude and perfection; and
spiritual wisdom, which lies in the knowledge of a man's self, his own
folly, impurity, impotence, and misery; being wise unto salvation; in
the knowledge of Christ, as the only way of salvation, and of God in
Christ; in partaking of the true grace, which is wisdom in the hidden
part; in being acquainted experimentally with the doctrines of the
Gospel; and in walking wisely and circumspectly, and as becomes it,
which is practical wisdom: and all this is the gift of God; as is also
Christ, who is wisdom, and is given to be wisdom to his people. He is
the gift of God to them, in all characters he bears, and relations he
stands in; he is a very large comprehensive gift, an unspeakable one;
which is given freely and liberally, and is never taken away again. Now
this is said, partly to caution such who search after wisdom, and find
it, not to attribute it to their diligence and industry, but to the
grace of God; and partly as a direction where to go for it; and as an
encouragement to hope to have it, since the Lord freely gives it, [Jam
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#005.md);

out of his mouth cometh knowledge and understanding; by the prophets of
the Old Testament who came with a "Thus saith the Lord", and were the
mouth of the Lord to the people; from whence flowed the knowledge of
divine things; of the will of God; of the Messiah, his person and
offices; of his coming, sufferings, death and salvation by him: and by
his Son, by whom he has spoke in these last days, and has declared all
his mind; and by whom the doctrines of grace and truth, and the
knowledge of them, are come fully and clearly, [Heb
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#001.md); and by the Scriptures of truth,
both of the Old and of the New Testament, which are the word of God;
what are breathed by him and come out of his mouth, and are able to make
men wise unto salvation: and by the ministers of the Gospel, who speak
in the name of the Lord, and the Lord by them; and by means of whom he
imparts much spiritual and evangelical knowledge to the sons of men; the
mouth of a Gospel minister, who is the month of God to men, "speaketh
wisdom, and his tongue talketh of judgment", [Psa
37:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#030.md). This clause is added, to
encourage to a search after wisdom in the use of means; namely, by
attending on the word, and the ministry of it.

[Proverbs 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 2:7</span></span>

He layeth up sound wisdom for the righteous,.... In order to give it to
them that seek for it; which is another encouragement to search after
it. By "sound wisdom" may be meant, not the law, as Kimchi and Ben
Melech; so called, because it endures for ever, when all beings are
defective and come to nothing; but the Gospel, which is sound doctrine,
pure and not corrupt; true and real wisdom, in opposition to that which
has only the show of wisdom, and is science falsely so called; and this
was hid in God, in Christ, and laid up as a treasure in the sacred
Scriptures: or else the true grace of God, in distinction from that
which is counterfeit; and is that goodness of his, which he has laid up
in his heart, and in the covenant of his grace; and the fulness of grace
which he has laid up in Christ for them [Psa
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#019.md); or eternal glory and happiness.
The word here used signifies "essence", "substance" (o); that which
really is, and is solid and substantial; and such are the glories of the
other world the crown of righteousness, the hope laid up in heaven, and
the inheritance reserved there, [Col
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005.md). These are real things, though
invisible, and are rich and valuable; and have substance and solidity in
them, in opposition to earthly riches, which are a vain show, and are
things that are not, and at best temporal and perishing; but these are
an enduring substance, [Pro 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#021.md). The
Septuagint render it by "salvation", and the Targum by a word which
signifies "glory" and "honour"; all which may well be understood of
eternal life which is laid up and reserved "for the righteous": not for
such who are only so in show and imagination, but for those who are
really and truly so; not for those who are legally, but evangelically
righteous; or not for such that seek righteousness by the law, but by
faith in Christ; for such who are made righteous by the righteousness of
Christ imputed to them, and by faith receive it, and lay hold on it as
their righteousness; and in consequence of this live soberly and
righteously: for these only eternal life is prepared; they only have a
right unto it, and a meetness for it, and shall enjoy it;

he is a buckler to them that walk uprightly; who are sincere in their
deportment before God and men; who walk according to the rule of the
divine word; who walk by faith on Christ, and walk on in him as they
have received him; and go on living by faith on his righteousness, which
is walking in his uprightness, till they come to be with him for ever in
heaven. To these the Lord is a "buckler" or shield; he covers them with
the "shield of faith", his own Son, his blood righteousness, and
sacrifice; which faith lays hold on and uses as a shield against Satan's
fiery darts; and gives them "the shield of salvation" which secures them
from sin and wrath and every enemy; and encompasses them about with his
"favour", as a "shield", which is immutable and invariable; and keeps
them by his power through faith unto salvation, [Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016.md); with this compare [Gen
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#001.md), [Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003). Some (p.md) read these words by way
of apposition, and understand them of sound wisdom; that that is a
buckler or shield to the persons here described; see [Ecc
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#012.md).

\(o\) "essentiam", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Mercerus,
Gejerus; "quicquid revera est", Junius & Tremellius; "solidam firmamque
substantiam", Baynus; "solidum, vel solidam rem", Schultens. (p) So
Mercerus, Piscator, Schultens. Gussetius chooses to take the word for a
verb, and renders it, "he delivers it"; that is, sound wisdom to them
that walk uprightly; Ebr. Comment. p. 454.

[Proverbs 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 2:8</span></span>

He keepeth the paths of judgment,.... That is, the Lord keeps them; he
does that which is just and right himself, in the course of his
providence, and in the methods of his grace; and as he guides the feet
of his people in the ways of righteousness and holiness, he keeps them
there from turning out of them. The words may be rendered, "to keep the
paths of judgment" (q); and so expresses the end, fruit, and effect of
the Lord's being a buckler to them, as he is said to be in [Pro
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#007.md), he is their shield and
protection, so as either to keep them in the right ways in which they
should go; or that they might studiously observe them, and keep walking
therein, without stumbling in them, or declining from them;

and preserveth the way of his saints; to whom he has been kind and
bountiful; or who have been merciful, liberal, and generous to others;
who having partook of the grace of God themselves, are useful to men:
the Targum calls them "righteous ones". These the Lord preserves by his
power and grace, in the way in which he has led them, and which is his
own way, safe to his kingdom and glory: for none of his saints, his holy
and righteous ones, shall ever perish; the way in which he directs them,
and in which he keeps them, leads to everlasting life; see [Sa1
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#009.md).

\(q\) "ad custodiendum", Pagninus, Montanus; "ad servandum", Baynus,
Schultens.

[Proverbs 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 2:9</span></span>

Then shalt thou understand righteousness and judgment,.... This is
another fruit and effect of the Gospel, and of a spiritual understanding
of it; that besides the knowledge of God, and how to behave with
reverence towards him, [Pro 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#005.md); it
leads men into a notion of doing that which is right and just among men;
it gives them not only a theoretic but a practical understanding of
justice, and a true judgment of what is right and wrong; or gives such
an understanding thereof as that they practise it; for it teaches men to
live soberly, righteously, and godly, [Tit
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011.md). It is not only a revelation and
ministration of the righteousness of Christ as the only matter of a
sinner's justification before God; and informs a man's judgment so that
he can distinguish between truth and error, right and wrong, good and
bad notions and practices; but it influences his actions, life, and
conversation, and engages him to do works of righteousness from the best
principles, upon the best motives, and with the best views;

and equity; yea, every good path; that is, so to understand equity, as
to do that which is equitable between man and man; and to understand
every good path which the word of God directs to, even all the
commandments and ordinances of the Lord, so as to walk in them; these
things the Gospel acquaints men with, and urges them to observe: or the
words may be rendered, either "the rectitude" or "equity of fall good
paths", as the Syriac version; how just, and right, and plain, and
equitable, everyone is, and therefore ought to be walked in; or
"plainnesses", or "most plain", is or shall be "every good path" (r), to
them that have a spiritual and experimental knowledge of the Gospel; and
by it an understanding of their duty. One word signifies "plain" and
"straight", and another "round" (s), and both are true of the path of
righteousness; for though it is a circle of duty saints walk in, yet
straight and plain.

\(r\) So Schmidt. (s) "complanationes", Schultens; "orbitam", Montanus;
"ab rotundus", Gejerus.

[Proverbs 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 2:10</span></span>

When wisdom entereth into thine heart,.... Either Christ, the Wisdom of
God; who enters there at conversion, and sets up a throne in the heart,
and dwells there by faith: or else the Gospel, the wisdom of God in a
mystery; which enters not into the head only, as in hypocrites and
formal professors; nor into the natural affections, as in the stony
ground hearers; but into the heart, opened by the Spirit of God to
receive it, so as to have a spiritual understanding of it; which is done
when the Gospel comes not in word only, but in the demonstration and
power of the Spirit; when a man truly understands it, approves of it,
loves it, believes it; and it has a place in his heart, and richly
dwells there;

and knowledge is pleasant unto thy soul; which the Gospel thus entering
gives; even the knowledge of God in Christ, as the God of all grace, as
gracious and merciful, forgiving iniquity, transgression, and sin; the
knowledge of Christ, as the only Redeemer and Saviour; and the knowledge
of Gospel truths, which lead and relate unto him: all which is pleasant
to a gracious soul, and affords unspeakable delight to the mind; and is
sweeter, as every truth of the Gospel is, than the honey or the
honeycomb; see [Pro 16:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#024.md).

[Proverbs 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 2:11</span></span>

Discretion shall preserve thee,.... Which wisdom or the Gospel gives, or
the Lord by the means of it; for the Gospel makes a man wise and
discreet in the business of salvation, and in his conduct and
deportment; and the discretion it gives him will put him upon his guard,
and direct him to watch against every error, and every false way. And so
the words may be rendered, "discretion will watch over thee"; to keep
thee from everything pernicious in doctrine and practice. The Septuagint
version renders it, "good counsel"; which wisdom gives, and the Gospel
is full of; and which, if attended to, is a means of the preservation of
the saints;

understanding shall keep thee; which is only the same thing expressed in
other words. The Septuagint version renders it, "an holy thought"; and
the Arabic version, "a just thought shall preserve thee in thy last
times". What these are a means of keeping and preserving from is
explained in the following verses.

[Proverbs 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 2:12</span></span>

To deliver thee from the way of the evil man,.... Who is so by nature
and practice, who is hardened in sin and abandoned to it, whose course
of life is evil, and who endeavours to draw others into the same evil
practices; now the Gospel, and a spiritual knowledge of it, are a means
of preserving men from following the examples of such persons, and from
walking with them in the ways of sin: or from "the evil way" (t), from
every evil way, from a vicious course of life; not from idolatry only,
as some interpret it, though this may be included, and chiefly designed;
but from all manner of sin, from everything that is contrary to the law
of God and sound doctrine;

from the man that speaketh froward things; perverse things, things
contrary to the light of nature, to divine revelation, to the word of
God, both law and Gospel; if a single man is meant, he might be thought
to be the man of sin, antichrist, who has a mouth speaking blasphemies
against God, his name, his tabernacle, and them that dwell therein, [Rev
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005.md); and the Gospel delivers men from
following him, and falling in with his perverse doctrines and practices;
but the word seems to be a collective one, and to be understood of all
wicked men, to whom the description agrees, as it is explained in the
following verses in the plural number; who out of their evil hearts, and
the abundance of wickedness there, speak evil things, tending to debauch
the minds and manners of others; to be delivered from whom is a singular
mercy. Jarchi restrains this to heretics, and such as caused Israel to
apostatize to idolatry, and turned the law into evil. The Gospel is
undoubtedly a means of preserving from error and heresy.

\(t\) "a via mala", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Cocceius,
Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 2:13</span></span>

Who leave the paths of uprightness,.... Or "righteousness", or the
"right and plain ways" (u); which the light of nature and the law of
God, and especially the Gospel of Christ, direct to; and in which they
have been trained up, having had a religious education; for it supposes
them to have been externally in these ways, since they are said to leave
them; for though persons do not easily and ordinarily leave the ways
they have been brought up in, yet sometimes they do; and there are
instances of it, and such generally are the worst of men;

to walk in the ways of darkness: sin, ignorance, and infidelity; in
which they that walk know not where they are, nor whither they are a
going, and which must be very uncomfortable as well as dangerous; in
which only works of darkness are done, and which lead to blackness of
darkness, the darkness of hell; a miserable choice, a sad change this!
So Schultens renders it, "ways of horrid darkness".

\(u\) "semitas rectas", Mercerus; "itinera recta", Piscator; "itinera
planissima", Schultens.

[Proverbs 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 2:14</span></span>

Who rejoice to do evil,.... At the doing of it, or when they have done
it; they are glad of an opportunity of doing mischief, and glory when
they have done it; it is a sport and pastime to them, [Pro
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#002.md); they take pleasure in the act of
sin, and have no remorse of conscience afterwards; they speak of it in
an exulting manner, and boast of it, and glory in their shame;

and delight in the frowardness of the wicked: of the wicked man, as Aben
Ezra and Gersom supply it; in the perversities and contradictions of
every wicked man; they not only take pleasure in their own sins, but in
the sins of others, and in them that commit them; which is an
aggravation of their wickedness, [Rom
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#032.md); they delight to hear a man speak
froward and perverse things; things against God, and Christ, and
religion, against all good men, and everything that is good; against the
Gospel, the doctrines and ordinances of it; and they delight to see him
do things perverse and contrary to the will of God. The Vulgate Latin
version renders it, "they exult in the worst things".

[Proverbs 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 2:15</span></span>

Whose ways are crooked,.... Which swerve from and are not agreeably to
the rule of the divine word, either the law of God or the Gospel of
Christ; sin is an aberration, a straying from the rule of God's word, a
transgression of his law; and a walk in it is unbecoming the Gospel of
Christ; it has many serpentine windings and turnings in it; full of
distortions and excursions, and many retrograde actions; see [Psa
125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005.md);

and they froward in their paths; declining here and there, sometimes
going one way and sometimes another, but always following that which is
evil, and resolute to continue therein.

[Proverbs 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 2:16</span></span>

To deliver thee from the strange woman,.... As the Gospel of Christ and
its doctrines, or the instructions of wisdom, are a means of delivering
persons from the evil man, his company, ways, and works; so from a
naughty woman, an adulteress, called a "strange" woman; not because of
another nation, or unknown, but because she belongs to another person,
and not to him whom she entices into her embraces. Gersom interprets
this of the sensitive appetite, and Jarchi of idolatry; as others do
also of superstition and all false doctrine, and everything that is
contrary to true wisdom; and the whole that is here and afterwards said
may well enough be applied to the whore of Rome, from whose fornication,
or spiritual adultery, that is, idolatry, will worship, and
antichristian doctrines, the Gospel delivers men; see [Pro
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#005.md), &c.

even from the stranger which flattereth with her words; that useth
smooth and soft words to work upon the passions, move the affections,
and win the hearts of men; and ensnare them and draw them to commit
wickedness with her; see [Pro 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#003.md); and
so antichrist, and all false teachers and heretics, with good words and
fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple, [Rom
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018.md).

[Proverbs 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 2:17</span></span>

Which forsaketh the guide of her youth,.... Not God, the God of her
life, and who had provided for her from her youth up; nor her parent
that had taken care of her in her infancy, and had been the guardian of
her virgin state; but her husband, to whom she was married in her youth,
and to whom she gave up herself to be guided and directed, ruled and
governed, by: and as it is an aggravation of evil in a man to deal
treacherously against the wife of his youth, and the wife of his
covenant, [Mal 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#014.md); so it is in a
woman to forsake "the friend" or "companion of her youth" (w), as the
phrase may be rendered; who loved her and espoused her in his youthful
age, and with whom he had lived long in love and friendship, and in
great happiness, but now forsakes him; her affections being alienated
from him, leaves his company and bed, and associates with others. Gersom
interprets this of the human understanding, appointed to govern the
other powers and faculties of the soul;

and forgetteth the covenant of her God: not the covenant made with Noah,
in which adultery, as well as other things, were forbidden; nor the law
of Moses, or covenant at Sinai, in which it was condemned; but the
marriage covenant, which she entered into with her husband when espoused
to him, and when they mutually obliged themselves to be faithful to one
another: and this is called "the covenant of God"; not only because God
is the author and institutor of marriage, and has directed and enjoined
persons to enter into such a contract with one another; but because he
is present at it, and is a witness of such an engagement, mid is
appealed unto in it; which, as it adds to the solemnity of it, makes the
violation of it the more criminal. So the church of Rome has forsook
Christ, who was her guide in her first settlement, and her husband she
professed to be espoused to, as a chaste virgin; and has followed other
lovers, and become the mother of harlots; so false teachers leave their
guide, the Scriptures, and bring in damnable heresies, and deny the Lord
that bought them, [Pe2 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe2002.htm#001.md).

\(w\) "amieum adolescentiae suae", De Dieu, Michaelis; "socium
juventutis suae", Schultens.

[Proverbs 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 2:18</span></span>

For her house inclineth unto death,.... Bends, verges, and points that
way; it lies in the way to death, and brings unto it, and sinks into it
as into a ditch; or all that are in her house, that are familiar with
her, live and dwell with her, and commit wickedness with her; these
incline or are liable to lose, and do lose, their name, character, and
reputation, which is a death upon them; and bring diseases upon their
bodies, which issue in corporeal death; or are in danger of dying by the
hand of the injured husband, or the civil magistrate; and also are
exposed unto eternal death: or "she inclines to death, which is her
house" (x), so Aben Ezra and Kimchi; and to which the Targum agrees,

"for in the pit of death is her house:''

that is, the house she at last comes to and must dwell in, and all that
are ensnared by her; see [Pro 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#005.md); and
the second death will be the portion of the whore of Rome and all her
followers, [Rev 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010.md);

and her paths unto the dead; that is, her evil ways in which she walks,
and into which she draws others to join with her; these lead both her
and them to the "damned" (y) in hell, to keep company with them, and be
punished as they are: the word "rephaim", here used, sometimes signifies
"giants", and so the Targum renders it here; and may refer to the giants
of the old world, who were cut off for their debauchery and uncleanness,
[Gen 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#004.md); and with whom such persons
shall be for ever.

\(x\) "ad mortem quoad domum suam", Cocceius; "ad mortem domum suam",
Gejerus; "quod ad domum suam", Michaelis. (y) "ad damnatos", Tigurine
version; "ad orcinos", Schultens.

[Proverbs 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 2:19</span></span>

None that go unto her return again,.... That is, those that commit
whoredom with her return not again by repentance, and to a sober and
chaste way of living, at least but very few; hence some of the ancients
thought adultery was the unpardonable sin; but it is certain that some
have been recovered by the power of divine grace, and have been brought
to repentance for their impure manner of life, and have truly believed
in Christ, and lived sober and godly lives afterwards; but, as the
Targum adds, they do not return "in peace", but with great distress of
mind, remorse of conscience, and bitterness of soul; and these instances
are rare; generally speaking, such as are ensnared by an adulterous
woman, whose heart is snares and nets, and whose hands are as bands, are
held so fast by her that they seldom get out again, though some few may
escape, [Ecc 7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#026.md). The words may be
rendered, "all that go into her (z) shall not return again"; no, very
few of them. And it is a very rare thing, when men are fallen into
idolatry, superstition, will worship, and heresy, that they are
recovered out of this snare of the devil; there is a peradventure they
may, but it is not often that they be loosed from it, [Ti2
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#025.md);

neither take they hold of the paths of life; Christ, and the ways of
Christ, which lead to eternal life; few there be that find these paths
and walk in them, [Mat 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#014.md); and
especially such as are drawn aside by an impure woman, they are held so
fast by her alluring charms, and so bewildered by her art of deceiving,
that they are like persons that are led out of their way, and cannot
find it again.

\(z\) "omnes ingredientes eam", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Proverbs 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 2:20</span></span>

That thou mayest walk in the way of good men,.... Who are not so by
nature, but made so by the grace of God; such as the saints, prophets,
and patriarchs of old; and who walked in the way of righteousness,
holiness, and truth; being directed therein by the Spirit and word of
God: now the use and profit of wisdom's instructions, or of the Gospel
of Christ, and the doctrines of it, and a spiritual understanding of
them, are not only to deliver men from the wicked man and the naughty
woman, but also to influence and engage them to follow the examples of
good men, and to walk in the same good old paths as they have done, [Heb
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb006.htm#012.md);

and keep the paths of the righteous; not only observe them and walk in
them, but continue therein, even in the paths of faith and holiness; for
righteous men, such as are made righteous by the righteousness of
Christ, and are anew created unto righteousness and true holiness, and
in consequence thereof live righteously; these walk by faith on Christ,
and as becomes his Gospel; and in all the ordinances of it, and in all
the duties of religion; and the Gospel teaches all those that receive
and profess it to do the same.

[Proverbs 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 2:21</span></span>

For the upright shall dwell in the land,.... Such as are upright in
heart, who have a right spirit renewed in them; whose hearts are right
with God, have the truth of grace in them; whose faith is unfeigned,
their love without dissimulation, and their hope without hypocrisy; and
who are upright in their lives and conversations; these being Israelites
according to the flesh, as well as Israelites indeed in a spiritual
sense, shall dwell in the land of Canaan, which the Lord promised to
such, and which good men enjoyed by virtue of it: or the sense is, that
such shall dwell peaceably and quietly in the world, and possess the
good things of it, though in a small quantity, in such a comfortable
manner, with the love of God and a sense of it, as wicked men do not; or
else they shall inhabit the world to come, as Jarchi interprets it; not
only a future state of happiness in heaven, but the Messiah's kingdom on
earth, the new heavens and new earth, wherein dwelleth righteousness,
[Pe2 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#013.md);

and the perfect shall remain in it; or "be left in it" (a); or shall be
"strengthened" (b), confirmed, and established in it; or they shall
dwell in it as a tent or tabernacle, bound with strong cords; see [Isa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020.md); or continue there, when others
should have no place in it, as follows. By the "perfect" are meant such
as have all grace seminally implanted in them, though it is not come up
to maturity; who have a perfection of parts, but not of degrees; are
properly men in Christ, though they are not arrived to the measure of
the stature of the fulness of Christ; are perfectly holy in Christ,
though not in themselves; and are perfectly justified by his
righteousness, and perfectly comely through his comeliness, though as
yet imperfect in themselves; and those that shall dwell in the new
heavens and new earth, and remain there a thousand years, shall be
entirely perfect in soul and body, wholly without sin; and complete in
knowledge, holiness, and peace: the Targum renders it, who are "without
spot", undefiled persons; such who are not defiled with women, with the
strange woman before mentioned; whose garments are not defiled, and who
are free from the pollution of false doctrine, will worship,
superstition, and idolatry, [Rev 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#004.md).

\(a\) "superstites erunt", Tigurine version, Mercerus; "superstitabunt",
Cocceius; "reliqui fient", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator;
"relinquentur", Michaelis. (b) "Nervabuntur", Schultens.

[Proverbs 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 2:22</span></span>

But the wicked shall be cut off from the earth,.... Suddenly by death;
or in a judicial way by the hand of the civil magistrate, before they
have lived out half their days; and shall not enjoy the good things of
the earth they have been seeking for, and laying up, and promising
themselves a long and quiet possession of; but, on the contrary, like
unfruitful trees, shall be cut down, and cast into the fire; and,
however, shall not dwell in the second Adam's earth, in the new earth,
but shall perish out of his land, [Psa
10:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#016.md); see [Psa
37:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#002.md);

and the transgressors shall be rooted out of it; such as have acted
treacherously and perfidiously (c), and are opposed to upright men; as
the wicked are to the righteous, pure, and spotless; these shall not
only be cut off as trees to the stump, but be rooted up, and have
neither root nor branch left them; they shall have no posterity to
succeed them, and their memory shall utterly perish; see [Mal
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#001.md); or "shall be scraped off", or
"swept away" (d), as the dust and dross of the earth, and the
offscouring of all things.

\(c\) "perfide agentis", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "perfidi",
Cocceius, Michaelis, Schultens. (d) "eradentur", Montanus, Mercerus,
Gejerus; "everrentur", Schultens.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 3](pro003.md)

</div>
