<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Proverbs Index](pro.md)  
  [Previous](pro013)  [Next](pro015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#001.md)

[Proverbs 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 14:1</span></span>

Every wise woman buildeth her house,.... Not only by her fruitfulness,
as Leah and Rachel built up the house of Israel; but by her good
housewifery, prudent economy; looking well to the ways of her household;
guiding the affairs of her house with discretion; keeping all things in
a good decorum; and bringing up her children in virtue, and in the fear
and admonition of the Lord. So Christ, who in this book goes by the name
of "Wisdom", or the wise woman, builds his house upon himself, the Rock;
and all his people on their most holy faith, by means of the ministry of
the word, and administration of ordinances: he guides and governs his
house, where he is, as a Son in it and over it; and of whom the whole
family in heaven and earth is named, taken care of, and wisely and
plentifully provided for: and so Gospel ministers, who are wise to win
souls, being well instructed in the kingdom of God; these "wise women"
(y), so it is in the original text, or wise virgins; these wise master
builders lay the foundation Christ ministerially, and build souls on it;
and speak things to the edification of the church and people of God, and
the building of them up in faith and holiness;

but the foolish plucketh it down with her hands; the Vulgate Latin
version adds, "being built"; this she does by her idleness and laziness;
by her lavish and profuse way of living; by her negligence and want of
economy; by her frequenting playhouses, and attention to other
diversions; and so her family and the affairs of it go to wreck and
ruin. Thus the apostate church of Rome, who is called a "woman", and may
be said to be a "foolish" one, being a wicked one and a harlot; see [Rev
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002.md); pulls down the true church and
house of God with both hands, as much as in her lies, by her false
doctrines, and superstitious worship and idolatry; and by her murders
and massacres of the saints, with the blood of whom she is said to be
drunk; nay, not only pulls it down with her hands, but treads upon it
with her feet, [Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002.md). So likewise
all false teachers do as this foolish woman does, by their impure lives
and impious doctrines, defile the temple of God, subvert the faith of
many; by means of whom the tabernacle of David, or house of God, is
fallen down; the ruins and breaches of which Christ will repair in the
latter day.

\(y\) "sapientes mulieres", Munster, Baynus; so the Septuagint and
Arabic versions.

[Proverbs 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 14:2</span></span>

He that walketh in his uprightness feareth the Lord,.... It is plain
that the fear of the Lord is upon the heart and before the eyes of such
that walk according to the word of God, with a sincere desire to glorify
him; for it is by the fear of the Lord that men depart from evil, and
because of that they cannot do what others do; and therefore when a man
walks uprightly, and his conversation is in all holiness and godliness,
it shows that the fear of God has a place in his heart, which influences
his outward behaviour;

but he that is perverse in his ways despiseth him; either God himself,
whom the upright walker fears; for he that acts perversely, contrary to
the law of God, or transgresses that, and goes out of the way, despises
God the lawgiver, tramples upon his authority, stretches out his hand,
and commits acts of hostility against him; and he that perverts the
Gospel of Christ despises his ministers, and despises Christ himself,
and him that sent him. Or else the meaning is, that such a perverse
walker despises him that fears the Lord; so Aben Ezra interprets it; and
such are generally the contempt of wicked men: to this sense is the
Vulgate Latin version,

"he that walks in a right way, and fears God, is despised by him that
walks in an infamous way;''

but the Septuagint and Arabic versions render it, "is despised": meaning
the perverse man.

[Proverbs 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 14:3</span></span>

In the mouth of the foolish is a rod of pride,.... A proud tongue, or a
tongue speaking proud and haughty things; with which foolish or wicked
men smite others and wound and hurt their reputation and credit, and in
the issue hurt themselves also; their tongue is not only a rod to
others, but a scourge to themselves, or is the cause of evil coming upon
them; such was the tongue of Pharaoh, as Jarchi on the place observes,
[Exo 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002.md); and of those the psalmist
speaks of, [Psa 73:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa073.htm#009.md); and particularly
of antichrist, whose mouth is opened in blasphemies against God, and his
tabernacle, and his saints, [Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005.md);

but the lips of the wise shall preserve them; from speaking such proud
and haughty things against God and men; or from being hurt by the
tongues of men or their own; yea, what coaxes out of their mouth is
confounding and destructive to their enemies, [Rev
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#005.md).

[Proverbs 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 14:4</span></span>

Where no oxen are the crib is clean,.... Or "empty" (z), so Jarchi and
Aben Ezra. Oxen were used in Judea in several parts of husbandry; in
ploughing the land, bringing home the corn, and in threshing or treading
it out, [Deu 22:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#010.md). Now where these
are not, or not used, where husbandry is neglected, there is no straw in
the crib for beasts, and much less food for men; or rather, no corn or
"wheat" (a) on the "threshingfloor" (b), or in the barn, granary, or
storehouse; for so the same word is rendered, [Jer
50:26](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#026.md); and in this manner it is
interpreted by Gersom here, as also by Kimchi (c): the word translated
"clean" is used for "wheat", [Amo 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/amo008.htm#005.md).
By supplying the negative particle, the whole may be rendered thus;
"where no oxen are, the threshingfloor", "granary", or storehouse, "is
without wheat"; or there is no wheat "on the floor", or "in the barn",
&c. the note of Jarchi on the text is,

"where there are no scholars of the wise men, there is no instruction in
the constitutions.''

But much better is the mystical sense, thus; that where there are no
ministers of the Gospel, there is no food for souls. Oxen are an emblem
of faithful and laborious ministers. The ox was one of the emblems in
the cherubim, which design Gospel ministers; the names by which oxen are
called agree with them. Here are two words used of them in the text; the
one comes from a root which signifies to "teach", "lead", "guide", and
"govern"; and the same word for "oxen" signifies "teachers", "leaders",
"guides", and "governors"; names which most properly belong to ministers
of the word: the other word comes from a root which signifies to "see",
to "look"; because these creatures are sharp sighted. Ministers are
seers, overseers, and as John's living creatures in [Rev
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#006.md); one of which was an ox, were full
of eyes, within, and before, and behind. So ministers of the word had
need to have good sight, to look into the Scriptures, and search them;
to look to themselves and to their flock, and to look out to discover
enemies, and danger by them; and to look into their own experience, and
into things both past and to come. There is a likeness in ministers to
these creatures, as to the nature of them; they are clean, creatures, as
such should be that minister in holy things; and chew the cud, as such
should revolve in their minds and constantly meditate upon divine
things; and, like them, are patient and quiet under the yoke; and are
not only strong to labour, but very laborious in the word and doctrine;
submit to the yoke, draw the plough of the Gospel; bring home souls to
Christ, to his church, and to heaven; and tread out the corn, the
mysteries of grace, out of the sacred writings. Now where there are no
such laborious and diligent ministers of the word, as there are none in
the apostate church of Rome, there is no spiritual food for the souls of
men; but a famine of the word, and men perish for lack of knowledge;

but much increase is by the strength of the ox; as there is a large
increase of the fruits of the earth, through the tillage of it by proper
instruments; as by the strong and laborious ox, whose strength is
employed in ploughing the ground (d) and treading the corn; which is put
for all means of husbandry, where that is used or not: so through the
unwearied labours of Gospel ministers, the blessing of God attending
them, there is much spiritual food; see [Pro
13:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#023.md). There is an increase of
converts, a harvest of souls is brought in; and an increase of gifts and
of grace, and of spiritual light and knowledge, and plenty of
provisions; which spiritual increase, through the ministry of the word,
is owing to God, [Co1 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006.md).

\(z\) "vacuum", V. L. Munster, Pagninus, Mercerus, Gejerus, Amama; so
the Syriac version. (a) "Triticum", Baynus. (b) "area", Gussetius, p.
14. Michaelis, Schultens. (c) Sepher Shorash. rad & R. Joseph Kimchi in
Abendana in loc. (d) "Fortis arat valido rusticus arva bove", Tibullus,
l. 2. Eleg. 2. v. 14.

[Proverbs 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 14:5</span></span>

A faithful witness will not lie,.... For that would be contrary to his
character as faithful; and as he will not witness to a falsehood upon
oath in a court of judicature, so neither will he tell a lie in common
conversation. This may be applied to Gospel ministers, who are witnesses
of Christ; the Gospel they preach is a testimony concerning him, and
they bear a faithful witness to the truth; nor will they, knowingly and
willingly, deliver out a falsehood, or a doctrinal lie, since "no lie is
of the truth", [Jo1 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#021.md); the
character of a faithful witness is given to Christ, [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005.md); who is a "witness" of his
father's love and grace, of his mind and will, and of the doctrines of
the Gospel relating to himself, and the method of salvation by him; and
he is "faithful" to him that appointed him; nor can he nor will he lie,
for he is "truth" itself;

but a false witness will utter lies; or "blow" (e) them out, and spread
them abroad in great plenty; he will not stick to tell them, and, having
no conscience, will utter them as fast as he can, with all boldness and
confidence; for one that fears not to bear testimony to a falsehood upon
oath, will not scruple to lie in common talk. Or the words, "nay" be
rendered, "he that uttereth lies will be a false witness"; he that
accustoms himself to lying, in his conversation with men in private
company, will become a false witness upon occasion in a public court of
judicature: such an one is not to be depended on; lesser sins lead to
greater, lying to perjury. So false teachers, and the followers of the
man of sin, speak lies in hypocrisy, doctrinal ones, which they are
given up to believe; and such as do so are false witnesses, deceivers,
and antichrist.

\(e\) "efflabit", Montanus; "efflat", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Proverbs 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 14:6</span></span>

A scorner seeketh wisdom, and findeth it not,.... So the scornful
Greeks, that scoffed at the plainness and simplicity of the Gospel,
sought natural wisdom, and thought they found it, and professed they
had; but professing themselves to be wise they became fools, and with
all their wisdom knew not God; and false teachers, that boasted of their
evangelical wisdom, and of their great attainments in Gospel light, and
derided others, were ever learning, and never came to the knowledge of
the truth; and the scornful Jews, that mocked at the true Messiah, would
seek him, the Wisdom of God, as they have done, and find him not; see
[Joh 7:34](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#034.md); Men often seek for wisdom
in a wrong way and manner, in the use of wrong means; and seek it of
wrong persons, and to wrong ends and purposes, and so seek amiss and
find not; and some seek for wisdom, even evangelical wisdom, in a
scornful manner, in a jeering sarcastic way, as the scoffing Athenians
did, [Act 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#018.md); and find it not, nor
Christ the substance of it, and so perish for lack of knowledge of him;

but knowledge is easy unto him that understandeth; the knowledge of
Wisdom, or of Christ, is easy to him that has a spiritual understanding
given him; the knowledge of the Gospel, and the doctrines of it, is easy
to him to whom it is given to know the mysteries of the kingdom of
heaven; there is nothing perverse or froward in the words and doctrines
of Christ; they are all plain to man whose understanding is opened by
the Spirit of God; especially such as relate to the glory of Christ's
person, and to the way of life and salvation by him; see [Pro
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#008.md).

[Proverbs 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 14:7</span></span>

Go from the presence of a foolish man,.... A wicked one; avoid him, shun
his company, depart from him, have no fellowship with him, it, being
dangerous, infectious, and hurtful;

when thou perceivest not in him the lips of knowledge; when it is
observed that his lips pour out foolishness, what is corrupt and
unsavoury, unchaste and filthy; what does not minister grace to the
hearers, nor is for the use of edifying, nor any ways improving in
useful knowledge, but all the reverse: the Targum is,

"for there is no knowledge in his lips,''

in what is expressed by them; some understand this ironically, and
render the words thus, "go right against a foolish man" (f); join in
company with him, "and thou shalt not know the lips of knowledge", or
learn anything by him; if you have a mind to be ignorant, keep company
with a foolish man; so Jarchi and Gersom: or rather to this sense the
words may be rendered, "go to a foolish man, seeing thou knowest not the
lips of knowledge" (g), since thou dost not approve of wise and knowing
men, whose lips would teach knowledge; and despisest the Gospel, and
Gospel ministers the pope of Rome, as Cocceius on the text serves, and
hear him, what his holiness and infallibility says; or some other false
teacher.

\(f\) "e regione viri stulti", De Dieu; so Gussetius, p. 495. and
Schultens (g) "Abi ut stes cora in viro stolido", Cocceius.

[Proverbs 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 14:8</span></span>

The wisdom of the prudent is to understand his way,.... The way of his
calling, in which he should abide, and how to manage it in the best
manner; the way of his duty, that he may walk inoffensively both towards
God and men; and the way of life and salvation, which is by Jesus
Christ, which to understand and to walk in is the highest wisdom and
prudence;

but the folly of fools is deceit: or "the wisdom of fools", which the
opposition requires, and is meant, and is what the Holy Ghost calls
"folly", as elsewhere, [Co1 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#019.md); this
is itself "deceit"; it is science, falsely so called; it lies in
tricking and deceiving; and the issue of it is, not only the deceiving
of others, but themselves also: such is the folly of the man of sin and
followers, which lies in deceiving the inhabitants of the earth with
their sorceries and superstitions, with their lying wonders and
miracles; see [Th2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010.md), [Rev
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#014.md).

[Proverbs 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 14:9</span></span>

Fools make a mock at sin,.... At sinful actions, their own or others;
they make light of them, a jest of them, call evil good, and good evil;
take pleasure in doing them themselves, and in those that do them; yea,
sport themselves with the mischief that arises from them unto others;
they make a mock at reproofs for them, and scoff at those that instruct
and rebuke them; and laugh at a future state, and an awful judgment they
are warned of, and in a scoffing manner say, "where is the promise of
his coming?" Some, as Aben Ezra observes, render it "a sin offering";
and interpret it of the sin offerings and sacrifices under the law, as
derided by wicked men; but may be better applied to the sin offering or
sacrifice of Christ, who made his soul an offering for sin, to make
satisfaction and atonement for the sins of his people; this is mocked at
by false teachers, who deny it; and is exposed to derision and contempt
by the Papists, by their bloodless sacrifice of the mass, and by their
merits and works of supererogation, which they prefer to the sacrifice
and satisfaction of Christ. The words may be rendered, "sin makes a mock
of fools" (h); it deceives them, it promises them pleasure, or profit,
or honour, but gives them neither, but all the reverse;

but among the righteous there is favour: they enjoy the favour of God
and man; or "there is good will" (i), good will towards men; they are so
far from making a mock at sin, and taking delight in the mischief that
comes by it to others, that they are willing to do all good offices unto
men, and by love to serve their friends and neighbours: or "there is
acceptance" (k); they are accepted with God upon the account of the sin
offering, sacrifice, and satisfaction of Christ, which fools mock and
despise.

\(h\) , Aquila & Theodotion in Drusius; "delictum illudit fatuos",
Gejerus. (i) "benevoleatia", Montanus, Baynus, Piscator, Mercerus,
Gejerus. (k) "Acceptatio", Cocceius, Gussetius.

[Proverbs 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 14:10</span></span>

The heart knoweth his own bitterness,.... Or "the bitterness of his
soul" (l), the distress of his conscience, the anguish of his mind; the
heart of man only knows the whole of it; something of it may be known to
others by his looks, his words, and gestures, but not all of it; see
[Co1 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#010.md); bitterness of soul often
arises from outward troubles, pains, and diseases of body, losses,
crosses, and disappointments, [Sa1
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#010.md). Sometimes it is upon spiritual
accounts; but this is not the case of every heart; men may be in the
gall of bitterness, and have no bitterness of soul on account of it; the
sensualist and voluptuous worldling feels nothing of it, nor the
hardened and hardhearted sinner; only such who are awakened and
convinced by the Spirit of God; to these, as sin is a bitter thing in
itself, it is so to their taste; it makes hitter work for repentance in
them; it brings trembling and astonishment on them; fills them with
shame and confusion of face, causes self-loathing and abhorrence, and
severe reflections upon themselves; seeing sin in its own colours, they
are cut to the heart and killed with it; they are pressed down with the
guilt of sin, and the load of it; and, having no views of pardon, are in
that distress and bitterness of soul which no tongue can express nor
heart conceive but what has felt the same;

and a stranger doth not intermeddle with his joy; or "mingle himself
with it" (m); he does not share in it or partake of it; this is more
especially true of spiritual joy, which, as it is unspeakable to the man
that possesses it, it passes the understanding of a natural man; he can
form no true idea of it: spiritual joy is what a sensible sinner
partakes of upon the Gospel, the joyful sound of salvation, reaching his
ears and his heart, at the revelation of Christ in him and to him, as a
Saviour; when an application of pardoning grace is made to his soul, and
he has a view of the complete righteousness of Christ, and his interest
in it, and can see all his sins expiated and stoned for by his
sacrifice; when he is favoured with a sight of the fulness of grace in
Christ, and of the spiritual and eternal salvation he has wrought out
for him; and likewise when he is indulged with a visit from him, and
enjoys communion with him; and when he has a glimpse of eternal glory,
and a well grounded hope of right unto it, and meetness for it: now a
stranger, one that is a stranger to God and godliness, to Christ and the
way of salvation by him, to the Spirit and his work of grace upon the
heart, to the Gospel and the doctrines of it, to his own heart and the
plague of it, to the saints and communion with them; knows nothing at
all of the above joy, nor can he interrupt it, nor take it away.

\(l\) "amaritudine animae suae", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus,
Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis. (m) "non immiscet se", Michaelis, so
Tigurine version; "non miscebit sese", Baynus; "non intermiscet se",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Proverbs 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 14:11</span></span>

The house of the wicked shall be overthrown,.... Houses built to
perpetuate their names and eternize their memory; and which, though
built high and stately, strong and firm, yet by one accident or another
shall come to ruin, when they imagined they would continue for ever, and
their dwelling places to all generations, [Psa
49:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#011.md); or their families shall become
extinct, none to be their heirs and inherit their estates, and transmit
their name to posterity; or the substance of their house, their riches
and wealth, especially that gotten dishonestly, shall waste away: and in
a spiritual sense the house or hope of such, as to eternal salvation,
being built on the sand, or something of their own, their external
duties, or an outward profession of religion, shall not stand; though
they lean upon it and would hold it fast, but it shall fall, and great
shall be the fall of it; and particularly the apostate church of Rome,
that synagogue of Satan, that habitation of devils, that hold of every
foul spirit, and cage of every unclean bird, shall be overthrown with an
utter overthrow, shall fall and never rise more, [Rev
18:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#002.md);

but the tabernacle of the upright shall flourish: their low and mean
cottages, which are put up quickly, like tents movable from place to
place, yet shall be established, [Pro
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro015.htm#025.md); their families shall become
numerous like a flock of sheep, [Psa
107:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#041.md); and their substance increase;
they shall flourish in worldly things and grow rich, or however in
spirituals, in girls and grace; shall flourish in the courts of the
Lord, and tabernacles of the most High, like palm trees and cedars; for
the allusion is to the flourishing of trees, [Psa
92:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#013.md); especially they will be in such
flourishing circumstances in the latter day, when antichrist will be
destroyed, and when the tabernacle of God will be with men, [Psa
72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008.md).

[Proverbs 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 14:12</span></span>

There is a way which seemeth right unto a man,.... As the way of sin and
wickedness does, it promising much carnal pleasure and mirth; there is a
great deal of company in it, it is a broad road, and is pleasant, and
seems right, but it leads to destruction; so the way of the hypocrite
and Pharisee that trusts to his own righteousness, and despises others,
and even the righteousness of Christ; or however does not submit to it,
but tramples upon him, and counts the blood of the covenant an unholy
thing, and so is deserving of sorer punishment than the profane sinner;
yet on account of his good works, as he calls them, fancies himself to
be in a fair way for heaven and happiness; so Popery, through the pomp
and grandeur and gaudiness of worship, through the lying miracles of the
priests, and the air of devotion that appears in them, seems to be a
right way;

but the end thereof are the ways of death; which lead unto eternal
death; for that is the wages of sin, let it appear in what shape it
will.

[Proverbs 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 14:13</span></span>

Even in laughter the heart is sorrowful,.... As Belshazzar's was in the
midst of his feast and jollity, when he saw the writing on the wall; so
sin may stare a man in the face, and guilt load his conscience and fill
him with sorrow, amidst his merriment; a man may put on a merry
countenance, and feign a laugh, when his heart is very sorrowful; and
oftentimes this sorrow comes by sinful laughter, by mocking at sin and
jesting at religion;

and the end of that mirth is heaviness: sometimes in this life a sinner
mourns at last, and mourns for his wicked mirth, or that he has made
himself so merry with religious persons and things, and oftentimes when
it is too late; so the end of that mirth the fool in the Gospel promised
himself was heaviness, when his soul was required of him; this was the
case of the rich man who had his good things here, and his evil things
hereafter.

[Proverbs 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 14:14</span></span>

The backslider in heart shall be filled with his own ways,.... One that
is a backslider at heart, whose heart departeth from the Lord; in whom
there is an evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God; and
indeed apostasy begins at the heart, and shows itself in the life and
conversation: there may be a backsliding when the heart does not
wickedly depart from God; but is through the infirmity of the flesh and
the force of temptation; from which backslidings the Lord's people are
recovered, and which are healed by his grace; but here such an one is
meant who willingly and heartily backslides; and such shall have the
reward of their hands and actions given them, or the full and due
punishment of their sins; they shall have their bellyful of their own
wicked ways and works, the just recompense of reward for them;

and a good man shall be satisfied from himself; shall eat the fruit of
his own doings, shall be blessed in his deeds, and have peace and
satisfaction therein; though not salvation by them, or for them: he
shall be satisfied with the grace of God bestowed on him and wrought in
him; and, from a feeling experience of the grace of God within him,
shall be satisfied that he has in heaven a better and an enduring
substance; or he shall be satisfied "from above himself" (m), from the
grace that is in Christ, out of the fulness which is in him; and shall
be filled with all the fulness of God he is capable of; and especially
in the other world, when he shall awake in his likeness. The Targum is,

"a good man shall be satisfied with his fear;''

and so the Syriac version, with the fear of his soul; it may be
rendered, as by the Vulgate Latin version, "a good man shall be above
him" (n); that is, above the backslider; shall be better tilled, and be
more happy than he.

\(m\) "de super eo", Montanus; "de super semet", Schultens. (n) "Et
super cum erit vir bonus", V. L. De Dieu.

[Proverbs 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 14:15</span></span>

The simple believeth every word,.... Every thing that is said to him
every story that is told him, and every promise that is made him; and so
is easily imposed upon, and drawn in to his hurt: every word of God, or
doctrine of his, ought to be believed; because whatever he says is true,
he cannot lie; every word of his is pure, free from all error and
falsehood; it is a tried word, and found to bear a faithful testimony,
and, if we receive the witness of then, the witness of God is greater;
besides, his word is profitable for instruction, and for the increase of
peace, joy, and comfort, and is effectual to saving purposes: every word
of Christ is to be believed, who is a teacher sent from God; whose
mission is confirmed by miracles, and whose doctrine is not his own as
man, but his Father's; he is the faithful witness, and truth itself; his
words are more than human, and besides are pleasant and wholesome: and
every word and doctrine of his apostles, who received their mission
commission, and doctrines from him, is also to be believed; but every
spirit, or everyone that pretends to be a spiritual man, and to have
spiritual gifts, is not to be believed; but the words and doctrines of
ordinary men and ministers are to be first tried by the unerring rule of
the sacred Scriptures; yea, the doctrines of the apostles were examined
by them; see [Jo1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#001.md); they are
"simple", weak, silly, foolish persons, that believe all they hear,
whether right or wrong, true or false, good or hurtful; they are
children in knowledge, who are tossed to and fro with every wind of
doctrine, and are deceived with good words and fair speeches, [Eph
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph004.htm#014.md), [Rom
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#018.md). This truly describes the
followers of the man of sin; who give heed to seducing spirits, and
doctrines of devils; who believe as the church believes; that believe
with an implicit faith; believe every word and doctrine the pope and
councils say they should, though ever so absurd; as, for instance, the
doctrine of transubstantiation: these are "simple" or fools with a
witness, who give up their understandings, and even their senses unto,
and pin their faith upon, another;

but the prudent man looketh well to his going; or "its going" (o); to
the course and tendency of the word he hears, or the doctrine which is
proposed to his faith; he considers well whether it is agreeable or is
contrary to the perfections of God; whether it derogates from the glory
of any of the divine Persons; whether it makes for the magnifying the
riches of God's grace, and for the debasing of men; or for the
depreciating of the one, and setting up of the other; and whether it is
a doctrine according to godliness, or not, that tends to promote
holiness of heart and life, or to indulge a loose conversation; and
according to these criteria he judges and determines whether he shall
believe it or not. Or, "to his going"; that is, to the going of the
deceiver and impostor; he observes narrowly the methods he takes, the
artifices he makes use of, the cunning sleight by which he lies in wait
to deceive; how craftily he walks, and handles the word of God
deceitfully; and he takes notice of his moral walk and conversation,
and, as our Lord says, "ye shall know them by their fruits", [Mat
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#016.md). Or else the meaning is, and
which seems to be the sense of our version, that he looks well unto, and
carefully observes, his own goings; he takes heed to his ways, that they
are right; that he is not in ways of his devising and choosing, but in
God's ways; in the way of life and salvation by Christ; in the path of
faith on him, and in the way of holiness; that he has chosen the way of
truth, and walks in that; and that every step he takes in doctrine is
according to the word of truth; and that whatever he does in worship is
agreeably to the divine rule; and that every path of duty he treads in
is according to the same, and as he has Christ for a pattern, and the
Spirit for a guide; and that his walk is as becomes the Gospel, worthy
of the calling wherein he is called, and that it is circumspect and
wise; and such a man may be truly said to be a "prudent" man: the Targum
is,

"he attends to his good;''

and so he does.

\(o\) "gressum illius, sc. sermonis", Baynus, so some in Mercerus.

[Proverbs 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 14:16</span></span>

A wise man feareth, and departeth from evil,.... He fears God, and is
careful not to offend him; wherefore he departs from sin, stands at a
distance from it, abstains from all appearance of it; being influenced
by the goodness and grace of God unto him, he fears the Lord and his
goodness, and therefore avoids all occasions of sinning against him: his
motive is not merely fear of punishment, as Jarchi, but a sense of
goodness; and now, as it is through the influence of divine fear that
men depart from evil; so to do this shows a good understanding, and that
such a man is a wise man, [Pro 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#006.md);

but the fool rageth, and is confident; he fears neither God nor men, he
sets his mouth against both; he "rages" in heart, if not with his mouth,
against God and his law, which forbid the practice of such sins he
delights in; and against all good men, that admonish him of them, rebuke
him for them, or dissuade him from them: and "is confident" that no evil
shall befall him; he has no concern about a future state, and is
fearless of hell and damnation, though just upon the precipice of ruin;
yet, as the words may be rendered, "he goes on confidently", nothing can
stop him; he pushes on, regardless of the laws of God or men, of the
advices and counsels of his friends, or of what will be the issue of his
desperate courses in another world.

[Proverbs 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 14:17</span></span>

He that is soon angry dealeth foolishly,.... A man that is quick and
short, of a hasty spirit, and presently discovers anger and resentment
in his face; he says and does many foolish things, which he afterwards
is sorry for, and repents, and is ashamed of; and he is to be pitied and
forgiven;

and a man of wicked devices is hated; one that hides his anger, covers
his resentment, contrives schemes to revenge himself, and waits an
opportunity to put them in execution, is justly hateful to God and men.

[Proverbs 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 14:18</span></span>

The simple inherit folly,.... It is natural and hereditary to them, they
are born like wild asses colts; the foolish sayings and proverbs,
customs and practices, of their ancestors, though they have been
demonstrated to be mere folly, yet these, their posterity, approve them;
they love, like, and retain them as their patrimony, [Job
11:12](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#012.md). Such are the foolish
traditions, customs, principles, and doctrines, of the church of Rome,
handed down from father to son; and because Popery is the religion they
have been bred and brought up in, though so foolish and absurd, they
will not relinquish it;

but the prudent are crowned with knowledge; natural, civil, and
spiritual, especially the latter; evangelical knowledge, the knowledge
of Christ, and of God in Christ, and of Gospel truths; they are honoured
with an acquaintance with them; and they esteem the knowledge of these
above all things else, and reckon all things else but loss and dung in
comparison of them; they are as a crown unto them, and the knowledge of
them is the way to the crown of life; yea, is itself life eternal, [Phi
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#008.md). Or, they "crown themselves with
knowledge" (p); they labour after it, pursue it with eagerness, follow
on to know the Lord, and attain to a large share of it; surround,
encompass, and lay hold upon it, and gird themselves about with this
girdle of truth. Or, "they crown knowledge" (q); do honour to that, by
putting it in practice; by adding to it temperance, and every virtue,
and by bringing others to it; and are an ornament to it in their lives
and conversation; they adorn the doctrine of God their Saviour.

\(p\) "imponent coronam sibi scientiam", Montanus; "coronant se
scientia", Piscator, so Ben Melech. (q) "Coronabunt scientiam", Baynus;
"ornant scientiam", Drusius.

[Proverbs 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 14:19</span></span>

The evil bow before the good,.... Wicked men before good men. This, as
Jarchi observes, respects future time; even the latter day glory, or the
spiritual times of the Messiah, when the kingdom under the whole heaven
shall be given to the saints of the most High: for though there may have
been some few instances of this kind, as Haman bowing before Mordecai,
and the Heathen emperors before Constantine; and there may be some now,
in some cases where obligation requires; yet this is far from being
general, as it will be in the spiritual reign of Christ; when the sons
of those that afflicted the church will come bending to her, and they
that have despised her shall bow themselves down at the soles of her
feet; and even great personages too shall bow down and lick the dust of
her feet; the kings of the earth, who before have been in confederacy
with antichrist, and have persecuted the saints, now shall hate the
whore, and honour the true church of Christ: this will be in the
Philadelphian state, which is the same with the spiritual reign of
Christ; such who called themselves Jews, and are not, shall come and
worship before the feet of the church, and own that she and her members
are the favourites of heaven, [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027.md), [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md);

and the wicked at the gates of the righteous; or, "come to the gates of
the righteous", as the Syriac version supplies it; they come and knock
there, stand and wait, or lay themselves down; become prostrate and
humble supplicants for relief and protection, as beggars do. This may
also respect their attendance at Wisdom's gates, at the gates of Zion,
on public ordinances, for counsel and instruction, which before they
despised, [Pro 8:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro008.htm#034.md). The Septuagint
version is, "shall serve thy gates"; that is, at them; see [Isa
60:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#011.md).

[Proverbs 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 14:20</span></span>

The poor is hated even of his own neighbour,.... As well as of
strangers; that is, he is shy of him; he does not care to take any
notice of him, or be friendly with him, lest he should be burdensome to
him. Poverty brings a man into contempt and disgrace; the same man, in
affluence and indigence, is respected or disrespected: this is true, as
Gersom observes, of a man that is poor, whether in money or in
knowledge, in his purse or in his understanding;

but the rich hath many friends; or, "many are the lovers of the rich"
(r): for the sake of their riches; either for the sake of honour or
profit, or because the rich want nothing of them, or because they
themselves may gain something by them: this also is observed by the
above Jewish commentator to be true of the rich in substance or in
wisdom; but the former sense is best; for a wise man, if poor in the
world, is but little regarded.

\(r\) "et amatores divitiis spissi", Schultens; "dilectores autem
divitis multi sunt", Piscator. "Donec eris felix, multos numerabis
amicos", Ovid. Trist. Eleg. 8. "Dat census honores, census amicitias",
ib. Fasti, l. 1. so Phocylides, v. 925, 926.

[Proverbs 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 14:21</span></span>

He that despiseth his neighbour sinneth,.... He that despiseth his
neighbour in his heart, speaks slightly of him, overlooks him, is not
friendly to him, will neither converse with him, nor relieve him in his
necessity; for it seems to be understood of his poor neighbour; and so
the Septuagint and Arabic versions render it, "he that despiseth the
poor"; that despises him for his poverty; because of his pedigree and
education, and the low circumstances he is in; or on account of his
weakness and incapacity, or any outward circumstance that attends him;
such an one sins very greatly, is guilty of a heinous sin; and he will
be reckoned and dealt with as a sinner, and be condemned and punished,
and so be unhappy and miserable;

but he that hath mercy on the poor, happy is he; or,

"that gives to the poor,''

as the Targum; who has compassion on him in his distress, and shows it
by relieving him: he that shows favour to the meek and humble ones, as
the word (s) may be rendered, and as they generally are that are in
affliction and poverty, for these tend to humble men; and such who
regard them in their low estate are "happy" or blessed; they are blessed
in things temporal and spiritual, and both here and hereafter; see [Psa
41:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#001.md).

\(s\) "modestorum", Montanus, Mercerus; "mansuetos", Cocceius.

[Proverbs 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 14:22</span></span>

Do they not err that devise evil?.... Certainly they do; they go astray
from the right way, from the word of truth, from the Gospel of Christ,
who contrive schemes to commit sin, and do mischief to their neighbours;
or who "plough" (t) it, and sow it, and expect a fine harvest; but they
will be mistaken, and find it will not turn to account, and that they
have took a wrong course, and have gone out of the way: none more
mischievous devisers or contrivers of evil than the Papists, and none
more sadly and fatally err;

but mercy and truth shall be to them that devise good; who devise
liberal things, to do good to the poor and needy; to their neighbours,
their fellow creatures and fellow Christians: such receive grace and
"mercy" at the hands of God, and his "truth" will appear in making good
all promises to them; mercy and truth will preserve them from the evil
way, and guide them in the right way, so that they shall not err as
others do; neither from the doctrines of grace and truth, nor from the
practice of them.

\(t\) "arant", Baynus; "arantibus", Amama; "verbum proprie significat
arare", Piscator.

[Proverbs 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 14:23</span></span>

In all labour there is profit,.... Or "abundance" (u); much is got by
it, food, raiment, riches, wealth, wisdom, honour; either with the
labour of the hands or head, and nothing is to be got without labour;
and he that is laborious in his calling, whether it be by manual
operation, working with his hands that which is good; or by hard study,
much reading, and constant meditation, is like to gain much for his own
use and the good of others;

but the talk of the lips tendeth only to penury; or "want" (w), of food
and raiment, the common necessaries of life; a man that spends his time
in idle talk, boasting of what he can do and does, and yet does nothing,
is in a fair way to come to beggary: so all talk about wisdom, and
knowledge, and religion, without making use of the proper means of
improvement, tends to the poverty of the mind; and generally they are
most empty of knowledge, natural or spiritual, that talk and brag most
of it; empty casks make the greatest sound; good discourse, wholesome
words, sound doctrine, thoroughly digested, tend indeed to edification,
to the enriching of the mind; but vain words, the enticing words of
men's wisdom; logomachies, striving about words to no profit; and all
great swelling words of vanity, which are all mere lip labour; they tend
to spiritual poverty and leanness of soul.

\(u\) "abundantia", Tigurine version, Baynus, Mercerus, Gejerus. (w) "ad
defectum", Pagninus, Montanus; "ad egestatem", Tigurine version,
Piscator, Cocceius.

[Proverbs 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 14:24</span></span>

The crown of the wise is their riches,.... Riches being used by them to
increase and improve their knowledge and wisdom, and for the good of
men, are an honour to them, and give them credit and reputation among
men of sense and goodness; see [Ecc
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#011.md);

but the foolishness of fools is folly; mere folly, extreme folly, just
the same as it was; riches make them never the wiser; yea, their folly
is oftentimes made more manifest through the ill use they make of their
riches; spending them in the gratification of their sinful lusts; and
making no use of them for their own improvement in knowledge, or for the
good of their fellow creatures. The Targum is,

"the glory of fools is their folly;''

and that is no other than their shame, and in which they glory; such
fools are wicked men.

[Proverbs 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 14:25</span></span>

A true witness delivereth souls,.... Or, "a witness of truth" (x): one
that witnesses truth upon oath in a court of judicature, he "delivers
souls"; men, not one man only, but many; a whole family, or more, in
danger of being ruined; he delivers them, as the Septuagint and Arabic
versions add, "from evils"; from evil charges and accusations brought
against them; from the oppression of their enemies, from the loss of
their good name, and from ruin and destruction, that otherwise would
have come upon them; he delivers their "lives" (y), as it may be
rendered, in danger of being lost by false accusations: so a witness of
the truth of Christ, or a faithful minister of the Gospel, not only
saves himself, but them that hear him; and is an instrument of
delivering the souls of men from error and damnation;

but a deceitful witness speaketh lies; boldly, openly, by wholesale; he
blows them out (z), to the ruin of the good names and characters, and to
the destruction of the lives, of the innocent; and so a false teacher,
one that lies in wait to deceive, speaks lies in hypocrisy, doctrinal
lies, to the ruin of the souls of men. The Targum is,

"he that speaketh lies is deceitful;''

he is "deceit" (a) itself, as in the Hebrew text. Such is the man of
sin, and such are his emissaries.

\(x\) "testis veritatis", Montanus, Cocceius, Schultens. (y) "vitas;
animam pro vita usurpari notum", Gejerus. (z) "efflat", Tigurine
version, Piscator, Gejerus; "spirat", Schultens; "efflabit", Monatnus.
(a) "dolus", Montanus, Vatablus; "fraus", Cocceius.

[Proverbs 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">pro 14:26</span></span>

In the fear of the Lord is strong confidence,.... Such who fear the Lord
may be confident that he has a love to them, a delight in them; that his
eye is upon them, and his heart towards them; and will communicate every
needful good to them, and protect and defend them: or the Lord himself
that is feared, who is the object of fear, called the fear of Isaac,
[Gen 31:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#042.md); he is a strong tower, a
place of defence to those that fear him and trust in him, [Pro
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#010.md);

and his children shall have a place of refuge; the children of God, as
those that fear him are; the Lord is a place of refuge to them, from the
avenger of blood, from the vindictive justice of God; from the storm and
tempest of divine wrath, and from the curses of a righteous law; as well
as from the rage and persecutions of men.

[Proverbs 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">pro 14:27</span></span>

The fear of the Lord is a fountain of life,.... Where the true fear of
God is, there is a real principle of grace, which is "a well of living
water, springing up unto everlasting life", [Joh
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014.md); eternal life is connected with
it; it makes meet for it, and issues in it: or the Lord, who is the
object of fear, he is the fountain of life: as of natural, so of
spiritual and eternal life; spiritual life springs from him, is
supported and maintained by him, the consequence of which is life
everlasting;

to depart from the snares of death; sins, transgressions, as Aben Ezra
interprets it; these are the works of men's hands, in which they are
snared; these are the cords in which they are holden, and so die without
instruction; the wages of them are death, even death eternal: likewise
there are the snares of the world and of the devil, temptations to sin,
with which being ensnared, lead to death; now the fear of the Lord is a
means of delivering from and of avoiding those snares, and so of
escaping death.

[Proverbs 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">pro 14:28</span></span>

In the multitude of people is the king's honour,.... For it is a sign of
a good and wise government, of clemency and righteousness being
exercised, of liberty and property being enjoyed, of peace, plenty, and
prosperity; which encourage subjects to serve their king cheerfully, and
to continue under his reign and government peaceably; and which invites
others from different parts to come and settle there also; by which the
strength and glory of a king are much increased. This is true of the
King of kings, of Jesus Christ, who is King of saints; his honour and
glory, as Mediator, lies in a large number of voluntary subjects, made
"willing" to serve him "in the day of his power" upon them, as numerous
as the drops of the morning "dew", [Psa
110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003.md); such as he had in the first
times of the Gospel, both among the Jews and among the Gentiles; and as
he will have more especially in the latter day, when those prophecies
shall be fulfilled in [Isa 60:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#004.md); and
so this is interpreted of the King Messiah, in an ancient writing (b) of
the Jews;

but in the want of people is the destruction of the prince; or, "the
consternation" (c) of him; if his people are destroyed in wars his
ambition or cruelty has led him to; or they are driven out from his
kingdom by persecution or oppression; hence follows a decay of trade,
and consequently of riches; lack of cultivation of land, and so want of
provision: in course of time there is such a decrease, that, as there
are but few to carry on trade and till the land, so to fight for their
prince, and defend his country; wherefore, when attacked by a foreign
power, he is thrown into the utmost consternation, and is brought to
destruction. This will be the case of the prince of darkness, the man of
sin, antichrist; who, though however populous he may be, or has been,
ruling over tongues, people, and nations, yet before long he will be
deserted by them; one nation after another will fall off from him; they
and their kings will hate him, make him bare and desolate, and burn him
with fire, [Rev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015.md). Some render it,
"the consternation of leanness" (d); such consternation as causes
leanness in a king.

\(b\) Zohar in Exod. fol. 67. 3, 4. (c) "formidat princeps", Tigurine
version; "consternatio", Cocceius, Michaelis, Schultens. (d)
"Consternatio macici", Gussetius, p. 785. "consternatio tabifica",
Schultens; "contritio maciei", Gejerus; "terror tenuitatis", Mercerus,
Gersom.

[Proverbs 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">pro 14:29</span></span>

He that is slow to wrath is of great understanding,.... Or "long in
wrath" (e); it is long before he is angry; he is longsuffering, bears
much and long, is very patient; such an one appears to understand
himself and human nature, and has a great command over his passions;
which shows him to be a man of great wisdom and understanding;

but he that is hasty of spirit exalteth folly; or is "short of spirit"
(f); is soon angry; presently discovers resentment in his words, looks,
and gestures; such an one "exalts folly", prefers it to wisdom, sets it
above himself, and makes it his master: or he "lifts" it (g) up; exposes
his folly to public view, so that it is seen of all men to his disgrace.

\(e\) "longus iris", Vatablus; "longus naribus", Montanus; "longus
narium", Schultens. (f) "brevis spiritu", Montanus, Vatblus. Cocceius,
Merceus, Michaelis; "curtus spiritu", Schultens. (g) "attollit",
Mercerus, Piscator; "alte proclamat", Schultens; "elevat", Baynus.

[Proverbs 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">pro 14:30</span></span>

A sound heart is the life of the flesh,.... A heart made so by the grace
of God, in which are sound principles of truth, righteousness, and
holiness; these preserve from sin, and so from many diseases; whereby
the life of the flesh or body is kept safe and sound, or that is kept in
health and vigour; or a "quiet heart" (h); a heart free from wrath,
anger, and envy, and such like passions and perturbations; this
contributes much to the health of the body, and the comfort of life: or
a "healing heart", or "spirit" (i); that is humane, kind, and friendly;
that pities and heals the distresses of others, and makes up differences
between persons at variance: such an one is "the life of fleshes" (k),
as in the original text; or of men, of the same flesh and blood; the
life of others, as well as of his own flesh; such an one contributes to
the comfortable living of others as well as of himself;

but envy the rottenness of the bones; a man that envies the happiness
and prosperity of others, this preys upon his own spirits, and not only
wastes his flesh, but weakens and consumes the stronger parts of his
body, the bones; it is as a "moth" within him, as the Arabic version:
the Targum is,

"as rottenness in wood, so is envy in the bones;''

hence Ovid (l) calls it "livor edax", and so Martial (m).

\(h\) "cor leve", Baynus; "cor lene", Mercerus; "cor lenitatis",
Gejerus, so Ben Melech. (i) "Animus sanans", Junius & Tremellius, so the
Tigurine version; "sanator", Gussetius, p. 800. (k) "vitae carnium",
Montanus; "vita carnium", V. L. Pagninus, Michaelis. (l) Amorum, l. 1.
Eleg. 15. v. 1. & de Remed. Amor. l. 1. in fine. (m) Epigr. l. 11. Ep.
21.

[Proverbs 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">pro 14:31</span></span>

He that oppresseth the poor reproacheth his Maker,.... That does him any
injury, either by scoffing at him, and reproaching him for his poverty;
or by vexatious law suits; or by withholding from him his wages; or not
giving him that relief which he ought: such an one not only injures the
poor man; but reproaches God that made him, not only a man, but a poor
man; and who is the Maker of the rich man also, [Pro
22:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro022.htm#002.md);

but he that honoureth him hath mercy on the poor; he that is desirous of
honouring God, and glorifying him, will give of his substance to the
poor; having compassion on him in his necessitous circumstances, will
relieve him; and in so doing he honours God, whose image the poor man
bears, and who has commanded him so to do. The words may be rendered,
"he that hath mercy on the poor honoureth him"; that is, his Maker: so
the Targum,

"he that hath mercy on him that suffers injury honoureth him.''

[Proverbs 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">pro 14:32</span></span>

The wicked is driven away in his wickedness,.... That is, at death, as
the opposite clause shows; he is driven out of the world, his heart is
so much set on; from all the good things of it, which are his all, his
portion; from the place of his abode, which will know him no more; and
from all his friends and acquaintance, with whom he has lived a merry
and jovial life; he shall be driven out of light into darkness, even
into outer darkness; into hell, which is a place of torment, a prison, a
lake burning with fire and brimstone; he shall be driven as a beast is,
driven: and such is the man of sin, who shall go into perdition; and
such are his followers, and that will be their end, [Rev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#001.md); he shall be driven sore against
his will; the righteous depart, and desire to depart; but the wicked are
driven, and go unwillingly, with reluctance; they would fain flee out of
the hand of God, and yet they have no power to withstand; go they must,
they are driven forcibly and irresistibly: and it may also denote the
suddenness of their death, and the swiftness of their destruction. The
driver is not mentioned; it may be understood of the Lord himself, who,
in and by a storm of his wrath, hurls them out of their place; or of
death, as having a commission from him, when a man has no power over his
spirit to retain it; or of angels, good or bad, employed by the Lord in
driving their souls to hell upon their separation from their bodies. The
circumstance, "in his wickedness", may denote their dying in their sins,
unrepented of, unforgiven, and without faith in Christ; in the midst of
them, in their full career of sin, under the power, faith, and guilt of
it; and as sometimes, in the horror of a guilty conscience, in black
despair, without any hope or view of pardon, the reverse of the
righteous man; and so will have all their wickedness to answer for, it
being not taken away, but found upon them: or this may be expressive of
the cause of the wicked man's being driven away, namely, his wickedness;
for so it may be rendered and interpreted, "because of his wickedness"
(n) it is for that he shall die and go to hell: or it may be rendered,
"into his evil" (o); and so denote the everlasting punishment into which
he shall go, being driven;

but the righteous hath hope in his death; not in the death of the wicked
man, as Aben Ezra, when he shall be delivered, and he can do him no more
hurt; but in his own death; he dies as other men; his righteousness,
though it delivers him from eternal death, yet not from a corporeal one;
though the death of a righteous man is different from others; he dies in
Christ, in the faith of him, and in hope of eternal life by him; and to
die his death is very desirable: he has a hope of interest in the
blessings of grace and glory; which is a good hope through grace; is
wrought in him at regeneration; and is founded on that righteousness
from whence he is denominated righteous, even the righteousness of
Christ; and is of singular use and advantage to him in life: and this
grace he exercises at death; it carries him through the valley of death,
and above the fears of it; he hopes, though he dies, he shall rise
again; and he hopes to be in heaven and happiness, immediately upon his
dissolution, and to all eternity; he hopes to see God, be with Christ,
angels and good men, for evermore. Jarchi's note is,

"when he dies, he trusts he shall enter into the garden of Eden, or
paradise.''

\(n\) "propter suam malitiam", Pagninus, Mercerus, Gejerus. (o) "In
malam suum", Junius & Tremellius, Amama, so some in Mercerus.

[Proverbs 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">pro 14:33</span></span>

Wisdom resteth in the heart of him that hath understanding,.... It is in
his heart, as the treasury where it is laid up, and where it is kept in
safety; here it lies hid and undiscerned, unmolested and undisturbed; no
noise is made about it, or any ostentation of it; it dwells quietly and
constantly there;

but that which is in the midst of fools is made known; the least share
of knowledge which such persons have, or think they have, does not lie
long in the midst of them; they take every opportunity of showing it to
others, or of letting others know what they have attained to; and
thereby, instead of getting the character of wise and prudent men,
obtain that of fools; for, though a prudent man is communicative of his
knowledge to others, it is at proper times, and in proper places, and to
proper persons, which fools do not observe; but, without any manner of
judgment or discretion, or regard to persons, places, and seasons,
vainly thrust out their knowledge, and so proclaim their folly. The
Syriac version is,

"in the heart of fools it shall not be known;''

it has no place there.

[Proverbs 14:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">pro 14:34</span></span>

Righteousness exalteth a nation,.... Administered by the government, and
exercised by subjects towards one another; doing justice between man and
man: this exalts a nation, as it did the people of Israel, while
practised among them; this sets a people above their neighbours, and
high in the esteem of God and men; and is attended with privileges and
blessings, which make a nation great and honourable. Some understand
this of aims deeds, or beneficence to the poor; which, both in the
Hebrew and Greek languages, is called righteousness; See Gill on [Mat
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#001.md). It may be put for the whole of
true religion, which is an honour to a nation, where it obtains; and is
what makes the holy nation, and peculiar people, so truly illustrious;
and particularly the righteousness of Christ makes such who are
interested in it really great and noble, and promotes and exalts them to
heaven and happiness;

but sin is a reproach to any people; where vice reigns, iniquity
abounds, profaneness, impiety, and immorality of all sorts prevail, a
people become mean and despicable; they fall into poverty and contempt;
are neither able to defend themselves, nor help their neighbours, and so
are despised by them. The word rendered "reproach" most commonly
signifies "mercy" or goodness; and some render it, "and the mercy of a
people is a sin offering" (p); or as one: or it is so "to the nations";
it is as good as a sacrifice for sin, of which the word is sometimes
used, or better, more acceptable to God, "who will have mercy, and not
sacrifice", [Mat 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#013.md); even
beneficence and kindness to the poor, the same with righteousness, as
before. I think it may be as well rendered, "the piety" or religion "of
the nations is sin" (q); it being idolatry, as Aben Ezra observes: such
is the religion of the antichristian nations, who worship idols of gold
and silver; and though they may afflict themselves, as Gersom remarks of
the idolatrous nations, with fasting and penance, with whippings and
scourgings; yet it is nothing else but sin, will worship, and
superstition.

\(p\) "beneficentia expiatio est populi", Grotius; "sacrificium
expiatorium", Tigurine version; "velut sacrificium pro peccato",
Vatablus, Gejerus; "gratuita beneificentia nationibus est aliquid
sacrificium peccati expiatorium", Gussetius, p. 74. (q) "Pietas nationum
est peccatium", Munster, Mercerus; "studium nationum peccatum",
Cocceius.

[Proverbs 14:35](../../../bib/kjv/pro014.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">pro 14:35</span></span>

The king's favour is toward a wise servant,.... Who does his prince's
business well, committed to him; manages all his affairs wisely and
prudently; is diligent and careful to do everything for the king's
honour, and the good of his subjects; such an one has a share in royal
favour, a place in the affections of his master; and is sure to be
promoted to honour by him, and exalted to higher places of trust and
profit, as well as to be protected and defended by him: so Christ, the
King of kings, shows favour to his wise and faithful servants, [Luk
12:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#042.md);

but his wrath is against him that causeth shame; who neglects his
business, or does it foolishly; in such a manner as his prince is
ashamed of him, and which brings shame and disgrace to himself; all
which provokes the anger of his master, who discharges him from his
service, and this fixes a mark of infamy upon him; see [Luk
12:45](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#045.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 15](pro015.md)

</div>
