<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Proverbs Index](pro)  
  [Previous](pro012)  [Next](pro014) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Proverbs Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#001)

[Proverbs 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">pro 13:1</span></span>

A wise son heareth his father's instruction,.... As he should, and has
good reason to do; since it must be cordial, faithful, and
disinterested, as well as the effect of age and experience. He "asks for
it" and "loves" it, as Jarchi supplies the text; he likes and approves
of it, is well pleased with it, and delights in it; seeing it tends to
his profit and advantage; he "receives" it, as the Targum, so Ben
Melech; he listens to and obeys it, and acts agreeably to it, which
shows him to be wise; and this is the way to be wiser and wiser. So one
that is spiritually wise will attend to and receive the instruction of
Wisdom or Christ; who stands in the relation of an everlasting fin, her
to his children; whose instruction is the doctrine of the Gospel; which
a wise man hears, so as to understand it; to love and like it, and
approve of it; cordially to embrace and obey it, and put it in practice;
see [Mat 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#024). The word also signifies
"correction" (s), because instruction often comes by it; and he that is
a wise man will hear the rod and him that has appointed it, and learn to
know his mind by it, and receive instruction from it: or is "chastised
by his father" (t), and takes it well, [Mic
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mic006.htm#009);

but a scorner heareth not rebuke; that is, a son who is a scorner, as
the Targum and Aben Ezra; one that makes a mock at sin, and scoffs at
religion: such a man will be so far from hearing, attending to, and
receiving the rebuke and reproof of his father, that he will scoff also
at that; such as were the sons in law of Lot, and the sons of Eli and
Samuel. So scornful men, that make a jest of everything that is sacred,
will not hearken to the reproof of God's word, to the rebukes of Gospel
ministers, or even to the rebukes of Providence, which will issue in
their destruction, [Pro 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#011).

\(s\) "obedivit castigationem", Baynus, so Gejerus. (t) "Castigatur a
patre, vel castigatus patris", Scultens, so De Dieu.

[Proverbs 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">pro 13:2</span></span>

A man shall eat good by the fruit of his mouth,.... Or, "of the mouth";
either another's or his own, since the word his is not in the text;
though it is supplied by the Targum, Aben Ezra, the Vulgate Latin, and
Syriac versions, as by us. The Septuagint and Arabic versions render it,
"shall eat of the fruits of righteousness". I should choose to translate
the whole thus: "a good man shall eat of the fruit of his mouth": so
Aben Ezra interprets it, "a good man shall eat"; and so the Septuagint,
Syriac, and Arabic versions render it. The sense is, that a good man
brings forth good things out of the good treasure of his heart by his
mouth; which not only minister grace to the hearers, and are for the use
of edifying to others, but also to himself; while he gives wholesome
counsel and advice to others, it is of service to himself; while he
comforts others, he comforts himself; and while he teaches and instructs
others, he teaches and instructs himself: so a good minister of Jesus
Christ, while he feeds others with knowledge and understanding, he
himself is nourished up with the words of faith and good doctrine; so
Jarchi refers it to a man's doctrine, and the reward of it here and
hereafter;

but the soul of the transgressors shall eat violence; Jarchi interprets
it,

"the delight of transgressors is violence;'' (u).

that is, what their souls desire, choose, will, and take pleasure in,
even using violence, and doing mischief to others; and to the same
purpose is the note of Gersom: but Aben Ezra supplies it from the former
clause, as we do; and the sense is, that the same measure they mete out
to others shall be measured out to them again; what they give others to
eat, they shall eat themselves, even the bread of violence; see [Pro
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#016). And this will be the case of all
perfidious and treacherous ones, as the word (w) used signifies; of
false teachers and cruel persecutors; and of Babylon, of whom it will he
said, "reward her as she rewarded you", [Rev
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#006).

\(u\) "Anima cupido praevaricatorum est violentis", Gussetius, p. 524.
(w) "perfidiosorum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "perfidorum",
Cocceius, Schultens.

[Proverbs 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">pro 13:3</span></span>

He that keepeth his mouth keepeth his life,.... He that keeps his mouth
shut keeps it as with a bridle; keeps it from speaking things of other
persons, particularly of such as are in high places, of kings and
princes, and civil magistrates: he keeps himself quiet and comfortable;
keeps himself from many troubles, which otherwise he would come into;
keeps his life from danger, to which it would be exposed, should he
speak evil of dignities, or give himself the freedom, as some do,
whereby they are brought to an untimely end; see [Pro
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro018.htm#021); besides, persons ought to be
careful of their words, since by them a man will either be justified or
condemned hereafter, [Mat 12:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#037);

but he that openeth wide his lips shall have destruction; or
"consternation" (x): he that is rash and inconsiderate, hasty with his
lips, a talkative man; that speaks freely everything that comes into his
mind, regardless of the characters of men, or consequences of things; is
often brought into frights and fears, through the menaces and
threatenings of men in power, whose characters he has made too free
with, and oftentimes is brought to ruin and destruction: so he, whose
throat is as an open sepulchre, belching out filthy words, horrid oaths,
curses, and imprecations, destruction is near him, even in all his ways;
and the man of sin, that opens his mouth in blasphemy against God, and
his tabernacle, and his saints, shall go into perdition, [Rev
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005).

\(x\) "consternatio", Mercerus, Cocceius, Michaelis; "terrebitur",
Tigurine version.

[Proverbs 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">pro 13:4</span></span>

The soul of the sluggard desireth, and hath nothing,.... He desires
knowledge, but does not care to be at any pains to get it, and so has it
not; he desires riches, but chooses not to make use of the means, to be
diligent and industrious, and so he is without them; he desires to wear
good clothes and rich raiment, but is unwilling to labour for them, and
therefore is clothed with rags; he desires food, and plenty of it, but
refuses to work for it; and he that will not work should not eat, and
therefore he has it not, but starves and famishes: and, in spiritual
things, the sluggard desires heaven and happiness, but does not care to
do the duties of religion; he would die the death of the righteous, but
is unwilling to live his life; to abstain from sin, and live soberly and
righteously, is too hard service for him; he does not choose to do or
suffer anything for the cause of Christ and true religion. Jarchi's note
is, that

"in the future state he shall see the glory of the wise man, and desire
it; but shall not attain to it;''

but the soul of the diligent shall be made fat; become rich; increase in
temporal things, and have great plenty and prosperity; and so, in
spiritual matters, such who are diligent in the use of means, constantly
attend on the word and ordinances, and labour for the meat which endures
to everlasting life; such are filled and satisfied, as with marrow and
fatness; and become fat and flourishing, and fruitful in every good word
and work; and shall at last arrive to that state where there will be no
more hunger and thirst.

[Proverbs 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">pro 13:5</span></span>

A righteous man hateth lying,.... Or, "a word of falsehood" (y); as
being contrary to honour, truth, and conscience. He hates it in himself
and others; he hates all sorts of lies, lies in common conversation,
religious lies, doctrinal ones, false doctrines, lies spoken in
hypocrisy; such as the followers of antichrist spread, being given up
unto them that they might be damned, [Ti1
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002); these are an abomination to God
and all good men, [Rev 21:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#027);

but a wicked man is loathsome, and cometh to shame; or, "causes" or
"spreads a stink" (z): all wicked men are loathsome and abominable,
being very corrupt in principle and practice; all over defiled with sin,
and covered with wounds, bruises, and putrefying sores, from the crown
of the head to the sole of the feet; and especially liars, who are often
brought to shame and confusion in this life, and will hereafter come to
everlasting shame and contempt. Or, "makes himself to stink" (a); in the
nostrils of all good men, and so brought to shame: or "digs"; a
metaphor, as Cartwright thinks, from those that dig in the earth, where
such as are covered with shame would gladly put their heads.

\(y\) "verbum falsitatis", Montanus, Michaelis; "verbum fuci",
Schulteus. (z) "foetere facit", Vatablus, Mercerus; "foetere faciet",
Montanus; "foetere fecit foetorem", Gussetius, p. 114. "foetorem
spargit", Schultens. (a) "Se ipse foetere facit", Coccei Lexic. col. 77.
"foetidum se reddit", Piscator.

[Proverbs 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">pro 13:6</span></span>

Righteousness keepeth him that is upright in the way,.... Men of
uprightness and integrity, whose hearts are sincere in the ways of God;
the principle of grace and righteousness in them keeps them in those
ways, and will not suffer them to turn aside into crooked paths; the
word of righteousness, the doctrine of the Gospel, is a means of
preserving them from sin, and of keeping them in the right way;
particularly the doctrine of Christ's righteousness, and justification
by it, is a great antidote against sin, and a powerful motive and
incentive to the performance of good works, and all the duties of
religion: it engages men to observe every command of Christ, to walk in
all his ways; and is a great preservative from false doctrine and
antichristian worship;

but wickedness overthroweth the sinner; it is the cause of his utter
overthrow, of his being punished with everlasting destruction. It is, in
the Hebrew text, "sin" (b) itself; the sinner is so called, because he
is perfectly wicked, as Jarchi observes; he is nothing but sin, a mere
mass of sin and corruption. Aben Ezra renders it, "the man of sin"; and
it may be well applied to him, who is emphatically called so, and is
likewise the son of perdition; who, for his wickedness, will be
overthrown and destroyed at the coming of Christ, and with the
brightness of it, [Th2 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#003).

\(b\) "peccatum"; Montanus, Vatablus, Cocceius, Michaelis;
"lapsationem", Schultens.

[Proverbs 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">pro 13:7</span></span>

There is that maketh himself rich, yet hath nothing,.... Some persons
make a great show of riches, and would be thought to be rich; put on
fine clothes, live at a high rate, and appear in great pomp, and yet not
worth a farthing; which they do to gratify their pride and ambition, and
to draw in others to trust them with their substance. So in spirituals;
some persons, as hypocrites, would be thought to be rich in grace, and
to be possessed of all the graces of the Spirit, faith, hope, and love;
and yet have nothing of true grace, only what is counterfeit; the root
of the matter is not in them; no principle of life and grace, only a
name to live; nothing of the power, only the form, of godliness; no oil
of grace in the vessels of their hearts, only the lamp of an outward
profession: some, as the Pharisees, would be thought to be rich in good
works, when they have no good thing in them, and do nothing that is
spiritually good; either what they do is not done according to the
revealed will of God, as many things done by the Pharisees formerly, and
by the Papists now, or they do not flow from love; nor i are they done
in faith, nor in the name and strength of Christ, nor to the glory of
God by him: some, as the same persons, would be thought to be rich in
righteousness, when they have no true righteousness at all; not the
righteousness of the law, which requires perfection of obedience; not
the righteousness of faith, which is the righteousness of another; the
righteousness of God is imputed, and is without the works of men; they
have no righteousness that can justify them, or save them, or bring them
to heaven: some, as the Arminians, would be thought to be rich in
spiritual strength, and in the power of their free will, when they have
neither will nor power to do anything spiritually good; neither to
regenerate and convert themselves, nor to come to Christ, nor to do any
good work: some, as the Perfectionists, would be thought to be so rich
as to be free from sin, and perfect in grace, when they have none at
all, as says the apostle, [Jo1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#008);
their picture is drawn in Ephraim, and their language spoke by him, [Hos
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#008). The apostate church of Rome
would be thought rich with the merits of saints, and works of
supererogation, when she has no merit at all; nor is it possible for a
creature to, merit anything at the hands of God; compare with all this
[Rev 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#017);

there is that maketh himself poor, yet hath great riches; there are
some, on the other hand, who greatly degrade themselves; live in a very
mean way, as though they were very poor; either through covetousness, or
because they would not draw upon them the envy of their neighbours, or
encourage their friends to borrow of them, or invite thieves to steal
from them, or for some low end or another: the pope of Rome sometimes
affects to seem poor, though at other times, and in other respects, he
would be thought rich; at the Lateran procession the newly elected pope
scatters pieces of brass money among the people, saying, as Peter, whose
successor he pretends to be, did, "Silver and gold have I none", [Act
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#006); yet comes into great riches.
These words may be applied spiritually, in a good sense; there are some
who are sensible of their spiritual poverty, and own it; they
ingenuously express the sense they have of their own nothingness and
unworthiness; they declare they have nothing, and can do nothing; they
renounce all their own works in the business of salvation, and ascribe
it wholly to the grace of God; they have very mean thoughts, and speak
very meanly of themselves, as less than the least of saints, and the
chief of sinners: yea, some carry the matter too far in the expressions
of their poverty; will not be persuaded that they have the true riches
of grace, at least will not own it; but give way to their doubts and
fears about it, when they are possessed of much; to whom some think
these words are applicable. However, they are to such who are "poor in
spirit", [Mat 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003), as before
described; who have, notwithstanding, "great riches", the riches of
justifying grace, the riches of Christ's righteousness: the riches of
pardoning grace, a large share thereof, much being forgiven them; the
riches of sanctifying grace, faith, more precious than that of gold that
perisheth, with all other graces; the riches of spiritual knowledge,
preferable to gold and silver: they have Christ, and all things along
with him; they have God to be their portion, and exceeding great reward;
they have a large estate, an incorruptible inheritance, in heaven; they
have a better and a more enduring substance there; "theirs is the
kingdom of heaven", [Mat 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#003); it is
prepared for them, and given to them; compare with this [Co2
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010).

[Proverbs 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">pro 13:8</span></span>

The ransom of a man's life are his riches,.... As Benhadad's were to
him, when he was in the hands of the king of Israel, [Kg1
20:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg1020.htm#034); and as the treasures the ten
men had in the field were to them, for the sake of which Ishmael, the
son of Nethaniah, slew them not, [Jer
41:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#008). This is the advantage of riches
when a man is taken captive in war, or by pirates, or is in the hands of
thieves and robbers, he can redeem himself by his money; or when his
life is in danger by diseases, he can procure healing medicines; or by
famine, he can get food to preserve it, when a poor man cannot: but this
is not to be done always, and is only to be understood of a temporal
life; for, as to the spiritual and eternal redemption of the soul of
man, that requires a greater ransom price than such corruptible things
as silver and gold; nothing short of the precious blood of Christ is
sufficient for that, [Job 36:18](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#018).
Moreover, these words may not so much design the convenience as the
inconvenience of riches to men; since these often invite thieves to
assault their persons, and break into their houses, and threaten their
lives; and put wicked men upon forming schemes, and drawing up charges
and accusations against them, purely to get their money; which bring
their lives into danger, and which they can only redeem by their riches;

but the poor heareth not rebuke; no charge and accusation is brought
against him; no rebuke or reproof is given him; no notice is taken of
him, because nothing is to be got from him; he may sleep with his door
unlocked, thieves will give him no disturbance; he may travel upon the
road without being bid to stand (c). Jarchi interprets this of him that
is poor in the law; that hearkens not to reproofs and admonitions, given
him to depart from evil: but rather it may be applied to the poor in
spirit; who trust not in themselves and their own righteousness, but in
the grace of God and righteousness of Christ; who indeed hear the
rebukes of good men, and take them kindly; and of bad men, and return
not revilings for them; and also the rebukes of Providence, or the
chastisements of their heavenly Father, yet they will never hear any
rebuke in wrath from him here or hereafter; when the rich in their own
conceit, who trust in their riches and righteousness, and think to
ransom their souls from death by them, will have rebukes with flames of
fire.

\(c\) "Cantabit vacuus coram latrone viator", Juvenal. Sat. 10. v. 23.

[Proverbs 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">pro 13:9</span></span>

The light of the righteous rejoiceth,.... The light of joy and gladness,
which is sown for them, and arises to them; the light of spiritual
knowledge and experience they have; the light of sound doctrine; the
light of good works, and a Gospel conversation; all this, as it is
delightful to themselves and others, so it is increasing more and more
to the perfect day, and it continues: so the Septuagint and Arabic
versions, "light is always for the righteous"; especially it will be in
the latter day, and particularly in the New Jerusalem state, when there
will be no night, [Rev 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#023);

but the lamp of the wicked shall be put out; the light of the righteous
is like that of the sun, bright and pleasant; but the light of the
wicked is like that of a lamp, lesser and not so agreeable, nor will it
last; their prosperity is short lived, their joy is but for a moment;
the pleasures of sin are but for a season; their candle soon goes out;
it is put out in obscure darkness, and they themselves are reserved to
blackness of darkness, [Job 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/job018.htm#005); as
prosperous and flourishing as the kingdom of antichrist has been or is,
it will be full of darkness, [Rev
16:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#012).

[Proverbs 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">pro 13:10</span></span>

Only by pride cometh contention,.... Though it comes by other things,
yet by this chiefly, and there are no contentions without it: or
"truly", "verily", "certainly (d), by pride", &c. Unless the words may
be better rendered, "an empty man through pride will give contention"
(e), or make it; such as are empty of knowledge and wisdom; and such are
generally the most proud, and are very apt to raise contentions, and
foment divisions: contentions in families, in neighbourhoods, in towns,
cities, and countries, and in churches, are generally owing to pride;
what contentions and confusions has the pride of the pope of Rome
brought into kingdoms and states, into councils, and into the church of
God!

but with the well advised is wisdom: such who are humble and modest will
seek counsel of God; will consult the sacred oracles, and ask advice of
those who are superior to them in knowledge and understanding; and so
will neither raise contentions themselves, nor join with those that make
them, but do all they can to lay them; these show that true wisdom is
with them.

\(d\) "certe", Vatablus; "vere", Pagninus, Montanus, Merecrus. (e)
"Levis per superbiam dabit contentionam", Gejerus.

[Proverbs 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">pro 13:11</span></span>

Wealth gotten by vanity shall be diminished,.... In an unjust or
unlawful way, either by robbery and theft, as Aben Ezra; or by fraud and
tricking, by overreaching and circumventing others; or by vain
practices, as by cards or dice, and by stage playing and the like; or by
curious and illicit arts, as necromancy, judiciary astrology, and such
like things; whatever is gotten in a wicked way very seldom lasts long;
it lessens by little and little till it comes to nothing (f); see [Jer
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#011); and sometimes very quickly and
suddenly, all at once; thus that mass of riches which the church of Rome
has got together by her vain and wicked practices, by her idolatry,
pardons, and indulgences, will in one hour come to nought, [Rev
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017);

but he that gathereth by labour shall increase, or "that gathereth by
the hand" or "in it" (g); by hand labour in an honest way, or with the
diligent hand, which maketh rich; who labours with his hand and gets by
in sufficient to support himself and his family, and to give to the
necessities of others; who does not lay it up in coffers, but keeps it
in his hand to distribute; such generally thrive and flourish: some
copies read it, "he that gathereth, unto the hand" (h), that gathers and
puts it into the hands of others; that liberally communicates to the
poor; he shall increase, as commonly liberal persons do; so the Targum,

"he that gathereth and giveth to the poor shall increase in substance.''

\(f\) "De malo quaesitis vix gaudet tertius baeres", Herat. (g) "in
manu", Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "super manu", Gussetius,
p. 310. "super manum", Michaelis, Schultens. (h) "Usque ad manum",
Montantus.

[Proverbs 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">pro 13:12</span></span>

Hope deferred maketh the heart sick,.... That is, the object hoped for;
if it is not enjoyed so soon as expected, at least if it is delayed any
length of time, the mind becomes uneasy, the heart sinks and fails, and
the man is dispirited and ready to despond, and give up all hope of
enjoying the desired blessing; whether it be deliverance from any evil,
or the possession of any good;

but when the desire cometh, it is a tree of life; when that which is
hoped and wished for, and has been long expected and desired, comes;
when there is an accomplishment of men's wishes, it is as grateful to
him as the tree of life was in Eden's garden; it gives him an
unspeakable pleasure and delight. This may be applied to many things in
a spiritual way, as to the first coming of Christ; and some have thought
this is greatly regarded and chiefly intended; this was the object of
the hope of Old Testament saints; and it was hoped for on a good
foundation, on the promise of God, which was frequently repeated,
enlarged, and confirmed; yet this promised and hoped for blessing was
deferred a long time; from the first promise of it to its accomplishment
were four thousand years; though not deferred longer than the appointed
time, yet longer than the saints expected, and which sometimes made
their hearts sick; they became weak and feeble, fearful and dispirited,
lest it should never come to pass, which occasioned fresh promises and
assurances to them; see [Isa 35:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#003),
[Mal 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#001); but when "the desire" came,
Christ the desired object; and who is desirable for the excellencies of
his person, his mediatorial qualifications, the work of redemption and
salvation he came about, and the blessings he brought with him; and who
is the "desire of all nations" that was to come, [Hag
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#007); it was exceeding joyful and
delightful to all that expected him, and were looking for redemption in
Israel, or Christ; "the coming desire" (i), as it may be rendered, is "a
tree of life", or "lives", the author of life, natural, spiritual, and
eternal; see [Pro 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018). It may be
applied also to the spiritual presence of Christ, and communion with
him; this is what believers, being sometimes without, hope and wait for;
and sometimes it is deferred a long time, at least they think it so,
which makes them very uneasy, and even sick of love, as the church was,
[Sol 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#008); but when what they so
earnestly desire is granted them, it is as if they were in Eden's
garden, or rather in the paradise above, plucking the fruit of the tree
of life: likewise it may be applied to eternal glory and happiness; this
is the object of hope in the present state; it is sometimes impatiently
expected and desired, and the language of the soul is, "Why is his
chariot so long in coming?", "come, Lord Jesus, come quickly", [Jdg
5:28](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#028); and when this desired happiness
is enjoyed, how sweet will it be! and the sweeter for having been so
much longed and wished for; and when the saints will be in the paradise
of God, and eat of the tree of life in the midst of it, and never hunger
more.

\(i\) "desiderium venieus", V. L. Pagninus, Mercerus, Cocceius,
Michaelis, Schultens.

[Proverbs 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">pro 13:13</span></span>

Whoso despiseth the word shall be destroyed,.... The word of God. Either
Christ, the essential Word; which must be a great evil, considering the
dignity of his person; great ingratitude, considering the grace of his
office; very dangerous, considering what a quick, sharp, and powerful
Word he is: and such may be said to despise him who despise his
ministers, and the Gospel preached by them; and which may be meant by
the word, that being the word of God and of truth, the word of
righteousness, peace, life, and salvation; and is to them that perish
foolishness; and to whom it is so, they shall perish, and be punished
with everlasting destruction, for their contempt of it, and disobedience
to it. Or the written word may be meant, the Scriptures, which are given
by inspiration of God, and therefore ought to be had in the greatest
reverence; and yet are greatly slighted and despised by the man of sin
and his followers; who set up and prefer their unwritten traditions to
them, and so make them of none effect: such are all false teachers, that
despise or abuse them, they bring destruction to themselves; for so the
words may be rendered, "shall bring destruction to himself", or shall
receive detriment from it: so the Targum, from the word itself; the
Syriac version, "by it"; and the Arabic version, "by the commandment
itself"; by the threatenings in it, and according to them: or, "because
of it"; because of the contempt of it;

but he that feareth the commandment; receives the word with reverence,
trembles at it; fears God, and keeps his commandments, and fears to
break them: he

shall be rewarded; with good, as the Targum adds; for in keeping the
commandments of God there is great reward: or, "shall enjoy peace", or
"be in safety" (k); for great peace have they which love the law of God,
and serve it: or, "shall be sound, and in health" (l); when those that
despise it "shall be corrupted" (m); as the word in the preceding clause
may be rendered.

\(k\) "in pace versabitur", V. L. "fruetur pace", Vatablus; "donatur
pace", Junius & Tremellius; "pacabitur", Cocceius; "salvabitur", Syriac
version. (l) Sept. (m) "corrumpetur"; Pagninus, Montanus, Junius &
Tremellius.

[Proverbs 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">pro 13:14</span></span>

The law of the wise is a fountain of life,.... Or "doctrine" (n); the
doctrine of those who are taught by the word, and are wise unto
salvation; the words or doctrines of the wise, which are given forth by
one Shepherd; the instructions of such who are like Scribes, well
instructed themselves unto the kingdom of heaven: these are as a
fountain of living water; which are the means of quickening dead
sinners, and of reviving and refreshing the souls of weary saints; and
bring life and immortality to light, and point and lead to eternal life:
and so direct souls

to depart from the snares of death; the snares of sin, Satan, and the
world, to shun and avoid them; with which men being entangled, are
brought to destruction and death.

\(n\) "doctrina", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Schultens.

[Proverbs 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">pro 13:15</span></span>

Good understanding giveth favour,.... A good understanding in things
natural and civil gives favour among men; and so a good understanding in
divine and spiritual things gives a man favour among religious people,
makes him taken notice of by them, and acceptable to them: and such an
understanding no man has, unless it be given him; and such appear to
have one that do the commandments of God, [Psa
111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010). The Israelites, for having and
keeping the statutes of the Lord, were accounted by others a wise and an
understanding people; and Christ, as man, when he increased in wisdom,
grew in favour with God and men. It may be rendered, "good doctrine", as
the Vulgate Latin version, or "right doctrine", as the Arabic version,
"gives grace" (o); is the means of conveying grace into the hearts of
men, and of increasing it. What if it should be rendered, "grace gives a
good understanding" (p)? since it is certain, that an understanding to
know God and Christ is a gift of grace, [Jo1
5:20](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#020);

but the way of transgressors is hard; ungrateful and unpleasant to
themselves and others; it is a rough and rugged way, in which they
stumble and fall; and cannot walk with pleasure themselves, when their
consciences are awakened, and they are loaded with guilt, and filled
with terror; and must be very disagreeable to those who have seen the
evil of them.

\(o\) "gratiam", Pagninus, Montanus. Vatablus. Mercerus. Drusius,
Michaelis, Schultens. (p) "Successum bonum dat gratia", Junius &
Tremellius.

[Proverbs 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">pro 13:16</span></span>

Every prudent man dealeth with knowledge,.... In order to get more, and
with men of knowledge for the same purpose; all he does is with
knowledge and discretion; he does not meddle with things, nor has he to
do with persons, he knows nothing of; he both acts and speaks with
knowledge, cautiously, wisely, considering well time, place, and
persons: and every wise and good man deals with evangelical knowledge,
and studies to grow in the knowledge of the Gospel, and the mysteries of
it; in the knowledge of Christ, and of God in Christ; the issue of which
is life eternal;

but a fool layeth open his folly; or "spreads" (q) it; and exposes it to
the view of everyone, by his foolish talk and indiscreet actions.

\(q\) "expandit", Mercerus, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Proverbs 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">pro 13:17</span></span>

A wicked messenger falleth into mischief,.... That does not do his
errand right, nor deliver his message faithfully; such an one falls from
the degree of honour in which he was into disgrace; he loses his
master's favour that sent him; he is degraded from his post and office:
he falls "by evil", or "into evil" (r); by the evil of sin, into the
evil of punishment. So wicked ministers and false teachers, such who
transform themselves into the apostles of Christ and into angels of
light, who corrupt the word of God, and handle it deceitfully; these
shall receive their just condemnation; since they do a deal of mischief
to the souls of men, and therefore shall fall into mischief themselves,
even into everlasting perdition;

but a faithful ambassador is health; or, "an ambassador of truths" (s);
one that performs his embassy well and truly, he is salutary, useful,
and profitable to himself, and to them that send him: the word for
ambassador is translated an "hinge", [Pro
26:14](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#014); and he is so called, because
upon his negotiations abroad the hinge of political affairs turn at
home. An ambassador of Christ, who does his work faithfully, keeps back
nothing that is profitable, but declares the whole counsel of God; the
sound doctrines he delivers are health to the souls of men; as well as
he is approved of God and Christ; and so it turns to his own health and
advantage, who will hear one day said unto him, "Well done, good and
faithful servant", [Mat 25:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#023).

\(r\) "in malum", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Junius &
Tremellius, Pisccator, &c. (s) "legatus veritatum", Montanus, Vatablus.

[Proverbs 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">pro 13:18</span></span>

Poverty and shame shall be to him that refuseth instruction,.... Of
parents, masters, and ministers of the word; the instruction of wisdom,
the instruction of the Gospel, in things relating to their present
spiritual peace, and to their eternal welfare: such generally come to
poverty and disgrace in this life, and to everlasting shame and contempt
in another; see [Pro 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#011);

but he that regardeth reproof; the reproof of the word, and of the
ministers of it, and of all good men, and takes it kindly, and acts
according to it,

shall be honoured; with riches and reputation; if not with the riches of
this world, yet with the riches of grace and glory; and shall have
honour among the saints, and from the Lord himself; who will honour
those that honour him, as they do who regard the reproof and instruction
of his word, [Sa1 2:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#030).

[Proverbs 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">pro 13:19</span></span>

The desire accomplished is sweet to the soul,.... Whether the desire be
after riches and honour, after wisdom and knowledge; or after the best
things, the knowledge of God, and communion with him; an interest in
Christ, and the blessings of his grace, as pardon, righteousness, &c.
and a right and title to eternal glory and happiness, and the enjoyment
of that: and how sweet are these things the soul desires, when they are
possessed! see [Pro 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#012); such are
"the desires of the godly", as the Septuagint render the word;

but it is abomination to fools to depart from evil; they cannot bear the
thoughts of parting with their lusts; they are so delightful to them,
not knowing anything of the sweetness of the things before mentioned;
and which they can never enjoy without departing from sin, to which they
are exceedingly averse.

[Proverbs 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">pro 13:20</span></span>

He that walketh with wise men shall be wise,.... Who is a companion of
them that fear the Lord; converses frequently with them in private about
spiritual and experimental things, and walks with them in public in all
the commandments and ordinances of the Lord; he by those means grows
wiser and wiser, gains a large stock of spiritual knowledge and
experience; for this holds good both in natural and spiritual wisdom, a
man of any capacity at all will improve by keeping wise company;

but a companion of fools shall be destroyed; the Vulgate Latin version
renders it, "shall become like them"; be a fool as they are, and grow
still more and more foolish. The Septuagint version is, "shall be
known"; known by the company he keeps to be a fool also: or rather,
"shall be broken" (t); ruined and destroyed, "evil communications
corrupt good manners", [Co1 15:33](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#033), and
so bring to ruin and destruction.

\(t\) "conteretur", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator, Mercerus, Gejerus;
"conquassabitur", Cocceius; "fragetur", Michaelis; "infringetur",
Schultens, so Ben Melech.

[Proverbs 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">pro 13:21</span></span>

Evil pursueth sinners,.... They pursue the evil of sin, and the evil of
punishment pursues them, and at last overtakes them; their damnation,
though it may seem to slumber and linger, it does not; it is upon the
full speed after them, and will quickly seize upon them. Some understand
this of the evil of sin in the conscience, which pursues the sinner, and
fills him with terror;

but to the righteous good shall be repaid; or, "he shall recompense the
righteous with good" (u), or "good to the righteous"; that is, God shall
do it; for all the good things they have done, from a right principle,
and to a right end; which good works of theirs will pursue and follow
them; and for all the ill things they have suffered for righteousness's
sake, a reward of grace, though not of debt, will be given them; as they
have had their evil things here, they shall have their good things
hereafter; as well as are often recompensed in this life, either in
themselves or in their posterity, as follows.

\(u\) "et justis reddet bonum", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Gejerus;
"justes remunerabit Deus bono", Michaelis; "justis autem bonum
rependet", Tigurine version, Piscator, so Cocceius.

[Proverbs 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">pro 13:22</span></span>

A good man leaveth an inheritance to his children's children,.... He not
only has a sufficiency for the present support of himself and family;
but is so prospered and succeeded, as to leave an inheritance after him;
and which is continued to and enjoyed, not only by his immediate
offspring, but theirs also; for being got honestly, it wears well; see
[Pro 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#011);

and the wealth of the sinner is laid up for the just; the riches which
wicked men get are laid up in the purposes of God for good men; and in
his providence they are translated from the one to the other: so the
riches of the Egyptians were designed for the Israelites, and by the
providence of God were put into their hands; see [Job
27:16](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#016).

[Proverbs 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">pro 13:23</span></span>

Much food is in the tillage of the poor,.... The poor are generally
employed in tilling land; from whose labours in ploughing and sowing
much food arises to men, bread to the eater, and seed to the sower: or a
poor farmer, that has but a small farm, a few acres of land, to till;
yet through his diligence and industry, with the blessing of God upon
it, he gets a comfortable livelihood for himself and family; much food,
or a sufficiency of it for the present year, and seed to sow land again
the following year;

but there is that is destroyed for want of judgment; or discretion in
tilling his land, and managing the affairs of husbandry, which is God's
gift, [Isa 28:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#026); or, "through
injustice" (w), as some render it; for want of doing that which is right
and just; not paying his labourers their hire and wages, as he ought,
and so it is blasted, and comes to ruin. This may be spiritually
applied. By the "poor" may be understood the poor ministers of the
Gospel; who, though poor, make many rich, [Co2
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2006.htm#010); much spiritual food is to be had
under their labours and ministrations, they being employed in
cultivating the churches: or else the poor saints and poor churches
themselves may be meant; who are tilled by them, among whom is plenty of
spiritual provisions; as in the poor Protestant churches, who, though in
the wilderness, are nourished for a time, and times, and half a time,
when there is no food in the apostate church of Rome: and so by the
"tillage" may be meant the church of Christ itself, which is "God's
husbandry", [Co1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#009); his agriculture,
his tillage, his arable land; which he has separated and distinguished
from the wide world, and employs his power and care about. For he is the
husbandman, [Joh 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh015.htm#001); it is he that
breaks up the fallow ground of men's hearts; that makes the ground good
which he tills; who sows the seed of the word, and the seed of his grace
there; who waters it with the dews of his grace, and causes his people
to grow as the corn, and ripens them for glory: and when the harvest is
come, the end of the world or of life, he sends his reapers, his angels,
to gather them, the wheat, into his garner. And he employs the ministers
of the word as under husbandmen, as labourers under him and with him;
these are the ploughmen that hold the plough of the Gospel, and manage
that; these are his sowers that go forth, bearing the precious seed of
the word, and sow it under his direction; and these water the ground
that is sown and planted; their doctrines distil as the rain and dew
upon it; and these bring in their sheaves with joy at last. And now in
this tillage is much spiritual food; in God's husbandry, the church, are
the word and ordinances, in which are milk for babes, and meat for
strong men, salutary, wholesome, nourishing, and strengthening food;
here Christ, the best food, is set forth to faith to feed upon; true and
real food, meat and drink indeed, spiritual, savoury, satisfying food;
soul reviving, refreshing, and nourishing food; here is plenty of it,
enough and to spare: and yet there are some that are destroyed for want
of spiritual judgment and discerning; who take the poison of false
teachers instead of the food to be had under a Gospel ministry; so the
followers of the man of sin are given up to believe a lie and be damned;
for want of judgment, they receive the grossest absurdities, and perish;
as others also give in to damnable heresies, denying the deity,
satisfaction, and righteousness of Christ, and other soul destroying
notions; see [Hos 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#006).

\(w\) "ob non jus", Vatablus; i.e. "ob injustitiam", Michaelis; "sine
justitia", Gejerum.

[Proverbs 13:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">pro 13:24</span></span>

He that spareth his rod hateth his son,.... Who withholds or withdraws
his rod of correction, which is in his hand, which he has power to use,
and ought to exercise at proper times; he, instead of loving his son,
may be said to hate him; for such fond love is no better than hatred;
and, if he really hated him, he could scarcely do a more ill thing by
him than not to correct him for a fault; which was the sin of good old
Eli, and both he and his sons suffered for it;

but he that loveth him; that has a true love for his son, and a hearty
concern for his welfare and future good; he will regulate his affections
by his judgment, and not give way to a fond passion, to the prejudice of
his child: but he

chasteneth him betimes, or "in the morning" (x); in the morning of his
infancy, before vicious habits are contracted, or he is accustomed to
sinning, and hardened in it; or as soon as a crime is perpetrated,
before it is forgot or repeated: or every morning, as Jarchi and Aben
Ezra; that is, continually, as often as it is necessary, or as faults
are committed.

\(x\) "mane castigat eum", Munster; "matutinat ei disciplinam",
Michaelis.

[Proverbs 13:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">pro 13:25</span></span>

The righteous eateth to the satisfying of his soul,.... He is blessed
with a sufficient competency to live upon; and he is contented with what
he has, and uses it moderately; he has enough to eat, and is contented
with his portion, and eats no more than sufficeth; he eats to the
satisfying of his appetite, and no more; he does not indulge to luxury
and excess: and so as to spiritual things; he eats to the satisfying of
his soul, with the goodness and fatness of God's house, with the word
and ordinances, with the promises of the Gospel, and with Jesus Christ,
the bread of life; with these he is satisfied, as with marrow and
fatness;

but the belly of the wicked shall want; not only spiritual food, which
he has no appetite for, but corporeal food; he shall starve in the midst
of plenty, not having a heart to put that food into his mouth, and fill
his belly with it, as nature requires, through his covetousness; or,
having spent his substance in rioting and wantonness, wants bread to
satisfy the craving of his appetite.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Proverbs Chapter 14](pro014)

</div>
