<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa019)  [Next](psa021.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 20](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 20:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 20

To the chief Musician, a Psalm of David. This psalm is thought, by some,
to be written by David, on account of himself, and as a form to be used
by the people for him, when he was about to go to war; particularly with
the Ammonites and Syrians, [Sa2 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#006.md);
mention being made of chariots in it, [Psa
20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007.md); of which there was a great
number in that war: Arama thinks it was made by him when he got the
victory over the Philistines; others think it was written by one of the
singers on David's account, and should be rendered, "a psalm, for
David", as [Psa 72:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#001.md), but rather it is
a psalm concerning David; concerning the Messiah, whose name is David;
or a psalm of David concerning the Messiah, since he is expressly
mentioned, [Psa 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006.md); and Aben Ezra
says, there are some that interpret it of the Messiah; and some passages
in it are, by Jewish writers (m), applied unto him, as [Psa
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006.md); and our countryman, Mr.
Ainsworth, says, the whole psalm is a prophecy of Christ's sufferings,
and his deliverance out of them, for which the church with him triumphs.
Theodoret takes it to be a prophecy of Sennacherib's invasion of Judea,
and of Rabshakeh's blasphemy, and of Hezekiah's distress and prayer on
that account.

\(m\) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 18. 1. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 44. 2.

[Psalms 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 20:1</span></span>

The Lord hear thee in the day of trouble,.... All the days of Christ
were days of trouble; he was a brother born for adversity; a man of
sorrows, and acquainted with griefs; he had his own sorrows, and he bore
the griefs of others; he was persecuted by Herod in his infancy; he was
tempted by Satan in the wilderness; he was harassed by the Scribes and
Pharisees continually; he was grieved at the hardness, impenitence, and
unbelief, of that perverse and faithless generation of men, and was
sometimes made uneasy by his own disciples: at some particular seasons
his soul or spirit is said to be troubled, as at the grave of Lazarus,
and when in a view of his own death, and when he was about to acquaint
his disciples that one of them should betray him, [Joh
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033.md); but more particularly it was a
day of trouble with him, when he was in the garden, heavy, and sore
amazed, and his sweat was, as it were, drops of blood falling on the
ground, and his soul was exceeding sorrowful, even unto death; but more
especially this was his case when he hung upon the cross, and is what
seems to be principally respected here; when he was in great torture of
body through the rack of the cross; when he endured the cruel mockings
of men, of the common people, of the chief priests, and even of the
thieves that suffered with him; when he had Satan, and all his
principalities and powers, let loose upon him, and he was grappling with
them; when he bore all the sins of his people, endured the wrath of his
Father, and was forsaken by him: now in this day of trouble, both when
in the garden and on the cross, he prayed unto his Father, as he had
been used to do in other cases, and at other times; and the church here
prays, that God would hear and answer him, as he did: he always heard
him; he heard him at the grave of Lazarus; he heard him in the garden,
and filled his human soul with courage and intrepidity, of which there
were immediate instances; he heard him on the cross, and helped him as
man and Mediator, [Isa 49:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#008.md);

the name of the God of Jacob defend thee; that is, God himself, who is
named the God of Jacob, whom Jacob called upon, and trusted in as his
God, and who answered him in the day of his distress: Jacob was
exercised with many troubles, but the Lord delivered him out of them
all; and which may be the reason why the Lord is addressed under this
character here; besides, Israel is one of the names of the Messiah, [Isa
49:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#003.md); on whose account the petition is
put to which may be added, that Jacob may design people of God, the
spiritual sons of Jacob, the church of the living God, whose God the
Lord is; and the phrase may be here used by the church, to encourage her
faith in prayer: the petition, on account of the Messiah, is, that God
would "defend" him, or "set" him on "an high place" (n); or "exalt" him:
he was brought very low in his state of humiliation; he was in the form
of a servant; he was in a very low and mean condition throughout the
whole of his life; through the suffering of death he was made lower than
the angels, and he was laid in the lower parts of the earth: the church,
in this petition, prays for his resurrection from the dead; for his
ascension into the highest heavens; for his exaltation at the right hand
of God; for the more visible setting him on his throne in his kingdom;
in all which she has been answered.

\(n\) "elevet te", Pagninus, Montanus; "exaltet te", Vatablus, Museulus,
Michaelis; "in edito collocet te", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so
Ainsworth.

[Psalms 20:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 20:2</span></span>

Send thee help from the sanctuary,.... Meaning either from the
tabernacle, the holy place, where was the ark, the symbol of the divine
Presence; or rather heaven, the habitation of God's holiness unless the
same is meant by it as by Zion, in the next clause, the church of God,
from whence he sends the rod of his strength;

and strengthen thee out of Zion; and the "help" and "strength" prayed
for are not to be understood of that assistance and support, which
Christ, as man, had from his Father, at the time of his sufferings,
which were promised him, and he believed he should have, and had, [Psa
89:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#021.md); since these petitions follow
that which relates to his exaltation; but of the help and strength
afforded to the apostles and ministers of Christ, after they had
received the commission from him to preach the Gospel to every creature;
when, as a full answer to these petitions, God worked with them, greatly
assisted them, strengthened them with strength in their souls; confirmed
the word with signs and wonders following; made it the power of God to
salvation to multitudes; and so strengthened the cause, interest, and
kingdom of the Redeemer.

[Psalms 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 20:3</span></span>

Remember all thy offerings,.... The spiritual sacrifices of prayer and
praise which Christ, as the great High Priest, offers up for his people;
or which they offer by him, and are acceptable to God through him, by
virtue of the incense of his mediation; or the offering up of himself,
which answers to, and is the body, the sum and substance, of all the
offerings of the law; they were types of this, and what they could not
do this did; and therefore it is expressed in the singular number in the
next clause;

and accept thy burnt sacrifice. The word rendered "accept" signifies to
"reduce to ashes" (o); and the way in which it was known that sacrifices
were acceptable to God was by fire coming down from heaven upon them and
consuming them, [Lev 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev009.htm#024.md); and
therefore the word is rightly rendered "accept"; and Christ's sacrifice
of himself, putting away sin, and perfecting for ever them that are
sanctified, is of a sweet smelling savour to God; for hereby his justice
is satisfied, his law is magnified and made honourable, the sins of his
people are atoned for, their persons are accepted, and their sacrifices
of prayer and praise come up also with acceptance to him through the
virtue of this sacrifice; and so these petitions have their
accomplishment.

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md).

\(o\) "incineret", Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius; "in cinerem vertat",
Vatablus; so Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Gejerus, Ainsworth.

[Psalms 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 20:4</span></span>

Grant thee according to thine own heart,.... Which is to see his seed,
the travail of his soul, and to have the pleasure of the Lord prosper in
his hand; to have all his people called, preserved, and glorified;

and fulfil all thy counsel; whatever was agreed upon in the council and
covenant of peace between him and his Father, relating to his own glory,
and the salvation of his people.

[Psalms 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 20:5</span></span>

We will rejoice in thy salvation,.... That is, "so will we", &c. or
"that we may" (p), &c. or "let us"; these words, with what follow, point
at the end of the church's requests, and what she resolved to do upon
the accomplishment of the above things; for instance, she would rejoice
in the salvation of the Messiah; meaning either the salvation and
deliverance from death and the grave, and all other enemies, which he
himself is possessed of, and which enters into, and is the occasion of
the joy of his people; for not his sufferings and death only, but
chiefly his resurrection from the dead, session at God's right hand, and
intercession for them, cause the triumph of faith in him, and further
the joy of it, [Rom 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#033.md); or else the
salvation he is the author of, which being so great, so suitable, so
complete and perfect, and an everlasting one; is matter of joy to all
sensible of their need of it, and who have a comfortable hope of
interest in it;

and in the name of our God we will set up our banners; either as a
preparation for war; see [Jer 51:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#027.md);
so when Caesar (q) set up his banner, it was a sign to his soldiers to
run to their arms and prepare to fight; and then the sense is, putting
our trust in the Lord, relying on his strength, and not on our own, we
will cheerfully and courageously engage with all his and our enemies,
sin, Satan, and the world; as good soldiers of Christ, we will endure
hardness, fight his battles under the banners of the Lord of hosts, in
whose service we are enlisted; or as a sign of victory, when standards
were set up, and flags hung out (r); see [Jer
50:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#002.md); and then the meaning is, Christ,
the great Captain of our salvation, having obtained a complete victory
over all enemies, and made us more than conquerors thereby, we will set
up our banners, hang out the flag, and in his name triumph over sin,
Satan, the world, death, and hell;

the Lord fulfil all thy petitions: the same as in [Psa
20:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#004.md); this is put here to show that
the church will be in such a frame as before described, when the Lord
shall have fulfilled all the petitions of his Anointed; of which she had
a full assurance, as appears from the following words.

\(p\) So Ainsworth; "ovemus", Vatablus, Piscator, Michaelis; "cantemus",
Gejerus. (q) De Bello Gallico, l. 2. c. 20. (r) Schindler. Pentaglott.
col. 1126.

[Psalms 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 20:6</span></span>

Now know I that the Lord saveth his Anointed,.... Not David, though he
was the anointed of the God of Jacob, and was anointed with material oil
to be king of Israel by Samuel, at the express order of God himself; but
David is not here speaking of himself, nor the church of him, but of the
Messiah; anointed by Jehovah king over his holy hill of Zion, with the
oil of gladness, or the Holy Spirit. The church in prayer rises in her
faith, and is strongly assured of the salvation of the Messiah; that
though his troubles would be many and great, he should be delivered out
of them all; should be heard and helped in the day of salvation, and be
freed from the sorrows of death and hell, he should be encompassed with;
that he should be raised from the dead; have all power in heaven and
earth given him; ascend on high, and triumph over all his enemies; and
all his people, all the members of his body, should be saved through
him, which is in a sense the salvation of himself;

he will hear him from his holy heaven; where his throne and temple are,
which is the habitation of his holiness, whither the prayers of the
Messiah when on earth ascended, where they were received, heard, and
answered. Before the church prays that he might be heard, now she
believes he would; and that,

with the saving strength of his right hand; that is, by the exertion of
his mighty power, in strengthening him as man to bear up under his
sorrows, go through his work, and finish it; by upholding him with his
right hand while engaged in it, and by raising him up from the dead with
it, and setting him down at it in the highest heavens.

[Psalms 20:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 20:7</span></span>

Some trust in chariots, and some in horses,.... That is, in chariots and
horses prepared for war; which, besides their use for carriage, did
great annoyance to the enemy in battle, and were very terrible to them,
and were greatly trusted in by those that possessed them, [Deu
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu020.htm#001.md); such chariots as were called
"currus falcati", that had scythes at the sides of them, which being
drove with fury among the infantry, cut them down as grass is mown with
scythes; such the old Canaanites used, which were very terrible, [Jos
17:16](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#016.md); and horses trained up for war
do much execution in a battle by pawing and trampling; see [Job
39:21](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#021.md); though these are vain things
for safety, and not to be depended on, for salvation and victory are of
the Lord, [Psa 33:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#017.md); and such are the
chariots and horses of the sun, and the idols in which the Gentiles
trusted, [Kg2 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2023.htm#011.md); and all external
things in which men depend for salvation, as fleshly privileges, outward
works of righteousness, morality, a profession of religion, a round of
duties, &c. all which are disclaimed by those who know the way of life
and salvation by Christ, [Hos 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#003.md);

but we will remember the name of the Lord our God; not any of the names
by which the Lord God is called, as Elohim, Elshaddai, Jehovah, and the
like; though each of these are worthy of remembrance, and greatly serve
to encourage faith in him; but rather the perfections of God, such as
the goodness, wisdom, and power of God, which are to be remembered and
confided in; and not the friendship of princes, the schemes of human
policy, and the outward forces of strength; or else God himself is
intended, whose name is himself, and is a strong tower to the righteous:
and to remember him is to bear him in mind, and not forget him; to have
the desires of the soul towards him, and to the remembrance of him; and
to make mention of him, of his names, attributes, word, and works; which
is both for his glory and for the encouragement of faith in him, both in
ourselves and others; it is to call upon his name in times of trouble,
and at all times, and also to trust in him and not in an arm of flesh;
for it stands opposed to trusting in chariots and horses; and it is to
call to mind past instances of his goodness, wisdom, and power, and be
thankful for them, and make use of them to engage confidence in him; and
which should be done from the consideration of his being God and not
man, and of his being our God, our covenant God and Father.

[Psalms 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 20:8</span></span>

They are brought down and fallen,.... These are they that rode in
chariots and on horses, and trusted in them; who are brought down from
their places of honour and safety; and fall, not into the hands of their
enemies, and into a low and mean estate, but to the ground by death; as
also such who, being like Capernaum, lifted up to heaven with their own
outward attainments, and think to get thither by them, are brought down
to hell, and fall into the pit of corruption;

but we are risen, and stand upright; who remember the name of the Lord,
and trust in him; the church is sometimes in a very low and depressed
condition; it consists of a poor and an afflicted people, and who are
persecuted by men; so the church has been under the Heathen Roman
emperors, and under the Papacy, and will be as long as she is in the
wilderness, and the witnesses prophesy in sackcloth; and especially when
they will be slain, and their bodies lie on the earth unburied; but
these shall rise and stand upright, and ascend to heaven; there will be
a glorious state of the church; there will be a reviving of the interest
of Christ, through the bringing in the fulness and forces of the
Gentiles, and the conversion of the Jews; the dry bones will live again,
and stand upon their feet, an exceeding great army; in those days the
righteous will flourish and have abundance of peace and prosperity. This
may also include the first resurrection, which the saints will have a
part in; the dead in Christ will rise first, and will stand before the
Lord with confidence, and not be ashamed; when the ungodly shall not
stand in judgment, nor sinners in, the congregation of the righteous;
for though these words are expressed in the present tense, because of
the certainty of them, they belong to future times; hence the following
petitions.

[Psalms 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 20:9</span></span>

Save, Lord,.... Not "the king", as the Septuagint, Ethiopic, and Arabic
versions read the words, joining the word "king" to them, which is in
the next clause; but this, as Aben Ezra observes, is not right, because
of the accent "athnach", which divides these words from the following;
rather the word us may be supplied; and so the Syriac version renders
it, "the Lord will deliver us"; and the Targum is, "O Lord", , "redeem
us", or "save us"; that is, with a temporal, spiritual, and eternal
salvation: this petition is directed to Jehovah the Father, as the
following is to the King Messiah;

let the King hear us when we call; for not God the Father is here meant,
though he is an everlasting King, the King of kings; and who hears his
people, when they call upon him, and while they are calling; yet he is
rarely, if ever, called "the King", without any other additional
epithet; whereas the Messiah often is, as in the next psalm, [Psa
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#001.md); and prayer is made to him, and
he hears and receives the prayers of his people; and, as Mediator,
presents them to his Father perfumed with his much incense; for he is a
Priest as well as a King.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 21](psa021.md)

</div>
