<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa046)  [Next](psa048.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 47](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 47:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 47

To the chief Musician, A Psalm for the sons of Korah. Thus psalm is
thought by some to be written on occasion of the ark being brought from
the house of Obededom to the city of David, to the place he had prepared
for it; which was attended with singing and dancing, with shouting, and
the sound of a trumpet, [Sa2 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#012.md); but
it rather seems to be penned on account of the ascension of Christ to
heaven, prophetically spoken of in this psalm; and of the spread of the
Gospel, and the conquests it made in the Gentile world upon Christ's
ascension; as the whole psalm shows: and even Aben Ezra and Kimchi apply
it to the times of the Messiah; and so do some of their most ancient
writers, who particularly interpret [Psa
47:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005.md) of him, as may be seen in the
note upon it.

[Psalms 47:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 47:1</span></span>

O clap your hands, all ye people, Meaning the Gentiles more especially;
see [Psa 117:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa117.htm#001.md) compared with [Rom
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009.md); who had reason to rejoice and be
glad, since the ascended Lord and King here spoken of was given to be
their Saviour, was the propitiation for their sins, and had given
himself a ransom price for them; and now the Gospel was preached among
them, by an order from him after his resurrection; and upon his
ascension gifts were bestowed on his apostles, qualifying them for it;
when many of them were converted by it, and were made partakers of the
same grace and privileges with the Jews that believed in Christ, and
were formed into Gospel churches. Wherefore they are called upon to
declare their joy and gladness by "clapping their hands"; which is a
gesture expressive of exultation and joy; see [Psa
98:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa098.htm#008.md), [Nah
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/nah003.htm#019.md). It was used at the unction and
coronation of a king, [Kg2 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2011.htm#012.md); and
so very proper to be used on occasion of the Messiah being made or
declared Lord and Christ, as he was at his ascension, [Act
2:36](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#036.md);

shout unto God with the voice of triumph; as when triumphs are made on
account of victories obtained, which was now the case; Christ having
conquered sin, Satan, and the world, by his sufferings and death, and
having spoiled principalities and powers, made a show of them, openly
triumphing over them, when he ascended on high, and led captivity
captive; and he having sent his apostles into the Gentile world with his
Gospel, they were caused to triumph in him wherever they came. And now
these external actions of clapping hands, and shouting with the voice,
are expressive of inward spiritual joy; which those among the people who
were conquered by the grace of God, and had a sight of their ascended
Lord and Saviour, were filled with: and who are exhorted to express it
in this manner, unto God: not to angels, nor to men, no, not to
ministers, who brought the joyful tidings to them; but to God, either to
God the Father, for all their temporal and spiritual blessings;
especially for the unspeakable gift of his Son, to suffer and die for
them: or to the Son of God, God manifest in the flesh; God that was gone
up with a shout, [Psa 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005.md); and was
now at the right hand of God, crowned with glory and honour; who, by the
sufferings of death, had obtained eternal redemption for them.

[Psalms 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 47:2</span></span>

For the Lord most high is terrible,.... Christ is not only the Son of
the Highest, but he himself is the most high God, God over all, blessed
for ever. He is higher than the highest, than the angels in heaven, or
any of the sons of men on earth. He is the high and lofty One, that
dwells in the high and lofty place. And even this character agrees with
him as the ascended Lord and King in his human nature; he is ascended on
high, is set down on the right hand of the Majesty on high. He is highly
exalted to be a Prince and a Saviour; he is made higher than the
heavens, and than the kings of the earth are; angels, authorities, and
powers, are subject to him. And this is a reason exciting all the people
to joy and gladness. And he is "terrible" to his enemies, being the Lion
of the tribe of Judah; who will rule the nations with a rod of iron, and
break them in pieces as a potter's vessel: and so he will be when he
shall come in the clouds of heaven, land descend from thence, in flaming
fire, to take vengeance on those who have despised and rejected him; and
at the same time will be glorious to and admired by them that believe in
him. His appearance, which will be terrible to others, will be matter of
joy to them. Though the word used may be rendered as it is in [Psa
111:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#009.md); "reverend" or "to be feared"
(b), as he is; see [Isa 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#013.md); both on
account of his goodness, as the Redeemer and Saviour of his people, [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005.md); and of his greatness, being equal
with God, and King of saints. As it follows;

he is a great King over all the earth; as he must needs be, since he is
the great God and our Saviour; and is King of kings, and Lord of lords.
He is now King of Zion, and head over all things to the church; and
before long the kingdoms of this world will become his, and he will take
to himself his great power and reign, and shall be King over all the
earth openly and visibly; he shall be one, and his name One, [Zac
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009.md); which is another reason for joy
and gladness among the people.

\(b\) "reverendus", Junius & Tremellius; "timendus est", Coccius;
"venerandus", Michaelis.

[Psalms 47:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 47:3</span></span>

He shall subdue the people under us, and the nations under our feet. As
Joshua, his type, subdued the Canaanites; and as David, another type of
subdued the Syrians, Moabites, and others: the Jews from these words
expect, that, in the times of the Messiah they look for, the Gentiles in
a literal sense will be subdued by him, and become subject to them; but
these, and all other expressions of the like kind, are to be understood
in a spiritual sense; such as [Isa
49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md); and which will have their
accomplishment in the latter day, in the subjection of the Gentiles to
the word and ordinances of the Gospel administered in his churches:
though the passage here refers to the times following the ascension of
Christ to heaven, when he went forth in the ministry of his apostles
conquering and to conquer; and which he made use of to cause the people
to fall under him, and to be willing to be saved by him; to submit to
his righteousness, and to his ordinances, the sceptre of his kingdom;
and which was causing them to triumph, and subduing the people under
them, who through the Gospel preached by them became obedient by word
and deed; and which was an occasion of joy even to the conquered ones.

[Psalms 47:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 47:4</span></span>

He shall choose our inheritance for us,.... Either a portion in this
life; God knows what is best for his people, and therefore they should
leave it with him, who can make a better choice for them than for
themselves: an Heathen (c) once gave this advice,

"give thyself wholly to the will and disposal of the celestial ones; for
they who are used to give good things easily can also choose the
fittest.''

Or the heavenly inheritance, so called in allusion to the land of
Canaan, subdued and possessed by the Israelites, in which Christ is
greatly concerned; his people are predestinated to the adoption of
children, that is, to the inheritance they are adopted to by him, in
whom they obtain it; through his death they receive the promise of
eternal inheritance, he being the testator of that will of their
heavenly Father which bequeaths it to them; it is his righteousness
which gives them a title to it, and through his grace they have a
meetness for it, and he will at last introduce them into it; all which
is a reason for joy and gladness in them. The Arabic version renders it,
"he hath chosen us an inheritance for himself"; so the Lord's people
are, [Deu 32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009.md). Christ asked them of
his father, and he gave them for his inheritance, he having chosen them
as such, and greatly delighted he is with them, [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md);

the excellency of Jacob whom he loved. The saints, who are, in his
esteem, the excellent in the earth, and who will be in the latter day an
eternal excellency, [Psa 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#003.md); even
the whole church, consisting of Jews and Gentiles, the spiritual Jacob
or Israel of God, whom Christ has loved with an everlasting love, and
therefore has chosen them for his portion and peculiar treasure; as
Jacob in person was loved when Esau was hated.

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md).

\(c\) Socrates apud Valer. Maxim. l. 7. c. 2. extern. 1.

[Psalms 47:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 47:5</span></span>

God is gone up with a shout,.... That is, the Son of God, who is truly
and properly God, equal to the Father, having the same perfections; God
manifest in the flesh, the Word that was made flesh, and dwelt among men
on earth; who in the next clause is called "Lord" or "Jehovah", being
the everlasting "I AM", which is, and was, and is to come; he having
done his work on earth he came about, went up from earth to heaven in
human nature, really, locally, and visibly, in the sight of his
apostles, attended by angels, and with their shouts and acclamations,
which are here meant;

the Lord with the sound of the trumpet; which circumstance, though not
related in the account of Christ's ascension in the New Testament, yet
inasmuch as the angels say he shall descend in like manner as he
ascended, and that it is certain he will descend with a shout, with the
voice of the archangel, and the trump of God; so that if his ascent was
as his descent will be, it must be then with a shout, and the sound of a
trumpet, [Act 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#010.md). This text is
applied to the Messiah by the ancient Jewish writers (d).

\(d\) Bemidbar Rabba, s. 15. fol. 218. 1.

[Psalms 47:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 47:6</span></span>

Sing praises to God,.... That is gone up with a shout, Christ Jesus, our
ascended Lord and King, as the apostles did at the time of his
ascension, [Luk 24:52](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#052.md);

sing praises; sing praises unto our King, sing praises: who was then
made Lord and Christ, declared King of saints, and crowned with glory
and honour; the repetition of the phrase sing praises denotes frequency,
constancy, fervency, and great devotion in the performance of this
service; and that the ascension of Christ, the occasion of it, is of the
greatest moment and importance, and requires it to be performed in such
a manner.

[Psalms 47:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 47:7</span></span>

For God is the King of all the earth,.... Or "the king of all the earth
is God" (e); the same that is ascended into heaven, and is King of
saints, even Christ Jesus; and so he will appear to be, especially in
the latter day; See Gill on [Psa 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002.md);

sing ye praises with understanding; or, as De Dieu renders it, to him
that understandeth, that is, to God the only wise, whose understanding
is infinite; even to Christ, who, as God, knows all things; and, as man
and Mediator, is of quick understanding, and has all the treasures of
wisdom and knowledge in him; so R. Obadiah, "sing of him who
understands"; or, "sing ye praises, O everyone that understandeth" (f);
that is, how to sing, as everyone does not; this is the sense of Aben
Ezra and Kimchi; or "with understanding", as we render it; with
understanding of what is sung. The Apostle Paul seems to refer to this
passage in [Co1 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#015.md). The Targum
renders it, "with a good understanding".

\(e\) So Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Michaelis. (f)
"canite, intelligens", Montanus; i.e. "unusquisque", Vatablus.

[Psalms 47:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 47:8</span></span>

God reigneth over the Heathen,.... He reigned over Israel under the
former dispensation, and now he reigns over the Gentiles under the
Gospel dispensation; as appears by the numerous instances of conversion
among them in the first ages of Christianity; and by the many churches
that were planted by the means of the apostles; and by the destruction
of the Roman Pagan empire under the sixth seal, [Rev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012.md); and which will still more appear
by the destruction of Rome Papal, when all the Heathens shall perish out
of the land; and by the fulness and forces of the Gentiles being brought
into a submission to him; all which are reasons to sing praises to him;

God sitteth upon the throne of his holiness; or his holy throne, which
is heaven; on the right hand of the throne of the Majesty in the
heavens; on his Father's throne; having done his work on earth he is
received up into heaven, and is set down on a throne at the right hand
of God, an honour which none of the angels have: he has ceased from his
work and entered into his rest, and sits and sees of the travail of his
soul; all which is matter of joy to his people, and a reason why they
should sing praises; and the rather, since they are set down with him in
heavenly places: or this may be understood of his sitting on the throne
of judgment to judge the world in righteousness at the last day, it
following upon his reign over the Gentiles; though the other sense best
agrees with his immediate ascension to heaven.

[Psalms 47:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 47:9</span></span>

The princes of the people are gathered together,.... Not against Christ,
as at his first coming, but to him, and to his church and people; even
the great men of the earth, the kings and princes of it, as they will in
the latter day; see [Isa 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023.md); or
this may mean the saints in general, who are all of them the princes of
people, and are set among princes, yea, are kings priests unto God; some
render it, "the willing" or "voluntary ones of his people" (g); the same
word is here used as in [Psa 110:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa110.htm#003.md);
where it is rendered "willing", and designs such who are made willing to
be saved by Christ, submit to his righteousness, and be subject to his
word and ordinances;

even the people of the God of Abraham; whom the God of Abraham has
chosen for his people, taken into covenant, given to his Son, and who
are redeemed by his blood, and effectually called by his grace; and who,
though Gentiles, belong to the same covenant and the same covenant God
as Abraham did, and have the blessing of Abraham upon them; and are
indeed his spiritual seed, being Christ's. The Targum is, "the people
that believe in the God of Abraham". The words may be rendered in
connection with the former clause, "gathered together unto the people of
the God of Abraham" (h); and so denote the association of the Gentiles
converted with the believing Jews, as was at the first times of the
Gospel, and will be at the latter day, [Co1
12:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1012.htm#013.md);

for the shields of the earth belong unto God; that is, the rulers of the
earth, as the word is rendered in [Hos
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#018.md); who are as a shield and a
protection to their subjects; these are set up and put down by the Lord
at his pleasure; and their hearts are in his hands, and he can convert
them when he pleases, and gather them to his Son, and into his churches;
or, as Jarchi interprets it,

"he has power in his hands to protect as with a shield all that trust in
him;''

safety is of the Lord; the protection of the world and of the church is
from him who is King over all the earth;

he is greatly exalted; that is, Christ, who has all power in heaven and
in earth; he is highly exalted at the right hand of God, angels,
authorities, and powers, being subject to him.

\(g\) "voluntarii populorum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius.
(h) So Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Gejerus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 48](psa048.md)

</div>
