<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](job042)  [Next](psa001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALMS

The title of this book may be rendered "the Book of Praises", or
"Hymns"; the psalm which our Lord sung at the passover is called an
"hymn", [Mat 26:30](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#030.md); and the one
hundred forty fifth Psalm is entitled "an Hymn of David"; and the psalms
in general are called "hymns" by Philo the Jew (a), and songs and hymns
by Josephus (b); and to these several names of this book the apostle
manifestly refers in [Eph 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019.md), [Col
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#016.md). The Jews divided the writings of
the Old Testament into three parts: the first division is the Law, or
five books of Moses; the second is the Prophets, former and latter; and
the third, the "Hagiographa", or holy writings; to which division Christ
has a regard in [Luk 24:44](../../../bib/kjv/luk024.htm#044.md); and
because the book of Psalms stand first in the last division, the whole
goes by its name. This book by the Apostle Peter is entitled as here,
[Act 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/act001.htm#020.md); the title in the Syriac
version is,

"the Book of the Psalms of David, King and Prophet,''

with which agrees the Arabic version. As to the divine authority of it,
that it was written by inspiration of God, we have not only the
testimony of David, who says, "the Spirit of God spake by me", [Sa2
23:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#002.md); but the testimonies of Christ
and his apostles, [Mat 22:43](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#043.md); and, as
Aben Ezra (c) observes the whole of it was spoken , "by the Holy Ghost".
Concerning the penman or amanuensis, employed by the Spirit of God in
writing it, there are different opinions. The Jews make mention of ten,
which are differently reckoned by them. According to Jarchi (d), they
were Adam, Melchizedek, Abraham, Moses, David, Solomon, Asaph, and the
three sons of Korah. According to Kimchi (e), they were Adam, the first,
Melchizedek, Abraham, Asaph, Heman, Jeduthun, Moses, and the three sons
of Korah; Asir, Elkanah, and Abiasaph. Some ascribe all the Psalms to
David (f), and think that those which are said to be a psalm of Asaph,
or of Heman, &c. should be rendered "a psalm to Asaph", &c. and only
signify that they were psalms delivered to them, to be sung in a public
manner. But the truest opinion seems to be, that the greater part of
them were written by David, and for the most part those that have no
title; and the rest by those whose names they bear. Some were written at
and after the Babylonish captivity, as [Psa
126:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa126.htm#001.md) and [Psa
137:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa137.htm#001.md). The manner or form in which
they were written was metre (g), though some deny it that the Jews had
metre: as appears by the different accentuation of them from other
writings, and from their being sung vocally and on musical instruments.
Josephus (h), the Jewish historian, says, that

"David being free from war, and enjoying a profound peace, composed
songs and hymns to God, of various metre; some trimeter, and some
pentameter;''

that is, some of three feet, and others of five feet: for the Psalms of
David are thought to be of the "lyric" kind; and Gomarus, in his Lyra,
has given many instances out of them, which are of the "iambic",
"trochaic" kind, &c. though the Jews for many years have lost the
knowledge of the sacred poetry. R. Benjamin (i) indeed says, that in his
time there were at Bagdad R. Eleazar and his brethren, who knew how to
sing the songs, as the singers did when the temple was standing. The
subject matter of this book is exceeding great and excellent; many of
the psalms respect the person, offices, and grace of Christ; his
sufferings and death, resurrection, ascension, and session at the right
hand of God; and so are exceeding suitable to the Gospel dispensation.
The whole book is a rich mine of grace and evangelical truths, and a
large fund of spiritual experience; and is abundantly suited to every
case, state, and condition, that the church of Christ, or particular
believers, are in at any time.

\(a\) De Mutat. Nom. p. 1062. (b) Antiquitat. l. 7. c. 12. s. 3. (c)
Praefat. in Psalm. (d) Praefat. in Psalm. (e) Praefat. in ibid. (f) R.
Hona in Midrash Tillim, fol. 2. 1. (g) Vid. Lowth de Sacr. Poes. Heb.
Praelect. 3. s. 32, &c. (h) Ut supra. (Antiquitat. l. 7. c. 12. s. 3.)
(i) Itinerar. p. 70, 71.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 1](psa001.md)

</div>
