<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa082)  [Next](psa084) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 83](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 83:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 83

A Song or Psalm of Asaph. This is the last of the psalms that bear the
name of Asaph, and some think it was written by him on occasion of
David's smiting the Philistines, Moabites, Syrians, Edomites, and
others, [Sa2 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#001), but these did not
conjunctly, but separately, fight with David, and were overcome by him;
whereas those this psalm makes mention of were in a confederacy
together; and besides, the Tyrians in David's time were in friendship
with him; but are here mentioned as joining with others against Israel,
[Psa 83:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#007), others are of opinion that
this was prophetic delivered out with respect to future times, either to
the conspiracy of the enemies of the Jews against them in the times of
the Maccabees,

"Now when the nations round about heard that the altar was built and the
sanctuary renewed as before, it displeased them very much. &c.'' (1
Maccabees 5:1)

or rather to the confederacy of the Moabites, Ammonites, and others, in
the times of Jehoshaphat, [Ch2 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#001),
so Kimchi, Arama, and the generality of interpreters: perhaps reference
is had to the enemies of God's people, from age to age, both in the Old
and in the New Testament; R. Obadiah understands it of the war of Gog
and Magog.

[Psalms 83:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 83:1</span></span>

Keep not thou silence, O God,.... Which he is thought and said to do,
when he does not answer the prayers of his people, nor plead their
cause, nor rebuke their enemies; when he does not speak a good word to
them, or one for them, or one against those that hate and persecute
them;

hold not thy peace; or "be not deaf" (b) to the cries and tears of his
people, and to the reproaches, menaces, and blasphemies of wicked men:

and be not still, O God; or "quiet" (c), at rest and ease, inactive and
unconcerned, as if he cared not how things went; the reason follows.

\(b\) "ne obsurdescas", Vatablus; "ne surdum agas", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; "ne quasi surdus et mutus sis", Michaelis. (c) "ne quiescas",
Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Gejerus;
"neque quietus sis", Michaelis.

[Psalms 83:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 83:2</span></span>

For, lo, thine enemies make a tumult,.... Or "a noise" (d): wicked men
are commonly noisy, roaring out their blasphemies against God, belching
out oaths and curses, and breathing threatenings and slaughter against
the saints; especially a numerous army of them, consisting of many
people and nations, as this did; who are called the Lord's "enemies",
being the enemies of his people, and their cause and his are one and the
same; and besides, all wicked men are enemies to God, and all that is
good, in their minds, and which appears by their actions; yea, they are
enmity itself unto him:

and they that hate thee have lift up the head; are haughty, proud, and
arrogant; speak loftily, and with a stiff neck; set their mouth against
heaven, and God in it; and their tongue walks through the earth, and
spares none; they exult and rejoice, as sure of victory, before the
battle is fought; such then were, and such there are, who are haters of
God, hate his being, perfections, purposes, and providences; hate his
Son without a cause, and even do despite unto the Spirit of grace; hate
the law and its precepts, the Gospel and its doctrines and ordinances,
and the ways, worship, and people of God, as appears by what follows.

\(d\) "sonuerunt", V. L. "perstrepunt", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Cocceius; "strepunt", Gejerus.

[Psalms 83:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 83:3</span></span>

They have taken crafty counsel against thy people,.... The people of
Israel, hereafter named, whom God had chosen and avouched to be his
people; these they dealt subtlety with, as the king of Egypt had done
with their forefathers; and this, agreeably to their character, being
the seed of the old serpent, more subtle than any of the beasts of the
field; these devised cunning devices, formed crafty schemes for the
destruction of the Lord's people; but often so it is, that the wise are
taken in their own craftiness, and their counsel is carried headlong:

and consulted against thy hidden ones; not hidden from the Lord, and
unknown unto him, though from their enemies, and unknown by them, and so
the object of their hatred and persecution; but hidden by him as his
jewels and peculiar treasure, which he takes care of; hidden under the
shadow of his wings, in the secret of his presence and tabernacle, as in
a pavilion; and therefore it was a daring piece of insolence in their
enemies to attack them: so the life of saints is said to be hid with
Christ in God, which denotes both its secrecy and safety; see [Col
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/col003.htm#003), the Targum is,

"against the things hidden in thy treasures;''

meaning the riches of the temple.

[Psalms 83:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 83:4</span></span>

They have said,.... Secretly in their hearts, or openly to one another,
and gave it out in the most public manner, as what they had consulted
and determined upon; see [Psa 74:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#008),

come, and let us cut them off from being a nation; they were not content
to invade their country, take their cities, plunder them of their
substance, and carry them captives, but utterly to destroy them, root
and branch; so that they might be no more a body politic, under rule and
government, in their own land, nor have so much as a name and place in
others; this was Haman's scheme, [Est
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/est003.htm#008).

that the name of Israel may be no more in remembrance; but this
desperate and dreadful scheme, and wretched design of theirs, took not
effect; but, on the contrary, the several nations hereafter mentioned,
who were in this conspiracy, are no more, and have not had a name in the
world for many hundreds of years; while the Jews are still a people, and
are preserved, in order to be called and saved, as all Israel will be in
the latter day, [Rom 11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025). So
Dioclesian thought to have rooted the Christian name out of the world;
but in vain: the name of Christ, the name of Christianity, the name of a
Christian church, will endure to the end of the world; see [Psa
72:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#017). Compare with this [Jer
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#019).

[Psalms 83:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 83:5</span></span>

For they have consulted together with one consent,.... Or "heart" (e);
wicked men are cordial to one another, and united in their counsels
against the people of God, and his interest: whatever things they may
disagree in, they agree in this, to oppose the cause and interest of
true religion, or to persecute the church and people of God: Herod and
Pontius Pilate are instances of this:

they are confederate against thee; or have made a covenant against thee
(f); the covenant they had entered into among themselves, being against
the Lord's people, was against him; and such a covenant and agreement
can never stand; for there is no wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel
against the Lord, [Pro 21:30](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#030). This the
psalmist mentions to engage the Lord in the quarrel of his people, and
not be still, and act a neutral part; since those were his enemies, and
confederates against him, and they are next particularly named.

\(e\) "corde", Pagninus, Montanus; "ex corde", Tigurine version,
Musculus, Gejerus; "cordicitus", Cocceius. (f) "foedus adversus te
icerunt", Tigurine version; "contra te foedus pepigerunt", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Gejerus; so Musculus, Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Psalms 83:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 83:6</span></span>

The tabernacles of Edom, &c. Or the Idumeans, as the Targum; the
posterity of Esau, who, with the rest that joined with them, hereafter
mentioned, and made the confederate army, brought their tents with them,
pitched them, and encamped in them against Israel:

and the Ishmaelites; or Arabians, as the Targum, who descended from
Ishmael, the son of Abraham:

of Moab, and the Hagarenes; the Moabites, who sprung from Lot by one of
his daughters, in an incestuous way; and the Hagarenes are the same with
the Hagarites, [Ch1 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch1005.htm#010) who dwelt to
the east of the land of Israel, so called from Hagar, the handmaid of
Abraham, but not by him, but by another husband, after sent away from
him, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi think, or by him, supposing Hagar to be the
same with Keturah, as some do: the Targum calls them Hungarians; the
Syriac version renders it Gadareans, or Gadarenes; of which see [Mar
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/mar005.htm#001).

[Psalms 83:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 83:7</span></span>

Gebal,.... Gubleans, or Gebalites, as the Targum; the same with
Giblites, [Jos 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos023.htm#005), or men of Gebal,
[Eze 27:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze027.htm#009) the same with Byblus: these
dwelt in Phoenicia, near Tyre, where Pliny (g) makes mention of a place
called Gabale: the Syriac version joins it with Ammon, and renders it
"the border of Ammon":

and Ammon and Amalek, the Philistines, with the inhabitants of Tyre;
these are well known in Scripture, and as the enemies of Israel.

\(g\) Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 20.

[Psalms 83:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 83:8</span></span>

Assur also is joined with them,.... Before mentioned, or Assyria, though
at so great a distance from Israel, and unprovoked by them: according to
R. Joseph Kimchi, the sense is, that the Assyrians joined them,
continuing in their wickedness, though their army had been destroyed by
an angel in Hezekiah's time, of which they were unmindful; but this, as
his son observes, makes this confederacy and war to be after the times
of Hezekiah; whereas it was long before it: the Targum is,

"Sennacherib, king of Syria, is joined with them;''

and so some refer this to his invasion of Judea, and besieging
Jerusalem, with an army consisting of many nations, in Hezekiah's time;
but he was the principal there, and not an auxiliary, as here:

they have holpen the children of Lot; or were "an arm" (h) unto them,
assisted and strengthened them: these were the Moabites and Ammonites,
who were the principals in the war, and the rest auxiliaries, as it
appears they were in the times of Jehoshaphat, [Ch2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#001), here were ten different nations,
which joined in confederacy against the people of Israel; to which
answer the ten horns of the beast, or ten antichristian kings, who
agreed to give their kingdom to the beast, and to make war with the Lamb
and his followers, [Rev 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#012), and it
may be observed, that these were on all sides of the land of Israel; the
Edomites, Ishmaelites, and Amalekites, were on the south; the Moabites,
Ammonites, and Hagarenes, were on the east; the Assyrians on the north;
and the Philistines, Gebalites, and Tyrians, on the west: so that Israel
was surrounded on all sides with enemies, as the Lord's people are
troubled on every side, [Co2 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co2004.htm#008), and
so the Gog and Magog army, of which some understand this, will encompass
the camp of the saints about, and the beloved city, [Rev
20:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#009).

Selah. See Gill on [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

\(h\) "fuerunt brachium", Pagniuus, Montanus; "sunt brachium", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, &c.

[Psalms 83:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 83:9</span></span>

Do unto them as unto the Midianites,.... In the times of Gideon, who
destroyed one another, trod in whose destruction the hand of the Lord
was very visible, [Jdg 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#020), and much
in the same manner was the confederate army of the Moabites, Ammonites,
and others, destroyed in the times of Jehoshaphat, [Ch2
20:20](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#020),

as to Sisera, as to Jabin: Jabin was a king of Canaan, who oppressed
Israel, and Sisera was his general; the latter was slain by a woman,
Jael, the wife of Heber; and the former the hand of Israel prevailed
against, until they destroyed him, [Jdg
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#002), the great victory which they
obtained over them was

at the brook of Kison, or "Kishon", [Jdg
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#007) with this compare [Ch2
20:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#016).

[Psalms 83:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 83:10</span></span>

Which perished at Endor,.... Aben Ezra and Kimchi understand this of the
Midianites; but rather it is to be understood of Jabin and Sisera, and
the army under them, who perished at this place, which is mentioned
along with Taanach and Megiddo, [Jos
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011), which are the very places where
the battle was fought between Jabin and Israel, [Jdg
5:19](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#019) according to Jerom (i), it was
four miles from Mount Tabor to the south, and was a large village in his
days, and was near to Nain, the place where Christ raised the widow's
son from the dead, [Luk 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#011).

they became as dung for the earth; being unburied, they lay and rotted
on the earth, and became dung for it; see [Jer
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#002), or were trodden under foot, as
dung upon the earth; so the Targum,

"they became as dung trodden to the earth.''

\(i\) De locis Hebraicis, fol. 88. L. and 91. E.

[Psalms 83:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 83:11</span></span>

Make their nobles like Oreb, and like Zeeb,.... Two princes of Midian,
who were slain, the one at the rock Oreb, and the other at the winepress
of Zeeb, so called after their names, [Jdg
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/jdg007.htm#025),

yea, all their princes as Zebah, and as Zalmunna; kings of Midian, slain
by Gideon, [Jdg 8:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#021).

[Psalms 83:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 83:12</span></span>

Who said,.... Not the kings and princes of Midian just mentioned, but
the confederate enemies of Israel, named [Psa
83:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#006), to whom the like things are
wished as to the Midianites and others, because they said what follows:

let us take to ourselves the houses of God in possession; not only the
temple, which was eminently the house of God, but all the habitations of
the Israelites in Jerusalem, and other places, where the Lord vouchsafed
to dwell; unless this should be ironically spoken by their enemies
calling them so, because they pretended, as they reckoned it, to have
and to hold them by the gift of God; whereas, of right, they belonged to
them, at least some of them: such a claim was made by the Ammonites in
the times of Jephthah, [Jdg 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg011.htm#013), and
to dispossess the Israelites was the intention of the Ammonites and
Moabites in the times of Jehoshaphat, [Ch2
20:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#010).

[Psalms 83:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 83:13</span></span>

O my God, make them like a wheel,.... Which, as the Targum adds, is
rolled, and goes on, and rests not in a declivity; let them be as fickle
and inconstant as a wheel; being in high, let them be in slippery
places, and brought down to desolation in a moment; like a wheel set
running down hill, so let them swiftly and suddenly come to ruin; or be
in all kind of calamities, and continual troubles (k) as the wheel is
always turning: some think there is an allusion to the wheel by which
bread corn was bruised; see [Isa
28:28](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#028), but the word (l) signifies a
rolling thing before the wind, as a wisp of straw or stubble, which is
easily carried away with it: Jarchi interprets it of the tops or down of
thistles, which fly off from them, and roll up, and are scattered by the
wind; see [Isa 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa017.htm#013), and which agrees
with what follows:

as the stubble before the wind; which cannot stand before it, but is
driven about by it here and there; and so wicked men are, as chaff and
stubble, driven away in their wickedness, with the stormy wind of divine
wrath and vengeance, and chased out of the world, which is here
imprecated.

\(k\) "Vide Suidam in voce" (l) "rem in levem quae turbine
circumagitur", some in Amama; "pappos", i.e. "lanuginem carduorum", so
some in Grotius; "as a rolling thing", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 83:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 83:14</span></span>

As the fire burneth the wood,.... Or "forest" (m); which is sometimes
done purposely, and sometimes through carelessness, as Virgil (n)
observes; and which is done very easily and swiftly, when fire is set to
it; even all the trees of it, great and small, to which an army is
sometimes compared, [Isa 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa010.htm#018), and as
the flame setteth the mountains on fire; either the mountains
themselves, as Etna, Vesuvius, and others; or rather the grass and trees
that grow upon them, smitten by lightning from heaven, which may be
meant by the flame: in like manner it is wished that the fire and flame
of divine wrath would consume the confederate enemies of Israel, above
mentioned; as wicked men are but as trees of the forest, and the grass
of the mountains, or as thorns and briers, to the wrath of God, which is
poured out as fire, and is signified by everlasting burnings.

\(m\) "sylvam", Montanus, Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, &c. (n) Georgic. l. 2. v. 310.

[Psalms 83:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 83:15</span></span>

So persecute them with thy tempest,.... Pursue them with thy fury,
follow them with thy vengeance; cause it to fall upon them like a mighty
tempest:

and make them afraid with thy storm; God has his storms and tempests of
wrath and vengeance, which he sometimes causes to fall upon wicked men
in this life, to their inexpressible terror, and with which he takes
them out of this world; and he has still more horrible ones to rain upon
them hereafter: see [Job 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/job027.htm#020).

[Psalms 83:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 83:16</span></span>

Fill their faces with shame,.... For their sins, or rather through
disappointment, not being able to put their desperate and deep laid
schemes into execution: or "with lightness" (o); instead of a weight of
honour and glory upon them, let them be despised. R. Joseph Kimchi
renders it, "fill their faces with fire"; let their faces be as if they
were on fire, as men's faces are, who are put to an exceeding great
blush, or are most sadly confounded and ashamed:

that they may seek thy name, O Lord; not they themselves, who are filled
with shame; for it is imprecated, that they be ashamed, and troubled for
ever, and so as to perish, [Psa 83:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#017)
but others; for the words may be supplied, as in [Psa
83:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#018) "that men may seek thy name, or
that thy name may be sought": the judgments of God upon wicked men are
sometimes the means of arousing others, and putting them upon seeking
the Lord, his face, and his favour; that God would be merciful to them,
pardon their iniquities, avert judgments from them, and preserve them
from threatened calamities; and this is a good end, when answered; see
[Isa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#009).

\(o\) Heb. "levitate", Piscator; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 83:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 83:17</span></span>

Let them be confounded and troubled for ever,.... As long as they are in
this world, and to all eternity in another; a dreadful portion this:

yea, let them be put to shame, and perish; wholly and eternally, in soul
and body, for evermore.

[Psalms 83:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa083.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 83:18</span></span>

That men may know that thou, whose name alone is Jehovah,.... Or, "that
thou, thy name alone is Jehovah" (p), a self-existent Being, the Being
of beings, the everlasting I AM, the immutable God; for this name is
expressive of the being, eternity, and unchangeableness of God, who is,
and was, and is to come, invariably the same, [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004) which is to be understood not to
the exclusion of the Son or Spirit, who are with the Father the one
Jehovah, [Deu 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/deu006.htm#004), and to whom this
name is given; see [Exo 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006), compared
with [Co1 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#009), [Isa
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#008) compared with [Act
28:25](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#025), but to the exclusion of all
nominal and fictitious deities, the gods of the Heathens; and the being
and perfections of God are known by the judgments he executes, [Psa
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016),

art the most High over all the earth; or,

and that thou art, &c. (q), being the Maker and the Possessor of it, and
the sovereign Lord of its inhabitants, doing in it what seems good in
his sight; see [Gen 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#022), for the
accents require two propositions in the text: the Heathens (r) give the
title of most high to their supreme deity: the Targum is,

"over all the inhabitants of the earth.''

\(p\) "quod nomen tuum", Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus. (q) "Quod tu,
inquam, sis altissimus", Michaelis. (r) Pansan. Boeotica sive, l. 9. p.
555.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 84](psa084)

</div>
