<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa095)  [Next](psa097) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 96](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 96:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 96

This psalm was written by David, as appears from [Ch1
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#007) to whom it is ascribed by the
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental versions. This and part
of Psalm 105 were first composed and sung at the bringing of the ark
from the house of Obededom to the city of David; and here it is detached
from that with a new introduction to it, and applied to the times and
kingdom of the Messiah, and; with great propriety, since the ark was an
eminent type of him. The inscription in the Syriac version is,

"a Psalm of David, a Prophecy of the coming of the Messiah, and of the
calling of the Gentiles that believe in him:''

and very rightly, since express mention is made of them in it, and of
the publication of the Gospel among them; and clear reference is had to
Christ, who is the Jehovah all along spoken of Jarchi well observes,
that wherever a "new song" is mentioned, it is to be understood of
future time, or the times of the Messiah; and the end of the psalm shows
it,

he cometh to judge, &c.

[Psalms 96:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 96:1</span></span>

O sing unto the Lord a new song,.... A famous excellent one, suited to
Gospel times, on account of the new benefit and blessing of redemption
and salvation lately obtained by the Messiah; which should be sung to
him, who is the Lord or Jehovah here designed, by all the redeemed ones,
[Rev 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009); see Gill on [Psa
33:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#003), the Targum adds,

"sing, ye angels on high:''

sing unto the Lord all the earth: not the whole land of Israel only, as
Aben Ezra interprets it; though here the Saviour first appeared, taught
his doctrines, wrought his miracles, suffered, and died for the
salvation of his people; here the angels first begun the new song; and
here those that believed in him first expressed that spiritual joy which
afterwards spread through the whole world, and who are here called upon
to sing; namely, all those that are redeemed from among men, throughout
all the earth: believing Gentiles are here intended: the Targum is,

"sing before the Lord, all ye righteous of the earth.''

[Psalms 96:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 96:2</span></span>

Sing unto the Lord,.... Which is repeated to show the vehemency of the
speaker, and the importance of the work exhorted to: this being the
third time that the word Lord or Jehovah is mentioned, have led some to
think of the trinity of Persons, Father, Son, and Spirit, the one only
Jehovah, to whom the new song of salvation is to be sung, because of
their joyful concern in it; the Father has contrived it, the Son has
effected it, and the Spirit applies it:

bless his name: speak well of him, whose name is excellent and glorious,
sweet and precious; even every name of his, Jesus, Immanuel, &c.
proclaim him the ever blessed God, as he is, as comes before with the
blessings of goodness, and made most blessed for ever; as Mediator,
ascribe all spiritual blessings to him, and bless him for them, and give
him the glory and honour of them:

show forth his salvation from day today; the salvation of his people he
undertook, and has completed; publish that as a piece of good news, as
glad tidings; so the word (n) used signifies; even evangelizing, or
preaching the Gospel; for this is the Gospel, the sum and substance of
it, salvation by Jesus Christ: this may be considered as directed to
ministers of the Gospel, whose work it is, more peculiarly, to show
forth the salvation of Christ; to point him out as a Saviour to sensible
sinners; to declare that this salvation is done, is wrought out for
sinners, is full and complete; is to be had freely, and to be had now;
and this is to be done

from day today, one Lord's day after another, frequently and constantly,
when opportunity serves.

\(n\) "evangelizate", Montanus, Tigurine version, Musculus, Cocceius,
Michaelis.

[Psalms 96:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 96:3</span></span>

Declare his glory among the Heathen,.... What a glorious Person the
Messiah is; the brightness of his Father's glory; having all the
perfections of deity in him; how the glory of God appears in him, and in
all that he has done; and especially in the work of redemption, in which
the glory of divine wisdom, power, justice, truth, and faithfulness,
love, grace, and mercy, is richly displayed; say what glory he is
advanced unto, having done his work, being highly exalted, set at the
right hand of God, and crowned with glory and honour; and what a fulness
of grace there is in him, for the supply of his people; and what a glory
is on him, which they shall behold to all eternity:

his wonders among all people: what a wonderful person he is, God
manifest in the flesh; what wonderful love he has shown in his
incarnation, obedience, sufferings, and death; what amazing miracles he
wrought, and what a wonderful work he performed; the work of our
redemption, the wonder of men and angels; declare his wonderful
resurrection from the dead, his ascension to heaven, sitting at the
right hand of God, and intercession for his people; the wonderful
effusion of his Spirit, and the conquests of his grace, and the
enlargement of his kingdom in the world; as also what wonders will be
wrought by him when he appears a second time; how the dead will be
raised and all will be judged.

[Psalms 96:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 96:4</span></span>

For the Lord is great,.... In the perfections of his nature; in the
works of his hands, of creation, providence, and redemption; and in the
several offices he bears and executes:

and greatly to be praised; because of his greatness and glory; See Gill
on [Psa 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001),

he is to be feared above all gods; the angels by whom he is worshipped;
civil magistrates, among whom he presides, and judges; and all the
fictitious deities of the Gentiles, who are not to be named with him,
and to whom no fear, reverence, and worship, are due.

[Psalms 96:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 96:5</span></span>

For all the gods of the nations are idols,.... Or are "nothings" (o),
nonentities; such as have not, and never had, any being, at least many
of them, but in the fancies of men; and all of them such as have no
divinity in them;

an idol is nothing in the world, [Co1
8:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1008.htm#004),

but the Lord made the heavens; and all the hosts of them, the sun, moon,
and stars; these are the curious workmanship of his fingers, and which
declare his glory, and show him to be truly and properly God, who is to
be feared and worshipped; see [Heb
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#010).

\(o\) "nihila", Tigurine version, Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Psalms 96:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 96:6</span></span>

Honour and majesty are before him,.... He being set down at the right
hand of the throne of the Majesty in the heavens, and having honour and
majesty laid upon him; being arrayed in robes of majesty, crowned with
glory and honour, sitting on the same throne of glory with his Father,
and having a sceptre of righteousness in his hand, and all the forms and
ensigns of royalty and majesty about him; rays of light and glory
darting from him; as well as those glorious and bright forms before him;
the holy angels continually praising him; which is a much more noble
sense than that of Kimchi's, who interprets them of the stars:

strength and beauty are in his sanctuary; the Targum is,

"the house of his sanctuary,''

the temple; the Gospel church, of which the temple or sanctuary was a
figure: the strength of Christ is seen here, in the conversion of
sinners by his Gospel, which is the rod of his strength, the power of
God unto salvation, when it comes not in word only; and by which he also
strengthens his people to the more vigorous exercise of grace and
discharge of duty; here they go from strength to strength: the "beauty"
of Christ is seen here; the King is held in the galleries of Gospel
ordinances, and is beheld in his beauty; his people appear here in the
beauties of holiness, and as a perfection of beauty, through the
righteousness of Christ upon them; and as they observe the order of the
Gospel, and do all things decently, and with a good decorum: or else, as
Kimchi interprets it, heaven may be meant by the sanctuary, of which the
holy place, made with hands, was a figure; here Christ reigns, girded
with "strength"; here he rules as the Lord God omnipotent, having all
power in heaven, and in earth, and doing according to his will in both;
and from hence he shows himself strong on the behalf of his people;
here. He, who is beauty itself, fairer than the children of men, dwells;
here those beauteous forms of light and glory, the holy angels, are; and
here the spirits of just men made perfect, who are without spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, have their abode: in [Ch1
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#027), it is,

strength and gladness are in his place; among his people and worshippers
there.

[Psalms 96:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 96:7</span></span>

Give unto the Lord, O ye kindreds of the people,.... Or families (p):
the Targum is,

"give unto the Lord a song, ye families of the people;''

by whom are meant not the tribes and families of the people of Israel,
but the Gentiles, the nations of the world, who were to be blessed in
the seed of Abraham, the family of Egypt, and others; see [Amo
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/amo003.htm#002), [Zac
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#017), even such as were chosen of
them, taken out from among them for a people to his name; who were
redeemed out of every kindred, tongue, people, and nation; and were
taken, one of a city, and two of a family, and brought to Zion: give
unto the Lord glory and strength; See Gill on [Psa
29:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#001).

\(p\) "familiae", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, &c.

[Psalms 96:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 96:8</span></span>

Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his name,.... Or "the glory of his
name" (q); whose name is glorious and excellent, because of his nature
and perfections, because of the works done by him, and because of his
benefits and blessings bestowed on his creatures; wherefore it is his
due, and their duty, to give him glory; See Gill on [Psa
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002); see Gill on [Psa
66:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#002), the word "Jehovah", or "Lord",
being thrice mentioned in this and the preceding verse, in the
ascription of glory, may lead our thoughts to the trinity of Persons,
Jehovah, Father, Son, and Spirit, to whom glory is to be equally given:

bring an offering, and come into his courts; not ceremonial sacrifices,
which are abolished under the Gospel dispensation, to which times this
psalm belongs; but either the saints themselves, their bodies, as a
holy, living, and acceptable sacrifice, and especially the sacrifices of
a broken heart, with as much of their substance as is necessary for the
relief of the poor, the support of the ministry, and the carrying on of
the cause and interest of the Redeemer: the allusion is to the law that
enjoined the Israelites not to appear empty before the Lord; but
everyone to bring his gift according to his ability, [Deu
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#016), or else their sacrifices of
prayer and praise, which are the spiritual sacrifices of the Gospel
dispensation, and are to be offered by the saints, as priests, to God
through Christ; or rather the sacrifice of Christ himself, which is of a
sweet smelling savour to God, makes way for access unto him, and
acceptance with him; and which should be brought in the arms of faith,
when they enter into the house of the Lord, and attend his word and
ordinances; for, through this, their persons and services become
acceptable to God, and the sins of their holy things are taken away.

\(q\) "gloriam nominis ejus", Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius, Gejerus; so
Ainsworth, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Psalms 96:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 96:9</span></span>

O worship the Lord in the beauty of holiness,.... See Gill on [Psa
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa029.htm#002), in this and the three preceding
verses there is a manifest allusion to the form of addresses made to
kings in the eastern nations; who being arrayed, and seated in a
majestic manner, with all the marks of royal honour and dignity about
them, whom their subjects approach with ascriptions of glory to them;
bringing presents in their hands, and bowing down to the ground before
them, as the word (r) for "worship" signifies; expressing the utmost awe
and reverence of them, as in the next clause:

fear before him, all the earth; or, as the Targum,

"all the inhabitants of the earth;''

it is the duty of all men to fear the Lord; but none can fear him aright
without his grace, or an heart given them to fear him: this respects the
latter day, when the Jews shall seek the Lord, and fear him and his
goodness; when all nations shall fear and worship him; when, from the
rising of the sun to the going down of the same, the name of the Lord
shall be great and tremendous among the Gentiles; see [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005).

\(r\) "incurvate vos", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; "prosternite vos", Tigurine version.

[Psalms 96:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 96:10</span></span>

Say among the Heathen,.... This is a direction to such as were converted
to Christ among the Jews, or were first called out from among the
Gentiles; or to the ministers of the word, the apostles and first
preachers of the Gospel more especially, who were sent into all the
world to preach the Gospel to every creature, that a people from among
them might he taken for the Lord:

that the Lord reigneth; whose Gospel should be received and obeyed, and
his ordinances submitted to; who now reigns in heaven, at his Father's
right hand, and must reign till all enemies are put under his feet; he
reigns in the hearts of his people by his Spirit and grace; will reign
more gloriously in his churches in the latter day, and with his saints
for a thousand years in the New Jerusalem church state; and, after that,
to all eternity in heaven: this is one part of the Gospel, or good
tidings to be published among the Gentiles, [Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007),

the world also shall be established, that it shall not be moved; not the
natural material world; for that shall flee, and pass away, and be no
more; it shall be burnt up, and all things in it; though that, and
mankind on it, will be continued till all the elect of God are gathered
in; Christ will uphold it, it being by his power that it shall not be
moved till the work is effected: moreover, the church, in however
fluctuating and unsettled a condition it may be now, sometimes in one
place, and sometimes in another, yet ere long will be established on the
top of the mountains, so that it shall not be moved; and the Gospel
dispensation is what will remain unto the end of time, and the Gospel is
an everlasting one; the ordinances of it will continue to the second
coming of Christ; and he will be with his churches to the end of the
world; he is reigning King of Zion; has set up a government, of which,
and the peace of it, there shall be no end: during the spiritual reign
of Christ, the world will be in such stable tranquillity as to have no
commotions in it, nor to be moved with wars, and rumours of wars; and
when the Millennium shall take place, the new heavens and new earth
shall never pass away:

he shall judge the people righteously: he reigns over his people in a
righteous manner, with a sceptre of righteousness, according to the
rules of righteousness, by righteous laws and ordinances; he justifies
his people with his own righteousness; he forms the new man in them,
which is created in righteousness, and sets up a kingdom within them,
which consists of righteousness; and he protects and defends them, and
keeps them in safety from all their enemies.

[Psalms 96:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 96:11</span></span>

Let the heavens rejoice,.... At the coming and kingdom of Christ; at
what is said and done in the Gentile world; even the hosts of heaven, as
the Targum, the angels that dwell there, and never left their habitation
and first estate: these rejoiced at the incarnation of Christ, at the
first setting up and appearance of his kingdom in the world; and as they
rejoice at the conversion of a single sinner, much more must they be
supposed to do at the conversion of multitudes in the Gentile world, and
at the increase of the Redeemer's interest there: or heavenly men, such
as are born from above, partakers of the heavenly calling; these rejoice
when the kingdom of Christ is enlarged, and his cause flourishes: or the
holy apostles and prophets of Christ, and ministers of the word, full of
heavenly gifts and grace, are meant; who express their joy when sinners
are converted, and made subject to Christ, at any time; and will be
called upon to do it, when the fulness of the Gentiles is brought in,
and Babylon is fallen, [Rev 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020),

and let the earth be glad; the righteous of the earth, as the Targum;
the excellent of the earth, who are glad, and exult at the coming and
kingdom of Christ, in every sense; in the salvation which he has wrought
out; in the righteousness which he has brought in; at the sight of him,
the glory of his person, and riches of his grace; in the enjoyment of
his presence; at hearing his Gospel, and the comfortable truths of it;
and when it is made useful to the souls of others; and in a view and
hope of the glory of God, and of being partakers of it to all eternity:

let the sea roar, and the fulness thereof; the roaring of the waves is
the voice of the sea, which sometimes speaks terror, and here expresses
joy: its fulness is not literally the abundance of its waves, or the
multitude of its fishes, as Kimchi; but the islands in it, the
inhabitants of them; see [Psa 97:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#001) and
such as ours of Great Britain and Ireland, who have reason to rejoice
and be glad at the bringing of the Gospel among us, the continuance of
it with us, and the kingdom and, interest of Christ in the midst of us.

[Psalms 96:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 96:12</span></span>

Let the field be joyful, and all that is therein,.... Not the field of
the world, but of the church, separated from others by distinguishing
grace; the peculiar property of Christ, cultivated and manured by his
Spirit and grace, and abounding with the fruits and flowers thereof; of
a wilderness becoming a fruitful field, and for that reason should
rejoice, even with joy and singing, [Isa
35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001),

then shall all the trees of the wood rejoice; the sons of God, so
called, [Sol 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003), who, though like
such, in their nature state, barren and unfruitful, yet, being ingrafted
into Christ, become trees of righteousness; and so have reason to
rejoice at their root in Christ, their stability by him, and
fruitfulness through him: Jarchi interprets this of all the governors of
the people; see [Eze 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/eze017.htm#024), all this,
indeed, by a prosopopoeia, may be understood of inanimate creatures; the
heavens, earth, and sea, fields, woods, and trees, rejoicing, if they
could, and in their way, at such great and wonderful appearances in the
Gentile world; see [Isa 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#023). Aben
Ezra interprets all this of the heavens giving dew, the earth its
increase, and the field its fruit; all which is rejoicing.

[Psalms 96:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 96:13</span></span>

Before the Lord,.... At the face of him, in his presence; meeting him as
he comes, and rejoicing at his coming: this clause is to be joined to
everyone in the two preceding verses:

for he cometh, for he cometh; which is repeated to show the certainty of
Christ's coming, and the importance of it, and the just reason there was
for the above joy and gladness on account of it; and it may be also, as
Jerom and others have observed, to point out both the first and second
coming of Christ, which are both matter of joy to the saints: his first
coming, which was from heaven into this world, in a very mean and abject
manner, to save the chief of sinners, to procure peace, pardon,
righteousness, and eternal life for them, and therefore must be matter
of joy: his second coming, which will be also from heaven, but in an
extremely glorious manner, without sin, or the likeness of it, unto the
salvation of is people: it will be as follows,

to judge the earth; the inhabitants of it, small and great, high and
low, rich and poor, bond and free, quick and dead, righteous and wicked;
when all works, words, and thoughts, good and bad, will be brought to
account; and every man will be judged, as those shall be, with or
without the grace of God:

he shall judge the world with righteousness, and the people with his
truth; according to the rules of justice and equity; he will truly
discern and rightly judge; his judgment will be according to his truth;
he will approve himself to be the righteous Judge, and his judgment will
appear to be a righteous judgment; for which he is abundantly qualified,
as being the Lord God omniscient and omnipotent, holy, just, and true;
see [Act 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 97](psa097)

</div>
