<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa008)  [Next](psa010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 9

To the chief Musician upon Muthlabben, a Psalm of David. Some, take
"muthlabben" to be the name of the tune to which this psalm was sung,
and to design the same note which we call the counter-tenor: others
think, that "upon muth", or "almuth", are but one word, and the same as
"alamoth", [Psa 45:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#001.md), title; and that
it is the name of a musical instrument; and that "Ben" in "labben", is
the name of the chief musician, who was over that sort of instrument, to
whom the psalm is inscribed (l); and indeed R. Sol Jarchi says, that he
had seen in the great Masorah these words as one; and so it seems the
Septuagint interpreters read them, who render them, "for the hidden
things of the son"; and the Arabic version, "concerning the mysteries of
the son": and Ben is a name, it is said, of one of the singers, whose
kindred and companions were appointed with psalteries on "alamoth", [Ch1
15:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#018.md). And so then the title runs
thus; "to the chief musician on alamoth, \[even to\] Ben". But others
are of opinion that the subject matter or occasion of the psalm is
designed by this phrase; and that as "muth" signifies "death", the death
of some person is intended, on account of which this psalm was composed;
some say Nabal, seeing the word "Laban", inverted, or read backwards, is
"Nabal" (m), whose death affected David; as appears from [Sa1
25:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#038.md). Others, that it was one of the
kings of the Gentiles, whose name was Labben, and is mentioned nowhere
else, who fought with David, and whom he slew, and upon his death penned
this psalm (n). Others, Goliath the Philistine (o), who is called, [Sa1
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#004.md). , which we render "champion" and
dueller, one of two that fight together. But rather the reason of the
name is, as given by the Jewish commentators (p), because he went and
stood between the two camps of the Philistines and the Israelites; and
so the Chaldee paraphrase renders the title of this psalm,

"to praise, concerning the death of the man who went out between the
camps, a song of David.''

And so the psalm itself, in the Targum, and by other Jewish writers, is
interpreted of Goliath and the Philistines, and of the victory over
them; and which does not seem amiss. Arama interprets it of the death of
Saul. Others interpret Almuth Labben "of the death of the son"; and
understand it of the death of Absalom, the son of David (q): but David's
passion moved in another way, not in joy, but in grief, [Sa2
18:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#033.md); nor is there anything in the
psalm that can be referred unto it. Others, of the death of the son of
God; but of that there is not the least hint in the psalm. Theodoret
interprets it of Christ's victory over death by dying, which was a
mystery or hidden thing. Rather, I should think, it might be interpreted
of the death of the son of perdition, the man of sin and his followers;
who may be typified by Goliath, and the Philistines: and so, as
Ainsworth observes, as the former psalm was concerning the propagation
of Christ's kingdom, this is of the destruction of antichrist. And
Jerom, long ago said, this whole psalm is sung by the prophet in the
person of the church, concerning antichrist: and to this agrees the
Syriac version; which makes the subject of the psalm to be,

"concerning Christ, taking the throne and kingdom, and routing the
enemy.''

And also the Arabic version, according to which the argument of the
psalm is,

"concerning the mysteries of the Son, with respect to the glory of
Christ, and his resurrection and kingdom, and the destruction of all the
children of disobedience.''

To which may be added, that this psalm, according to R. Sol Jarchi,
belongs to the time to come, to the days of the Messiah, and the future
redemption by him.

\(l\) Kimchi & Abendana in Miclol Yophi in loc. (m) So some in Jarchi &
Aben Ezra in loc. (n) Donesh Hallevi in ibid. (o) Kimchi & Ben Melech in
loc. (p) Jarchi, Kimchi, Levi Ben Gersom, R. Isaiah, & Ben Melech in 1
Sam. xvii. 4. (q) So some in Jarchi in loc.

[Psalms 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 9:1</span></span>

I will praise thee, O Lord, with my whole, heart,.... This is what is
called in the New Testament making melody in the heart, or singing with
grace in the heart, [Eph 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019.md); and yet
does not signify mere mental singing, but vocal singing, the heart
joining therein; for the word here used for praise signifies to confess,
to speak out, to declare openly the praises of God in the public
congregation, as David elsewhere determines to do, [Psa
111:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001.md); the heart ought to, be engaged
in every, part of divine service and worship, whether in preaching or in
hearing, or in prayer, or in singing of praise; and the whole heart
also: sometimes God has nothing of the heart in worship, it is removed
far from, him, and gone after other objects; and sometimes it is divided
between God and the creature; hence the psalmist prays that God would
unite his heart to fear him, and then he should praise him with all his
heart, with all that was within him, with all the powers and faculties
of his soul; see [Psa 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011.md). This
phrase is not expressive of the perfection of this duty, or of
performing it in such manner as that there would be no imperfection in
it, or sin attending it; for good men fail in all their performances,
and do nothing good without sin; hence provision is made for the
iniquities of holy things; but of the heartiness and sincerity of it;
and in such a sincere and upright manner the psalmist determines, in the
strength of divine grace, to praise the Lord;

I will show forth all thy marvellous works; such as the creation of all
things out of nothing, and the bringing them into the form and order in
which they are by the word of God; and in which there is such a display
of the power and wisdom of God; and particularly the formation of man
out of the dust of the earth, in the image, and after the likeness of
God; the sustentation of the whole world of creatures in their being,
the providential care of them all, the preservation of man and beast;
and especially the work of redemption: it is marvellous that God should
think of redeeming sinful men; that he should fix the scheme of it in
the way he has; that he should pick upon his own Son to be the Redeemer;
that ungodly men, sinners, the chief of sinners, and enemies, should be
the persons redeemed; and that not all the individuals of human nature,
but some out of every kindred, tongue, people, and nation: as also the
work of grace, which is a new creation, and more marvellous than the
old; a regeneration, or a being born again, which is astonishing to a
natural man, who cannot conceive how this can be; a resurrection from
the dead, or a causing dry bones to live; a call of men out of darkness
into marvellous light; and it is as wondrous how this work is preserved
amidst so many corruptions of the heart, temptations of Satan, and
snares of the world, as that it is; to which may be added the wonderful
works yet to be done, as the setting up of the kingdom of Christ, the
destruction of antichrist, the resurrection of the dead, the last
judgment, and the eternal glory and happiness of the saints; and
doubtless the psalmist may have respect to the many victories which he,
through the divine power, obtained over his enemies; and particularly
the marvellous one which was given him over Goliath with a stone and
sling: these the psalmist determined to make the subject of his song, to
dwell and enlarge upon, to show forth unto others, and to point out the
glories, beauties, and excellency of them: and when he says "all" of
them, it must be understood of as many of them as were within the
compass of his knowledge, and of as much of them as he was acquainted
with; for otherwise the marvellous works of God are infinite and without
number, [Job 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#009.md).

[Psalms 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 9:2</span></span>

I will be glad and rejoice in thee,.... Not in himself, in any
attainments or works of his; not in his wisdom, riches, and strength,
nor in his warlike exploits, but in the Lord; not in second causes, in
horses and chariots, in armies, and in the courage and valour of men,
but in God, as the author of deliverance, victory, and salvation; not in
God only as the God of nature and providence, but as the God of all
grace, and as his covenant God and Father; and because of the blessings
of this covenant, as forgiveness of sin, a justifying righteousness, &c.
for he rejoiced not in his own righteousness, but in the righteousness
of Christ, as well as in his person, grace, and sacrifice; so the
Chaldee paraphrase renders it, "I will be glad and rejoice", "in thy
Word", the Logos, the essential Word of God, of whom there were many
types, promises, and prophecies in the former dispensation; two words
being here used express the greatness of this joy, and especially the
latter word denotes a very vehement joy, a joy unspeakable and full of
glory; such as arises from a sight of Christ the object, and which the
psalmist had now in view; and this was not a carnal and worldly joy, but
joy in the Holy Ghost;

I will sing praise to thy name, O thou most High; that is, to the glory
of his name, his being, and perfections, as displayed in his marvellous
works, and in the revelation of his word, and especially in his son; and
under the character of the "most high" God, the supreme Being over all
creatures, angels and men; see [Psa
7:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#017.md).

[Psalms 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 9:3</span></span>

When mine enemies are turned back,.... As the Philistines were, when
Goliath their champion was dead; and as the men that came to apprehend
Christ, David's antitype, went backwards and fell to the ground, through
the superior power of Christ; and as sin, Satan, and the world, and at
last antichrist, are made to retreat from the Lord's people, who are
more than conquerors over them through Christ that has loved them. "They
shall fall and perish at thy presence"; they shall stumble at one thing
or another which divine Providence will throw in their way to hinder
them from executing their designs, and so fall before them they meant to
destroy, and perish at the presence of God as wax melteth before the
fire; see [Psa 27:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa027.htm#002.md); so antichrist
shall be consumed with the breath of Christ's mouth, and the brightness
of his coming, [Th2 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#008.md); and this is
the ground and foundation of the psalmist's joy, and rejoicing, and
singing praise to God as it will be the reason of the joy of saints in
the latter day, [Rev 18:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#022.md).

[Psalms 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 9:4</span></span>

For thou hast maintained my right and my cause,.... Or vindicated and
established his righteous cause; God had pleaded and defended it, and by
the flight, fall, and ruin of his enemies, had clearly made it appear
that his cause was just and good;

thou sittest in the throne judging right; God has not only a throne of
grace on which he sits, and from whence he distributes grace and mercy
to his people, but he has a throne of judgment, and which is prepared
for it, as in [Psa 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007.md); where he sits
as the Judge of all the earth, and will do right; nor can he do
otherwise, though his judgments are not always manifest in the present
state of things; and the vindication of the psalmist's innocence and
uprightness is another reason of his joy and gladness.

[Psalms 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 9:5</span></span>

Thou hast rebuked the Heathen,.... The people of the Philistines, as the
Targum and Kimchi explain it, though some Jewish writers (a) understand
it of Amalek the chief of the Heathen nations; but it rather refers to
Gospel times, and to the rebukes of the Heathen, by the preaching of the
Gospel, for their idolatry and superstition; and especially to the
latter day, and to the rebukes of the antichristian states, the Papists
who are called Gentiles; which will be with flames of fire, and will
issue in their utter extirpation, upon which a profound peace and
prosperity will succeed in the Christian churches, according to [Isa
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004.md); which is a prophecy of those
times;

thou hast destroyed the wicked; the wicked man; for it is in the
singular number, "labben", as Aben Ezra observes, or who is meant by
him; Goliath, according to the Targum and Kimchi; or Esau, as other
Jewish writers (b), that is, his posterity the Edomites; and each of
these were figures of antichrist, the man of sin, the wicked one, whom
Christ will slay with the breath of his lips, [Isa
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#004.md);

thou hast put out their name for ever and ever; that is, the glory and
reputation of their name, a good and honourable one, which they sought
to transmit to the latest posterity; for though the names of wicked men
may continue, as Pharaoh, Judas, and others; yet they continue with a
scandal and reproach upon them that shall never be wiped off, their
names rot and stink; see [Pro 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007.md);
the whole of this denotes the utter ruin and shameful end of the enemies
of Christ and his church, and which is matter of joy to the saints.

\(a\) Jarchi in loc. & Pesikta in ibid. in v. 1. (b) Ibid.

[Psalms 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 9:6</span></span>

O thou enemy,.... Which some understand of Goliath, though we do not
read of any desolations made by him, nor of any cities destroyed by him;
nor by the Israelites upon his death, and the flight of the Philistines
on that account; Jarchi interprets it of Esau and his posterity, who
shall be destroyed in future time, to which he applies, [Eze
35:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#009); other Jewish writers (c.md) think
Amalek is intended, whose destruction they suppose will be in the days
of the Messiah, and then will this Scripture be fulfilled: and as these
all prefigured antichrist, as before observed, he seems to be designed,
and not Satan, as some Christian interpreters have thought, that enemy
of Christ, personal and mystical, of the church, and every true
believer; and so is antichrist, he opposes himself to God, and all that
is called God; he is one that is contrary to Christ, as his name
signifies, to his persons, offices, grace, and kingdom; who blasphemes
the name of God, his tabernacle, and his saints;

destructions are come to a perpetual end; which may be understood either
of the destructions and desolations made by antichrist, the havoc he has
made in the world, treading under foot the holy city, the church,
destroying the earth and the inhabitants of it, the bodies, souls, and
estates of men; but now the psalmist prophetically declares the end of
them to be come, his forty two months, or one thousand two hundred and
sixty days or years, will be up, and he will go on no more desolating
and destroying; see [Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002.md); or of
the destructions and desolations made upon him by the pouring out of the
seven vials upon the antichristian states, upon the seat of the beast,
and upon both Pope and Turk, the eastern and western antichrist; when in
the issue the beast, and the false prophet with him, will be taken and
cast alive into a lake of fire; see [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020.md); and so this phrase denotes that
the destruction of antichrist will be consummate, his ruin will be
complete, and there will be an utter end of him. Some, instead of
"desolations", by the change of a point read "swords", and Ben Labrat or
R. Donesh says (d) that he found it so written in an ancient book; and
so reads Jarchi, though he takes notice of the other reading also; and
so read the Septuagint, Syriac, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions; and then
the sense is, swords shall fail, they shall be no more made use of to
destroy men with, they shall be beaten into ploughshares; for upon the
destruction of the man of sin there will be a profound peace in the
world; see [Isa 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#004). Some (e.md) read
these words interrogatively, "are destructions come to a perpetual end?"
that is, which the enemy antichrist designed to bring upon the people of
God? no, they are not; he may imagine they are, when the two witnesses
are slain; and may think he has then made an entire slaughter, and a
complete destruction of the saints; but he will be mistaken, these
witnesses will rise again, and ascend up to heaven in the sight of their
enemies, and to the great terror of them, [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010.md);

and thou hast destroyed cities, or "hast thou destroyed cities?" that
is, as antichrist threatened and intended, namely, to destroy all the
cities and churches of Christ; but, alas! he will never be able to do
it, they are built on a rock against which the gates of hell can never
prevail: but it is better to read the words affirmatively, and interpret
them not of the enemy, but of God, and of him destroying the cities of
the enemy; for, at the pouring out the seventh and last vial, the great
city, the whole antichristian jurisdiction, will be divided into three
parts, and utterly perish; and the cities of the Pagan and Mahometan
nations will fall, and particularly Babylon the great city will come in
remembrance before God, and be utterly destroyed, [Rev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019.md);

their memorial is perished with them; they shall not be returned or
built any more, but shall be like a millstone cast into the sea, and be
found no more at all, [Eze 35:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze035.htm#009.md). Some
(f) read this clause by way of interrogation as the others, "is their
memorial perished with them?" no, the righteous are in everlasting
remembrance, even those churches which the Romish antichrist has made
havoc of, as the Albigenses and Waldenses; the memory of them is still
precious.

\(c\) Midrash Tillim in loc. Tzeror Hammor, fol. 150. 2. (d) Apud Aben
Ezra in loc. (e) So Piscator, Cocceius, Ainsworth. (f) Sic Genevenses,
Diodatus, Bueerus, Cocceius.

[Psalms 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 9:7</span></span>

But the Lord shall endure for ever,.... When antichrist is entirely
ruined, his cities destroyed, and the memorial of them perished, then
"shall the Lord sit for ever" (g), as the words may be rendered; that
is, as a Jewish writer (h) paraphrases them, in rest and quiet. The
words may be expressive of the unchangeableness and eternity and power
of God; the Chaldee paraphrase of them is, , "the Word of the Lord is
for ever; his habitation is in the highest heavens". And they may very
well be interpreted of Christ, the essential Word of God, who is the
unchangeable, everlasting, and almighty God; and who sits King for ever,
and must sit at God's right hand, in the highest heavens, until all his
enemies are made his footstool; and to him most properly do the
following things in this verse [Psa
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008.md) belong:

he hath prepared his throne for judgment; for the administration of
judgment in this world, for the particular judgment after death, and for
the general judgment after the resurrection of the dead; which seems by
what follows to be chiefly meant, and which will come on after the
destruction of antichrist; and all things are preparing for it; the day
is appointed in which God will judge the world; Christ is ordained to be
the Judge of quick and dead; devils and ungodly men are reserved to the
judgment of the great day; the throne is ready, which will be a white
one, [Rev 20:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#011.md); denoting the purity,
justice, and uprightness of the Judge, who himself is at the door.

\(g\) "sedebit", Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Cocceius, Michaelis; so
Ainsworth; "sedet", Vatablus, Musculus. (h) R. Abraham Seba in Tzeror
Hammor, fol. 150. 2.

[Psalms 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 9:8</span></span>

And he shall judge the world in righteousness,.... The word rendered
"world", is, as Ben Melech well observes, a general name for all the
countries of the habitable world; and so shows that it is the universal
judgment that is here spoken of; and which will be carried on and
finished with the utmost righteousness, and according to the strictest
rules of justice and equity; and is therefore called the righteous
judgment of God, [Rom 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005.md); see [Psa
96:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#013.md);

he shall minister judgment to the people in uprightness; which signifies
the same with the former clause, unless by the "world" there, should be
meant the wicked of the world; and by the "people" here, the people of
God; to whom the righteous Judge will give the crown of righteousness.

[Psalms 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 9:9</span></span>

The Lord also will be a refuge for the oppressed,.... The poor and weak,
such as have no might nor power, and are thrown down and trampled upon,
as the word (i) signifies; and such are the people of God. They are
oppressed with the burden of sin; they are bowed down with Satan and his
temptations; and are sometimes pressed out of measure, and above their
strength, with the persecutions of men; they are trodden under foot by
antichrist, or otherwise are borne down with a variety of sorrows and
afflictions; but the Lord is a refuge for them. The Chaldee paraphrase
renders it as before, "the Word of the Lord", the eternal Logos, the Son
of God: he is a refuge for poor sensible sinners, fleeing from wrath to
come; being typified by the cities of refuge, whither the manslayer fled
from the avenger of blood: he is the strong hold for the prisoners of
hope to turn into; his name is a strong tower and place of defence for
oppressed saints; he is a refuge when all others fail, and at all times,
in the day of affliction, and in the hour of death, and at judgment;

a refuge in times of trouble; of which the saints have many, as when God
hides his face, when corruptions prevail, when grace is low in exercise,
and temptations are strong, yet even then Christ is the refuge from the
storm; the salvation of his people is of him, and he is their strength
in every time of trouble; see [Isa
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#004.md).

\(i\) "attrito", Cocceius, Gejerus: "contrito", Michaelis.

[Psalms 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 9:10</span></span>

And they that know thy name,.... As proclaimed in the Gospel, a God
gracious and merciful, and forgiving sin; and as in Christ, in whom his
name is, and in whom he is the God of love, grace, and mercy, though out
of him a consuming fire; or the name of Christ himself, the Word of the
Lord, who is the refuge of saints and sinners; his name Jesus, a
Saviour: such who know him to be the able, willing, complete, all
sufficient, and everlasting Saviour; who know his power and faithfulness
to keep what is committed to him; and who know him not merely notionally
and speculatively, and in a professional way only, but affectionately,
spiritually, and experimentally: such

will put their trust in thee; as they have great reason to do; and the
more they know of the grace and mercy of God in Christ, and of the
ability and suitableness of Christ as a Saviour, the more strongly will
they place their trust and confidence in him;

for thou, Lord, hast not forsaken them that seek thee: who are first
sought out by God in the effectual calling, and then under the influence
and direction of his grace and Spirit seek him in Christ, where he is
only to be found; and seek Christ and his righteousness above all things
else, and with their whole hearts, and diligently; and seek to Christ
alone for life and salvation, and continue seeking the Lord, by prayer
and supplication, for whatever they stand in need of; these God does not
forsake: he may sometimes hide his face from them, as he does from his
own children, and did from his own Son, yet he never forsakes them
totally and finally; nor will he forsake the work of his own hands,
which he has wrought in them, but will perfect it; he will never leave
them so as that they shall perish by sin, Satan, or any enemy; he will
not forsake them in life, nor at death, but will be the strength of
their hearts, and their portion for ever.

[Psalms 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 9:11</span></span>

Sing praises to the Lord, which dwelleth in Zion,.... The psalmist
having determined in the strength of grace to praise the Lord himself,
and show forth all his marvellous works, and given his reasons for it,
both with respect to himself in particular, and with respect to the
people of God in general, here calls upon others to engage in the same
work; the Lord is not only to be praised, which may be done by
celebrating the perfections of his nature, and the works of his hands;
by giving him thanks for mercies temporal and spiritual, and by living
to his glory; but his praises are to be sung by a modulation of the
voice in musical notes, as the word used signifies; see [Sol
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012.md); where the same word is used of
the singing of birds; and this is to be done by the saints jointly, in
concert together, as Paul and Silas in prison sang the praises of God;
and there is great reason why they should join together in this work,
since they share the blessings of divine grace in common together; and
it is their duty to stir up one another to this service, as well as to
other parts of worship: and this perfectly agrees with the exhortation
to the saints, and the work they shall be employed in at the fall of
Babylon, or destruction of antichrist, [Rev
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#001.md). Jehovah, to whom praises are to
be sung, is described as the inhabitant of Zion, the ark and tabernacle
being there before the temple was built, which were symbols of the
divine Presence. The Targum paraphrases it, "who causeth his Shechinah
to dwell in Zion"; as many of the Jewish writers interpret this psalm of
Goliath, a doubt arises here about it, since in the days of Saul, and at
the time of Goliath's death, Zion was in the hands of the Jebusites, and
the ark of God was not there till many years afterwards; to this it is
replied, that David might compose this psalm upon that occasion not
immediately at that time, but after he was king of Israel, and when the
ark was brought to Zion; or that he said this by a prophetic spirit,
foreseeing that, God would dwell there; and Kimchi observes, that it was
everywhere a received tradition among the people of Israel that the
sanctuary would be built there; but however this be, certain it is that
the church of God goes by the name of Zion frequently; see [Psa
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#006.md), [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022.md). God by his essence and power is
everywhere, he fills heaven and earth, and cannot be contained in
either; his glorious presence is in heaven; his gracious presence is in
his church and among his people; where they dwell he dwells, and where
he dwells they dwell: hence the church is called by the same name as the
Lord is here, the inhabitant of Zion, [Isa
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#006.md); and this description of him
points out the place where his praises are to be sung, in Zion; who are
to sing them, the members of the church; and the reason why, because the
Lord dwells in Zion; and is there a refuge for his people, and protects
them;

declare among the people his doings; what God does for the souls of men
is not only to be declared among the people of God, [Psa
66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016.md); but also among the people of
the world, when a suitable opportunity offers; and especially in the
public ministry of the word; partly that the name of God may be exalted,
his grace, goodness, and mercy be displayed; and partly that it might be
the means of the conversion of God's chosen ones among them, [Psa
96:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#002.md); though it may be here his doings
in providence are meant, his special providential care of his church and
people, and his vengeance on their enemies, on Babylon; for upon the
ruin of antichrist, the judgments of God, his providential dispensations
towards his church and people, will be made manifest, and all nations
will be called upon to fear and worship him; see [Jer
50:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer050.htm#028); the word (k.md) which is here used
signifies such deeds and actions as are the effects of thought and
counsel, and which are purposely and industriously done; and whatsoever
is done by the Lord, whether in a way of grace or providence, is done
after the counsel of his own will; as he thought so it is, as he
purposes so it comes to pass, and all things are done well and wisely,
and answer the ends and designs of them.

\(k\) "significat tam machinationes, sive consilia", 1 Sam. ii. 3. "quam
consiliorum eventus, seu opera ipsa, quomodo", Jer. xxxii. 19. Gejerus.

[Psalms 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 9:12</span></span>

When he maketh inquisition for blood,.... The Arabic version renders it,
"he remembers him that seeks their blood"; that is, the wicked man, that
lies in wait for innocent blood, and whose feet are swift to shed it;
the man of sin, who is bloodthirsty; who drinks up the blood of the
saints like water, and has been made drunk with the blood of the martyrs
of Jesus, him will God remember, and take vengeance on, in his own time:
but rather this is to be understood of God himself, seeking for the
blood of his saints: he knows where it is, though ever so privily shed,
as he did Abel's; yet, to show his strict care and accurate notice of
it, he is represented as searching for it, and finding it out by secret
search, [Jer 2:34](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#034.md). And it is the same
phrase with "requiring" blood, and expresses a demand of satisfaction
for it; and declares the vengeance that God will take on account of it:
he requires the blood of every man at the hand of him by whom it is
shed, [Gen 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#005.md); especially the blood
of the righteous, [Mat 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035.md);
particularly the blood of the martyrs of Jesus, shed by the Romish
antichrist; he will make inquisition for that, and will find in Babylon
the blood of the prophets and saints, and of all that are slain on
earth; and will avenge the blood of his servants at her hand, and give
her blood to drink, [Rev 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#024.md);

he remembereth them; either the "righteous", as the Targum paraphrases
it, whose blood has been shed; or else the wicked, who shed their blood:
God will remember them and their sins; which, for some time, may seem
not to have been taken notice of by him, and will pour out his wrath,
and inflict just punishment on them; see [Rev
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019.md);

he forgetteth not the cry of the humble: the "Cetib", or writing of the
text, is "afflicted"; the "Keri", or marginal reading, is "humble"; so
the Masorah and Targum read: both may be taken into the sense: afflicted
persons are generally humble, afflictions make them humble; God's people
are an afflicted people; afflicted with sin, with Satan, with the world,
with antichrist and his followers: and they are an humble people; grace
makes them humble, and a sense of their sin and unworthiness keeps them
so: and this is a proper character of the followers of Jesus. These in
their distress cry to the Lord, as the Israelites did in Egypt under
their bondage and, pressures: yea, their blood cries after death, as
Abel's did, and as the blood of the martyrs of Christ does, whose souls
under the altar cry for vengeance, [Rev
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#009.md); and God is not unmindful of their
cry; however he may seem to be, he takes notice of it, and wilt in his
own time avenge his elect, which cry unto him day and night.

[Psalms 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 9:13</span></span>

Have mercy upon me, O Lord,.... The psalmist proceeds to petitions on
his own account in this verse: the ends he proposes by the fulfilling of
them are mentioned in the next. A good man, a man called by the grace of
God, though he has obtained mercy of the Lord, yet still stands in need
of more, of fresh discoveries of pardoning grace and mercy, of merciful
supplies, of merciful support, and merciful deliverances from enemies,
inward and outward: and such an one flees to God, and not to the
creature; and pleads, not his own dignity, righteousness, or merit, but
the mercy of God;

consider, my trouble which I suffer of them that hate me; or "see my
affliction because of mine enemies" (l); look upon me under it with an
eye of pity and compassion, and help and deliver me; and look upon mine
enemies that give me this trouble, and take vengeance on them;

thou that liftest me up from the gates of death; the house appointed for
all living; that is, from the power of it, when just upon the brink of
it; when near it, as a person is to an house, when he is at the gates of
it; either through sickness, or some violent distemper of body, as
Hezekiah was; or through some imminent danger in battle, as David was
when engaged with Goliath; when everyone thought, as Kimchi observes,
that he should fall by his hand: or it may be this may have respect to
his being raised up from the death of sin, and delivered from the power
of darkness; to his being brought out of the horrible pit and miry clay
of an unregenerate state, and set upon the rock of salvation; which is a
lifting up indeed, an exaltation from a very low to a very high estate:
and this the psalmist takes notice of to encourage his faith; and makes
use of it as an argument with God, that as he had dealt so graciously
and bountifully with him, he would still show mercy to him, and look
upon him under his affliction.

\(l\) "intuere afflictionem meum propter osores meos", Gejerus.

[Psalms 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 9:14</span></span>

That I may show forth all thy praise,.... That is, all thy bounties and
acts of goodness, deserving of praise; even as many of them as he had an
experience of, and which came within his knowledge; and as much of them
as he was capable of observing: for otherwise the instances of divine
grace and goodness are so many, that they cannot be reckoned up in
order, nor God be praised for them, in the present state of things, as
he should; See Gill on [Psa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001.md);

in the gates of the daughter of Zion: it was usual with the Hebrews to
represent a chief city as a mother city, and the towns and villages, and
places adjacent, as daughters; and so, as Zion or Jerusalem signifies
the church of God in general, or the mother church, [Gal
4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026.md); so "the daughter" of Zion may
mean a particular church: the Targum renders it the congregation of
Zion; and "the gates" of it are the public ordinances of divine worship
in it; and the sense is, that the psalmist desired to show forth the
praises of God in the most public manner in the congregation and
assembly of the saints;

I will rejoice in thy salvation, or "that I may rejoice in thy
salvation" (m): meaning either temporal salvation and deliverance from
enemies, wrought by God for him, which would be matter of joy to him; or
spiritual salvation, which may be called God's salvation, because
contrived by him in the council of peace, and secured by him in the
covenant of grace, and wrought out by his Son in the fulness of time,
and applied by his Spirit at conversion. And a gracious man rejoices in
this salvation more because it is the Lord's than because it is his own;
or he rejoices more because of the glory of God, which is displayed in
it, than because of his own advantage and happiness by it.

\(m\) "exultem", Junius & Tremellius, Musculus; "ut exultem", Piscator,
Gejerus, Michaelis; "gaudeam", Cocceius; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 9:15</span></span>

The Heathen are sunk into the pit that they made,.... The psalmist
having determined to praise the Lord, and called upon others to join
with him in it, here enters upon it: for, as Jarchi and Aben Ezra
observe, this is "the praise" he was desirous to show forth, which is
occasioned by the destruction of God's enemies, and the deliverance of
his people: by "the Heathen" are meant not the Philistines, as Kimchi
interprets it, who thought to cause Israel to fall, and fell themselves;
but this is spoken prophetically of the nations of the earth, who have
joined in the idolatry of antichrist, the Gentiles, by whom the holy
city has been trodden under foot; even the several antichristian states,
that will be destroyed by the pouring out of the seven vials, and
especially the last, at the battle of Armageddon; and which will be
brought on by themselves, with a design to destroy the whole kingdom and
interest of Christ, but will issue in their utter ruin, which this
phrase is expressive of; see [Rev
18:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#003.md). The metaphor is taken from
hunters, who dig pits for the wild beasts to fall into, that they may
the more easily take them, into which they fall themselves; see [Psa
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015.md). Wicked men are mischievous and
crafty, but sometimes they are taken in their own craftiness;

in the net which they laid is their own foot taken; which may signify
the same thing as before, that the mischief they design for others falls
upon themselves; only as the former phrase denotes their utter
destruction like the sinking of a millstone in the sea, by which the
irrecoverable ruin of Babylon is expressed, [Rev
18:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#021.md); this may design the restraint
and hinderance of them from doing the evil they would; their feet are
entangled, that they cannot run to shed blood; and their hands are held,
that they cannot perform their enterprise; and their wrath in restrained
and made to praise the Lord. The metaphor is taken from fowlers, who lay
nets and snares for birds, and cover them that they may not be seen, but
fall into them unawares; see [Psa
124:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#007.md).

[Psalms 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 9:16</span></span>

The Lord is known by the judgment which he executeth,.... The judgment
which God will execute upon antichrist, and the antichristian powers,
will be a means of making known his name, his glory, his perfections, in
all the earth; as his wisdom, power, justice, and goodness; see [Exo
9:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#016.md). The destruction of antichrist
will be the Lord's doing, and it will be a righteous one; it will be a
just retaliation; as he has killed with the sword, multitudes of his
followers shall be killed with the sword; as he has led captive, he
shall be taken captive at the battle of Armageddon; as he has burnt,
many of the martyrs of Jesus, he shall be cast into the lake of fire
burning with brimstone. Some read these words as two sentences, "The
Lord is known; he hath executed judgment" (n): the latter of these
refers not to the ministration of justice in the providential government
of the world, or at the last day in the general judgment; but to the
judgment of the great whore, or antichrist, at which time the Lord will
be known in his Gospel in all the world; the earth will be tilled with
the knowledge of him, and he, and he alone, will be exalted; his name
will be great and glorious throughout the earth; all shall know him,
from the least to the greatest; and their knowledge of him will be very
clear and comprehensive;

the wicked is snared in the work of his own hands; not Goliath, as
Kimchi thinks, who was slain by David with his own sword, though this
was true of him in the letter and type; but the wicked one, the man of
sin and son of perdition, antichrist, whose coming is after the working
of Satan, with all craftiness and wily stratagems, called the depths of
Satan, [Rev 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024.md); but his own sins
shall take him, and he shall be holden with the cords of his iniquities,
and be rewarded double for all his sins; what is before figuratively
expressed is here literally declared; or, "he hath snared the wicked in
or by the work of his hands" (o), that is, God.

Higgaion. Selah; of the latter of these words; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md); the former signifies
"meditation"; Jarchi paraphrases it "let us meditate on this, selah";
Aben Ezra interprets it, "I will show forth this in truth"; the Chaldee
paraphrase is, "the righteous shall rejoice for ever"; the note of
Kimchi and Ben Melech is, "this salvation is to us meditation and
praise"; upon the whole the sense seems to be this, that God's judgments
upon antichrist, and the antichristian states, and the deliverance of
his people from their yoke and tyranny, are things worthy of the
meditation of the saints, and afford just matter of joy, praise, and
thanksgiving.

\(n\) "notus est Dominus; judicium fecit", Pagninus, Montanus,
Gussetius; so Vatablus, Musculus, Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis, and
Ainsworth. (o) "illaqueavit iniquum per opus (vel in opere) manunm
ipsius", Gussetius.

[Psalms 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 9:17</span></span>

The wicked shall be turned into hell,.... Some render it, "shall return
to the grave" (p), to the earth, the original dust from whence they
came; but this is common to all men, to the righteous as well as the
wicked; rather here signifies the place of torment, commonly called
hell, where devils and damned spirits are; hither the souls of the
wicked go immediately upon their departure from their bodies, [Luk
16:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#023.md); and after the judgment is over,
they will be remanded thither in soul and body; and their damnation is
called the destruction of soul and body in hell; which will consist in
an everlasting separation from God, and in a sense of his wrath and
fiery indignation: and though this is true of all the wicked, yet here
that wicked one, antichrist, and his wicked followers, are chiefly
designed; even the beast and false prophet, who shall be cast alive into
the lake of fire burning with brimstone, [Rev
19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020.md);

and all the nations that forget God; which is not to be understood of
the Pagan nations, though they may be said to forget God, since he is to
be known by the light of nature, and yet they worship idols, the works
of their hands; but the Papal nations, who adore the pope of Rome as God
on earth, worship angels and saints departed, and images of gold and
silver, and wood and stone. It may be applied to every wicked man who
forgets there is a God who sees and knows all things, and to whom men
are accountable; see [Psa 50:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#022.md).

\(p\) "revertentur ad vel in sepulchrum", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus,
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Psalms 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 9:18</span></span>

For the needy shall not always be forgotten,.... The people of God are
poor and needy for the most part; they are so in things temporal, and
they are poor in spirit, or in things spiritual, of which they are
sensible; their needs are many, and frequently return; but God has
provided a throne of grace for them to come to for help in time of need,
and he will supply all their wants out of the fulness of grace in
Christ; nor is he unmindful of them, and of his covenant with them;
strictly speaking, they are never forgotten by him, being engraven on
his hands, and set as a seal on his heart; but they sometimes seem to be
so both to themselves and others, [Psa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003.md); and they may continue so long;
God may seem for a long time to take no notice of them, but suffer them
to lie under affliction and persecution; the holy city is trodden under
foot forty two months, or one thousand two hundred and sixty days, that
is, so many years; so long the witnesses prophesy in sackcloth, so long
the church is in the wilderness, and so long will be the reign of
antichrist, [Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002.md); but as great
Babylon will come up in remembrance before God, and he will remember her
sins, and render her double; the set time to favour his poor and needy
will come, and he will arise and have mercy on them, and bring them into
a glorious and comfortable state and condition;

the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever; the negative
particle, though not in the original text, is rightly supplied from the
preceding clause, as it is by the Targum, Jarchi, Aben Ezra, and Kimchi,
and as the sense requires; and the expectation of Christ's poor ones is
not only a supply of grace here and eternal happiness hereafter; but
they expect a glorious state of the church on earth, and that Christ
will descend in person from heaven, and his tabernacle will be among
men; and that they shall be kings and priests, and possess the kingdom,
and reign with Christ a thousand years; and though these things may seem
to be deferred, and their expectation put off to a length of time, yet
it shall not perish for ever; there will be a performance of the things
promised and expected.

[Psalms 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 9:19</span></span>

Arise, O Lord,.... To the destruction of thine enemies, and the
salvation of thy people; See Gill on [Psa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006.md);

let not man prevail; the man of sin, antichrist, that is, let him not
always prevail; he is the little horn that was to prevail against the
saints, and has prevailed, [Dan 7:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#021.md);
but he shall not always prevail; this petition will be heard and
answered; for though he shall cast down many thousands, he shall not be
"strengthened" by it, [Dan 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#012.md);
where the same word is used as here; the Lamb at last shall overcome him
and his ten kings, his supporters, and all that shall aid and assist
him, [Rev 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014.md);

let the Heathen be judged in thy sight; that is, the antichristian
nations that adhere to the man of sin, let them be judged and punished
in the sight of God, the Judge of all the earth, whose eyes are as a
flame of fire; compare with this [Joe
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#012.md).

[Psalms 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 9:20</span></span>

Put them in fear, O Lord,.... Who are, a bold, impudent, fearless
generation of men; who, like the unjust judge, neither fear God nor
regard men, therefore the psalmist prays that God would inject fear into
them, who only can do it; and this will be done at Babylon's
destruction, when the antichristian kings, merchants, and seafaring men,
will stand afar off for fear of her torment, [Rev
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010.md);

that the nations may know themselves to be but men; and not God, and
have no power against him; see [Isa
31:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa031.htm#003.md); the sense is, that the
antichristian nations, who oppose themselves to Christ and his people,
may know that they are but frail, mortal, miserable men, as the word (q)
signifies; and that he who is at the head of them, the man of sin, is no
other, though he exalts himself above all that is called God, [Th2
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004.md); or these words are a prayer for
the conversion of many among the nations, and may be rendered, "put, O
Lord, fear in them" (r); that is, the true grace of fear, "that the
nations may know" themselves, their sin and guilt and danger, and know
God in Christ, and Christ, and the way of salvation by him; for at the
word "know" should be a stop, concluding a proposition, since the accent
"athnach" is there; and then follows another, "they are men. Selah":
destitute of the fear and grace of God, are capable of it, but cannot
give it to themselves.

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md).

\(q\) "mortales esse", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Gejerus; "homines
miseri", Cocceius, Michaelis; "sorry men", Ainsworth. (r) "pone timorem
eis", so Junius and Tremellius, Piscator, Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius,
Ainsworth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 10](psa010.md)

</div>
