<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa066)  [Next](psa068.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 67](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 67:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 67

To the chief Musician on Neginoth, A Psalm or Song. According to the
Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions, this psalm is
a psalm of David; and very probably it was written by him, since the
spirit and language of it agree with that sweet singer of Israel, though
his name is not in the title; wherefore Aben Ezra says, we know not who
composed it: and so the inscription of the Syriac version pronounces the
same uncertain; which adds,

"the people sung it when they brought David over Jordan;''

meaning after Absalom's rebellion was over, [Sa2
19:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#041.md); but what follows better
expresses the occasion and intent of it;

"but to us it intimates a prophecy in it concerning the calling of the
Gentiles, and the preaching of the apostles; likewise concerning the
judgments of the Lord:''

and it seems indeed to breathe out the desires of the church after the
coming of Christ, and spiritual blessings by him, and the spread of the
Gospel among the Gentiles, as what would bring forth much fruit in the
earth, and be the occasion of great joy. The ancient Jews (i) apply it ,
"to future time"; the world to come, the times of the Messiah: and
Kimchi understands it of the gathering of the present captivity when the
Messiah comes, and of the destruction of Gog and Magog. Of the word
"neginoth", See Gill on [Psa 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001.md),
title.

\(i\) Debarim Rabba, s. 1. fol. 233. 4. Yalkut Simeoni in loc.

[Psalms 67:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 67:1</span></span>

God be merciful unto us, and bless us,.... That is, God, of his
unmerited mercy, of his rich grace and free favour, bless us with the
coming of his Son, the promised seed, in whom all nations are to be
blessed; and with the blessings of peace, pardon, and righteousness in
him; all which with him spring from the tender mercy of God, the riches
of his grace, and his great love; than which nothing could be more
desirable to the Old Testament saints, who were shut up under the law,
until faith came; and though children, they differed nothing from
servants, being in a state and under a spirit of bondage: for the
psalmist seems to represent the whole church under that dispensation:
some understand the words as a prophecy, expressing the certainty of
what would be; and, as the words may be rendered, "God will be
merciful", or "gracious to us (k), and he will bless us"; as he has
promised to do;

and cause his face to shine upon us; that is, grant his gracious
presence, and the discoveries of his love; that he would favour with
communion with himself through Christ, and a greater knowledge of him in
him; or that he would cause him, who is his face, his image, the
brightness of his glory, to appear and shine forth; the great light, the
sun of righteousness, and dayspring from on high, that was to arise and
shine upon the people of God. The Targum is,

"and cause the splendour of his face to shine with us always;''

there seems to be some reference to the high priest's form of blessing
in [Num 6:24](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024.md).

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md).

\(k\) "miserebitur", Gejerus, Schmidt.

[Psalms 67:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 67:2</span></span>

That thy way may be known upon earth,.... God's way and method of grace,
in the salvation of sinners; the contrivance of it in Christ, the
impetration of it by him, and the application of it by his Spirit; and
the way of sinners to him through Christ, the way, the truth, and the
life, the new and living way to the Father; and the way of life and
salvation, which is grace, and by Christ alone; and the Gospel which
points out this way, and is itself called the way of God, [Act
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#025.md); together with the ordinances of
it, which are ways of pleasantness, and paths of peace; all this was
made known by the apostles and first preachers of the Gospel; not only
in the land of Judea, but throughout the whole earth;

thy saving health among all nations; or "thy salvation"; or "thy Jesus"
(l); whose name signifies a Saviour; and who is the only one, and an
able and willing one, and is God's salvation, of his appointing,
promising, and sending; salvation is by him, and by him only; he came to
obtain it, and he is the author of it; health is also by him, he is the
physician of souls, and his blood the balm that cures every disease; so
that he is the Saviour, salvation, and saving health, to his people;
this was unknown to the nations of the world until the Gospel came among
them, until the grace of God bringing this salvation appeared unto them,
and shone upon them, [Tit 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/tit002.htm#011.md).

\(l\) "salutem tuam", Pagninus, Montanus, &c. "i.e. salvatorem cujus
nomen erit Jesus", Gejerus.

[Psalms 67:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 67:3</span></span>

Let the people praise thee, O God,.... Let them have occasion to praise
God, the people of the Jews, for the mission of Christ, and for the
blessings of grace and peace with him;

let all the people praise thee; all the nations of the world, for making
known the way of life and grace, and the saving health or salvation of
God unto them: the word used signifies to "confess" (m); and so the
Targum,

"the people shall confess before thee, O God; all the people shall
confess before thee;''

that is, shall confess their sins, being made sensible of them; and
confess the true and living God, turning from their idols to serve him;
and Christ to be the only Saviour and Redeemer, being now made known
unto them, through the preaching of the Gospel.

\(m\) "confiteantur", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Psalms 67:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 67:4</span></span>

O let the nations be glad and sing for joy,.... As they were glad, and
did sing for joy, and glorified God, when Christ was made known, and the
Gospel was preached unto them, [Act
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005.md).

for thou shalt judge the people righteously; meaning not the people of
the world at the last day, at the general judgment, which will be a
righteous one; when God will judge the world in righteousness, according
to the strict rules of justice and equity, by him whom he has ordained,
[Psa 96:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa096.htm#001.md); but either the righteous
judgment which will be executed on the enemies of Christ's church and
people; particularly on antichrist, which will be matter of great joy,
[Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001.md); and Kimchi interprets it of
the judgment of the nations which shall come with Gog and Magog; or else
the judging and vindicating the Lord's own people, defending their
cause, righting their wrongs, and suffering no weapon to prosper against
them;

and govern the nations upon earth; or "lead them" (n); not to
punishment, as Kimchi, who interprets this clause as the other; but by
his grace and Spirit, into the knowledge of his way, and saving health;
or as a shepherd leads his flock into green pastures, and beside the
still waters; or as a king leads and governs his people, as David guided
the people of Israel, with the skilfulness of his hands; so Christ leads
and governs his people, protects and defends them, holds them by his
right hand, guides them with his counsel, and then receives them to
glory; see [Psa 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#002.md).

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md).

\(n\) "duces eas", Montanus; "deduces", Junius & Tremellius, Cocceius;
"deducis", Piscator.

[Psalms 67:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 67:5</span></span>

Let the people praise thee, O God; let all the people praise thee. See
Gill on [Psa 67:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#003.md). This is repeated
from that preceding verse to show the earnest desire of the church that
it might be so; or that there might be an occasion for it; the ardour of
her mind, and fervency of her petitions, and how much she was solicitous
for the praise and glory of God; or to declare the certainty of it, she
most strongly believing that so it would be; as the Targum, "the people
shall confess", &c. because of a new favour to be enjoyed, mentioned in
[Psa 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md).

[Psalms 67:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 67:6</span></span>

Then shall the earth yield her increase,.... Not literally the land of
Israel, as in some copies of the Targum, and as Kimchi interprets it;
see [Lev 26:3](../../../bib/kjv/lev026.htm#003.md); but mystically and
spiritually the church of God in the times of the Messiah, [Eze
34:23](../../../bib/kjv/eze034.htm#023.md); the word of God preached in the
world is the seed sown in it; converts to Christ are the increase or
fruit of it; and the church is God's husbandry, where it is yielded or
brought forth; and this increase is of God, and is owing to the efficacy
of his grace attending the ministration of the word, [Co1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#006.md); it had its accomplishment in part
in the first times of the Gospel, when it was preached by the apostles
throughout the earth, and brought forth fruit everywhere, [Col
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#005.md); and has been fulfilling more or
less ever since, and will appear more abundantly in the latter day; a
large increase and a plentiful harvest of souls shall be brought in,
both Jews and Gentiles: or this may be understood of the fruitfulness of
believers in Christ, who may be called "earth", because of their common
original from the earth with the rest of mankind; because they are
inhabitants of the earth; and because they have earthly as well as
heavenly principles in them; but more especially because they are the
good ground on whom the seed of the word falls and becomes fruitful; or
are the earth which drinks in the rain of the Gospel, and of grace, and
brings forth fruit meet for them, by whom it is dressed, and receives
blessing of God, [Mat 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#023.md); these
yield the fruits of the Spirit, increase in grace, and abound in the
exercise of it; bring forth fruits meet for repentance, being filled
with the fruits of righteousness by Christ; for the increase and fruit
yielded by them are owing to the grace of God, to their grafting into
Christ the vine, and to the influence of the blessed Spirit. Some of the
ancients understand this of the incarnation of Christ; see [Psa
85:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa085.htm#011.md); then "the earth" is the Virgin
Mary, who was, as to her original, of the earth, earthly; of whose
earthly substance Christ took flesh, and is called the fruit of her
womb; yea, the fruit of the earth, [Luk
1:42](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#042.md); for though he is the Lord from
heaven, as to his divine nature, and came down from thence, not by
change of place, but by assumption of nature; yet, as to his human
nature, he was made of a woman, and is the seed of the woman, the
promised seed, in whom all nations of the earth were to be blessed; and
it here follows:

and God, even our own God, shall bless us; not as the God of nature and
providence only; but as the God of grace, as a covenant God in Christ,
in which sense he is peculiarly his people's own God, so as he is not
others; and as such he blesses them with all spiritual blessings in
Christ: or the repetition of the word "God", with the affix "our own",
may denote the certainty of the divine blessing, the assurance had of
it, and the great affection of the persons that express it: and some
think, because the word is repeated three times in this verse and [Psa
68:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#007.md), respect is had to the trinity of
Persons in the Godhead; God the Father blesses his people in Christ with
the blessings of justification, pardon, adoption, and eternal life: the
Son, who is Immanuel, God with us, God in our nature, our own God, God
manifest in the flesh; he blesses with the same blessings of grace,
peace, and eternal happiness; he was raised up of God as man and
Mediator, and sent to bless his people, [Act
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/act003.htm#026.md).

[Psalms 67:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa067.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 67:7</span></span>

God shall bless us,.... The Holy Spirit blesses with regenerating and
renewing grace; with faith, comfort, joy and peace, by shedding abroad
in the heart the love of the Father and the Son; by applying precious
promises; by testifying adoption; by making meet for heaven and
happiness, and working up for the selfsame thing eternal glory;

and all the ends of the earth shall fear him; the one God, Father, Son,
and Spirit, the object of religious fear, internal and external; for
this includes the exercise of that inward grace of filial fear, and the
performance of all divine worship, public and private; and which in the
latter day will be found among Jews and Gentiles, in all the inhabitants
of the earth, even to the ends of it, [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 68](psa068.md)

</div>
