<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa074)  [Next](psa076.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 75](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 75:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 75

To the chief Musician, Altaschith, A Psalm or Song of Asaph. Of the word
"altaschith", See Gill on [Psa 57:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#001.md),
it signifies "do not destroy", or "do not corrupt"; the Targum renders
it,

"do not destroy thy people;''

so Jarchi,

"do not destroy Israel;''

perhaps it may be considered as a petition, that God would not suffer
the man of sin to go on to destroy the earth, and corrupt the
inhabitants of it with his false doctrine, idolatry, and superstition,
[Rev 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018.md), for the psalm respects the
times of the Gospel dispensation, and includes both the first coming of
Christ in the flesh, and his second coming to judgment; the argument of
it with the Syriac version is,

"the divinity of Christ, and a remembrance of the judgment;''

it is said to be a psalm or song of Asaph, but is thought to be written
by David, and delivered to Asaph; for it may be rendered "for Asaph"
(k); and so the Targum,

"by the hands of Asaph;''

though some think it was written after the Babylonish captivity; perhaps
by some person whose name was Asaph, or was of the family of him that
lived in David's time. Theodoret supposes it was written in the person
of the captives in Babylon.

[Psalms 75:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 75:1</span></span>

Unto thee, O God, do we give thanks,.... Either David and his men, when
he was delivered from Saul, and raised to the kingdom, or the Jews upon
their return from the Babylonish captivity; or rather the churches of
Christ under the Gospel dispensation, for the coming of Christ and the
blessings of grace through him, and in the view of the sure and certain
destruction of antichrist and all the wicked of the earth; yea, Christ
himself may be considered as at the head of his people, joining with
them in thanksgiving, to whom this action is sometimes ascribed, [Mat
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#025.md) and the rather since he is
continued all along speaking to the end of the psalm:

unto thee do we give thanks; which is repeated to show the constancy,
fervency, and sincerity with which this was performed: it may be
rendered, "unto thee do we confess" (l); sins committed against God,
unworthiness to receive favours from him, and his grace and goodness in
bestowing them:

for that thy name is near; or rather, "for thy name is near" (m); and so
the words are a reason of the above thanksgiving; for they belong not so
much to what follows after as to what goes before, since the accent
"athnach" is upon "thy name"; and are to be understood of God himself,
for his name is himself; who is near to his people, both in relation,
being their Father, and as to presence, communion, and fellowship, which
are matter of praise and thanksgiving; or his works and word, by which
he is known and made manifest; his works which are throughout the earth,
and so near at hand, and his word which is nigh, being in the mouths and
in the hearts of his people; or rather his Son, in whom his name is, his
nature and divine perfections: he was at a distance in promise and
prophecy, and only seen afar off; after the Babylonish captivity, at
which time some think this psalm was written, he was near; the prophets
Haggai, Zechariah, and Malachi, speak of him as just coming; and when he
was made flesh, and dwelt among men, he was near indeed, so as to be
found of them, seen, heard, and handled by them; on which account there
was and is reason to give thanks to God:

thy wondrous works declare; meaning either the miracles of Christ, which
were proofs and evidences of his being come, and of his being the true
Messiah; see [Mat 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#003.md) or the
wonderful works done by him, which to do were the principal end of his
coming; as the work of righteousness, the business of reconciliation,
and in general the affair of redemption and salvation; all which were
amazing instances of his power, grace, and goodness, and which are
declared in the everlasting Gospel by the ministers of it; for the
words, I think, may be better rendered, "they declare thy wondrous
works" (n), or impersonally, "thy wondrous works are declared".

\(k\) "ipsi Asaph", Pagninus, Montanus; "Asapho", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator. (l) "confessi sumus", Montanus; "confitemur", Cocceius,
Michaelis. (m) "nam propiuquum", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (n)
"narrant mirabilia tua", Montanus; "enarrant", Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator.

[Psalms 75:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 75:2</span></span>

When I shall receive the congregation,.... Some render it, from the
Arabic signification of the word, "the promise" (o); the Spirit
promised, the gifts of the Spirit, which Christ received for men, and
gave to men, whereby he executes the judgment or government of the
church committed to him: others the time, so the Septuagint, Vulgate
Latin, Ethiopic, Syriac, and Arabic versions, to which agrees the
Targum, the word signifying a set appointed time, [Psa
102:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa102.htm#014.md), and so may respect the time
appointed for the judgment of the world, which when come, Christ will
execute in a most righteous manner, as follows; see [Act
17:31](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#031.md), but whereas the people of
Israel met at the door of the tabernacle, which from thence was called
"Ohel Moed", the tabernacle of the congregation; hence the word is used
for a congregation, and here designs the general assembly and church of
the firstborn written in heaven, even all the elect of God; these were
received by Christ of his Father in eternity, when he espoused them to
himself, and undertook the care of them; and they are received by him,
one by one, in effectual calling; and in like manner are they received
by him into glory at death; but when they are all gathered in, and are
prepared for him as a bride for her husband, then will he receive them
all in a body, and present them to himself a glorious church during the
thousand years' reign; upon which will proceed the judgment of the
wicked; see [Rev 20:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#005.md),

I will judge uprightly; in equity, in strict justice, in the most
righteous manner, rendering to every man according to his works; hence
the future judgment is called a righteous one, and so is the Judge; no
injustice will be done to men, but the strictest integrity, uprightness,
and impartiality, will be observed in pronouncing the several sentences
on the righteous and on the wicked, and in adjudging them to their
several places and states.

\(o\) "promissa", Schultens animadv. p. 174. "festi dona", Gusset. p.
334.

[Psalms 75:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 75:3</span></span>

The earth and all the inhabitants thereof are dissolved,.... Or "melted"
(p); the inhabitants, through fear and dread of the righteous Judge,
appearing in the clouds of heaven, and of the wrath that is coming on
they are deserving of; and the earth, through fire, when the heavens
being on fire shall be dissolved, the elements melt with fervent heat,
and the earth and the works therein shall be burnt up, [Pe2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#010.md).

I bear up the pillars of it.: so that it shall not utterly perish; for
though by the fire, at the general conflagration, the heavens and the
earth will be so melted and dissolved as to lose their present form, and
shall be purged and purified from all noxious qualities, the effects of
sin; yet the substance will remain, out of which will be formed new
heavens and a new earth, and this through the power of Christ sustaining
it, and preserving it from entire destruction or annihilation. R.
Obadiah by "pillars" understands in a figurative sense the righteous,
for whose sake the world is continued in its being; these at the general
conflagration will be bore up and preserved by Christ, whom they shall
meet in the air, even the church, who is the pillar and ground of truth;
and not only the ministers of the Gospel, who are pillars in Christ's
house, but also every believer, which is a pillar there, that shall
never go out, [Ti1 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#015.md). Aben Ezra and
Kimchi interpret the pillars of the mountains.

Selah. See Gill on [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md).

\(p\) "liquefacti", Montanus; "liquefiet", Musculus.

[Psalms 75:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 75:4</span></span>

I said unto the fools,.... To the vain gloriosos, proud boasters,
mockers, and scoffers at the day of judgment, and burning of the world:

deal not foolishly; by glorying in themselves, boasting of their riches,
and trusting in them; singing a requiem to themselves on account of
their abundance, and by putting away the evil day far from them:

and to the wicked, lift not up the horn; of power, grandeur, and wealth,
and use it to the injury of others; or be so elated with it as to look
with disdain on others; or imagine they shall always continue in this
exalted state, as antichrist the horned beast does, [Rev
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007.md), the allusion is to horned
beasts, particularly harts, which lift up their heads and horns in great
pride (p): the phrase signifies to behave proudly and haughtily.

\(p\) Vid. "Suidam in voce"

[Psalms 75:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 75:5</span></span>

Lift not up your horn on high,.... Or "against the most High" (q); as
the little horn, or the beast with ten horns, antichrist, does, whose
look is more stout than his fellows, and opens his mouth in blasphemy
against God, his name, his tabernacle, and them that dwell in heaven,
[Dan 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#008.md),

speak not with a stiff neck; arrogantly, proudly, and haughtily: or
"hard things with a neck" (r); hard speeches against Christ and his
people with an outstretched neck, in an imperious and insolent manner;
for the righteous Judge will convince such of their hard speeches, and
condemn them for them; [Jde 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#014.md).

\(q\) "contra excelsum", Junius & Tremellius. (r) "collo durum",
Michaelis.

[Psalms 75:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 75:6</span></span>

For promotion cometh neither from the east, nor from the west, nor from
the south. It is not from men, from themselves, or others, or from any
quarter under the heavens, but from God; it is he that raises men to
high places, and sets them there, which are often slippery ones: by him
kings reign; they have their crowns and sceptres, thrones and kingdoms
from him; there is no power but what is of God; riches and honour come
of him, and he can take them away when he pleases; and therefore men
should not be proud, haughty, and arrogant: some take these words to be
the words of the fools and wicked, when they speak with a stiff neck,
either as triumphing over the Messiah, his ministers, cause, and
interest, reading the words thus, "neither from the east, nor from the
west, nor from the south, shall there be a lifting up" (s), or an
exaltation; that is, of Christ and his people, they are low, and shall
never rise more; but in this they are mistaken; though now the Son of
God is trampled under foot in his person and offices, there is a day
coming when the Lord, and he alone, shall be exalted; though his
ministers and witnesses prophesy in sackcloth, and shall be slain and
lie unburied, yet they will arise again and ascend to heaven, to the
great terror and astonishment of those their enemies; though Jacob is
small, and it is said, by whom shall he arise? yet he shall become,
great and numerous; the mountain of the Lord's house, the church, shall
be established upon the top of the mountains, and exalted above the
hills; and this enlargement of Christ's kingdom and interest shall be
east, west, north, and south; or else as flattering themselves that no
evil shall come to them from any quarter: "neither from the east, nor
from the west, nor, from the desert of the mountains" (t), cometh evil;
meaning to themselves, looking upon themselves as secure, and putting
the evil day far from them: but there will be an awful and righteous
judgment; there is a Judge ordained, a day appointed, in which the world
will be judged in righteousness, and destruction and ruin will come upon
the ungodly, and at a time when they are crying Peace, peace; nor shall
they escape; and so the Syriac version renders the words, "for there is
no escape from the west, nor from the desert of the mountains"; taking
the word not to signify "promotion, elevation", or "a lifting up", as
Kimchi and others, whom we follow: but Moatanus and R. Aba observe that
the word always signifies "mountains" but in this place: the Targum is,

"for there is none besides me from the east to the west, nor from the
north of the wildernesses, and from the south, the place of the
mountains;''

no Messiah to be expected from any quarter; see [Mat
24:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#023.md), no God besides him, nor any
other Saviour, [Isa 44:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#006.md) nor any other
Judge, as follows.

\(s\) "exaltatio", Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (t)
"Neque a desertis montibus", V. L. "neque a deserto montium", Cocceius;
"neque a deserto Australi montium", Michaelis.

[Psalms 75:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 75:7</span></span>

But God is the Judge,.... Or "because God is the Judge" (u); and so this
is another reason why fools should not deal foolishly, nor wicked men
lift up the horn, and speak with a stiff neck, because there is a Judge
to whom they are accountable for their words and actions; and this Judge
is God omniscient, knows all persons and things, searches the heart and
tries the reins, will bring every secret thing into judgment, bring to
light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the counsels of
the heart; omnipotent, able to do all things, raise the dead, call to
judgment, bring all before him, pass the sentences, and execute them;
omnipresent, there is no fleeing from him, nor escaping his righteous
judgment; holy, just, and true, who will render to every man according
to his works:

he putteth down one, and setteth up another; he humbles or brings one
low, such as are proud, haughty, and arrogant; and he exalts another,
such as are lowly and humble: this he does in providence, he removes
kings, and sets up kings; puts down the mighty from their seats, and
exalts them of low degree, [Dan 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#021.md),
he has many ways to mortify the proud, by inflicting diseases on their
bodies, by stripping them of their honour and wealth, and by bringing
them into disgrace among men: and this he does in grace; such as are
stout hearted and far from righteousness, and will not submit to the
righteousness of Christ, he brings them to it; and those whom he makes
humble by his grace, he raises to a high estate, to be kings and
priests, and to sit among princes, and to inherit a throne of glory.
This might be exemplified in Jews and Gentiles; he has stripped the one
of their privileges, and put them down from their civil and church
state, and raised up the other to be his church and people; and also in
antichrist and the true church of Christ; he will ere long put down the
one, that sits as a queen, and exalt the other, when she shall be as a
bride adorned for her husband, having the glory of God upon her.

\(u\) "quoniam", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus; "siquidem",
Tigurine version; "quia", Gejerus; so some in Michaelis.

[Psalms 75:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 75:8</span></span>

For in the hand of the Lord there is a cup,.... Another reason why men
should not act haughtily and arrogantly; for by the cup are meant
afflictions, calamities, and judgments, which are measured out in
proportion to men's sins, and are of God's appointing, and in his hands,
and at his disposal

and the wine is red; an emblem of the wrath of God this cup is full of,
as it is explained, [Rev 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010.md), where
there is a reference to this passage; for it is a cup of fury, of
trembling, and of indignation: [Isa
51:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa051.htm#017.md),

it is full of mixture; has many ingredients in it, dreadful and shocking
ones, though it is sometimes said to be without mixture, [Rev
14:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#010.md), without any allay, alluding to
the mixing of wine with water in the eastern countries; see [Pro
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#002.md),

and he poureth out of the same; his judgments upon men in this world, in
all ages; on some more, others less, as their sins call for, or his
infinite wisdom judges meet and proper:

but the dregs thereof all the wicked of the earth shall wring them out
and drink them; the whole cup that God has measured out and filled up
shall be poured out at last, and all be drank up; the very dregs of it
by the wicked of the world, when they shall be punished with everlasting
destruction in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone: this will
be the portion of their cup, [Psa
11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006.md).

[Psalms 75:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 75:9</span></span>

But I will declare for ever,.... These are not the words of the
psalmist, but of Christ, who is all along speaking in the psalm; what he
would declare is not expressed, and is to be supplied in sense thus;
either that he would declare the wonderful works of God, [Psa
75:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#001.md), so the Targum, his thoughts,
mercies, and kindnesses to his people, as in [Psa
55:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#005.md), or his judgments on his enemies,
whom he shall pass sentence on, which will be for ever; or the name of
the Lord, his purposes and decrees, his counsel and covenant, his mind
and will, his Gospel and the truth of it: see [Psa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022.md),

I will sing praises to the God of Jacob; the covenant God of his people,
Christ's God, and their God; of his singing praise to him, see [Psa
22:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#022.md).

[Psalms 75:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 75:10</span></span>

All the horns of the wicked also will I cut off,.... Therefore let them
not lift up the horn on high: "horns" denote the power and authority of
wicked men, their kingdoms and states; both Rome Pagan and Rome Papal
are said to have ten horns, which are interpreted of ten kings or
kingdoms; and which will be cut off when the vials of God's wrath are
poured out on the antichristian states; which vials will be filled from
the cup which is in the hand of the Lord, [Rev
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#001), the Jews (b.md) interpret this of
the ten horns of the nations of the world, that shall be cut off in
future time; and Jarchi particularly of the horns of Esau, by whom he
means Rome, or the Roman empire:

but the horns of the righteous shall be exalted; either of the righteous
one Christ, for the word is in the singular number; he who is the Lord
our righteousness, whose power and authority, kingdom and government,
shall be enlarged and increased, signified by the budding of the horn of
David, and the exaltation of the horn of his Messiah, [Sa1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010.md) or of everyone of the righteous,
which will be when the kingdom and dominion, and the greatness of the
kingdom under the whole heaven, shall be given to the people of the
saints of the most High, and they shall reign with Christ on earth a
thousand years, [Dan 7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027.md). Kimchi says
this will be in the war of Gog and Magog, which is expected by the Jews.

\(b\) Vid. Yalkut in loc.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 76](psa076.md)

</div>
