<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa027)  [Next](psa029) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 28:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 28

A Psalm of David. This psalm, Aben Ezra says, David either composed
himself, or one of the singers for him; the former seems most likely;
and it might be made by him when he was persecuted by Saul, or when
delivered from him; or at least when he had faith and hope that he
should be delivered: the psalm consists of two parts, petitions and
thanksgivings.

[Psalms 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 28:1</span></span>

Unto thee will I cry,.... This denotes the distress the psalmist was in,
fervency and ardour in prayer, resolution to continue in it, and
singularity with respect to the object of it; determining to cry to the
Lord only; to which he was encouraged by what follows;

O Lord my rock; he being a strong tower and place of defence to him, in
whom were all his safety, and his trust and confidence, and in whom he
had an interest;

be not silent to me; or "deaf" (q); persons that do not hear are silent,
and make no answer; as the Lord seems to be, when he returns no answer
to the cries of his people; when he does not arise and help them; when
he seems not to take any notice of his and their enemies, but stands at
a distance from them, and as if he had forsaken them; see [Psa
39:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa039.htm#012); the words may be considered, as
they are by some, as an address to Christ his rock, his advocate and
intercessor; that he would not be silent, but speak for him, and present
his supplications to God, with the much incense of his mediation; see
[Sa1 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#008);

lest, if thou be silent to me, I become like them that go down into the
pit; either like such that fall into a ditch, and cannot help themselves
out, and they cry, and there is none to take them out from thence; or
like such that die in battle, and are cast into a pit, and there buried
in common with others; which David might fear would be his case, through
Saul's violent pursuit after him; or lest he should be like the dead,
who are not regarded, and are remembered no more; or lest he should
really die by the hands of his enemies, and so be laid in the grave, the
pit of corruption; or be in such distress and despair as even the damned
in hell be, the pit out of which there is no deliverance.

\(q\) "ne obsurdescas", Vatablus, Tigurine version, Gejerus; so
Ainsworth, Junius & Tremellius, Michaelis.

[Psalms 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 28:2</span></span>

Hear the voice of my supplications,.... Which proceed from the Spirit of
grace and of supplication, and are put up in an humble manner, under a
sense of wants and unworthiness, and on the foot of grace and mercy, and
not merit;

when I cry unto thee; as he now did, and determined he would, and
continue so doing, until he was heard;

when I lift up my hands toward thy holy oracle: the holy of holies, in
the tabernacle and in the temple, which was sometimes so called, [Kg1
6:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#023); compared with [Ch2
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#010); where were the ark, the mercy
seat, and cherubim, between which the Lord dwelt, and gave responses to
his people; or heaven itself, which the holy of holies was a figure of;
where is the throne of God, and from whence he hears the prayers of his
people directed to him; or else Christ himself, who is the most Holy,
and the "Debir", or Oracle, who speaks to the Lord for his people; and
by whom the Lord speaks to them again, and communes with them. The
oracle had its name, "debir", from speaking. Lifting up of the hands is
a prayer gesture, and here designs the performance of that duty to God
in heaven, through Christ; see [Lam
3:41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#041); it was frequently used, even by
the Heathens, as a prayer gesture (r); see [Psa
141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002).

\(r\) "Duplices manus ad sidera tendit--et paulo post--et ambas ad
coelum tendit palmas", Virgil. Aeneid. 10. vid. Aeneid. 2. "Ad coelum
manibus sublatis", Horat. Satyr. l. 2. satyr. 5. v. 97. "Coelo supines
si tuleris manus", ib. Carmin. l. 3. Ode 23. v. 1. "Et pandere palmas
ante Deum delubra", Lucretius l. 5. prope finem , Homer. Iliad. 5. v.
174.

[Psalms 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 28:3</span></span>

Draw me not away with the wicked,.... That is, with those who are
notoriously wicked; who are inwardly and outwardly wicked; whose inward
part is very wickedness, and who sell themselves and give up themselves
to work wickedness: the sense is, that God would not suffer him to be
drawn away, or drawn aside by wicked men, but that he would deliver him
from temptation; or that he would not give him up into their hands, to
be at their mercy; who he knew would not spare him, if they had him in
their power; or that he might not die the death of the wicked, and
perish with them; see [Psa 26:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#009);

and with the workers of iniquity; who make it the trade and business of
their lives to commit sin; and which may be applied, not only to profane
sinners, but to professors of religion, [Mat
7:23](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#023); since it follows,

which speak peace to their neighbours, but mischief is in their hearts;
hypocrites, double minded men, who have a form of godliness, but deny
the power of it; pretend to religion, and have none; and speak fair to
the face, but design mischief and ruin; as Saul and his servants did to
David, [Sa1 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#017).

[Psalms 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 28:4</span></span>

Give them according to their deeds,.... According to the demerit of
them, which is death, even death eternal;

and according to the wickedness of their endeavours; for though wicked
men do not always succeed; yet their want of success does not excuse
their wickedness;

give them after the work of their hands; see [Ti2
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014);

render to them their desert; what their iniquities, in thought, word,
and deed, deserve: such petitions are not contrary to that Christian
charity which the Gospel recommends; nor do they savour of a spirit of
revenge, which is condemned by the word of God; for it should be
observed, that these things are said with respect to men given up to a
reprobate mind; and that the psalmist does not seek to avenge himself,
nor to gratify his own mind; but he sought the glory of God, and
moreover spoke by a prophetic spirit, knowing what was the will of God
in this case; see [Psa 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005); and
therefore these petitions of his are not to be drawn into an example in
common and ordinary cases.

[Psalms 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 28:5</span></span>

Because they regard not the works of the Lord,.... Neither the work of
creation, as if there was no first cause of all things; nor the work of
Providence, taking no notice either of the judgments or of the mercies
of God; as though they believed that God had forsaken the earth, and
would do neither good nor evil; and still less the work of redemption,
which in covenant, promise, and prophecy, was appointed for the Messiah
to work out; and as for the work of the Spirit of God upon the soul,
they had no notion of that, of the nature and necessity of it; the
things of the Spirit of God being foolishness to them, and undiscernible
by them; see [Isa 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#012). Perhaps the
psalmist may have some regard to his being anointed by Samuel, according
to the will of God, and to the victory which he obtained over Goliath,
and over others, which justly gained him great esteem among some, and
created envy in others; and also the wonderful protection of him from
time to time; the Chaldee paraphrase is, "because they do not understand
the law of the Lord". It follows,

nor the operation of his hands; in which his hand was so very apparent,
that nothing less could be said than that this was the finger of God;
wherefore,

he shall destroy them, and not build them up; that is, they shall be
irrecoverably lost; they shall be punished with everlasting destruction;
there will be no help or remedy for them: some (s) understand this as a
prayer, that God would destroy them in such a manner, and render it,
"let him destroy them", &c. (t).

\(s\) Kimchi in loc. Vid. Aben Ezram in loc. (t) "destruat eos",
Vatablus; so the Arabic version.

[Psalms 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 28:6</span></span>

Blessed be the Lord,.... Which must be understood, not as invoking nor
as conferring a blessing on him, neither of which can be done by a
creature; nor does he stand in need of any, he being Elshaddai, God all
sufficient, God over all, blessed for ever; but as ascribing all
blessedness to him, congratulating his greatness and happiness, and
giving him praise and glory for mercies received; and particularly for
the following:

because he hath heard the voice of my supplications; what he had prayed
for, [Psa 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#002); an answer was quickly
returned, even while he was speaking, [Isa
65:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#024); though this may be an
expression of faith, being fully persuaded and assured that he was
heard, and would be answered, and may be said by a prophetic spirit;
knowing that what he had humbly asked for would be granted; so Aben Ezra
and Kimchi understand it in a way of prophecy.

[Psalms 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 28:7</span></span>

The Lord is my strength,.... That is, the author both of natural and
spiritual strength; that gave him strength of body, and fortitude of
mind, to bear up under all the exercises he was tried with; the strength
of his life, spiritual and temporal, and of his salvation; the strength
of his heart under present distresses, and who he knew would be so in
the hour of death, when his heart and strength would fail;

and my shield; to protect and defend him; as were the love, power, and
faithfulness of God, and the Lord Jesus Christ, his power and fulness,
his blood, righteousness, and salvation;

my heart trusted in him; in the Lord as his strength and shield; not in
any creature, nor in his own strength and righteousness; but in the Lord
God, in whom are righteousness and strength: and it is plain he did not
trust in his own heart, since his heart trusted in the Lord; and which
shows that his trust was an hearty one, his faith was a faith unfeigned,
he believed with the heart unto righteousness;

and I am helped: this was the fruit of his trust, even a gracious
experience of divine assistance: saints are helpless in themselves, and
are also as to the help of man; God is the only helper of them; he helps
them out of all their troubles; in whatsoever he calls them unto, and to
what they want; and the help he affords is sometimes quick, and always
seasonable; and sometimes by means, and sometimes without them;

therefore my heart greatly rejoiceth; that is, in the Lord, the ground
of which was the help he had from him; and this joy was very great, a
joy unspeakable, and full of glory; it was not carnal, but spiritual, a
heart joy, joy in the Holy Ghost;

and with my song will I praise him; praise is due to God, what glorifies
him, and is acceptable to him; it becomes the saints, is comely for
them, and it is pleasant work to them, when grace is in exercise; see
[Psa 69:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030); this may be understood of
one of his songs, and one of the best of them, and of one better than
this, as a Jewish writer (u) observes.

\(u\) R. Moseh in Aben Ezra in loc.

[Psalms 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 28:8</span></span>

The Lord is their strength,.... The strength of his people, mentioned in
[Psa 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009); not only the strength of
David in particular, but of all his people in general; see [Psa
37:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa037.htm#039);

and he is the saving strength of his anointed; meaning either himself,
as before, who was anointed by Samuel king of Israel, and therefore had
not invaded and thrust himself into an office he had no call and right
unto; or the Messiah, the Lord's Anointed, whom he heard, helped, and
strengthened in the day of salvation, and delivered him from the power
of death and the grave, and raised him from thence, and gave him glory;
see [Psa 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006).

[Psalms 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa028.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 28:9</span></span>

Save thy people,.... The psalmist begins the psalm with petitions for
himself, and closes it with prayers for the people of God; whom God has
chosen for his people, taken into covenant to be his people, and given
them to his son as such; these he has resolved to save, and has
appointed Christ, and sent him into the world, to be the Saviour of
them; and to them he makes known and applies the great salvation by his
Spirit: so that this prayer was a prayer of faith, as are also the
following petitions;

and bless thine inheritance; the people whom the Lord has chosen for his
inheritance, and has given to Christ as his portion, and are his
peculiar possession; and these he blesses with all spiritual blessings,
with grace here, and glory hereafter, as is requested;

feed them also; as the shepherd does his flock, by leading them into
green pastures, by giving them the bread of life, by nourishing them
with the word and ordinances, by the means or his ministering servants,
who are under-shepherds appointed to feed the saints with knowledge and
understanding;

and lift them up for ever; above their enemies, and out of the reach of
them; bear and carry them now, as the shepherd does his lambs, in his
arms and bosom; and raise them out of their graves, and give them the
dominion in the morning of the resurrection, and cause them to reign as
kings and priests with Christ, as they ever will.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 29](psa029)

</div>
