<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa010)  [Next](psa012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 11:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 11

To the chief Musician, A Psalm of David.

This psalm has no name; it is neither called a psalm, nor hymn, nor
song, nor prayer, only said to be David's; and is inscribed and directed
as others to the chief musician, or master of the song, to be used in
public service; and seems to be written much upon the same subject with
the two preceding psalms. According to Theodoret it was written when
David was persecuted by Saul, and was advised by some to flee for his
safety.

[Psalms 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 11:1</span></span>

In the Lord put I my trust,.... Not in himself, in his own heart, nor in
his own righteousness and strength; nor in men, the greatest of men, the
princes of the earth; nor in his armies, or any outward force; but in
the Lord, as the God of providence and of grace; and in the Messiah, in
his person and righteousness; so the Chaldee paraphrase renders it, "in
the Word of the Lord do I hope": and the phrase denotes a continued
exercise of faith in the Lord; that he was always looking to him,
staying himself on him, and committing himself and all his concerns to
him; for he does not say, I "have", or I "will", but I "do", put my
trust in the Lord; at all times, even in the worst of times, and in the
present one; wherefore he is displeased with his friends for
endeavouring to intimidate him, persuading him to flee and provide for
his safety, when he had betaken himself to the Lord, and was safe
enough;

how say ye to my soul, flee as a bird to your mountain? they compare him
to a little, fearful, trembling bird, wandering from its nest, moving
through fear from place to place, whereas his heart was fixed, trusting
in the Lord; and this gave him a disgust: they advise him to flee either
"from" his mountain, so Kimchi and Ben Melech interpret it; that is,
either from Judea, which was a mountainous country, especially some
parts of it; or from Mount Zion, or rather from the mountain in the
wilderness of Ziph, or the hill of Hachilah, where David sometimes was,
[Sa1 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014); or it may be rendered "to
your mountain", as we, so the Targum; that is, to the said place or
places where he had sometimes hid himself; and this they said to his
"soul", which was very cutting and grieving to him; the word rendered
"flee" in the "Cetib", or writing of the text, is in the plural, "flee
ye"; but is pointed for, and in the "Keri", or marginal reading, is
"flee thou"; the latter agrees with this being said to David's soul, the
former with the phrase "your mountain", and both are to be taken into
the sense of the words; not as if the one respected David's soul only,
and the other both soul and body, as Kimchi and Ben Melech observe; but
the one regards David's person, and the other his companions, or the
people with him; and contains an advice, both to him and them, to flee
for their safety; the reasons follow.

[Psalms 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 11:2</span></span>

For, lo, the wicked bend their bow,.... Are devising mischief, and
making preparations to accomplish it;

they make ready their arrow upon the string; of the bow, and are just
about to execute their wicked designs;

that they may privily shoot at the upright in heart; such as David, and
those that were with him, were; they were men whose hearts were upright
before God, and were of upright conversations before men, and so became
the butt of the malice and resentment of wicked men; against these they
formed evil purposes, delivered out bitter words, which were like sharp
arrows of the mighty; threatened them with ruin and destruction, and
took methods to bring about their designs and make good their words, in
the most private and secret manner. Hence some of David's friends
thought it most advisable for him to make his escape; adding,

[Psalms 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 11:3</span></span>

If the foundations be destroyed,.... Or, "for the foundations are
destroyed" (s); all things are out of order and course both in church
and state; the laws, which are the foundations of government, are
despised and disregarded; judgment is perverted, and justice stands afar
off; the doctrines and principles of religion are derided and subverted;
so that there is no standing, either in a political or religious sense.
Jarchi interprets this of the priests of the Lord, the righteous, who
are the foundations of the world, particularly the priests of Nob, slain
by Doeg. Other Jewish writers, as Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech,
understand it of the purposes and counsels, nets and snares, laid by the
wicked for the righteous, which are broken and destroyed; not by them,
for what can they do? but by the Lord, who is in his holy temple. So it

what can the righteous do? or "what does the righteous one do" (t)? that
is, the righteous Lord, he sits in the heavens, he beholds all the
actions of the wicked, he distinguishes the righteous from them, and
rains a violent storm of wrath upon them, as in the following verses; or
"what has the righteous man done" (u)? what has David done, that the
priests of Nob should be slain? nothing that was criminal; nor shall he
bear the sin, but they, according to Jarchi's sense; or rather, what has
he done that the wicked should bend their bow, prepare their arrow, and
attempt to shoot privily at him, and to overturn the foundations of
justice and equity? nothing that deserves such treatment: or if the
fundamental doctrines of true religion and everlasting salvation be
subverted, what can the righteous do? he can do nothing to obtain
salvation, nor do any good works of himself; the Chaldee paraphrase is,
"wherefore does he do good?" he can have no principle, motive, or end to
do good, if fundamental truths are destroyed: or "what should he do"
(w)? something the righteous ones may do, and should do, when men are
attempting to undermine and sap the foundation articles of religion;
they should go to the throne of grace, to God in his holy temple, who
knows what is doing, and plead with him to put a stop to the designs and
attempts of such subverters of foundations; and they should endeavour to
build one another up on their most holy faith, and constantly affirm it
while others deny it; and should contend earnestly for it, and stand
fast in it.

\(s\) "nam fundamenta destruuntur", Piscator, Michaelis; "quoniam",
Pagninus, Montanus; so Ainsworth. (t) "justus quid operatus est?"
Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Gejerus; "quid facit?" Syr. Arab. (u)
"Justus quid fecit?" V. L. Munster, Tigurine versiom, Piscator; so
Ainsworth. (w) "Quid fuerit operatus justus?" Junius & Tremellius; "quid
fecerit?" Schmidt.

[Psalms 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 11:4</span></span>

The Lord is in his holy temple,.... Not in the temple at Jerusalem,
which as yet was not built; nor in the temple of Christ's human nature;
but rather in the church, where he dwells, which is an holy temple to
the Lord; and which is an argument for trust in him, and a reason
against the fears of men in the worst of times; see [Psa
46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001). Though it may be best to
understand it of heaven, the habitation of God's holiness, and which is
the true sanctuary; and which the holy places made with hands were only
a figure of; since it follows,

the Lord's throne is in heaven; yea, the heaven is his throne; here he
sits on a throne of grace, and here he has prepared his throne for
judgment; and both this and the preceding clause are expressive of his
glory and majesty; and are said to command awe and reverence of the
Divine Being, and to inject terror into the wicked; and to show that God
is above the enemies of his people, and to encourage the saints' trust
and confidence in him; and are mentioned as a reason why David put his
trust in him; and are, with what follows in [Psa
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005), opposed to the advice and
reasonings of some of his friends in the preceding ones;

his eyes behold; all men, and all their actions; he sees what the wicked
are doing in the dark, what preparations for mischief they are making,
and beholds them when they shoot privily at the upright in heart; he can
turn the arrow another way, and cause it to miss the mark: his eyes run
to and fro throughout the earth, in favour of those whose hearts are
perfect and sincere. God's omniscience, which is denied by wicked men,
who are therefore hardened in sin, and promise themselves impunity, is
used by the saints as an argument to encourage their faith and trust in
God, with respect to their preservation and deliverance. The Septuagint
and Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions, read, "his eyes look
unto the poor"; but this is an addition to the text not suitable to the
context;

his eyelids try the children of men; he tries their reins, he searches
into their very hearts, and into the inmost recesses of them, and takes
cognizance of their thoughts, intentions, and designs; and confounds and
disappoints them, so that they cannot perform their enterprises.

[Psalms 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 11:5</span></span>

The Lord trieth the righteous,.... As gold is tried in the fire, by
afflictive providences; hereby he tries their graces, their faith, and
patience, their hope, and love, and fear; and, by so doing, expresses
his love to them, since this is all for their good: and therefore, when
he suffers the wicked to go great lengths in persecuting and distressing
them, this should not weaken, their confidence in him; he still loves
them, and loves when he rebukes and chastises them;

but the wicked, and him that loveth violence, his soul hateth; that is,
such who live in a course of sin and wickedness, and who not only do
injury to the persons, characters, and properties of men, but love it,
and delight therein, and also take pleasure in them that do the same:
these God has a continued and inward aversion to; sin and wickedness
being the abominable thing his righteous soul hates: and he shows his
hatred to them, by not chastising them now, as he does his own people,
but reserving everlasting punishment for them hereafter; see [Pro
13:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro013.htm#024).

[Psalms 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 11:6</span></span>

Upon the wicked,.... The wicked one, the man of sin, antichrist, and
upon all that worship the beast and his image, on all persecutors, and
upon all wicked men in general:

he shall rain snares, fire, and brimstone, and an horrible tempest; this
will be in hell, as Jarchi observes. The allusion is to the Lord's
raining fire and brimstone from heaven upon Sodom and Gomorrah, which
was an example and emblem of eternal fire; see [Gen
19:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#024). For the beast and the false
prophet, and all the antichristian party, and all wicked men, will have
their part in the lake which burns with fire and brimstone. The phrases
used express the dreadfulness and horribleness of their punishment; the
suddenness, violence, and force, with which it will come; and the rise
of it, it will be from heaven; God himself will rain this shower of
wrath upon them, [Job 20:23](../../../bib/kjv/job020.htm#023); nor will
there be any escaping it, it will be inevitable: therefore "snares" are
said to be "rained"; the wicked will be snared in the works of their own
hands; they will be taken and held in the cords of their own sins; and
full and deserved punishment will be inflicted on them, which will be
very severe and terrible. All that is dreadful in a storm is here
expressed, even in a storm of fire. The word rendered "snares" is by
some thought to be the same with "burning coals"; and may signify
burning stones, hot thunderbolts; see [Psa
18:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#013); "fire" may signify lightning,
with its dreadful flashes, and which burn and consume in an instant; and
"brimstone" the nauseous scent and smell, which always attend lightning
and thunder, as naturalists observe (x): and the words for "an horrible
tempest" signify a burning wind: so that they all serve to convey
horrible ideas of the punishment of the wicked in hell. The Targum calls
them "showers of vengeance";

this shall be the portion of their cup; which will be measured out to
them in proportion to their sins, and which God, in righteous judgment,
has appointed for them; and which they shall all drink of, and wring out
the very dregs of it.

\(x\) Senecae Nat. Quaest. l. 2. c. 21, 53. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 35. c.
15.

[Psalms 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 11:7</span></span>

For the righteous Lord loveth righteousness,.... The Lord is righteous
in himself, and in all his ways and works; and therefore righteousness,
as it lies both in punishing the wicked, and in maintaining the
righteous cause of his people, must be loved by him, it being agreeable
to his nature: he loves to exercise righteousness in the earth, to
administer it to and among men; this he delights in. He is well pleased
with the righteousness of his Son, it being satisfactory to his justice,
and that by which his law is magnified and made honourable; and he is
well pleased with his people, as they are clothed with it: and he
approves of their righteous actions, as they are done in obedience to
his righteous law, in faith, from a principle of love, and with a view
to his glory; these are acceptable to him in Christ;

his countenance doth behold the upright; whom wicked men privily shoot
at, [Psa 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002); God looks with pleasure
upon them, and takes delight in them, and takes care of them, protects
and defends them, and at last saves them; and which, with all that goes
before, was an encouragement to David to trust in the Lord; see [Psa
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#010); and moreover, the Lord lifts up
the light of his countenance on such, and indulges them with his
gracious presence, than which nothing is more comfortable and desirable.
Some choose to render the word, "their countenance" (y), meaning the
trinity of Persons, Father, Son, and Spirit, who all have a gracious
regard to such: others render the clause thus, "the upright shall see
his face", the face of God; so the Chaldee paraphrase and the Arabic
version; see [Psa 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#015).

\(y\) "facies eorum", Genebrardus, Vatablus, Gussetius; so R. Japhet in
Aben Ezra, who compares it with Genesis xx. 13.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 12](psa012)

</div>
