<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa075)  [Next](psa077.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 76](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 76:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 76

To the chief Musician on Neginoth, A Psalm or Song of Asaph. The Targum
is,

"by the hand of Asaph:''

concerning "neginoth", see the title of [Psa
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa004.htm#001.md), this psalm is generally thought
to be written on account of some great appearance of God for the Jews,
or victory obtained by them over their enemies, either the Ammonites in
the times of David; so the first part of the Syriac inscription is,

"when Rabbah of the children of Ammon was destroyed;''

see [Sa2 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026.md) or in the time of
Jehoshaphat, when they came up against him, and were in a wonderful
manner defeated, which occasioned great joy and thankfulness, [Ch2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#001.md). The Septuagint version entitles
the psalm "an ode against the Assyrian", in which it is followed by the
Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions: and it is the opinion of many that
it was written on account of the defeat of Sennacherib, and his army,
which came up against Jerusalem in the times of Hezekiah, and was
destroyed by an angel in one night, and so slept their sleep, and a dead
one, with which agree [Psa 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005.md), so
Arama and Theodoret; Jarchi gives this reason for such an
interpretation, because we do not find that any enemy fell at or near
Jerusalem but he, as is said [Psa
76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003.md), "there brake he the arrows of
the bow", &c. nor was one arrow suffered to be thrown into the city,
[Kg2 19:32](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#032.md). Kimchi and Ben Melech
interpret it of the war of Gog and Magog, yet to come; and the latter
part of the Syriac inscription is,

"moreover it shows the vengeance of the judgment of Christ against the
ungodly;''

and indeed it seems to point out the latter day, when Christ shalt
destroy the antichristian kings and states, and save his own people, and
shall be feared and praised; as the former part of it may respect his
incarnation, appearance, and dwelling in the land of Judea, and so the
whole is of the same argument with the preceding psalm.

[Psalms 76:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 76:1</span></span>

In Judah is God known,.... God is to be known, and is made known, by his
works of creation, and by his providences, and particularly by his
judgments in the whole world, even among the Gentiles; and he was made
known by his word and ordinances, his statutes and his judgments, among
the Jews, to whom these were specially given; and he is made known by
his Spirit, and in his Son in a spiritual and saving manner to such who
are Jews inwardly, or the true circumcision: moreover this may be
understood of Christ, God manifest in the flesh, and regard his
appearance in human nature in the land of Judea; he was, according to
prophecy, of the tribe of Judah as man, and was born in Bethlehem, a
city in that tribe, where David was, and of the family of David, that
formerly lived there: and he was made known by John the Baptist, who
came preaching in the wilderness of Judea, and by his being baptized of
him in Jordan; by his own ministry and miracles in that land, and by the
preaching of his apostles in the several cities of it, he was known in
person to many; and by the fame of his doctrine and miracles to more,
though seemingly but to few:

his name is great in Israel; he himself is great, for his name is
himself, being the great God, and possessed of all divine perfections;
his offices and titles are great, he is a great Saviour, a great High
Priest, a great Prophet risen up in Israel, a great King, add the great
Shepherd of the sheep; his works which make him known are great, his
works of creation and providence, in which he is jointly concerned with
his Father; the mighty works he did on earth, and especially the great
work of our redemption; and his Gospel, which is called his name, [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015.md), brings glad tidings of great and
good things; by means of which, and the wonderful things he did in the
land of Israel, his fame was spread about in it, for he was sent only to
the lost sheep of the house of Israel; here his marvellous works were
done, and his Gospel first preached, which afterwards went into all the
earth.

[Psalms 76:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 76:2</span></span>

In Salem also is his tabernacle,.... That is, in Jerusalem, as the
Targum expresses it, where the tabernacle of Moses and the ark of the
covenant were, and afterwards the temple of Solomon, which the Targum
here calls the house of the sanctuary; and may be interpreted of the
human nature of Christ, the true tabernacle which God pitched, and not
man, in which the divine word when he was made flesh dwelt or
tabernacled among the Jews at Jerusalem, and in other parts of Judea,
[Heb 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb008.htm#002.md). Salem or Jerusalem often
signifies the church of God in Gospel times, in the midst of which
Christ resides, and where he grants his gracious presence, [Heb
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#022.md) and in the New Jerusalem the
tabernacle of God will be with men, and he will dwell among them, [Rev
21:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#002.md). The Septuagint translate the
word, and render it, "in peace", as in [Heb
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb007.htm#002.md), the God of peace dwells among
those that live in peace, [Co2 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#011.md),

and his dwelling place in Zion; where the ark was brought by David, and
the temple was built by Solomon, into which, as rebuilt by Zerubbabel,
Christ came, and here he preached; a figure of the church, which is his
habitation.

[Psalms 76:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 76:3</span></span>

There brake he the arrows of the bow.... The Targum is,

"there brake he the arrows and the bows of the people that make war;''

the word translated "arrows", signifies "sparks or coals of fire"; see
[Job 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/job005.htm#007.md) and is used of arrows,
because they fly swiftly, as sparks do, or because of their brightness,
or because fiery; so we read of "the fiery darts of Satan", [Eph
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#016.md), and perhaps they may be meant
here: when Christ our Lord suffered near Jerusalem, he spoiled
principalities and powers, and broke their strength and might, and made
peace by the blood of his cross, in which he triumphed over them; for
the destroying of these instruments of war with what follow:

the shield, and the sword, and the battle, is expressive of making wars
to cease, and causing peace; and may include the peace which was all the
world over at the birth of Christ, and was foretold and expressed in
much such language as here, [Zac 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009.md),
and also that which was made by his sufferings and death, and which was
published in his Gospel by his apostles, whom he sent forth unarmed,
whose weapons were not carnal, but spiritual; and likewise the spiritual
peace he gives to his people, quenching the fiery darts of Satan, and
delivering them from the archers that shoot at them, and sorely grieve
them; as well as that peace which shall be in the world and churches in
the latter day; see [Psa 46:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#011.md),

Selah. See Gill on [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md).

[Psalms 76:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 76:4</span></span>

Thou art more glorious and excellent than the mountains of prey. Which
is to be understood not of Zion, as some interpret it; though it is true
that the mountain of Zion, or the church of Christ, his kingdom and
interest, shall in the latter day be more glorious and excellent than
all other mountains, kingdoms, and interests; see [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md), but of God or Christ before
spoken of; and so the Targum,

"bright, to be feared, art thou, O God, to be praised from the house of
thy sanctuary.''

Christ, who is God over all, is "bright" (z), splendid, and glorious, in
his divine nature, being the brightness of his Father's glory, and the
express image of his person: and "excellent" in his office as Mediator,
and in all his works as such; and in human nature, at he is exalted at
his Father's right hand, far above all principality, power, might, and
dominion, signified here by "mountains of prey": the kingdoms of this
world, because of their eminence and strength, are compared to
mountains: see [Isa 41:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#015.md) and may be
called "mountains of prey", in allusion to mountains inhabited by beasts
of prey, as lions and leopards; see [Sol
4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008.md) because obtained and possessed by
tyranny and oppression. Christ is more glorious and excellent than the
kings of the earth; he is higher than they, and is King of kings; he is
richer than they, the earth is the Lord's, and the fulness thereof, the
world, and they that dwell therein; he is wiser than they, by him kings
reign, and princes decree justice; he is more powerful than they, and
all must submit to him, and all will serve him hereafter; and his
kingdom will be greater than theirs, more large and more lasting; it
will be an everlasting one, and reach from sea to sea, and even to the
ends of the earth.

\(z\) "illustris", Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator; "illustrior", Tigurine, version; "splendidus", Vatablus,
Gejerus, Michaelis; "bright", Ainsworth.

[Psalms 76:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 76:5</span></span>

The stout hearted are spoiled,.... The Assyrian army, its officers and
generals, that came up against Jerusalem, with great resolution and
courage, and with daring impiety and blasphemy against the God of
heaven, as Rabshakeh and others; these were spoiled, and their armour
and riches became a prey to those they thought to have made a prey of.
So principalities and powers were spoiled by Christ upon the cross, and
Satan, the strong man armed, has in the conversion of a sinner his
armour taken from him, and his spoils divided by him that is stronger
than he; and such as are stouthearted, and far from true righteousness,
are stripped of their own, and made willing, in the day of Christ's
power upon them, to submit to his; and as for antichrist, whose look is
more stout than his fellows, that exalts himself above all that is
called God, and opens his mouth in blasphemy against him and his
followers, he shall be destroyed with the breath of Christ's mouth, and
the brightness of his coming: or "the stout hearted have spoiled
themselves" (a); as the Midianites did, or gave themselves for a prey;
so the Targum,

"the stouthearted have cast off from them the weapons of war;''

threw away their armour, and ran away, such of them as were not
destroyed by the angel. It is observable, that the Hebrew word,
translated "spoiled", is in the Syriac form:

they have slept their sleep: the sleep of death, as did the Assyrians
when smitten by the angel, which was done in the night, when probably
they were fast asleep, and so never awoke more, as the Babylonians, [Jer
51:57](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#057.md). So Jezebel, or the Romish
antichrist, shall be cast into a bed, and her children killed with
death, [Rev 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#022.md). Death is often in
Scripture signified by a sleep, both the death of the righteous and of
the wicked; but there is a difference between the one and the other;
wherefore the death of the wicked here is called "their sleep"; the one
sleep in Jesus, in his arms, and under his guardianship, the other not;
to the one death is a true and proper rest from toil and labour, to the
other only a cessation from doing mischief, [Job
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017.md), the one rests in hopes of a
glorious resurrection, the other not; the one will awake in Christ's
likeness, and to everlasting life; the other in the image of Satan, and
to everlasting shame and contempt:

and none of the men of might have found their hands; none of the valiant
soldiers in the Assyrian army could find their hands to fight their
enemies, or defend themselves; as men in a deep sleep cannot find their
hands to do anything, and are as if they had none, and still less in a
dead sleep. The Targum is,

"they were not able to lay hold on their armour with their hands.''

This was the case of them that were killed; and as for those that
remained alive, they were struck with such a panic, that their hearts
could not endure, nor their hands be strong when God thus dealt with
them; and so it will be with the antichristian army at the battle of
Armageddon; and so it is with the wicked at death, they cannot find
their hands so as to prevent it; and when it has seized upon them, they
cannot find their hands to do any more mischief.

\(a\) "praedae se exposnerunt", Tigurine version, Gejerus; "dediderunt
se in praedam", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Psalms 76:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 76:6</span></span>

At thy rebuke, O God of Jacob,.... The God of Jacob personally, and of
his posterity, the children of Israel, and of the church, often so
called who rebukes his people in love, but his enemies with furious
rebukes, with rebukes in flames of fire; with such he rebukes the
Heathen, destroys the wicked, and puts out their name for ever:

both the chariot and horse are cast into a dead sleep; that is, the
riders in chariots and on horses; such there were doubtless in the
Assyrian army, it being usual to have such in great armies. Kimchi
observes, that the word translated "cast into a dead sleep", is in the
singular number, and interprets it of the king, the head of the men of
might: but Sennacherib, king of Assyria, was not slain, he departed to
his own country; wherefore he applies it to Gog and Magog, the chief
prince of Meshech and Tubal, [Eze 39:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze039.htm#001.md)
and may very well be understood of the head of the apostasy, the king of
the bottomless pit, the beast or false prophet, who being destroyed, the
flesh of his captains and horsemen shall be the food of the fowls of the
air, at the supper of the great God, [Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017.md).

[Psalms 76:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 76:7</span></span>

Thou, even thou, art to be feared,.... By his own people with reverence
and godly fear, because of his greatness and goodness; and to be dreaded
by his enemies; which seems to be the sense here, as appears by what
follows:

and who may stand in thy sight when once thou art angry? or "from the
moment thou art angry" (b); so the Targum, from the "time", and Jarchi,
from the "hour": that is, as soon as ever his anger begins, when it is
kindled but a little, and how much less when it burns in its full
strength? there is no standing before his justice, and at his judgment
seat, with boldness and confidence, and so as to succeed, or come off
acquitted, without having on his righteousness; and much less is there
any standing before his wrath and fury, when his hand takes hold on
judgment to execute it; see [Nah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/nah001.htm#006.md).

\(b\) "ex quo irasceris", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "a momento, vel
tempore irae tuae", Michaelis.

[Psalms 76:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 76:8</span></span>

Thou didst cause judgment to be heard from heaven,.... When an angel was
sent down from heaven, and destroyed the Assyrian army, a judgment of
God upon them; at which time some think there was a violent clap of
thunder, which is the voice of God: and it may refer to the judgments
which God has decreed to execute on the antichristian states, the seven
vials of his wrath he will pour upon them; for all decrees, as Aben Ezra
on the place observes, come from heaven; or to the last judgment, when
Christ the Judge shall descend from heaven, the voice of the archangel
shall be heard, the last trumpet shall sound, the dead in their graves
shall hear it, and rise and stand before the judgment seat, and hear the
sentence pronounced:

the earth feared, and was still: or "trembled, and was quiet" (c); that
is, again: some think there was an earthquake when the angel smote the
Assyrian camp, but was quickly over. It may regard the panic the other
nations were in when they heard of it, and therefore were still and
quiet, and never offered to give the Israelites any disturbance. Some
understand this of the remainder of the army that escaped with
Sennacherib; these were seized with fear, and quickly withdrew, and
silently departed into their own land. Aben Ezra observes it as the
sense of some, "the earth feared", these are the wicked; "and was
still", they are the righteous; so the Targum,

"the land of the people feared, the land of Israel was still;''

reference may be had to the consternation, fear, and dread, that will
fall on them that escape the judgments inflicted on the antichristian
party, [Rev 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013.md) and the fear and
silence that will attend the last and awful judgment; see [Zac
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#013.md).

\(c\) "terra tremuit, et quievit", V. L.

[Psalms 76:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 76:9</span></span>

When God arose to judgment,.... He may sometimes seem to be asleep, and
to defer judgment, but he will arise and hasten it in his own time, and
will take vengeance on all his and his people's enemies, as he did upon
the army of the Assyrians, and will upon the antichristian powers, and
upon all the wicked, and at the same time will save his own people, as
follows:

to save all the meek of the earth; the quiet in the land, who are
afflicted in this world, despised by the men of it, are lowly and
humble, and mean in their own eyes; these the Lord takes notice of and
cares for them, he will beautify them with salvation; these, all of
them, even everyone of them, shall be saved in him with an everlasting
salvation; this verse is by some connected with the preceding; so
Kimchi, "the earth feared, and was still, when God arose to judgment",
&c. and by others, as R. Moses and Aben Ezra, with the following.

Selah. See Gill on [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md).

[Psalms 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 76:10</span></span>

Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee,.... Either the wrath which
comes from God, and has man for its object; and that either as it
regards the people of God; so the Targum,

"when thou art angry with thy people, thou hast mercy on them, and they
shall confess unto thy name;''

or praise thee; see [Isa 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#001.md), they
are deserving of the wrath of God, but are not appointed to it, and are
delivered from it by Christ, who bore it for them as their
representative; by which as the justice of God is glorified, it is
matter of praise to them; when the law enters into their consciences, it
works wrath there, which being removed by the application of pardoning
grace, is an occasion of praise to God; and whereas, under afflictive
dispensations, they apprehend and deprecate the wrath of God, when they
are delivered from them their mouths are filled with songs of praise:
or, as it regards wicked men, so it came forth upon the old world, and
drowned it; upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and reduced them to ashes; upon
Pharaoh and the Egyptians, in the plagues inflicted on them; all which
turned to the praise and glory of God; of the last instance, see [Rom
9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017.md), it came upon the wicked Jews to
the uttermost in the destruction of their nation, city, and temple; and
upon Rome Pagan, in the entire demolition of it as such; and so it will
come upon Rome Papal, which will be attended with great joy, praise, and
thanksgiving in the saints; see [Rev
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#017.md) or else this is to be understood
of the wrath which is in man, and comes forth from him, and has him for
its subject; which though it does not work the righteousness of God, yet
the righteousness of God is glorified both in checking and punishing it;
and the more it rages and burns against the people of God, the greater
reason have they to praise the Lord when delivered from it; see [Psa
124:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa124.htm#001.md), so the wrath of the Assyrian
monarch, and of railing and blaspheming Rabshakeh, gave the people of
the Jews a greater occasion to praise the Lord for their wonderful
deliverance; so the wrath of men against Christ, his church and people,
his ministers, Gospel, and ordinances, will all turn to the glory of his
name, when in the issue it will be seen that these are established,
overcoming all the rage and malice of men:

the remainder of wrath shall thou restrain: that which remains in a
man's breast, he has not yet vented, God can and does keep in, that it
may not break forth; this very likely was verified in Sennacherib, who
might breathe revenge, and threaten the Jews with a second visit; but
was prevented by a sudden and violent death. Some read the words, "the
remainder of wraths thou wilt gird" (d); that is, those that remain, and
are not destroyed through the rage and fury of men, God will gird with
strength to defend themselves, and resist their enemies that may rise up
against them, or with gladness, because of deliverance from them; see
[Psa 18:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#032.md). Some understand this of
the wrath of God, which he has in reserve and store for wicked men, and
render the words thus, with the remainder of wrath wilt thou gird
thyself (e); and so come forth like an armed man, clad with zeal, and
arrayed with the garments of wrath and vengeance; see [Isa
49:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#017.md).

\(d\) "res duum irarum accinges", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus,
Piscator, Gejerus. (e) "Reliquo indignationum accinges te", so some in
Vatablus; "residuo irarum accinges te", Michaelis.

[Psalms 76:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 76:11</span></span>

Vow, and pay unto the Lord your God,.... Not monastic vows, which the
Papists would infer from these and such like words; nor ceremonial ones,
but spiritual sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, such as men
sometimes make in times of distress, or when delivered, [Psa
66:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#013.md) and which when vowed ought to be
paid, [Ecc 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#004.md), not to creatures,
angels, or saints, but to God, from whom the mercy desired must be
expected, and from whence it comes, [Psa
50:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#014.md), these words are an address to
such who were delivered from wrath, either of God or man:

let all that be round about him; who surround the throne of his grace,
gather together in his house to attend his word and ordinances, who are
his servants, and constantly and faithfully adhere to him; among whom he
grants his presence, they are near to him, and he to them. It is a
periphrasis of the assembly of the saints; see [Psa
89:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#007.md). The Targum is,

"all ye that dwell round about his sanctuary;''

the allusion is to the situation of the camp of Israel, and the
tabernacle in the wilderness, [Num 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/num002.htm#001.md)
compare with this [Rev 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004.md),

bring presents unto him that ought to be feared, or "to the fear" (f),
which is one of the names of God; see [Gen
31:42](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#042.md) and who is and ought to be the
object of the fear and reverence of men; the "presents", to be brought
to him are the sacrifices of prayer and praise, yea, the whole persons,
the souls and bodies, of men; see [Psa
72:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#010.md), compare with this [Ch2
32:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch2032.htm#022.md). The Targum is,

"let them bring offerings into the house of the sanctuary of the
terrible One;''

of him that is to be feared, with a godly fear by good men, and to be
dreaded by evil men, as follows.

\(f\) "ad verb terrori, timori", Vatsblus; "numini", De Dieu, "venerando
et timendo huic numini", Michaelis; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 76:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 76:12</span></span>

He shall cut off the spirit of princes,.... The pride of their spirits,
as the Targum, humble their proud spirits, and bring them down; or
dispirit them, take away their courage from them, upon which they flee
apace to rocks and mountains to cover them; or confound them, blast
their schemes, and carry their counsel headlong, and even take away
their breath, or life; which he can as easily do as a man can cut off a
bunch of grapes from the vine, as the word (g) here used signifies; the
destruction of the wicked is expressed by cutting down the vine of the
earth, and casting it into the winepress of God's wrath, [Rev
14:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#017.md),

he is terrible to the kings of the earth; as he was to the king of
Assyria, when he sent his angel, and destroyed his army; and as he has
been to others in all ages; so he will be to the kings of the earth that
have committed fornication with the whore of Rome, who will be in the
utmost panic at the time of her destruction, [Rev
18:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#009.md), and who will themselves be
overcome by the Lamb, [Rev 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#014.md). The
Targum is, he is to be feared above all the kings of the earth.

\(g\) "qui vindemiat", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; "succidet nempe,
ut vindemiator racemos", Vatablus, so Ainsworth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 77](psa077.md)

</div>
