<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa011)  [Next](psa013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 12:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 12

To the chief Musician upon Sheminith, a Psalm of David.

The word "sheminith" is used in the title of [Psa
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#001), and signifies "eighth"; and
intends either the eighth note, to which the psalm was sung, or rather
the harp of eight chords, to which it was set, as the Targum and Jarchi
interpret it. Some Jewish writers (y) understand it of the times of the
Messiah; and the Syriac version entitles the psalm,

"an accusation of the wicked, and a prophecy concerning the coming of
the Messiah:''

and the Arabic version says, it is concerning the end of the world,
which shall be in the eighth day; and concerning the coming of the
Messiah: but Arnobius interprets it of the Lord's day.

\(y\) Sepher Lekach Shechachah apud Caphtor, fol. 64. 1. & Ceseph Misnah
in Maimon. Hilch. Teshuvah, c. 9.

[Psalms 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 12:1</span></span>

Help, Lord, for the godly man ceaseth,.... A godly man, according to the
notation of the word (z), is one that has received grace and mercy of
the Lord; as pardoning mercy, justifying and adopting grace; and who has
principles of grace, goodness, and holiness, wrought in him; who fears
the Lord, and serves him acceptably, with reverence and godly fear, and
sorrows for sin, after a godly sort; who loves the Lord, and hopes and
believes in him; who is regenerated and sanctified by the Spirit of God,
and is a true worshipper of God, and lives in all holy conversation and
godliness; and, particularly, is "beneficent", "kind", and "merciful"
(a) unto men: such may be said to "cease" when there are but few of
them; when their number is greatly reduced (b), either by death, or when
such who have seemed, and have been thought to be so, prove otherwise:
in a view of which, the psalmist prays for help and salvation; "help",
or "save" (c) Lord; meaning himself, being destitute of the company,
counsel, and assistance of good and gracious men; or the cause and
interest of religion, which he feared would sink by the ceasing of godly
men. When all friends and refuge fail, saints betake themselves to God,
and their salvation is of him; and he is their present help in a time of
trouble; and he saves and reserves for himself a number in the worst of
times; as he did in Elijah's time, who thought there was no godly man
left but himself; see [Rom 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#001);

for the faithful fail from among the children of men; so that there are
none left among them but carnal, unregenerate, ungodly, and unfaithful
men. The "faithful" are such who are upright in heart and conversation;
who trust in the Lord, and believe in the Messiah; who abide by the
truths and ordinances of God; and are faithful in what is committed to
their trust, whether they be gifts of nature, Providence, or grace; and
to their fellow Christians, in advising, reproving, &c. when needful:
these may fail in the exercise of grace, and in the discharge of duty,
but not so as to perish eternally. The words design the paucity of them,
and the sad degeneracy of the times to which they refer: and they may
belong either to the times of David, when Saul's courtiers flattered
him, and spoke evil of David; when the men of Keilah intended to have
delivered him up; when the Ziphites discovered him to Saul, and invited
him to come and take him; or when Absalom rose up in rebellion against
him, and so many of the people fell off from him: or else to the times
of Christ; the people of the Jews in his age were a wicked and faithless
generation; and even among his own disciples there was great want of
fidelity: one betrayed him, another denied him, and all forsook him and
fled; after his death, some doubted his being the Redeemer, and one of
them could not believe he was risen from the dead, when he was. And
these words may be applied to the antichristian times, the times of the
grand apostasy, and falling away from the faith, upon the revealing of
the man of sin; since which the holy city is trodden under foot; the
witnesses prophesy in sackcloth; and the church is in the wilderness,
and is hid there. Yea, to the second coming of Christ, when there will
be great carnality and security, and little faith found in the earth. A
like complaint with this see in [Isa
57:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#001).

\(z\) "passive pro beneficiario, sive alterius beneficiis gratiosis
cumulato", Gejerus. (a) "Misericors", Pagninus, Mariana; beneficus,
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (b) "Rari quippe boni", &c. Juvenal.
Satyr. 13. v. 36. (c) "serva", Pagninus, Cocceius; "da salutem", Junius
& Tremellius.

[Psalms 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 12:2</span></span>

They speak vanity everyone with his neighbour,.... That which is false
and a lie, either doctrinal or practical; what was not according to the
word of God, and was vain and empty, frothy, filthy, and corrupt; and
which no godly and faithful man would do. And this being done in common,
by the generality of men, one with another, shows the degeneracy of the
age, and supports the complaint before made. They speak even

with flattering lips; as Cain did to Abel, Joab to Amasa, the Herodians
to Christ, Judas to his Master, false teachers to those that are simple,
hypocrites to God himself, when they draw nigh to him only with their
lips, and all formal professors to the churches of Christ, when they
profess themselves to be what they are not. And this is a further proof
of the justness of the above complaint;

and with a double heart do they speak: or "with an heart and an heart"
(d); such are double minded men, who say one thing, and mean another;
their words are not to be depended upon; there is no faithfulness in
them. The Chinese (e) reckon a man of "two hearts", as they call him, a
very wicked man, and none more remote from honesty.

\(d\) "in corde & corde", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus. (e) Martin.
Sinic. Hist. p. 144. a heart having , a double meaning, as Pittacus
says, Laert. in Vit. Pittac. l. 1. p. 53.

[Psalms 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 12:3</span></span>

The Lord shall cut off all flattering lips,.... This is either a
prophecy or a prayer, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi observe; that God either
would or should cut off such who used flattery with their lips, by
inflicting some judgment in this life, or everlasting punishment
hereafter; by taking them away by death "out of the world", as the
Targum paraphrases it; or by casting them into hell, where all liars and
deceitful persons will have their portion; see [Job
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#021);

and the tongue that speaketh proud things, or "great things" (f), as the
little horn, [Dan 7:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#020); and the beast,
or Romish antichrist, who is designed by both, [Rev
13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005); and which will be accomplished
when Christ shall destroy him with the breath of his mouth, and the
brightness of his coming; and indeed every tongue that riseth up against
God, Christ, and his people, will be condemned; when ungodly sinners
will be convinced of all their hard speeches, [Isa
54:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#017), [Jde
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#015). Perhaps some regard may be had
to the tongue of Doeg the Edomite; see [Psa
52:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#003).

\(f\) "magna", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Piscator, Gejerus,
Michaelis; "grandia", Cocceius.

[Psalms 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 12:4</span></span>

Who have said, with our tongue will we prevail,.... Either through the
eloquence of them, or the outward force and power with which they are
backed. The sense is, as we say, so shall it be; our words are laws, and
shall be obeyed, there is no standing against them; our edicts and
decrees shall everywhere be regarded: or "we will make one to prevail",
or "have the dominion" (g); meaning antichrist, the man of sin; for all
this is true of the tongues of the antichristian party, and of their
laws, edicts, and decrees and which have obtained everywhere, and by
which the wicked one has been established in his tyrannical power and
authority;

our lips are our own, or "with us" (h): we will say what we please, and
make what laws and decrees we think fit, and impose them upon men; and
so change times and laws without control, [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025);

who is Lord over us? which is the very language and conduct of
antichrist, who opposes and exalts himself above all that is called God,
[Th2 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#004); and is indeed the language
of the hearts and lives of all wicked and ungodly men, sons of Belial,
men without any yoke or restraint; who walk, and are resolved to walk,
after the imagination of their own evil hearts; not knowing the Lord,
and being unwilling to obey him, or to be restrained by him; see [Exo
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo005.htm#002).

\(g\) "prevalere ac dominare, faciemus, scil. aliquem regem, dominum",
Cocceius. (h) "nobiscum", Musculus, Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus,
Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis; so Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Ainsworth.

[Psalms 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 12:5</span></span>

For the oppression of the poor,.... The servants and people of God, who,
for the most part, are poor in a temporal sense, and are all of them,
and always, so in a spiritual sense, standing continually in need of
fresh supplies of grace; and being often afflicted, as the word
signifies, are mean and despicable in the eyes of the men of this world,
and so oppressed by them, as the poor generally are by the rich; and as
the people of Israel were oppressed by the Egyptians, so are the people
of God by antichrist, and by his tyrannical laws and edicts, and by such
haughty and insolent persons as before described;

for the sighing of the needy; who groan under their oppressions; being
stripped of all good things, their friends, and worldly substance, they
sigh inwardly, and cry unto the Lord, who sees their oppressions, hears
their groans; and though he cannot be moved, as men are, by anything
without himself, yet, according to his abundant mercy and sovereign
will, he appears and exerts himself on the behalf of his people, and for
their relief and assistance;

now will I arise, saith the Lord; to have mercy on the poor and needy,
and to avenge them on their oppressors, and free them from them. And
this the Lord promises to do "now", speedily, immediately; God arises in
the most seasonable time, when his people are in the greatest straits,
and in the utmost distress and herein displays his wisdom, power, and
goodness. This is an answer to the petition of the psalmist in [Psa
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#001);

I will set him in safety from him that puffeth at him; or "in salvation"
(i); in Christ the Saviour. All God's people are put into the hands of
Christ, and are preserved in him; there they are in safety, for out of
his hands none can pluck them; and being built on him, the Rock, they
are safe, notwithstanding the waves and winds of temptation,
persecution, &c. come with ever so much force upon them. Here it seems
to signify, that God would deliver his poor and needy from their
oppressions, and put them into a comfortable, prosperous, safe, and
happy situation, in which they will be out of the reach of their
enemies; as will be the witnesses, when they shall ascend to heaven,
[Rev 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011); even out of the reach of
him that "puffeth at" them, despises them, and treats them with the
utmost scorn and contempt; see [Psa
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#005). Or that "breathes", or "let him
breathe" (k) threatenings and slaughters; as Saul did against the
disciples of Christ, [Act 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001); or that
"lays snares for him" (l), as the wicked do for the righteous; or that
"speaks unto him" in such haughty and insolent language as before
expressed. Some make this clause a proposition of itself, "he puffeth at
him"; meaning either that he that is secure, safety puffs at his enemy,
despises him, as he has been despised by him; or God, who breathes upon
him, and whose breath is as a stream of brimstone, which kindles in him
a fire of divine wrath, which is unquenchable; or else the sense is, God
will "speak to himself", or "to him" (m); in which sense the word is
used [Hab 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#004); that is, good and
comfortable words to the poor; or "he will give him refreshment", or
"rest": which he will determine in himself to speak to him: or "he shall
have breathing", or "let him breathe" (n): he shall have times of
refreshing from the Lord, and rest from adversity, from the oppositions
and persecutions of his enemies.

\(i\) "in salute", Pagninus, Montanus, Mariana, Vatablus, Junius, &
Tremeliius, Piscator; so Ainsworth. (k) "spiret vel spirabit sibi", De
Dieu. (l) "Qui ponit ei laqueum", Munster; "qui laqueum injicit illis",
Heb. "illi", Muis; so Kimchi. (m) "Loquetur sibi vel ei", Vatablus. (n)
"Respirationem dabit illi", Cloppenburgius; so Ainsworth, and some in
Michaelis.

[Psalms 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 12:6</span></span>

The words of the Lord are pure words,.... This observation the psalmist
makes in reference to what is just now said in [Psa
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005),, and in opposition to the words
of wicked men in [Psa 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#002); which are
deceitful, sinful, and impure. The Scriptures are the words of God; and
they are pure and holy, free from all human mixtures, and from all fraud
and deceit; they are the Scriptures of truth. The promises are the words
of God, and they are firm and stable, and always to be depended on, and
are ever fulfilled, being yea and amen in Christ Jesus. The Gospel, and
the doctrines of it, are the words of God; that is the sincere milk of
the word, pure and incorrupt; as it is in itself, and as it is dispensed
by the faithful ministers of it; and they are all according to
godliness, and tend to encourage and promote purity and holiness of
heart and life; See [Pro 30:5](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#005);

as silver tried in a furnace of earth; they are as "silver" for worth
and value; yea, they are more valuable than silver or gold, [Psa
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010). The Bible is a mine of rich
treasure, and to be searched into as for it; the promises in it are
exceeding precious; they are like apples of gold in pictures of silver,
and yield more joy than the finding a great spoil. The doctrines of the
Gospel are comparable to gold and silver and precious stones, and to be
bought at any rate, but to be sold at none: and they are as silver
"tried", which is pure, and free from dross. The words of men, of false
teachers, are as dross and reprobate silver; but the words of the Lord
are tried, and are pure, and free from all the dross of error and
falsehood, [Psa 18:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#030). And they are as
silver tried "in a furnace of earth", which some (o) render "by the Lord
of the earth"; but the word rather signifies a furnace, or an refinery,
in which metal is melted and purified; and may be applied to the Lord
Jesus Christ in human nature, in whom are all the treasures of wisdom
and knowledge, and who came full fraught with the doctrines of the
Gospel; and in whom they have been "tried", by his sufferings and death,
and are found to be pure, solid, and substantial: or to the ministers of
the Gospel, who have this treasure in earthen vessels, whose works and
words and ministry are tried by many fiery trials, and abide: or to all
the people of God in general, who dwelt in earthly tabernacles; and who,
in the midst of various afflictions, have a comfortable and confirming
evidence of the purity and truth of the words of God, of the promises of
his covenant, and the doctrines of the Gospel;

purified seven times; that is, many times, [Pro
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/pro024.htm#016); and so completely and perfectly
pure, and clear of all dross whatsoever, as silver so many times tried
must needs be: and so the words of God are not only pure, but very pure,
exceeding pure, [Psa 119:140](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#140).

\(o\) Vid. Jarchi, Kimchi, & Ben Melech in loc. so some in David de
Pomis, Lexic. fol. 11. 1. taking in to be radical, and doubled as if it
was

[Psalms 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 12:7</span></span>

Thou shall keep them, O Lord,.... Not the words before mentioned, as
Aben Ezra explains it, for the affix is masculine and not feminine; not
but God has wonderfully kept and preserved the sacred writings; and he
keeps every word of promise which he has made; and the doctrines of the
Gospel will always continue from one generation to another; but the
sense is, that God will keep the poor and needy, and such as he sets in
safety, as Kimchi rightly observes: they are not their own keepers, but
God is the keeper of them; he keeps them by his power, and in his Son,
in whose hands they are, and who is able to keep them from falling; they
are kept by him from a total and final falling away; from the dominion
and damning power of sin, and from being devoured by Satan, and from the
evil of the world: and this the psalmist had good reason to believe,
because of the love of God to them, his covenant with them, and the
promises of safety and salvation he has made unto them;

thou shalt preserve them from this generation for ever; or "thou shalt
preserve him" (p); that is, everyone of the poor and needy, from the
wicked generation of men in which they live, from being corrupted or
intimidated by them; and who are described in the beginning of the
psalm. Some take these words to be a prayer, "keep thou them, O Lord,
and preserve them", &c. (q); and so the following words may be thought
to be a reason or argument enforcing the request.

\(p\) "custodies eum", Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus, Michaelis; so
Ainsworth. (q) "Custodi eum", Tigurine version, Vatablus, "custodito
eorum quemque", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Psalms 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 12:8</span></span>

The wicked walk on every side,.... Of the poor and needy, of the
righteous ones, to watch them, lay snares for them, and hurt them;
therefore, Lord, keep and preserve them: the wicked are everywhere in
great numbers, the whole world lies in wickedness; and the men of it are
like their father the devil, they go about to do all the mischief they
can to the saints; wherefore they stand in need continually of divine
preservation;

when the vilest men are exalted: either to great dignities and high
offices, to be magistrates and rulers; see [Pro
29:2](../../../bib/kjv/pro029.htm#002); or are highly esteemed and
caressed; which shows the sad degeneracy and badness of the times, and
the unsafe and dangerous condition the people of God are in, unless kept
by him; see [Mal 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#015); or else these
words may be considered as expressive of the judgment of God upon wicked
men, and so confirm what the psalmist had said of God's regard to and
preservation of his own people; and the sense be, that the wicked shall
walk up and down here and there, as outcasts and vagabonds, in a most
desolate, destitute, and miserable condition; and as the latter clause
may be rendered, "according to their exaltation shall be the vileness",
depression, or humiliation "of the children of men" (r); they shall be
brought as low as they have been made high; by how much the more highly
they have been exalted, by so much the more deeply they shall be
humbled: or else the meaning is, they shall walk about here and there
fretting and vexing, when they shall see such who in their opinion are
the meanest and basest of men, of low degree, and of a mean extract,
exalted to the highest posts of honour and dignity; as David, who was
taken from the sheepfold, and placed on the throne of Israel; so Jarchi,
who observes that the Haggadah explains it of the Israelites, who will
be exalted in time to come.

\(r\) "secundum superelevationem, vilitas (erit vel est)", Cocceius.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 13](psa013)

</div>
