<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa006)  [Next](psa008) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 7

Shiggaion of David, which he sang unto the Lord, concerning the words of
Cush the Benjamite. The name of this psalm, "Shiggaion", either respects
the music or the matter of the psalm. Some take it to be the name of the
musical instrument to which the psalm was set (n): so Habakkuk's prayer
is said to be "upon shigionoth"; which is the same word with this, only
of the plural number, [Hab 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/hab003.htm#001). Others
say it was the first word of a song, to the tune of which this was sung
(o) And others understand it of a certain kind of a song (p): and the
Targum renders it, "the interpretation of the ode of David"; which
Ainsworth renders, "David's interpretation of the law"; leading instead
of as does also the king of Spain's Bible. And certain it is that it is
the name of a song; since it follows, "which he sang unto the Lord"; in
his presence, before him, and to the glory of his name. But the question
is, of what sort it is? and why it should be so called? since its root
signifies "to err" or "wander": it is more generally rendered, "an
erratic" or "wandering ode"; a song or psalm, which consisted of various
kind of metre: it was sung with various notes, and all kind of music,
which made it very pleasant. Hence some render it, "David's delight", as
R. Obadiah Gaon; and the verb from whence it is derived is translated
"ravished" in [Pro 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#019); and Ben
Melech says, the word signifies , "joy and pleasure"; and Aben Ezra
observes that some interpret it "delight". But others are of opinion
that this word regards the subject matter of the psalm, and may be
rendered, "David's ignorance" or "error"; his sin of ignorance; and
respects his mistaken conduct with regard to his enemies, particularly
Saul, in making imprecations upon them, [Psa
6:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#010); in cursing them, and especially
King Saul; when a king is not to be cursed, [Ecc
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/ecc010.htm#020); and in cutting off the skirt of
his garment, for which his heart smote him, [Sa1
24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004). Some render it, "the care of
David", as Cocceius; which he wrote in deep meditation, when he had
forgot himself, and was as it were in an ecstasy; setting forth "the sum
of his cares", as Ainsworth expresses it, when he was harassed and
greatly afflicted by his enemies. The occasion of it is, "the words of
Cush the Benjamite"; which some understand of Shimei the Benjamite, who
came out and cursed David as he went along, when he fled from Absalom,
[Sa1 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#005). Theodoret thinks Hushai is
meant, who persuaded Absalom not to follow the counsel of Ahithophel; on
which account David penned this psalm. Others interpret it of one of
Saul's courtiers, who was of the tribe of Benjamin, and whose name was
Cush (q); and which is very likely, since it is evident that some of
Saul's courtiers accused David to him, and charged him with seeking his
harm, not only to take away his crown and kingdom, but his life, [Sa1
24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#009). Though the generality of the
Jewish writers (r) interpret it of Saul himself, who is called Cush, in
allusion to his father's name Kish, who was a man of Benjamin, [Sa1
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001); or else because Cush signifies
"an Ethiopian", to which he may be compared, as the children of Israel
in [Amo 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/amo009.htm#007). For as the Ethiopian is
various in his skin, so was Saul in his actions, as Jarchi observes; or
rather because, as Kimchi and Ben Melech express it, as the Ethiopian
does not change his skin, [Jer 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer013.htm#023);
so Saul did not change his hatred to David. Though the same writers
observe, that he may be called so by the rule of contraries, because he
was a very goodly and beautiful man; the words referred to are supposed
to be those in [Sa1 22:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#007).

\(n\) Menachem in Jarchi in loc. So David de Pomis, Lexic. fol. 204. 1.
(o) Aben Ezra in loc. (p) Kimchi in loc. (q) Aben Ezra & Obadiah Gaon in
loc. (r) Targum, Jarchi, Kimchi, Arama, & Ben Melech in loc.

[Psalms 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 7:1</span></span>

O Lord my God, in thee do I put my trust,.... The psalmist expresses his
interest in God as his covenant God, and his trust and confidence in
him; and with these he sets out as the stay of his soul, and his bulwark
against the fears of his enemies; and he does not say that he had
trusted in God, or would for the future trust in him; but that he did
trust in him, and continued to do so. And God is to be trusted in at all
times; in times of affliction, temptation, and desertion; and these the
psalmist premises to his petition, which follows, as an encouragement to
him to hope for success, since God was his God, and none that ever
trusted in him were confounded;

save me from all them that persecute me, and deliver me; persecution is
no new thing to the people of God; David had his persecutors, and many
of them; the Church, in Jeremiah's time, had hers; the saints, in the
times of the apostles, and in all ages since, have had theirs. Every one
that will live godly in Christ Jesus must expect persecution in one
shape or another; and there is none can save and deliver from it but
God, and he can and will in his own time, [Co2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#010). David was sensible of this, and
therefore applies to him, and him only; and not to an arm of flesh, to
his friends, or to neighbouring princes and powers.

[Psalms 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 7:2</span></span>

Lest he tear my soul like a lion,.... That is, one of his persecutors,
the chief of them; it may be Saul, whom the psalmist compares to a lion
for his majesty and greatness, the lion being the king among beasts; and
for his authority, power, and might, and for his wrath and cruelty,
which he feared; and which, should it be exerted on him, would tear his
soul, or himself, in pieces; would rend his soul from his body, and
dispatch his life; see [Pro 19:12](../../../bib/kjv/pro019.htm#012). So
the Apostle Paul calls the Roman governor, before whom he was, and from
whose hands he was delivered, a lion, for his power and fierceness, [Ti2
4:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#017). And so our adversary the devil,
the chief of all persecutors, and who instigates others against the
saints, is by Peter said to go about like a roaring lion, [Pe1
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#008);

rending it in pieces, as the lion does his prey when hungry. So Homer
(s) compares Polyphemus to a mountain lion, which devours and leaves
nothing, neither the intestines, nor flesh, nor bones; and represents
(t) it first taking hold of the creature with its strong teeth, and
breaking its neck, and drawing out its blood and all its inwards; see
[Isa 38:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa038.htm#013);

while there is none to deliver; no saviour, no deliverer: for if God
does not save and deliver his people out of the hands of their
persecutors, none can; especially out of the hands of such an one as is
here described tearing and rending in pieces. As there is no God besides
the Lord, there is no saviour besides him: there is no temporal nor
spiritual saviour but he: salvation is not to be expected from any
other; and were it not for him, saints must fall a prey to their
enemies.

\(s\) Odyss. 9. v. 292, 293. (t) Iliad. 11. v. 175, 176. & Iliad. 17. v.
63.

[Psalms 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 7:3</span></span>

O Lord my God, if I have done this. The crime which Saul and his
courtiers charged him with, and which was made so public that every body
knew it; and therefore it was needless particularly to mention it;
namely, that he lay in wait for Saul, and sought his life to take it
away, [Sa1 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#009). The Targum interprets
it of this psalm, paraphrasing it, "if I have made this song with an
evil intention"; to give an ill character of any, and lead them with
false charges;

if there be iniquity in my hands; not that he was without sin, he had it
in his heart; nor that he lived without the actual commission of sin:
but his sense is, that there was no iniquity, as not in his heart,
purpose, and design, so not in his hand, nor attempted by him, of the
kind he was accused of, [Sa1 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011).
Otherwise, we often hear him complaining of the depravity of his nature,
and acknowledging his sins and transgressions, [Psa
32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005).

[Psalms 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 7:4</span></span>

If I have rewarded evil unto him that was at peace with me,.... That is,
when Saul was at peace with him; when he lived at his court, and ate at
his table his meaning is, that he did not conspire against him, nor form
schemes to deprive him of his crown nor of his life: or, as it may be
rendered, "if I have rewarded to him that rewarded me evil" (u); that
is, as Jarchi explains it, if I rewarded him as he rewarded me, evil for
evil. This David did not; and it is eminently true of Christ his
antitype, [Pe1 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#023); and in it he
ought to be imitated by every believer, [Rom
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#017);

yea, I have delivered him that without cause is mine enemy; meaning
Saul, who persecuted David without any just reason, and whom David
delivered without any obligation to do it; not for any benefit and
kindness he had received from him; for the phrase "without cause" may be
read in connection either with the word "delivered" (w); for the
deliverance was wrought without any cause or merit on Saul's part, or
profit to David; or with the word "enemy", for Saul was David's enemy
without any just cause on David's part: and the deliverance referred to
was when he cut off Saul's skirt, in the cave at Engedi, and spared his
life; and when he took away his spear from him, as he was sleeping in
the trench, and did not destroy him, nor suffer those that would to do
it, [Sa1 24:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#004). The words may be
rendered, "only I stripped him" (x). The sense is, that he cut off the
skirt of his coat, and took away his spear, and so in part stripped him
both of his clothes and armour, at two different times; not to do him
any hurt, but to let him know, as Jarchi observes, that he was delivered
into his hands, and he could have slain him, but did not. The same
Jewish writer interprets the word used "of stripping of garments"; and
Aben Ezra observes, from R. Moses, that the "vau", rendered "yea",
signifies "only", as in [Gen 42:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#010).

\(u\) "Si malum malo rependi", Castalio. (w) "absque emolumento ullo ad
me inde redeunte", Gussetius. (x) Verbum "proprie extrahere, &c.
significat, et de vestibus quae alieui exuuntur et eripiuntur proprie
dicitur", De Dieu.

[Psalms 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 7:5</span></span>

Let the enemy persecute my soul, and take it,.... That is, if the above
things he was charged with could be proved against him; then he was
content that Saul his enemy should pursue after him, and apprehend him,
and bring him to justice, by taking away his life from him;

yea, let him tread down my life upon the earth; with the utmost
indignation and contempt, without showing any mercy; as the lion treads
down his prey, and tears it to pieces, [Mic
5:8](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#008); or as the potter treads his clay
under foot, [Isa 41:25](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#025);

and lay mine honour in the dust; meaning either his life and soul, as
before; denominating himself from his better part, and which he
elsewhere calls his glory, [Psa 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#009);
see [Gen 49:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#006); or else his body, as R.
Judah Ben Balaam, who is blamed for it by Jarchi; or rather his fame,
credit, and reputation, that he had gained, both by his courage and
valour in the field, and by his wise and prudent behaviour at court,
[Sa1 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#007). Should he appear to be
guilty of the crimes he was accused of, he is willing to have his
glorious name buried in the dust of oblivion, and his memory perish for
ever. The words are to be considered as a strong assertion of his
innocence, in an appeal to God, the searcher of hearts, and the trier of
the reins of men; and as imprecating on himself the worst of evils,
should it not appear; see [Job 31:21](../../../bib/kjv/job031.htm#021).

Selah; Aben Ezra renders "selah", "in truth", "let it be so"; and the
Targum renders it, as usual, "for ever"; See Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

[Psalms 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 7:6</span></span>

Arise, O Lord, in thine anger,.... This and the following phrase do not
suppose local motion in God, to whom it cannot belong, being infinite
and immense, but are spoken of him after the manner of men, who seems
sometimes as though he had laid himself down, and was unconcerned about
and took no notice of human affairs, of the insults of the wicked and
the oppressions of the righteous; wherefore the psalmist beseeches him
to "arise", which he may be said to do when he comes forth in his power
in the defence of his people, and against their enemies; see [Psa
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa012.htm#005); and he also prays him to arise
in anger, to show himself displeased, and give some tokens of his
resentment, by letting his enemies feel the lighting down of his arm
with the indignation of his anger;

lift up thyself, because of the rage of mine enemies; ascend the throne
of judgment, and there sit judging right; show thyself to be the Judge
of the earth, high and lifted up; let it appear that thou art above all
mine enemies, higher and more powerful than they; stop their rage, break
the force of their fury, lift up a standard against them, who, likes
mighty flood, threaten to bear all before them: or "lift up thyself in
rage", or "fierce wrath, because of", or "against mine enemies" (y): and
so the sense is the same as before; and this way go many of the Jewish
interpreters (z);

and awake for me to the judgment that thou hast commanded; not that
sleep falls upon God, for the keeper of Israel neither slumbers nor
sleeps; nor does it fall on any but corporeal beings, not upon angels,
nor the souls of men, much less on God; but he sometimes in his
providence seems to lie dormant and inactive, as if he disregarded what
is done in this world; and therefore his people address him as if he was
asleep, and call upon him to arise to their help and assistance; see
[Psa 44:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa044.htm#023); and so David here, "awake
for me", that is, hasten to come to me and help me; suggesting that he
was in great distress and danger, by reason of his enemies, should he
delay coming to him. By "judgment" is either meant the vengeance which
God had ordered him to execute upon his enemies, as Jarchi interprets
it, and therefore he entreats him to arise and put him in a capacity of
doing it; or else his innocence, and the vindication of it, which God
had promised him, and then the petition is much the same with [Psa
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008). But the generality of Jewish (a)
writers understand it of the kingdom which God had appointed for him,
and for which he was anointed by Samuel; and who had told Saul that God
had found a man after his own heart, whom he had "commanded" to be
captain over his people, [Sa1 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014);
wherefore the psalmist prays that God would hasten the fulfilment of his
purpose and promise, and set him on the throne, that so he might
administer justice and judgment to the people.

\(y\) "in furore contra hostes meos", Mariana; "gravissimo furore
percitus in eos qui me opprimunt", Junius & Tremellius. (z) Targum,
Jarchi, & Kimchi, in loc. (a) R. Moses in Aben Ezra in loc. R. Obadiah
Gaon, Kimchi, & Ben Melech in loc.

[Psalms 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 7:7</span></span>

So shall the congregation of the people compass thee about,.... By "the
congregation of the people" are meant the nation of the Jews, the twelve
tribes of Israel, called an assembly of people, and a company of
nations, [Gen 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#003); and this is to be
understood not of their gathering together in an hostile manner about
David to take him, which might be interpreted compassing God himself
about, David being as dear to him as the apple of his eye, which is the
sense of several Jewish commentators (b); but rather of their
encompassing and surrounding the altar of God with songs of deliverance,
upon David's being rid of his enemies and advanced to the throne of the
kingdom; see [Psa 26:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa026.htm#006); unless it
should have regard to the pure worship of God by David, which was
greatly neglected in Saul's time; and then the sense is, that the
psalmist prays that he might be established in his kingdom, as God had
appointed and commanded, when he would fetch up the ark of God, and
encourage the worship of God, and rectify all disorders in it; that so
the several tribes might come up to Jerusalem and encompass the ark, the
symbol of the divine Presence, and worship in his holy mountain;

for their sakes therefore return thou on high; take, the throne of
justice, high and lifted up, vindicate the cause of the oppressed,
deliver me from all my troubles, put me into the peaceable possession of
my kingdom; if not for my, sake, yet for the sake of thy church and
people, and for the sake of thy worship and thy glory; the Targum
paraphrases it, "return thou to the house of thy Shechinah".

\(b\) Kimchi & Aben Ezra in loc.

[Psalms 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 7:8</span></span>

The Lord shall judge the people,.... The inhabitants of the world in
general; for God is the Judge of all the earth, and he judges the world
in righteousness daily, and ministers judgment in uprightness, though it
is not always manifest; or his own people in particular, whose cause he
pleads, whose injuries and wrongs he avenges, whose persons he protects
and defends; this the psalmist expresses with confidence, and therefore,
suitable to his character as a Judge, he entreats him as follows:

judge me, O Lord, according to my righteousness; he speaks not of his
justification before God, in whose sight he well knew no flesh living
could be justified by their own righteousness, [Psa
143:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa143.htm#002); nor of the righteousness of his
person, either imputed or inherent; but of the righteousness of his
cause, [Psa 35:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa035.htm#027); not of his
righteousness God-ward, for he knew that he was a sinner with respect to
him; but of his righteousness towards Saul, against whom he had not
sinned, but had acted towards him in the most righteous and faithful
manner, [Sa1 24:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#011); and therefore
desired to be judged, and was content to stand or fall according to his
conduct and behaviour towards him;

and according to mine integrity that is in me; who had always acted the
sincere and upright part towards Saul, though he had pursued him with so
much fury and violence; the psalmist's prayer was heard and answered,
[Psa 18:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#020).

[Psalms 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 7:9</span></span>

Oh, let the wickedness of the wicked come to an end,.... Which will not
be till the measure of it is fully up, and that will not be till the
wicked are no more; for, as long as they are in the world they will be
committing wickedness, and like the troubled sea continually cast up the
mire and dirt of sin; and they will remain to the end of the world, till
the new Jerusalem church state shall take place, when all the Lord's
people will be righteous, and there will not be a Canaanite in the house
of the Lord of hosts, nor a pricking brier or grieving thorn in all the
land; for, in the new earth will no sinner be, but righteous persons
only; and for this state the psalmist may be thought to pray; however by
this petition and the following he expresses his hatred of sin and love
of righteousness: some choose to render the words (c), "let wickedness
now consume the wicked"; as in the issue it will, unless the grace of
God takes place; some sins consume the bodies, others the estates of
wicked men, and some both; and all are the means of destroying both body
and soul in hell, if grace prevent not; this may be considered as a
declaration of what will be, being a prophetic petition (d);

but establish the just; or righteous one; meaning himself, and every
other who is made righteous, not by his own righteousness, but by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to him; and who needs not to have his
righteousness established, which is in itself stable, firm, and sure,
and cannot be more so; it is an everlasting one, and cannot be
abolished, but abides for ever, and will answer for him in a time to
come; but his faith to be established more and more in its exercise on
this righteousness: nor do the persons of the just need establishing, or
can they be more stable than they are, as considered in Christ, as they
are the objects of God's everlasting love, secured in the covenant of
grace, and built on Christ the foundation; but the graces of faith,
hope, and love, need daily establishing on their proper object, they
being weak, fickle, and inconstant in their acts; and the saints need
more and more establishing in the doctrines of the Gospel, and in their
adherence to the cause of God and Christ and true religion; and it is
God's work to establish them, to whom the psalmist applies; see [Pe1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010);

for the righteous God trieth the hearts and reins; he is righteous
himself in his nature, and in all his works, and he knows who are
righteous and who are wicked; he knows the hearts, thoughts, affections,
and inward principles of all men, and the springs of all their actions;
he looks not at outward appearances, but at the heart; and as he can
distinguish between the one and the other, he is capable of punishing
the wicked and of confirming the righteous, consistent with the truth of
his perfections.

\(c\) "consumat nunc vel quaeso malum impios", Muscuius, Vatablus, so
Jarchi, Kimchi, & Ben Melech. (d) "Consumat nunc malum impios",
Pagninus, Montanus, Hammond; so Obadiah Gaon.

[Psalms 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 7:10</span></span>

My defence is of God,.... Or "my shield is in" or "of God" (e); God was
his shield, his protector and defender; see [Psa
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#003); or "my shield is with God"; that
is, Christ, who was the shield his faith made use of against every
spiritual enemy, was with God; he was with him as the Word and Son of
God from all eternity, and as the living Redeemer of his people before
his incarnation; and he is now with him as their intercessor and
advocate, who pleads in defence of them, and opposes himself, his blood
and righteousness, to all the charges and accusations of Satan;

which saveth the upright in heart: who have the truth of grace in them,
wisdom in the hidden part; who are sincere in their affections,
purposes, and designs, in their faith, hope, and love; and act from real
principles of truth and love, in the integrity of their souls; for these
light and gladness are sown, to them grace and glory are given, and no
good thing is withheld from them; they are saved by God from sin, Satan,
the world, death, and hell, and every enemy, with a spiritual and
everlasting salvation.

\(e\) "in Deo", Musculus, Tigurine version, Junius & Tremellius, Muis,
Ainsworth; "apud Deum", Lutherus, Piscator, Gejerus, Cocceius,
Michaelis.

[Psalms 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 7:11</span></span>

God judgeth the righteous,.... Not all that are thought to be righteous,
or think themselves to be so, are such; nor is any man naturally
righteous, or of himself, nor by virtue of his obedience to the law of
works; but such only are righteous who are made so by the obedience of
Christ; these God governs and protects, avenges their injuries and
defends their persons; some render the words, "God is a righteous Judge"
(f); he is so now in the administrations of his government of the
universe, and he will be so hereafter in the general judgment of the
world;

and God is angry with the wicked every day; wicked men are daily
sinning, and God is always the same in his nature, and has the same
aversion to sin continually; and though he is not always making men
examples of his wrath, yet his wrath is revealed from heaven against all
unrighteousness of men; and there are frequent stances of it; and when
he is silent he is still angry, and in his own time will stir up all his
wrath, and rebuke in his hot displeasure.

\(f\) Vid. Aben Ezra & Abendana not. in Miclol. Yophi in loc. "Deus
judex justus", V. L. Munster, Musculus, Montanus, Piscator, Gejerus,
Michaelis; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 7:12</span></span>

If he turn not,.... Not God, but the enemy, or the wicked man, spoken of
[Psa 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#005); if he turn not from his
wicked course of life, to the Lord to live to him, and according to his
will; unless he is converted and repents of his sin, and there is a
change wrought in him, in his heart and life; the Septuagint, Vulgate
Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions read, "if ye turn not", or "are not
converted", an apostrophe to the wicked;

he will whet his sword: God is a man of war, and he is sometimes
represented as accoutred with military weapons; see [Isa
59:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#017); and among the rest with the
sword of judgment, which he may be said to whet, when he prepares sharp
and sore judgments for his enemies, [Isa
27:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#001);

he hath bent his bow, and made it ready; drawn his bow of vengeance, and
put it on the full stretch, and made it ready with the arrows of his
wrath, levelled against the wicked, with whom he is angry; which is
expressive of their speedy and inevitable ruin, in case of impenitence;
see [Lam 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#004); or "trod his bow", as is
the usual phrase elsewhere; see [Psa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002); which was done by the feet, and
was necessary when the bow was a strong one, as Jarchi on [Psa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002); observes; and so the Arabs, as
Suidas (g) relates, using arrows the length of a man, put their feet on
the string of the bow instead of their hands.

\(g\) In voce

[Psalms 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 7:13</span></span>

He hath also prepared for him the instruments of death,.... The weapons
of his indignation, [Isa 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#005); which,
will issue both in the first and second death, corporeal and eternal;
the instruments of the former are diseases of various kinds, and
judgments, as famine, pestilence, &c. and of the latter not only the law
is an instrument of it, that being the letter which kills, and is the
ministration of condemnation and death, but even the Gospel itself to
wicked men is the savour of death unto death; and devils will be the
executioners of it;

he ordaineth his arrows against the persecutors: the word for
persecutors signifies "hot" or "burning" (h), and designs such persons
who burn in malice and wrath, In rage and fury, against the saints, and
hotly pursue after them, as Laban did after Jacob, [Gen
31:36](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#036); for these more especially God
has determined in his eternal purposes and decrees, and for these he has
provided in his quiver, arrows of wrath and vengeance, fiery ones; and
against these will he bring them forth, direct them, and shoot them at
them, [Psa 64:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#007). Some (i) understand
all this not of God, but of the wicked man, and read "if he turn not",
but, on the contrary, instead of that, "will whet his sword, bend his
bow", &c. against the righteous; yet he shall be disappointed, he shall
not accomplish his designs, as appears by the following verses; these
phrases are used of wicked men, [Psa
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#002), but the former sense seems best.

\(h\) "ardentibus", V. L. "in ardentes", Montanus; "hot persecutors",
Ainsworth. (i) So Brentius & Glassius in Gejerus.

[Psalms 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 7:14</span></span>

Behold, he travaileth with iniquity,.... Is full of it, and big with it,
as a woman with child, and eagerly desires to bring it forth, and is in
pain till he commits it;

and hath conceived mischief; that which is injurious to God and the
perfections of his nature, a transgression of his law, and an affront to
his justice and holiness, is doing wrong to fellow creatures, and harm
to themselves, either to their name and credit, or to their substance
and estates, or to their bodies and souls, and it may be to them all;
and yet this they conceive, they devise it in their hearts, and form
schemes how to bring it to pass, and which they do with great freedom,
deliberation, and pleasure;

and brought forth falsehood; or "vanity" (k), or a vain thing, as the
same word is rendered in [Job 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/job015.htm#035);
no fruit at all, but wind, or stubble, [Isa
26:17](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#017); that which deceives does not
answer the expectation, but the contrary to it; the sense is, that
wicked men having devised mischievous things against the saints, they
are big with expectations of success, and strive to bring their purposes
to bear, but are miserably disappointed, for it all ends in vanity and
vexation of spirit to themselves.

\(k\) "rem inanem", so some in Vatablus; "vanitatem", Gejerum.

[Psalms 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 7:15</span></span>

He made a pit and digged it,.... That is, he digged a pit, and made it
very large and capacious, to answer his purposes;

and is fallen into the ditch which he made; so it is said of the
Heathen, [Psa 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#015); and is exemplified
in the case of Haman, who was hanged upon the gallows he had built for
Mordecai. Kimchi explains this of Saul's falling upon his own sword, and
dying by it, which he drew against David; phrase is proverbial, [Pro
26:27](../../../bib/kjv/pro026.htm#027); the sense of this and the above
figurative expressions is literally and properly given in [Psa
7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016).

[Psalms 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 7:16</span></span>

His mischief shall return upon his own head,.... That which he conceived
and devised in his mind, and attempted to bring upon others, shall fall
upon himself, as a just judgment from heaven upon him;

and his violent dealing shall come down upon his own pate; referring to
the violence with which Saul pursued David, which would be requited to
him, and of which he prophesied, [Sa1
26:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1026.htm#010).

[Psalms 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 7:17</span></span>

I will praise the Lord according to his righteousness,.... Or on account
of it, as it was displayed in vindicating the innocent, and punishing
the wicked; so Pharaoh having ordered male infants of the Hebrews to be
drowned, and he himself and his host in righteous judgment being drowned
in the Red sea; Moses and the children of Israel sung a song, as the
psalmist here;

and will sing praise to the name of the Lord most high; whose name is
Jehovah, and is the most High over all the earth; and who had now,
according to the psalmist's request, [Psa
7:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#006); arose and lifted up himself, and
returned on high, and had shown himself to be above all David's enemies,
and had sat on the throne judging right.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 8](psa008)

</div>
