<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa052)  [Next](psa054) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 53](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 53:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 53

To the chief Musician upon Mahalath, Maschil, A Psalm of David. The word
"mahalath" is only used here and in [Psa
88:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa088.htm#001). Some, with Aben Ezra, take it to
be the first word of a song, to the tune of which this psalm was set;
others, with Jarchi, that it is the name of a musical instrument on
which it was sung; a hollow instrument; of the same nature with
"nehiloth", See Gill on [Psa 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#001),
title. Though it may relate to the argument or subject matter of the
psalm, and be rendered, "concerning sickness" or "infirmity" (e); and,
as Jarchi observes, some interpret it, "concerning the sickness or
weakness of Israel", when the temple was destroyed. But it seems much
better to understand it of the sickness and disease of sin, and the
weakness following upon that, to which all mankind are subject; since
the psalm manifestly treats of the general corruption and depravity of
human nature. This psalm is the same with [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001), and is expressed in the same
words, with some little difference; the reason of its repetition is
variously conjectured. Some think that the compiler of the book of
Psalms, observing various readings in it occasioned by copying, thought
fit to insert it both ways; but it is most likely to be composed by
David himself, at different times, and it may be on different occasions,
and with different views. Some think the former, namely the fourteenth
psalm, was written concerning Nabal, and this concerning Doeg; according
to Jarchi, that was concerning Nebuchadnezzar, this concerning Titus
Vespasian; or, as others think, Antiochus Epiphanes. Kimchi is of
opinion that this psalm, being placed between one that relates to Doeg,
and another that refers to the Ziphites, points at the likeness there is
between the case of David and the Messiah; that as David had many who
sought to ensnare him, yet God rewarded them, and established him in the
kingdom; so it will be with the Messiah: but it is much more reasonable
with others to conclude, that it is repeated either because of the
importance of it; because that as the former may refer to the corruption
of the Jews in the times of David, this to the corruption of men in the
times of Christ and his apostles, and under the Gospel dispensation,
until the second coming of Christ, especially under the reign of
antichrist. The argument of the psalm, according to the Syriac version,
is concerning Ahithophel, who gave counsel to Absalom to pursue his
father David and kill him: and, according to the Arabic version, it is a
prophecy concerning Babel and Sennacherib; so Theodoret: but rather
concerning mystical Babylon, and the man of sin.

\(e\) "de miseria", Tigurine version, "vel infirmitate"; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 53:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 53:1</span></span>

The fool hath said in his heart, there is no God,.... The Targum adds,
"of whom is revenge"; or there is no God to punish and avenge the
wicked;

corrupt are they; the Chaldee paraphrase is, "the wicked have corrupted
their ways"; as all flesh had done in the old world, [Gen
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen006.htm#012);

and have done abominable iniquity; iniquity is the abominable thing that
God hates, and makes men abominable in his sight; in [Psa
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#001), it is read, "abominable worlds":
the Targum paraphrases the words, "they are far from good, for iniquity
is found in them"; see [Rev 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#008);

there is none that doeth good; See Gill on [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001).

[Psalms 53:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 53:2</span></span>

God looked down from heaven upon the children of men,.... In [Psa
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002), it is read, "the Lord" or
"Jehovah"; in everything else there is an agreement in this verse; See
Gill on [Psa 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002);

to see if there were any that did understand; the Targum is, "that were
understanding" in the law; it doubtless means understanding in divine
and spiritual things;

that did seek God; the above paraphrase is, "seeking doctrine from
before the Lord".

[Psalms 53:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 53:3</span></span>

Every one of them is gone back,.... From God, and the way of his
commandments. In [Psa 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003), it is,
"they are all gone aside"; See Gill on [Psa
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003);

they are altogether become filthy; there is none that doeth good,

no, not one. What follows in this verse is the same as [Psa
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003).

[Psalms 53:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 53:4</span></span>

Have the workers of iniquity no knowledge?.... In [Psa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004), it is, "have all the workers",
&c. There are none of them but what have, unless given up to judicial
blindness, and hardness of heart, to believe a lie, as antichrist and
his followers, [Th2 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#010); See Gill on
[Psa 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004);

who eat up my people, as they eat bread; and drink their blood, and are
drunken with it, [Rev 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#006);

they have not called upon God; but upon their idols, upon the Virgin
Mary, and saints departed. In [Psa
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#004), it is, "upon the Lord".

[Psalms 53:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 53:5</span></span>

There were they in great, fear, where no fear was,.... Before; neither
of God nor man, nor any dread of punishment, but the utmost security,
[Rev 18:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#007); also See Gill on [Psa
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#005);

for God hath scattered the bones of him that encampeth against thee;
either against Christ, or against his church and people; who set
themselves against the person, office, and grace of Christ, and seek to
distress and destroy his interest: "the bones of such God will scatter":
that is, he will destroy antichrist and his armies, which are his
strength, as the bones are the strength of the human body; and make such
a carnage of them, that the fowls of the air shall eat their flesh, and
their bones shall be scattered here and there; see [Rev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#017). So the Targum,

"for God scatters the strength of the armies of the wicked.''

Kimchi interprets it of the bones of the nations that shall encamp
against Jerusalem, in the days of Gog; see [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008); and Aben Ezra observes, that
"thee" respects either God or the Messiah;

thou hast put them to shame; this is either an address of the psalmist
unto God, declaring what he had done; or rather of God the Father to his
Son Christ Jesus; and so Kimchi and Ben Melech say this refers to the
Messiah: and it may be expressive of the shame and confusion that
antichrist and his followers will be thrown into, when they shall make
war with the Lamb, and he shall overcome them, [Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014);

because God hath despised them; or rejected them as reprobates; given
them up to a reprobate mind; and being ungodly men, has before ordained
them to this condemnation. The Targum is,

"for the Word of the Lord hath rejected them;''

as filthy, loathsome, and abominable, and cast them alive into the lake
of fire, [Rev 19:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#020).

[Psalms 53:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 53:6</span></span>

O that the salvation of Israel were come out of Zion!.... Or, "who will
give (f) out of Zion the salvation of Israel?" The Targum adds, "except
the Lord"; and this is a request to him for it: and, as in [Psa
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#007), it may be a wish for the first
coming of Christ, to work out salvation for his people; here it may be
expressive of the desire of the church for his coming in a spiritual
manner, in the latter day, to take to himself his great power, and
reign; to destroy antichrist, and deliver his people from bondage and
oppression by him; when the Gentiles shall be gathered in, the Jews will
be converted, and all Israel saved; see [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025). It is in the original text,
"salvations" (g); denoting the complete salvation of the church; when
all her enemies will be destroyed, and all peace and prosperity shall be
enjoyed by her; See Gill on [Psa 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#006).

when God bringeth back the captivity of his people: who have been
carried into it by antichrist, [Rev
13:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#010);

Jacob shall rejoice, and Israel shall be glad; for now the kingdoms of
this world will become Christ's; the marriage of the Lamb will be come,
and the bride made ready, through the calling of the Gentiles, and the
conversion of the Jews; which will occasion the twenty four elders, the
representatives of the Christian church, to give thanks to the Lord God
Almighty, and cause many voices to be heard in heaven, expressing great
joy on this occasion, [Rev 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015).

\(f\) "quis dabit", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (g) "salutes",
Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius; so Ainsworth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 54](psa054)

</div>
