<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa080)  [Next](psa082) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 81](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 81:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 81

To the chief Musician upon Gittith, A Psalm of Asaph. Of "gittith", See
Gill on [Psa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001). The Targum renders
it,

"upon the harp which came from Gath;''

and so Jarchi says it was a musical instrument that came from Gath. The
Septuagint, and the versions which follow that, render it, "for the
winepresses". This psalm, according to Kimchi, is said concerning the
going out of the children of Israel from Egypt; and was composed in
order to be sung at their new moons and solemn feasts, which were
typical of Gospel things in Gospel times; see [Col
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/col002.htm#016) and so the Syriac version,

"a psalm of Asaph, when David by him prepared himself for the
solemnities.''.

[Psalms 81:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 81:1</span></span>

Sing aloud unto God our strength,.... The strength of Israel, who, by
strength of hand, and a mighty arm, brought Israel out of Egypt,
protected and upheld them in the wilderness, and brought them to, and
settled and established them in the land of Canaan; and who is the
strength of every true Israelite, from whom they have both their natural
and spiritual strength; so that they can exercise grace, perform duty,
bear afflictions, withstand temptations, fight with and conquer enemies,
and hold on and out unto the end; and therefore have reason to sing the
praises of God with great fervour, zeal, and affection:

make a joyful noise unto the God of Jacob; or Israel, being the God that
had made a covenant with them, had chosen them for his peculiar people,
and had redeemed them out of the house of bondage, and bestowed peculiar
favours upon them; and therefore were under obligation to show forth his
praise vocally and audibly, and with strong expressions of joy; and the
spiritual Israel of God much more so, who have an interest in the
covenant of grace, and share in electing, redeeming, and calling grace,
by all which he appears to be their God and Father, in a special sense.

[Psalms 81:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 81:2</span></span>

Take a psalm,.... Or "lift one up" (y); hold up the book, and read and
sing it; or rather, lift up the voice in singing a psalm:

and bring hither the timbrel; or "give one" (z), put the hand to one:

the pleasant harp with the psaltery; make use of all these musical
instruments in singing, and so make an agreeable melody: these were used
in the times of the Old Testament, and were typical of the spiritual joy
and melody in the heart, expressed by vocal singing, under the New
Testament; see [Rev 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008).

\(y\) "attollite", Piscator; "tollite", Cocceius, Amama, Gejerus. (z)
"date", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Psalms 81:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 81:3</span></span>

Blow up the trumpet in the new moon,.... Either in every new moon, or
first day of the month, which was religiously observed by the Jews, [Kg2
4:23](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#023) or rather the new moon, or first
day of the seventh month, the month Tisri, which day was a memorial of
blowing of trumpets, [Lev 23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034), and
so the Targum,

"blow the trumpet in the month of Tisri,''

when their new year began, and was typical of the year of the redeemed
of the Lord, of the acceptable year of our God, of the famous new year,
the Gospel dispensation, when old things passed away, and all things
became new. The Jews say this blowing of trumpets was in commemoration
of Isaac's deliverance, a ram being sacrificed for him, and therefore
they sounded with trumpets made of rams' horns; or in remembrance of the
trumpet blown at the giving of the law; though it rather was an emblem
of the Gospel, and the ministry of it, by which sinners are aroused,
awakened and quickened, and souls are charmed and allured, and filled
with spiritual joy and gladness:

in the time appointed; so Aben Ezra, Jarchi, and Kimchi, interpret the
word of a set fixed time; see [Pro
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro007.htm#020), the word (a) used has the
signification of covering; and the former of these understand it of the
time just before the change of the moon, when it is covered, which falls
in with the former phrase; and so the Targum,

"in the moon that is covered;''

though the Latin interpreter renders it,

"in the month which is covered with the days of our solemnities,''

there being many festivals in the month of Tisri; the blowing of
trumpets on the first day of it, the atonement on the tenth, and the
feast of tabernacles on the fifteenth. But De Dieu has made it appear,
from the use of the word in the Syriac language, that it should be
rendered "in the full moon", and so directs to the right understanding
of the feast next mentioned;

on our solemn feast day, which must design a feast which was at the full
of the moon; and so must be either the feast of the passover, which was
on the fourteenth day of the month Nisan, and was a type of Christ our
Passover, sacrificed for us, on which account we should keep the feast,
[Exo 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#006), or else the feast of
tabernacles, which was on the fifteenth of the month Tisri, kept in
commemoration of the Israelites dwelling in booths, [Lev
23:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#034) and which is called the feast,
and the solemn feast, emphatically; see [Kg1
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#002), and was typical of the state of
God's people in this world, who dwell in the earthly houses of their
tabernacles, and have no continuing city; and of the churches of Christ,
which are the tabernacles in which God and his people dwell, and will
abide in this form but for a time, and are moveable; and also of
Christ's tabernacling in human nature, [Joh
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014).

\(a\) "quum tegitur luna", Piscator; "ad verbum in obtectione", i. e.
"eum obtegatur luna a sole", Amama.

[Psalms 81:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 81:4</span></span>

For this was a statute for Israel,.... It was not a piece of will
worship, or device of the children of Israel, but was of divine
institution; that the passover should be kept at the time it was; and
that the trumpets should be blown on the new moon, or first of Tisri;
and that the feast of tabernacles should be kept on the fifteenth of the
same month:

and a law of the God of Jacob; and therefore to be observed by Jacob's
posterity: the law for the one is in [Exo
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#018) and for the other is in [Lev
23:24](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#024) and so all the ordinances of
Christ, and of the Gospel dispensation, are to be regarded on the same
account, because they are the statutes and appointments of God; and the
feast of tabernacles is particularly put for them all, [Zac
14:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#016).

[Psalms 81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 81:5</span></span>

This he ordained in Joseph for a testimony,.... That is, this law
concerning the blowing of trumpets on the new moon, and the keeping the
solemn feast at the full of the moon, was made to be observed by all
Israel, who are meant by Joseph, for a testimony of God's good will to
them, and of their duty and obedience to him:

when he went out through the land of Egypt, or "over it" (b); which some
understand of Joseph, who is said to go over all the land of Egypt, to
gather in provision against the seven years of famine, [Gen
41:45](../../../bib/kjv/gen041.htm#045) and Jarchi says that his
deliverance from prison was at the beginning of the year, and was
advanced in Pharaoh's court: and the meaning is, either "when he", the
Lord, "went out against the land of Egypt", so Arama, in order to slay
their firstborn; and when he passed over Israel, and saved them; marched
through the land in his indignation, and went forth for the salvation of
his people, [Exo 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#004) then was the
ordinance of the passover appointed: or when Israel went out of Egypt,
designed by Joseph, some little time after, while in the wilderness, and
dwelling in tents, the feast of tabernacles was instituted; but rather
this shows that the feast of passover is before meant, which was
instituted at the time of Israel's going out of Egypt, and was the
solemn feast day ordained for a statute, law and testimony in Israel;
and that the new moon, or month rather, on which the trumpet was to be
blown, was the month Abib, the beginning of months, by an ordinance of
God, [Exo 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/exo012.htm#002).

where I heard a language that I understood not; here the prophet
represents the people of Israel in Egypt; though the Septuagint, Vulgate
Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions, read,

he heard, and he understood not and the language is either the voice of
God out of the fire, which before was never heard in this unusual
manner, nor understood, [Deu 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu005.htm#024) or
the speech of Moses, who had Aaron for his mouth and spokesman; or
rather the Egyptian language, which was not understood by the Israelites
without an interpreter, [Gen 42:23](../../../bib/kjv/gen042.htm#023)
which sense is confirmed by [Psa
114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001), and this is mentioned as an
aggravation of their affliction in Egypt; see [Jer
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#015).

\(b\) "in ipsum exeundo", Montanus; "cum exiret ipse super terram",
Pagninus.

[Psalms 81:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 81:6</span></span>

I removed his shoulder from the burden,.... These are the words of God,
declaring how he had delivered the Israelites from the oppression and
cruelty of the Egyptians; who made their lives bitter in hard bondage,
and obliged them to carry heavy loads of bricks upon their shoulders:

his hands were delivered from the pots, or "baskets" (c); into which the
bricks were put when made, and carried on their shoulders; or from
making of pots, as Kimchi, who thinks the Israelites were employed in
making pots of clay as well as bricks; see [Psa
68:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#013), the Targum is,

"his hands withdrew themselves from casting clay into the pots:''

the whole is typical of the saints' deliverance by Christ from the
bondage of sin, Satan, and the law.

\(c\) "a sporta, a cophino", Gejerus, Amama, Michaelis.

[Psalms 81:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 81:7</span></span>

Thou calledst in trouble, and I delivered thee,.... That is, when Israel
were in trouble in Egypt, as the Targum adds, and they cried unto the
Lord in their distress, he heard them, and answered them, and sent them
a deliverer, and brought them out of all their troubles, [Exo
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#007).

I answered thee in the secret place of thunder; by bringing the plague
of thunder and lightnings upon the Egyptians, when the Israelites were
hidden from them; a sense given by some, as Kimchi observes: or rather
this was done when the Lord looked out of the pillar of cloud at the Red
sea upon the Egyptian host, and troubled them; at which time the voice
of his thunder was heard in heaven, [Psa
77:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#016). Some think this has reference
to the thunder at the giving of the law on Mount Sinai; but the sense
before given is best:

I proved thee at the waters of Meribah; by withholding water from them
to try them, and see whether they would behave patiently, and put their
trust and confidence in the Lord, or not; see [Exo
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#004).

Selah. See Gill on [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002).

[Psalms 81:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 81:8</span></span>

Hear, O my people, and I will testify unto thee,.... Of himself, his
being, and perfections; what he was unto them, had done for them, and
would do for them, as in the following verses: or "testify in thee" (d),
bear witness to their spirits, that they were his people, and he was
their God; this is a witness which the people of God have in themselves;
it is the inward testimony of the Spirit; besides which, there is the
outward testimony of the word, and which also may be here meant; for it
may be rendered,

I will give a testimony to thee: the law is a testimony of the will of
God to his people, what he would have done, or not done; and the Gospel
is a testimony of his grace, and the whole word testifies of Christ, his
person, offices, obedience, sufferings, and death: some render it,
"testify against thee" (e), for their murmurings, rebellion, and
idolatry, as in [Psa 50:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#007) and they are
called upon to hear the voice of God in his word, and in his
providences, being his people; and as such he addresses them, which
bespeaks interest in them, affection to them, and an acknowledgment of
them, and carries in it a reason why they should hear him:

O Israel, if thou wilt hearken unto me; this explains who are meant by
the Lord's people, Israel, the posterity of Jacob, a chosen and special
people, who are exhorted not only to hear, but to hearken and to obey;
suggesting, it would be well with them, if they did as in [Psa
81:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#013), and some (f) take these words
to be a wish, as there; "Israel, O that thou wouldest hearken unto me":
see [Isa 48:18](../../../bib/kjv/isa048.htm#018).

\(d\) "testificabor in te", Gejerus. (e) "Ut testificer contra te",
Schmidt. (f) So Michaelis, and Gussetius, and Genevenses, in ib.
Comment. Ebr. p. 431.

[Psalms 81:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 81:9</span></span>

There shall no strange god be in thee,.... Or in the midst of thee,
owned and worshipped as God; or in thine heart, for whatever engrosses
the affection, or a man puts his trust and confidence in, that he makes
his god, and is a strange one: thus, if any friend or relation, father
or mother, wife or children, are loved more than God, they are set up as
such in his place; thus the epicure, that seeks the gratification of his
carnal lusts, makes his belly his god; and the covetous man his money,
in which he trusts, and therefore is called an idolater; and the
self-righteous man his righteousness, on which he depends for salvation:
hence we read of idols set up in the heart, from which they are
disengaged in conversion, and kept from, [Eze
14:7](../../../bib/kjv/eze014.htm#007).

neither shall thou worship any strange god; only the Lord God is to be
worshipped, [Mat 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019) and there is
but one God; though this is to be understood not to the exclusion of the
Son and Spirit, who are with the Father the one God, and to be
worshipped equally with him, and are; see [Mat
28:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#019).

[Psalms 81:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 81:10</span></span>

I am the Lord thy God,.... The true Jehovah, the Being of beings, in
whom all live and move and have their beings, the covenant God of his
people; and is a reason why they should hear him, and worship him, and
no other:

which brought thee out of the land of Egypt; this, with what goes
before, is the preface to the ten commands, the first and principal of
which is urged in the preceding verse; and this is another reason why
the Lord God should be had and worshipped, and not a strange god; and
redemption from worse than Egyptian bondage, from the bondage of sin,
Satan, and the law, and a deliverance from worse than Egyptian darkness,
and from a state of wickedness and impiety, should lay under greater
obligations still to serve the Lord, and worship him only; who adds, as
a further reason for it,

open thy mouth wide, and I will fill it; which may be understood of
opening the mouth either in prayer or in praise: to open the mouth wide
in prayer is to pray with great freedom, to pour out the soul to God,
lay open its whole case, and tell him all his mind and wants; to pray
with great boldness, and with much importunity and fervency, and in full
assurance of faith, pleading with great strength the promises of God,
and asking in faith for much, according to them; and God may be said to
fill this wide mouth of faith in prayer, when he grants the desires of
the heart, gives his people what they will, even very largely and
abundantly, yea, more than they can ask or think: to open the mouth wide
in praise is to be abundantly thankful for mercies received; and when
persons are so, the Lord fills them with more abundant matter for praise
and thanksgiving; see [Psa 71:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa071.htm#008), or
this may be interpreted of opening the mouth wide in expressions of
desire after spiritual food, hungering and thirsting after spiritual
things, when the Lord fills or satisfies the mouths of his people with
good things, [Psa 103:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#005), with the
sincere milk of the word which they desire, and with the ordinances, the
breasts of consolation they long for, and so satisfies them with the
goodness and fatness of his house, [Psa
64:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa064.htm#004), the metaphor seems to be taken
from the young of birds, which open their mouths, and are filled by the
old ones: the Targum is,

"open thy mouth to the words of the law, and I will fill it with every
good thing.''

[Psalms 81:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 81:11</span></span>

But my people would not hearken to my voice,.... Neither as exhorting
them to the above duties, nor as promising the above favours; would
neither hearken to the voice of the law, nor to the voice of the Gospel;
but were like the deaf adder, which stops its ear to the voice of the
charmer, charming never so wisely:

and Israel would none of me; would not attend to his word, acquiesce in
his will, nor delight themselves in him, and in his worship and service;
would have none of his salutary doctrines, or wholesome reproofs, nor of
his laws and government; would not have him to reign over them, nor to
be their Saviour, though the only one, and there is none beside him;
though the chiefest good, and from whom all good things come, and is the
portion and exceeding great reward of his people: see [Pro
1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#025).

[Psalms 81:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 81:12</span></span>

So I gave them up unto their own hearts' lust,.... Sometimes God gave
them up, when they sinned, into the hands of the Moabites, or Ammonites,
or Philistines, or other neighbouring nations, for their chastisement;
but to be delivered up unto their own hearts' lust is worse than that;
nay, than to be delivered to Satan: salvation may be the consequence of
that, but damnation of this; and yet it is a righteous judgment; for as
men like not to retain God in their knowledge, it is but just with him
to give them up to vile affections, to a reprobate mind, to do things
not convenient, [Rom 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#024) there is
nothing men are more desirous of than to have their hearts' lusts; and
there is no greater judgment can befall them than to be left to the
power of them, which must unavoidably issue in their ruin here and
hereafter: and they walked in their own counsels; which were bad; after
the imagination of their own evil hearts, and not after the counsels and
directions of God in his word, and by his servants.

[Psalms 81:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 81:13</span></span>

O that my people had hearkened unto me,.... This might have been
expected from them, as they were his professing people; and it would
have been to their advantage if they had hearkened to him, as well as it
would have been well pleasing to him; for that is what is designed by
this wish, which does not express the purposing will of God; for who
hath resisted that? if he had so willed, he could have given them ears
to hear; but his commanding will, and what is his approving one: to
hearken to him is not only to hearken to what he commands, but to what
he approves of; it is the good and acceptable will of God that men
should hearken to the declarations of his will in the law, and to the
declarations of his grace in the Gospel; and indeed it is the voice of
Christ, the Angel of God's presence, who went before the children of
Israel in the wilderness, which they were to hearken to and obey, that
is here meant; see [Exo 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo023.htm#020), and
[Heb 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006),

and Israel had walked in my ways; which he marked out and directed them
unto, meaning his ordinances and commandments; which to walk in, as it
denotes progress and continuance, and supposes and requires life and
strength, so it is both pleasant and profitable.

[Psalms 81:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 81:14</span></span>

I should soon have subdued their enemies,.... The Canaanites, and
others: this he would have done in a very little time, or at once, and
that easily, and without any trouble; he would quickly have humbled
them, and brought them on their knees, as the word (g) signifies, to
terms of peace; for when a man's ways please the Lord, he makes his
enemies to be at peace with him, [Pro
16:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro016.htm#007) so those that hearken to the
voice of Christ, and walk in his ways, he subdues their iniquities, and
will bruise Satan under their feet shortly, and make them more than
conquerors: through himself, over the world; the men and things of it he
has overcome:

and turned my hand against their adversaries; that troubled, distressed,
and oppressed them; and it is a righteous thing with God to render
tribulation to them that trouble his people; he turns his chastising
hand off of them, which sometimes is heavy upon them, and presses them
sore, and turns it in a way of wrath and vindictive justice against
their adversaries; and so the Targum,

"and turned the stroke of my power against their adversaries;''

this is the lighting down of his arm with the indignation of his anger,
which is intolerable, [Isa 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030).

\(g\) "flecterem", Cocceius.

[Psalms 81:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 81:15</span></span>

The haters of the Lord should have submitted themselves unto him,....
Or, "lied unto him" (h); feignedly submitted to him, flattered him,
pretended friendship to him, and entered into a league with him; either
Israel, mentioned [Psa 81:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#013), our God,
whom and whose worship and people they hated; as every natural man is an
hater of God, and all that is good, and enmity itself unto him; but
these shall all submit to Christ, sooner or later, in one way or
another, and acknowledge him Lord, and that he is superior to them, and
themselves not a match for him; as Julian the emperor when wounded,
said, Thou hast overcome me, O Galilean:

but their time should have endured for ever; which Jarchi and Aben Ezra
interpret of the calamities and vengeance that should come upon the
haters of God, who will be punished with everlasting destruction; their
worm will never die, nor their fire be quenched; it is everlasting, and
the smoke of their torment will ascend for ever and ever; in which sense
the word is used, [Isa 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#022) or rather
this is to be understood of the time, or happy state and condition, of
the Israelites, which would have been of long continuance, had they
hearkened to the Lord, and walked in his ways; particularly, they would
have long enjoyed the land of Canaan, which was given to Abraham and his
seed for an everlasting possession, and which they held by the tenure of
their obedience, [Gen 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen017.htm#008), and so all
truly gracious souls, that hearken to the voice of Christ, and walk in
his ways, are in a happy state, which will endure for ever; they are
blessed with all spiritual blessings, and those are for ever; the
heavenly land of Canaan they shall dwell in for ever; their mansions or
habitations in Christ's Father's house are everlasting; their house, not
made with hands, is eternal in the heavens; their estate, possession,
and inheritance is an eternal one; it is incorruptible, and fades not
away; their being with Christ is for ever; and their happiness is often
expressed by eternal life and eternal glory.

\(h\) "mentientur", Montanus; "mentiti fuissent", Vatablus;
"mentirentur", Musculus, Cocceius, Gejerus; "mendaciter se dedissent",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Psalms 81:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 81:16</span></span>

He should have fed them also with the finest of the wheat,.... Or the
"fat of the wheat (y)"; see [Deu
32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014), with the finest flour of it:
the Targum is,

"with the best bread of wheat;''

with the best of wheat, and the best bread that can be made of it: Aben
Ezra interprets it of the manna, which was better than the fat, or
finest, of the wheat, being the corn of heaven, and angels' food, [Psa
78:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#024), but it rather respects what the
Israelites would have been continued to be fed with in the land of
Canaan, which was a land of wheat, [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008), and such who hearken to the Lord,
and walk in his ways, are fed by him with the Gospel, which is
comparable to wheat, and the finest of it, for its choiceness and
excellency, for its solidity and substantiality, for its purity and
cleanness, and for its being of a nourishing and strengthening nature,
see [Jer 38:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer038.htm#028), and especially Christ,
the sum and substance of the Gospel, may be figuratively meant, with
whom the saints are fed, and who is compared to a corn of wheat, [Joh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024) for his preciousness and
excellency, for his purity and fruitfulness, and for being the food of
his people, the bread of life, for which he was prepared by his
sufferings and death; which may be fitly expressed by the threshing,
winnowing, and grinding of wheat, and then of kneading the flour, and
baking the bread:

and with honey out of the rock would I have satisfied thee; the land of
Canaan abounded with hills and rocks, in which bees had their hives, and
from whence honey dropped to lower places; and hence the land is said to
flow with milk and honey, [Exo 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#008),
nor is it unusual in other places to find honey in rocks; at Guadaloupe,
in the West Indies, we are told (z), honey was found in trees and caves
of rocks. Aben Ezra interprets this of the water which flowed out of the
rock at Horeb, which was sweeter than honey; but the former sense is
best: the rock spiritually and mystically designs Christ, the Rock of
salvation, [Co1 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#004), the honey out of
the rock, the fulness of grace in him, and the blessings of it, the sure
mercies of David, and the precious promises of the everlasting covenant;
and the Gospel, which is sweeter than the honey or the honeycomb; and
with these such are filled and satisfied, who hearken to Christ, and
walk in his ways; for, as the whole of what is here said shows what
Israel lost by disobedience, it clearly suggests what such enjoy who
hear and obey.

\(y\) "ex adipe frumenti", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus; "adipe
tritici", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so Cocceius, Gejerus,
Michaelis. (z) P. Martyr. Decad. 3. lib. 9.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 82](psa082)

</div>
