<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa085)  [Next](psa087.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 86](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 86:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 86

A Prayer of David. The title is the same with the Seventeenth Psalm, and
the subject of it is much alike: it was written by David, when in
distress, and his life was sought after; very likely when he was
persecuted by Saul, and fled from him; so Aben Ezra, Jarchi, and Kimchi:
and as he was a type of Christ in his afflictions, as well as in his
exalted state, it may not be unfitly applied to him, as it is by some
interpreters. The Syriac inscription of it is,

"for David, when he built an house for the Lord; and a prophecy of the
calling of the Gentiles; and moreover, a prayer of a peculiar righteous
man.''

Theodoret thinks it predicts the siege of Jerusalem by the Assyrians,
and Hezekiah's hope in God.

[Psalms 86:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 86:1</span></span>

Bow down thine ear, O Lord, hear me,.... This is spoken of God after the
manner of men, who, when they listen and attentively hearken to what is
said to them, stoop and bow the head, and incline the ear; and it
denotes condescension in the Lord, who humbles himself as to look upon
men, so to bow down the ear and hearken to them: this favour is granted
to the saints, to whom he is a God hearing and answering prayer, and
which Christ, as man and Mediator, enjoyed; see [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007.md),

for I am poor and needy; weak and feeble, destitute and distressed, and
so wanted help and assistance; and which carries in it an argument or
reason enforcing the above petition; for the Lord has a regard to the
poor and needy; see [Psa 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa006.htm#002.md). This may
be understood literally, it being the common case of the people of God,
who are generally the poor and needy of this world, whom God chooses,
calls, and makes his own; and so was David when he fled from Saul, being
often in want of temporal mercies, as appears by his application to
Ahimelech and Nabal for food; and having nothing, as Kimchi observes, to
support him, but what his friends, and the men of Judah, privately
helped him to; and the character well agrees with Christ, whose case
this was; see [Co2 8:9](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#009.md). Moreover, it
may be taken in a spiritual sense; all men are poor and needy, though
not sensible of it; good men are poor in spirit, are sensible of their
spiritual poverty, and apply to the Lord, and to the throne of his
grace, for the supply of their need; and such an one was David, even
when he was king of Israel, as well as at this time, [Psa
40:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa040.htm#017.md), and may be applied to Christ;
especially when destitute of his Father's gracious presence, and was
forsaken by him and all his friends, [Mat
27:46](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#046.md).

[Psalms 86:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 86:2</span></span>

Preserve my soul,.... Or life, which Saul sought after; and this prayer
was heard: David was often remarkably preserved by the Lord from his
attempts upon him; and so was the soul or life of Christ preserved in
his infancy from Herod's malice; in the wilderness from wild beasts, and
from perishing with hunger; and often from the designs of the Jews, to
take away his life before his time; and he was supported in death,
preserved from corruption in the grave, and raised from thence:
instances there are of his praying for the preservation of his life,
with submission to the will of God, in which he was heard, [Mat
26:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#039.md). The Lord is not only the
preserver of the lives of men in a temporal sense, but he is the
preserver of the souls of his people, their more noble part, whose
redemption is precious; he keeps them from the evil of sin, and
preserves them safe to his kingdom and glory; yea, their whole soul,
body, and spirit, are preserved by him blameless, unto the coming of
Christ:

for I am holy; quite innocent, as to the crime that was laid to his
charge by Saul and his courtiers; or was kind, beneficent, and merciful,
to others, and to such God shows himself merciful, they obtain mercy: or
was favoured of God, to whom he had been bountiful, on whom he had
bestowed many mercies and blessings; and therefore desires and hopes
that, to the rest of favours, this of preservation might be added; or,
as he was a sanctified person, and God had begun his work of grace in
him, he therefore entreats the Lord would preserve him, and perfect his
own work in him: some, as Aben Ezra observes, would have the sense to
be,

"keep my soul until I am holy:''

so Arama interprets it,

"keep me unto the world to come, where all are holy:''

the character of an Holy One eminently and perfectly agrees with Christ,
as well as the petition; see [Psa
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa016.htm#001.md).

O thou, my God, save thy servant that trusteth in thee; both temporally
and spiritually: the arguments are taken from covenant interest in God,
which is a strong one; from relation to him as a servant, not by nature
only, but by grace; and from his trust and confidence in him; all which,
as well as the petition, agree with Christ; see [Psa
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#001.md).

[Psalms 86:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 86:3</span></span>

Be merciful unto me, O Lord,.... In my distressed and miserable
condition, being an object of mercy, pity, and compassion; this petition
is used by Christ in [Psa 41:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa041.htm#010.md).

for I cry unto thee daily; or "all the day"; every day, and several
times in a day, [Psa 55:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#017.md) constant
and importunate prayer is the duty of saints, and available with God,
[Th1 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017.md). Christ was much in the
exercise of it, [Luk 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/luk006.htm#012.md).

[Psalms 86:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 86:4</span></span>

Rejoice the soul of thy servant,.... With the discoveries of love, of
pardoning grace, and mercy, before made sad with sin or sufferings; and
with the light of God's countenance, before troubled with the hidings of
his face: this may be applied to Christ, in sorrowful circumstances, who
was made full of joy with his Father's countenance, [Mat
26:37](../../../bib/kjv/mat026.htm#037.md).

for unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my soul: in prayer, as the Targum
adds; and it denotes the devotion, fervency, heartiness, and sincerity,
of his prayer; the doing of it with a true heart, the lifting up of the
heart with the hands unto God, [Lam
3:41](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#041.md) or by way of offering unto the
Lord, not the body only, but the soul or heart also; or as a depositum
committed into his hands; so Christ lifted up his eyes, and his heart
and soul, to his divine Father; and also made his soul an offering for
sin, and at death commended his spirit into his hands, [Joh
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#001.md); see Gill on [Psa
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#001.md).

[Psalms 86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 86:5</span></span>

For thou, Lord, art good,.... Essentially and independently good, from
whom every good and perfect gift comes; good in himself, and good to
others; good to all, in a providential way; and good to his own special
people in a way of grace: this is asserted by Christ, [Mat
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat019.htm#017.md).

and ready to forgive; there is forgiveness with him, and it is to be had
without difficulty; he has largely provided for it; he is forward unto
it, he freely giving it; it is according to the riches of his grace; he
does abundantly pardon; no sooner is it asked but it is had; this David
knew by experience, [Psa 32:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#005.md),

and plenteous in mercy unto all them that call upon thee; in truth, in
sincerity, in a right way, through Christ, and faith in him; to such not
only the Lord shows himself merciful, but is rich and abundant in mercy;
he has a multitude of tender mercies, and abounds in his grace and
goodness, and in the donation of it to his people; all which encourage
their faith and hope in their petitions to him.

[Psalms 86:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 86:6</span></span>

Give ear, O Lord, unto my prayer,.... As this psalm is called, in the
title of it; his own prayer, and not another's, not one composed for
him, but what was composed by him; this petition is repeated, as to the
sense of it, from [Psa 86:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#001.md) to show
his importunity to be heard:

and attend to the voice of my supplications; which proceeded from the
spirit of grace and supplication, put up in an humble manner, in a
dependence on the mercy of God, which the word used has the
signification of, and were attended with thanksgiving, [Psa
86:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012.md), according to the apostle's
rule, [Phi 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi004.htm#006.md), these were vocal
prayers, and not mere mental ones; see [Heb
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb005.htm#007.md).

[Psalms 86:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 86:7</span></span>

In the day of my trouble I will call upon thee,.... David had his
troubles, both inward and outward, before and after he came to the
throne, in private and public life; and every good man has his troubles;
and there are some particular times or days of trouble; which trouble
arises from different causes; sometimes from themselves, their
corruptions, the weakness of their grace, and the poor performance of
their duties; sometimes from others; from the persecutions of the men of
the world; from the wicked lives of profane sinners, and especially
professors of religion, and from the spread of false doctrine; sometimes
from Satan and his temptations; and sometimes from the more immediate
hand of God in afflictions, and from the hidings of his face: these
troubles do not last always; they are but for a day, for a particular
time; and such a season is a fit one for prayer, and the Lord invites
and encourages his people to call upon him in prayer when this is the
case, [Psa 50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015.md). Christ had his times
of trouble, in which he called upon his divine Father, [Joh
11:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#033.md).

for thou wilt answer me; which the idols of the Gentiles could not do;
Baal could not answer his priests, [Kg1
18:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1018.htm#026.md), this the psalmist concluded,
both from the promise of God, [Psa
50:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa050.htm#015.md), and from his frequent
experience, [Psa 138:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003.md), a very
encouraging reason or argument this to call on the Lord: Christ was
always heard and answered, [Joh 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#041.md).

[Psalms 86:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 86:8</span></span>

Among the gods there is none like unto thee, O Lord,.... Among the
angels of heaven, as the Targum, in the king's Bible; see [Mat
24:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036.md), and who are sometimes called
gods, and among whom there is none like to the Lord; see [Psa
97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007.md) or among civil magistrates, he
being King of kings, and Lord of lords, the only Potentate; among whom
he judges, over whom he presides, and whom he sets up and puts down at
pleasure, [Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001.md), or among all
those that are named gods in heaven, or on earth, the nominal and
fictitious gods of the Gentiles, who are vanity, and the work of error:
the portion of Jacob is not like them, [Jer
10:15](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#015.md), there is none like him, for the
perfections of his nature, his power, wisdom, faithfulness, holiness,
justice, mercy, grace, and goodness; [Exo
15:11](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#011.md).

neither are there any works like unto thy works; as the works of
creation and providence, and those of redemption and grace, in which
there is such a manifest display of the perfections of his nature, [Deu
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#024.md).

[Psalms 86:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 86:9</span></span>

All nations whom thou hast made,.... All nations, or the inhabitants of
all nations, are made by the Lord, and of the blood of one man, [Act
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#026.md), and which as it shows the
obligation of all men to come and worship, as is said should be; so
likewise that the Lord, who has made them, is able to make them come to
do homage to him, as follows:

shall come and worship before thee, O Lord; "come", spiritually, by
faith and repentance, to the Lord himself, being drawn by the power of
his efficacious grace through the ministry of the word; and, locally, to
the house and ordinances of God, to attend upon them, and wait on him in
them; and "worship" both externally, according to his revealed will; and
internally in the exercise of grace, in spirit and in truth: this is
prophetically said of the conversion of the Gentiles in Gospel times,
especially in the latter day; see [Rev
15:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#004.md). Kimchi and Arama say this will
be in the time of the Messiah:

and shall glorify thy name; the Lord himself, with their bodies and
spirits, which are his; and ascribe the glory of their salvation to him,
and glorify him for his mercy towards them in their redemption and
conversion; glorify that and every perfection of his, displayed in their
salvation; and also his Gospel, which brings them the news of it; see
[Rom 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#009.md).

[Psalms 86:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 86:10</span></span>

For thou art great,.... In his nature, and the perfections of it; in his
power, wisdom, truth, faithfulness, love, grace, and mercy; and in all
his persons; the Father is great, greater than all; the Son is the great
God, and our Saviour; and the Spirit, which is in his people, is greater
than he that is in the world:

and doest wondrous things; in nature and providence; such as the forming
of all things out of nothing; upholding all things by the word of his
power; the formation of man, soul and body, and the union of both; and
the constant government of the world; and more especially in grace, as
the provision in the covenant in eternity, the mission of Christ in
time, the conversion of a sinner, and bringing him to eternal glory:

thou art God alone; to the exclusion of all such who are not gods by
nature; but not to the exclusion of the Son and Spirit, who are, with
the Father, the one God, [Jo1 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#007.md).

[Psalms 86:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 86:11</span></span>

Teach me thy way, O Lord,.... The methods of thy grace, which thou hast
taken, and dost take, in the salvation of men, in the contrivance,
impetration, and application of it; or the way which thou hast marked
out for thy people to walk in, the way of thy commandments: each of
these the psalmist had knowledge of before; but he desires to be more
and more instructed therein, as every good man does; see [Psa
25:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa025.htm#004.md).

I will walk in thy truth; in Christ, the truth of types, and by whom
grace and truth came, and who is truth itself, and the true way to
eternal life; and to walk in him is to walk by faith in him, in hope of
eternal happiness through him, [Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017.md) or in the truth of the Gospel, of
Gospel doctrine, Gospel worship, and Gospel conversation; to walk in it
is to walk becoming it, and abide by it, its truths and ordinances; see
[Jo2 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo2001.htm#004.md).

unite my heart to fear thy name; there must be an heart given to man to
fear the Lord; for the fear of the Lord is not naturally in their
hearts, or before their eyes; and they should have, not a divided and
distracted heart, an heart divided between God and the world, between
the fear of God and the fear of man; but a heart united to the Lord,
that cleaves to him, and him only; a single and a sincere heart; a heart
that has a single view to his glory, and a sincere affection for him;
and such a heart the Lord has promised to give to his people, in order
to fear him, [Jer 32:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer032.htm#039.md).

[Psalms 86:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 86:12</span></span>

I will praise thee, O Lord my God, with all my heart,.... And under that
consideration, that he was his God, and which itself is sufficient
matter of praise; this makes him amiable, and such he is, love itself:
this is a blessing of pure grace, and is the foundation of all other
blessings, and continues for ever: this work of praise, which is no
other than ascribing glory to God, and giving thanks unto him for
mercies received, the psalmist determines to do with his whole heart,
which is to be engaged in every spiritual service; even all of it, all
that is within it, every power and faculty of the soul, [Psa
103:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#001.md), which is expressive not of
perfection, but sincerity:

and I will glorify thy name for evermore; by celebrating the perfections
of his nature, by giving him the glory of the works of his hands, by
praising him for all favours, by devoting himself unto him, and by doing
all things for his glory, and that for ever, in time as long as he
lived, and to all eternity.

[Psalms 86:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 86:13</span></span>

For great is thy mercy toward me,.... Both in things temporal and
spiritual; an instance of which follows:

and thou hast delivered my soul from the lowest hell; from a very
distressed and disconsolate condition, being almost in despair, under a
deep sense of sin, and a fearful apprehension of the wrath of God, as,
particularly, when he was charged by Nathan; or from hell itself, and
the severest punishment in it; from the second and eternal death, which
every man is deserving of, and are only delivered from by the grace of
God, and blood of Christ: this shows the sense the psalmist had of the
just demerit of sin, and his thankfulness for deliverance from it; see
[Psa 56:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa056.htm#013.md). Kimchi interprets it of
the grave; but says, there are some that interpret it of the judgment,
or condemnation of hell: such who have escaped great dangers in long and
perilous journeys, or have been delivered from threatening diseases, are
said to be saved from hell (r).

\(r\) Vide Heraclit. de Incredib. c. 21. p. 86.

[Psalms 86:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 86:14</span></span>

O God, the proud are risen against me,.... As all men naturally are, and
as all are without the grace of God; and because they are, they deal in
proud wrath: as, through the pride of their heart, they seek not after
God; so, through the same, they persecute his people, treating them with
the utmost contempt, and as the offscouring of all things. Jarchi
interprets this particularly of Doeg and Ahithophel:

and the assemblies of violent men have sought after my soul; or
"terrible" (s) ones, who breathed out nothing but cruelty, threatenings,
and slaughter; and who were many, and got together in bodies, and
entered into combinations and conspiracies; and whom nothing would
satisfy but the taking away of his life, which they sought after; see
[Psa 22:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#012.md).

and have not set thee before them; they did not consider the omniscience
of God, that he knew and took notice of all they did; nor his
omnipresence, that he was everywhere, and there was no fleeing from him;
nor his omnipotence, who was able to crush them to pieces; nor his
justice, which will render tribulation to them that trouble his; nor his
goodness, which should lead to repentance; nor had they any fear of him,
nor respect to his glory: in short, they were like the unjust judge, who
neither feared God nor regarded men, [Luk
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#004.md).

\(s\) "terribilium", Montanus; so some in Vatablus, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 86:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 86:15</span></span>

But thou, O Lord, art a God full of compassion,.... Or merciful (t), in
the most affectionate and tender manner, as a parent to its child, or
particularly as a mother to the son of her womb; and is rich and
plenteous in his mercy, and freely bestows it; and this was the support
of the psalmist under his troubles from his enemies, that though they
were cruel the Lord was merciful:

and gracious; so he has been in eternity, as appears by his election of
grace, by the covenant of his grace, and the provisions of it in his
Son; and so he is in time, as is manifest from his kindness in Christ
Jesus, from his justification, pardon, adoption, effectual calling and
salvation of his people, which are all of grace;

longsuffering; not only to wicked men, but to his chosen ones; which
longsuffering of his is salvation to them; he bears with them, and waits
to be gracious to them, to bring them to repentance, and save them, [Pe2
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/pe2003.htm#009.md),

plenteous in mercy; or goodness; See Gill on [Psa
86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005.md), and truth: in fulfilling
promises; see [Exo 34:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo034.htm#006.md), to which
these words refer.

\(t\) "misericors", Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
&c.

[Psalms 86:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 86:16</span></span>

O turn unto me, and have mercy upon me,.... For it seems the Lord had
turned away from him, and had hid his face, and withheld the
manifestation of his grace and mercy from him, and had not yielded him
the help and assistance he expected; and therefore entreats that he
would turn again to him, and show him his face and favour, and be
merciful to him:

give thy strength unto thy servant; spiritual strength, strength in his
soul, to exercise grace, perform duty, bear the cross, and stand up
against all enemies, and hold out to the end: this is God's gift; and
the psalmist pleads his relation to him as his servant, not merely by
creation, but by grace; this is interpreted by the Jews of the King
Messiah (u):

and save the son of thine handmaid; out of the hands of those that were
risen up against him; see [Psa 119:94](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#094.md).
Some think this has a special reference to Christ, who was made of a
woman, called an handmaid, [Luk 1:48](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#048.md),
born of a virgin, the son of Mary: Arama says David uses the word
"handmaid", because he sprung from Ruth the Moabitess.

\(u\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 58. 4. & 59. 1.

[Psalms 86:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 86:17</span></span>

Show me a token for good,.... Not only one by which he might know that
his sins were pardoned, and his person accepted with God, and that he
should be saved; but one visible to others, even to his enemies, by
which they might know that God was on his side, and would verily do him
good: Kimchi interprets it of the kingdom; and his being raised to the
throne of Israel was a token of the Lord's goodness to him, and showed
that he had a delight in him, and meant to do him good:

that they which hate me may see it, and be ashamed; of their envy of
him, their combinations and conspiracies against him, and of all their
efforts to distress him, to hinder him of the kingdom, or deprive him of
it, or make him uncomfortable in it:

because thou, Lord, hast holpen me, and comforted me; he comforted him
by helping him against his enemies, and out of his troubles; and, by
doing both, showed him a token for good, and filled his enemies with
shame and confusion.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 87](psa087.md)

</div>
