<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa047)  [Next](psa049.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 48](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 48:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 48

A Song and Psalm for the sons of Korah. This psalm is entitled a "song
psalm", a psalm to be sung vocally; or "a song and psalm" to be sung
both vocally and instrumentally; and is one of the spiritual songs the
apostle speaks of, [Eph 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019.md); It was
occasioned, as some think, by David's spoiling the Philistines, [Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017.md); or, as others, by the
deliverance of the people from the Moabites and Ammonites in the times
of Jehoshaphat, [Ch2 20:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#027.md); or, as
others, by the deliverance of the inhabitants of Jerusalem from
Sennacherib in the times of Hezekiah, [Kg2
19:34](../../../bib/kjv/kg2019.htm#034.md); though as Kimchi, a celebrated
Jewish commentator, owns, it belongs to the times of the Messiah, as the
other preceding psalms; and treats of his greatness, and of the praise
and glory due to him, and gives large encomiums of his church.

[Psalms 48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 48:1</span></span>

Great is the Lord,.... The same that in the foregoing psalm is said to
be gone, up to heaven with a shout, to sit on the throne of his
holiness, to reign over the Heathen, and to be King over all the earth;
who is great, and the Son of the Highest; the great God and our Saviour;
great in his person as God-man, God manifest in the flesh, his Father's
fellow and equal; and in the perfections of his nature, being of great
power, and of great wisdom, and of great faithfulness, and of strict
holiness and justice, and of wonderful grace and goodness; great in his
works of creation and providence; in his miraculous operations when on
earth, and in the work of man's redemption and salvation; great is he in
all his offices, a great Prophet risen in Israel, a great High Priest
over thee house of God, a Saviour, and a great one, and the great
Shepherd of the sheep;

and greatly to be praised in the city of our God; the city of Jerusalem,
the city of solemnities, where was the worship of God, and where the
tribes went up to worship, and God was present with his people; and
where the great Lord of all showed himself to be great; here Christ the
great Saviour appeared, even in the temple, when a child, where Simeon
and Anna saw him, and spoke great things of him; where he at twelve
years of age disputed with the doctors, and showed his great wisdom;
here when grown up he wrought many of his great miracles, and taught his
doctrines; here he entered in great triumph, attended with the shouts,
acclamations, and hosannas of the people; here he ate his last passover
with his disciples; and in a garden near it was he taken and brought
before the sanhedrim, assembled at the high priest's palace at
Jerusalem; and then tried and condemned at the bar of Pilate; when being
led a little way out of the city he was crucified on Mount Calvary; and
on another mount, the mount of Olives, about a mile from it, he ascended
to heaven; and here in this city he poured forth the Spirit in an
extraordinary manner on his disciples at the day of Pentecost, as an
evidence of his ascension; and from hence his Gospel went forth into all
the world; and therefore was greatly to be praised here, as he was by
his disciples, church, and people, [Act
2:46](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#046.md). Jerusalem is a figure of the
Gospel church, which is often compared to a city, [Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001.md); of which saints are citizens and
fellow citizens of each other; this is a city built on Christ the
foundation; is full of inhabitants, when together and considered by
themselves; is governed by wholesome laws, enacted by Christ its King,
who has appointed officers under him to explain and enforce them, and
see that they are put in execution; and has many privileges and
immunities belonging to it; and this is the city of God, of his building
and of his defending, and where he dwells; it is, as in [Psa
48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002.md); "the city of the great King",
the King Messiah, and where he displays his greatness; here he appears
great and glorious, shows his power and his glory; is seen in the
galleries and through the lattices of ordinances, in his beauty and
splendour; here he grants his gracious presence, and bestows his favours
and blessings; and is therefore greatly to be praised here, as he is by
all his people on the above accounts, Even

in the mountain of his holiness; as Mount Zion is called on account of
the temple built upon it, and the worship of God in it; and a fit emblem
it was of the church of Christ, which, as that is, is chosen and, loved
of God, and is his habitation, is impregnable and immovable, and
consists of persons sanctified by God the Father, in the Son, and
through the Spirit.

[Psalms 48:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 48:2</span></span>

Beautiful for situation,.... This, and what follows, are said of the
city of God, the city of Jerusalem, which was delightfully situated on
an eminence, in a wholesome air; the brook Kidron gliding by it, the
water of Siloah running through it or at least through some parts of it;
fields and gardens adjoining to it, and mountains all around it: and so
the church of Christ is built upon him, the Rock; the river of divine
love runs by it, the streams whereof make it glad; the green pastures of
the word and ordinances are in it; and salvation is as walls and
bulwarks about it; and so healthful is it, that the inhabitants have no
reason to say they are sick, since the people that dwell therein have
their iniquities forgiven, [Isa 33:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#024.md);

the joy of the whole earth: that is, the city of Jerusalem, [Lam
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam002.htm#015.md); especially it was so when
Christ, whose birth near it was matter of great joy to all people; when
he who is the desire of all nations was in it; and when the Gospel went
out from it unto the whole earth, and caused joy wherever it came in
power, and with the Holy Ghost: and the church of Christ, particularly
in the latter day, will be an eternal excellency, and a joy of many
generations, [Isa 60:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa060.htm#015.md); and even now
the whole world has reason to rejoice and be glad, because of the church
of Christ in it, who are the light of the world and the salt of the
earth, and on whose account the world continues, and the men of it enjoy
the blessings they do;

is Mount Zion; or "by Mount Zion": Jerusalem was near it, and
beautifully situated by it;

on the sides of the north; Jerusalem was north of Zion, as Zion was
south of Jerusalem; likewise the temple was on the north part of Mount
Zion, [Isa 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013.md); the altar and altar
gate were on the north side at the temple, and there were the tables on
which the sacrifices were slain, [Eze
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze008.htm#005.md); and on the north side of the
altar was the creature to be offered killed, [Lev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/lev001.htm#011.md); and perhaps some reference is
here had to the church of Christ in the latter day, which for many years
past has been chiefly in our northern part of the world: hence the
Protestant doctrine is by the Papists called the Northern Heresy; and it
will be "tidings out of the north" that shall trouble the man of sin, or
some agent of his, to come forth with fury, and plant the tabernacles of
his palace between the seas, in the glorious holy mountain, [Dan
11:44](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#044.md);

the city of the great King; of Christ the King of kings; See Gill on
[Psa 47:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa047.htm#002.md); and See Gill on [Psa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001.md).

[Psalms 48:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 48:3</span></span>

God is known in her palaces for a refuge. As there were palaces in
Jerusalem; see [Psa 48:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#013.md); so there
are in the church of Christ; every place in it is a palace fit for a
king; and everyone that has truly a name and a place there are kings and
priests unto God: and here God is a "refuge" both for saints and sinners
to fly unto; See Gill on [Psa 46:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#001.md);
and is "known" to be so; the ministers of the Gospel being here
appointed to direct and encourage souls to flee to Christ for refuge,
who is the hope set before them in the everlasting Gospel, preached by
them to lay hold upon; and all that do flee to him know, by experience,
that he is a refuge for them; and as all the people of God do in every
time of distress, and when all refuge fails them elsewhere.

[Psalms 48:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 48:4</span></span>

For, lo, the kings were assembled,.... As the princes of the Philistines
to seek for David, when in the strong hold of Zion, [Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017.md); as the Ethiopians in the time of
Asa, [Ch2 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009.md); and the Moabites and
Ammonites in the times of Jehoshaphat, [Ch2
20:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#001.md); and the kings of Syria and
Israel in the times of Ahaz, [Isa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa007.htm#001.md);
and Sennacherib with his princes, who, in his esteem, were kings, in the
times of Hezekiah, [Kg2 18:17](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#017.md); which
are instances of the kings, of the nations' gathering together against
Zion, the city of Jerusalem, and people of the Jews, who were typical of
the church of Christ; and that without success, and to their own
confusion and destruction; though this seems to refer to the latter day
of the Gospel dispensation, when all the kings of the earth, Pagan,
Papal, and Mahometan, will be gathered together at the instigation of
Satan, to the battle of the great day of the Lord God Almighty, in a
place called Armageddon, where they will be defeated by Christ the King
of kings, [Rev 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#013.md). Jarchi and
Kimchi interpret the passage of Gog and Magog gathering together to
fight against Jerusalem, with which compare [Rev
20:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#008.md);

they passed by together; either to the battle, as Jarchi explains it; or
they passed by Jerusalem, the city of our God, the church, without
entering into it, or doing it any harm.

[Psalms 48:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 48:5</span></span>

They saw it,.... Either the city or the power of God, as Aben Ezra; or,
as Jarchi, God himself going forth to fight against the nations. This
refers to the power Christ will take to himself, and show forth, by
reigning in his church, and protecting it, which will not only be
visible to the saints, but to the nations of the world; and to the
brightness of Christ's coming in his spiritual reign, with the lustre of
which antichrist will be destroyed, [Rev
11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#017.md); and to the glorious state of
the church, signified by the rising of the witnesses, and their standing
on their feet, and ascending to heaven, which will be seen by their
enemies, [Rev 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011.md); and to the
destruction of Rome, the smoke of whose burning, the kings of the earth,
that have committed fornication with her, will see and lament, [Rev
18:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#008.md);

and so their marvelled: at the glory of the church, the security of it,
the power of Christ in it and over it, and at the destruction of
mystical Babylon; see [Isa 52:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#014.md);

they were troubled: as Herod and all Jerusalem were, upon hearing of the
birth of Christ, [Mat 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat002.htm#003.md); so these
kings will be, upon seeing the coming and power of Christ in the latter
day, the invincibleness of his church, and their own immediate and utter
ruin: this will be the time or the howling of the shepherds, both civil
and ecclesiastical, when all hands will be faint, and every man's heart
will melt, [Zac 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac011.htm#002.md);

and hasted away: fled for fear of the great King at the head of his
armies, in the defence of his church and people: and as the kings of the
earth also at the destruction of Rome will flee and stand afar off, for
fear of her torment, [Rev 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#010.md).

[Psalms 48:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 48:6</span></span>

Fear took hold upon them there,.... That is, either when they came up to
the city, and passed by it, and saw what they did; or, as Kimchi
observes, in the place where they thought to have made a great
slaughter; that is, in Armageddon, [Rev
16:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#016.md); so upon the slaughter of the
seven thousand names of men, or men of name and renown, such as the
kings here assembled, the remnant will be frightened, [Rev
11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013.md);

and pain, as of a woman in travail; this figure is made use of
elsewhere, when the destruction of Babylon and the coming of Christ are
spoken of; see [Isa 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa013.htm#008.md).

[Psalms 48:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 48:7</span></span>

Thou breakest the ships of Tarshish with east wind. This is either
another simile, expressing the greatness of the dread and fear that
shall now seize the kings of the earth; which will be, as Kimchi
observes, as if they were smitten with a strong east wind, which breaks
the ships of Tarshish; and to the same purpose is the note of Aben Ezra;
who says, the psalmist compares the pain that shall take hold upon them
to an east wind in the sea, which breaks the ships; for by Tarshish is
meant, not Tartessus in Spain, nor Tarsus in Cilicia, or the port to
which the Prophet Jonah went and took shipping; but the sea in general:
or else this phrase denotes the manner in which the antichristian kings,
and antichristian states, wilt be destroyed; just as ships upon the
ocean are dashed to pieces with a strong east wind: or it may design the
loss of all their riches and substance brought to them in ships; hence
the lamentations of merchants, and sailors, and ship masters, [Rev
18:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#015.md).

[Psalms 48:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 48:8</span></span>

As we have heard, so have we seen,.... These are the words of the people
of God making their observations on the above things; and so Aben Ezra
and Kimchi understand them of the people of Israel; and the former,
referring them to the war of Gog and Magog, paraphrases them thus:

"the Israelites shall say in that day, as we have heard the prophets,
who prophesied of the fall of Gog and Magog, so have we seen in the city
of the Lord of hosts.''

The words may be understood, either of facts which have been reported
and heard to have been done in time past, to which others will
correspond, and will be seen to do to in the latter day; as, for
instance, as it has been heard that God inflicted plagues upon Egypt; so
it will be seen that he will pour out the vials of his wrath upon the
great city, which is spiritually called Egypt and Sodom: as it has been
heard that God brought his people Israel out of Egypt with a mighty
hand; so it will be seen that he will deliver his people from the
captivity and tyranny of the man of sin, and will call them out from
Babylon a little before the destruction of it: as it has been heard that
Pharaoh and his host were drowned in the Red sea; so it will be seen
that Babylon shall be thrown down like a mill stone cast into the sea,
and be found no more: as it has been heard that, literal Babylon is
destroyed; so it will be seen that mystical Babylon will be destroyed
also: and as it has been heard that the kings of the nations, at several
times, have gathered themselves together against Jerusalem, without
effect; so it will be seen treat the kings of the earth will assemble
together against the church of Christ; but, as soon as they shall come
up to her, and look upon her, they shall be astonished and flee with the
utmost consternation, fear, and dread, and be utterly ruined: or else
the sense is, as it has been heard, from the promises and prophecies
delivered out from time to time, that God will grant his presence to his
church and people, and will be the protection of them, and will destroy
all his and their enemies; so it has been seen that these have been
fulfilled, more or less, in all ages; in the latter day their
accomplishment will be full and manifest, even

in the city of the Lord of hosts; of the hosts of heaven and earth, of
all armies above and below; and therefore the church must be safe under
his protection;

in the city of our God: the covenant God of his people; wherefore, as
the former title declares his power, this shows his love and affection,
and both together secure the happiness of the saints: wherefore it
follows,

God will establish it for ever. Not only particular believers, of which
the church consists, are established on the foundation, Christ; but the
church itself is built on him, the Rock against which the gates of hell
cannot prevail; yet as they are not always in a settled and constant
condition, so neither is that, being sometimes tossed with the tempests
of afflictions and persecutions, and sometimes in one place, and
sometimes in another; but in the latter day it will be established on
the top of the mountains; and which is a desirable thing by all the
saints, and what they should, as many do, earnestly pray for; and which
God will do in his own time; and then it shall be established for ever,
and be a tabernacle that shall not be taken down; not one of its stakes
shall be removed, nor any of its cords broken, [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md), [Isa
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/isa033.htm#020.md).

Selah; on this word; see Gill on [Psa
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002.md).

[Psalms 48:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 48:9</span></span>

We have thought of thy lovingkindness, O God,.... Jarchi interprets it,
"we have waited for thy lovingkindness"; to see thy salvation; and some,
as Ben Melech observes, explain it of hope and expectation; as if the
sense was, "we have hoped for thy lovingkindness"; so the Syriac version
renders it, and the word used has the signification of tarrying, [Sa1
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#009.md). God has his set time to favour
his Zion, and till that time comes it is right in them to be hoping,
expecting, and waiting for it. The Chaldee paraphrase is, "we have
esteemed thy goodness"; it being very excellent, exceeding valuable, and
better than life itself; but other Jewish writers, as Menachem, Aben
Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech, render it as we do, "we have thought", &c.
The lovingkindness of God towards his people in Christ is a very
delightful and profitable subject to dwell in meditation upon, to
consider the objects, instances, cause, and nature of it; and serves
greatly to encourage faith and hope, to draw out love to God, and engage
to a ready and cheerful obedience to his will; and this is sometimes
done in public, as well as in private conversation, and in the closet;
as follows;

in the midst of thy temple; the church of Christ, which is of his
building, where he dwells, and grants his presence, and is often called
the temple of God in the New Testament, in allusion to Solomon's temple;
see [Co1 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016.md); here the word of God is
preached, his ordinances administered, and his presence granted; which
are instances of his lovingkindness, and lead his people to think of it;
and particularly when the faithful ministers of the Gospel make mention
of it, and the ordinance of the supper is administering, which is
intended to bring to remembrance the love of God and Christ: moreover,
in the latter day, to which this psalm belongs, the temple of God will
be opened, [Rev 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019.md); that is, the
true worship of God will be restored, and pure and undefiled religion
freely exercised; the Gospel will be clearly and fully preached; and the
ordinances administered as they were first delivered, which will lead
the saints to think of the lovingkindness of God unto them; and
particularly when they shall see the angels with the seven vials the
executioners of God's wrath on the antichristian states, go forth from
the temple to pour them out upon them, [Rev
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#006.md).

[Psalms 48:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 48:10</span></span>

According to thy name, O God, so is thy praise unto the ends of the
earth,.... That is, as he himself is in the perfections of his nature,
which are displayed in the works of his bands, throughout the whole
creation; so is or ought his praise to be: or rather, as in the latter
day his name will be great in all the earth, [Mal
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011.md); so will his praise be; and as
his name will be One, [Zac 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009.md); he
will be one Lord, there will be one faith and one baptism; his worship,
word, and ordinances, will be uniformly observed and attended to; so
will be his praise: all the saints will unite together in giving glory
to him: he, and he alone, shall be exalted. Moreover, his Gospel is his
name, [Act 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015.md); and that in the
latter day will be preached to every nation, kindred, tongue, and
people, [Rev 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#006.md); and multitudes,
both of Jews and Gentiles, will be convert ed, and from the uttermost
parts of the earth will be heard songs of praise and glory unto him,
[Isa 24:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa024.htm#015.md);

thy right hand is full of righteousness: of all spiritual blessings for
his people; and particularly of the righteousness of Christ, which God
accepts of, imputes unto, and liberally bestows upon them: and it is
also full of punitive justice, which he inflicts on his and their
enemies; his right hand teaches him terrible things, and these terrible
things he does in righteousness; all his works are in righteousness,
which the right hand, being the instrument of action, is a token of.
Moreover, Christ is the right hand of God; he is the man of his right
hand, and as dear to him as his right hand; he is the right hand of his
righteousness, by which he upholds his people; and this right hand of
his is full of righteousness; he does nothing else but righteousness; he
is the author and donor of it to his people, and will execute
righteousness upon his enemies; in righteousness he will make war with
them, [Rev 19:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#011.md); and which is greatly
the sense of this passage, as appears by [Psa
48:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#011.md).

[Psalms 48:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 48:11</span></span>

Let Mount Zion rejoice,.... The church in general; see [Psa
48:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#001.md);

let the daughters of Judah be glad; particular churches; and so the
Targum renders it, "the congregations of the house of Judah"; or
particular believers; such as are called the daughters of Jerusalem, and
the daughters of Zion, [Sol 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#010.md);
these are exhorted to joy and gladness, at the loving kindness of God,
at the spread of his name and glory to the ends of the earth, and at his
righteousness his right hand is full of; and as it follows,

because of thy judgments; executed on the antichristian kings, [Psa
48:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004.md); and on all the antichristian
states, and on the whore of Babylon, and those who have committed
fornication with her; see [Rev 19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001.md).

[Psalms 48:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 48:12</span></span>

Walk about Zion, and go round about her,.... These words are either an
address to the enemies of the church, sarcastically delivered; calling
upon them to come, and surround, and besiege Zion, and see what the
issue and consequence of it will he, even the same as that of the kings,
[Psa 48:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#004.md); or to the builders of Zion,
as Jarchi observes, to come and take a survey of it, and see what
repairs were necessary; or rather to the saints, to the daughters of
Judah before mentioned, to take a view of the strength and defence of
the church, for their own comfort and encouragement, and to report the
same to others for theirs also; for by walking around it may be observed
the foundation, the rock and eminence on which it is built, Christ
Jesus; the wall of it, the Lord himself, a wall of fire; the entrance
into it, Christ the gate of righteousness; the fortress and strong hold
of it the same; and the guards about it, the watch men on its walls, the
ministers of the Gospel, and an innumerable company of angels, that in a
circle surround both ministers and people; see [Rev
7:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#011.md);

tell the towers thereof; see [Ch2
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2026.htm#009.md); the Lord himself is the tower of
his people, high and strong, which secures and defends them from all
their enemies, [Psa 18:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#002.md); the
ministers of the Gospel, who are immovable, and are set for the defence
of it, [Jer 6:27](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#027.md); the Scriptures of
truth, which are like a tower built for an armoury, out of which the
saints are furnished and provided with proper armour, whereby they are
able to engage with false teachers, and to overcome the evil one, [Sol
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004.md); and the ordinances of the Gospel,
the church's two breasts, said to be as towers, [Sol
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#010.md); some render the words, "tell in
the towers" (i); publish on the house tops, declare in the high places
of the city, in the most public manner, the great things of the Gospel,
which relate to the glory of Christ and his church.

\(i\) , Sept. "in turribus ejus", V. L.

[Psalms 48:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 48:13</span></span>

Mark ye well her bulwarks,.... Such as the free favour of God in Christ;
which is not only as a shield, but as a bulwark to the church; his
everlasting love, electing grace, the covenant of grace, with its
blessings and promises, all which are more immovable than rocks and
mountains; and especially the power of God, which surrounds his church,
as the mountains did Jerusalem; and by which they are kept and preserved
as in a garrison, [Psa 125:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#002.md). Also
salvation by Christ; his righteousness, sacrifice, and satisfaction,
which God has appointed for walls and bulwarks, and which make the city,
the church, a strong and impregnable one, [Isa
26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001.md). Likewise the Spirit of God, and
his operations and influences, which are a standard against the enemy's
flood of opposition and persecution; and who being in his church and
people, is greater than he that is in the world, [Isa
59:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#019.md), [Jo1
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1004.htm#004.md). Some render the words, set "your
hearts on her strength", as the Vulgate Latin version; that is, on
Christ, who is the strength of the poor and needy in their distress; the
strength of their hearts, of their lives, and of their salvation, and
the security of the church. Others readier them, "set your hearts on her
armies"; as the Targum is; her volunteers, her soldiers, who endure
hardness as good soldiers of Christ, fight the Lord's battles, and are
more than conquerors through him; and a lovely sight it is to behold
them, with Christ at the head of them; see [Rev
19:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#014.md);

consider her palaces; for Jehovah, Father, Son, and Spirit, have their
dwelling places in Zion; and here, besides apostles, prophets,
evangelists, and ordinary ministers of the word, who are rulers and
officers set in the first place, every saint is a prince and a king; and
has a place and a name here, better than that of sons and daughters of
the greatest potentate on earth; every dwelling place in Mount Zion is a
palace.

that ye may tell it to the generation following: that is, the beauty and
glory, strength and safety of the church; and even all that is spoken of
her in this psalm, as well as what follows: this is the end proposed by
taking a circuit round Zion, and making the above observations on it.

[Psalms 48:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa048.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 48:14</span></span>

For this God is our God for ever and ever,.... Who is spoken of
throughout the whole psalm as greatly to be praised, as well as is known
in Zion, as the stability, security, and protection of her. This is said
as pointing unto him as if visible, as Christ is God manifest in the
flesh, now in Gospel times, to which this psalm belongs; as
distinguishing him from all others, from the gods of the Gentiles,
rejected by the people of God; as claiming an interest in him as their
covenant God; as exulting in the view of such relation to him; as
suggesting how happy they were on this account; and especially since
this relation will always continue, being founded in an everlasting
covenant, and arising from the unchangeable love of God;

he will be our guide, even unto death; the Lord orders the steps of the
righteous, holds them by the right hand, and guides them with his
counsel and in judgment: Christ, the great Shepherd of the flock, feeds
them, as the antitype of David, according to the integrity of his heart,
and guides them by the skilfulness of his hands; he guides their feet in
the ways of peace, life, and salvation, by himself; he leads them into
green pastures, beside the still waters, and unto fountains of living
waters: the Spirit of the Lord leads them to the fulness of Christ;
guides them into all truth, as it is in him; directs them into his and
his Father's love, and leads them on to the land of uprightness. And
this guide is an everlasting one; "even unto death", or "in death", or
"above death" (k); so as not to be hurt of the second death. He guides
not only to the brink of Jordan's river, but through the deep waters of
it, and never leaves till he has landed them safe on the shores of
eternity: and some, as Aben Ezra, render the word as if it was "for
ever"; and others, as Abendana observes, render it "secretly"; the Lord
sometimes leading his people in ways dark and hidden to them: and others
give the sense of it, "as in the days of youth"; that is, God is the
guide of his people in old age as in youth; he is always their guide,
and ever will be: to which sense incline R. Moses in Aben Ezra, others
in Kimchi and Abendana, and as also Jarchi and the Chaldee paraphrase;
but Kimchi and Ben Melech render it as we do, "unto death", or "unto our
death".

\(k\) "super mortem", Montanus; "supra mortem", Cocceius, Gussetius,
Michaelis; so Syr. vers. "in ipsa morte", Pfeiffer, Dub. Ver. loc. 66.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 49](psa049.md)

</div>
