<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa146)  [Next](psa148) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 147](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 147:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 147

This psalm is thought to be written by David, and according to Theodoret
predicts the return of the Jews from Babylon, and the rebuilding of
Jerusalem by Zerubbabel, which seems to be grounded on [Psa
147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002); though the words there agree
well enough with the times of David; hence the title in the Septuagint,
Ethiopic, Arabic, and Syriac versions, and Apollinarius, is as the
preceding; the Syriac adds,

"concerning Zerubbabel and Joshua the priest, and Ezra, who were
solicitous and diligent in building Jerusalem.''

Aben Ezra and other Jewish writers think it foretells the future
rebuilding of Jerusalem, and the restoration of the Jews from their
present captivity, and refer it to the times of the Messiah; and so far
it may be right, that it respects Christ and the praise of him, on
account of his nature and works; and may take in the conversion of the
Jews. It seems to be written by the same person, and on the same
account, as the preceding psalm.

[Psalms 147:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 147:1</span></span>

Praise ye the Lord,.... When he shall reign, as Kimchi connects this
psalm with the preceding; the arguments used to engage men to this work
are taken partly from the nature of it, as in the next clauses; and
partly from what the Lord is and does, as in the following verses;

for it is good to sing praises unto our God; it being agreeably to his
revealed will, what he enjoins, approves of, and accepts, and is
profitable to his people, as well as makes his glory; see [Psa
92:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa092.htm#001). Some render it, "because he is
good", as in [Psa 106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001); but the
accents, and what follows, will not admit of this sense;

for it is pleasant; to our God; with which the Septuagint, Vulgate
Latin, Ethiopic, and Arabic versions, join this clause; the sacrifice of
praise is more pleasing to the Lord than any ceremonial sacrifice,
especially when offered from a grateful heart in the name of Christ, and
with a view to his glory; and it is pleasant to saints themselves, when
grace is in exercise, and they make melody in their hearts to the Lord;

and praise is comely: is due to the Lord, and becomes his people to give
it to him; it is but their reasonable service, and a beautiful and
lovely sight it is to see the chosen, redeemed, and called of the Lamb,
harping with their harps, and singing the song of redeeming love.

[Psalms 147:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 147:2</span></span>

The Lord doth build up Jerusalem,.... Literally, after the Babylonish
captivity, according to some; or rather when taken from the Jebusites by
David; or spiritually the church, which is often called Jerusalem, even
the Gospel church, of which Christ is the builder, his ministers are
instruments, his people are the materials, and which, though now greatly
fallen to decay, will be rebuilt by him in the latter day; when his work
will be revived among his saints, his Gospel more powerfully preached,
his ordinances more purely administered, and multitudes of souls
converted; and which will be matter of praise and thanksgiving, as it is
now matter of prayer; see [Psa 51:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#018);

he gathereth together the outcasts of Israel; the exiles from Babylon,
as some; or rather such who in the times of the judges had been carried
captive by their neighbours, or fled from their cities, in the times of
Saul for fear of the Philistines, and who were gathered to their own
country, cities, and houses, when David began to reign. Spiritually this
regards the whole Israel of God, the elect of God, whether Jews or
Gentiles, and the outcasts of them; so called, not because ever cast out
or cast off by the Lord, being received into his favour, covenant, and
church; but either because cast out of the company of profane men, as
evil and unworthy; or cast out of Israel, the church of God, very
justly, for offences given; but, being brought to repentance, are
restored and gathered in again: or rather this may represent the Lord's
people as in a state of nature, like the wretched infant cast out into
the open field, scattered up and down in the world, in a state of
distance from God, Christ, and his people; these are gathered by Christ
in redemption, who came to seek and collect them together; and by his
spirit in conversion, when he gathers them to himself, and into his
fold; and this, as it is an occasion of joy to angels and saints, is
matter of praise and thanksgiving to the outcasts themselves, thus
gathered in. The Septuagint render it, to the dispersion or dispersed of
Israel; see [Joh 7:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh007.htm#035).

[Psalms 147:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 147:3</span></span>

He healeth the broken in heart,.... Christ is a physician; many are the
diseases of his people; he heals them all by his blood, stripes, wounds;
and among the rest their broken hearts, which none can cure but himself;
hearts broken by the word, as a hammer, accompanied with a divine power;
which have a true sense of sin, and godly sorrow for it; are truly
contrite, such as the Lord has a respect unto, dwells with, and accepts
of; and these he heals, and only he, by pouring in oil and wine, as the
good Samaritan; or by applying pardoning grace and mercy to them,
streaming through his blood;

and bindeth up their wounds; or "griefs" (n); and so gives them ease,
health, and peace, for which they have abundant reason to call upon
their souls to bless his name and sing his praise; see [Psa
103:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa103.htm#001); compare with this [Isa
61:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#001).

\(n\) "dolores eorum", Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius, Gejerus.

[Psalms 147:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 147:4</span></span>

He telleth the number of the stars,.... Which no man can do exactly; see
[Gen 15:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#005); the ancient astronomers
pretended to tell them, as Aratus and Eudoxus (o), and fixed their
number at a thousand and some odd; but then these were only such as were
of some magnitude and influence, and such as commonly appeared; but
since the use of telescopes many are seen which were not before; and
especially those clusters of them in the Milky Way cannot be distinctly
discerned and told; but the Lord that made them can tell their exact
number. Aben Ezra thinks this is said with respect to the outcasts of
Israel scattered throughout the whole earth, as the stars are in the
upper orb; and that as the Lord knows the one, he knows the other; which
is not amiss, especially spiritually understood;

he calleth them all by their names; not that he calls one Jupiter and
another Verus, &c. as the Heathens have done; but the sense is, that he
has as perfect, distinct, and exact knowledge of them, as we have of any
persons or things that we can call by name, and more so; see [Isa
40:26](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#026). This may be applied to the
saints, who are like to stars for the light they receive from Christ the
sun of righteousness, and are a number which no man can number; but
Christ knows them all distinctly and exactly, and can call them by name,
and holds them in his right hand, and will preserve them; and they shall
shine for ever like stars, yea, like the sun in the kingdom of his
Father; so Arama interprets this of the righteous, who are compared to
stars; see [Dan 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#004).

\(o\) Vid. Augustin de Civ. Dei, l. 16. c. 23.

[Psalms 147:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 147:5</span></span>

Great is our Lord, and of great power,.... "Our Lord" is our Lord Jesus
Christ, the Lord of the whole earth; the Lord of his own people by
creation, by redemption, by marriage, and by the conquest of his grace,
and their voluntary submission to him; he is "great" in his person,
offices, and grace, and therefore greatly to be praised; see [Psa
145:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#003); and particularly his "power" is
very "great", as appears in the creation of all things out of nothing by
him; in the sustaining and support of the world and all things in it: in
the redemption of his people from the hand of their powerful enemies; in
beginning, carrying on, and perfecting a work of grace on their hearts
by his Spirit and power; and in the preservation of them unto eternal
life, through a thousand dangers and difficulties: at his resurrection
all power in heaven and earth were given him as Mediator; and in the
latter day he will take to himself his great power and reign; and in the
last day will raise the dead out of their graves;

his understanding is infinite; it reaches to all things, not to the
stars of heaven only, as in [Psa
147:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#004), but to the fowls of the air, to
the beasts of the field, and cattle upon a thousand hills; to all on the
surface of the earth, or in the bowels of it; and to the fishes of the
sea: it reaches to all men, and to all the thoughts of their hearts, the
words of their mouths, and the actions of their lives; it reaches to all
things past, that have been, to everything present, and to whatsoever is
to come; it includes not only the knowledge of all things that are, or
certainly will be, but of all things possible, or which he could bring
into being if he would; it is concerned not only with the quality and
nature of things it perfectly understands, but with the quantity of
them; even all things in creation and providence, which are without
number and past finding out by men; and so his understanding is without
number, and cannot be declared, as the word signifies.

[Psalms 147:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 147:6</span></span>

The Lord lifteth up the meek,.... The lowly and humble souls, such as
are made so by the Spirit of God; he shows them their sinfulness, and
want of righteousness; the insufficiency of their own, and need of
Christ's; blowing a blast upon all their goodliness, so bringing down
their natural pride and haughtiness, and causing them to submit to
Christ, that he alone might be exalted; such as learn of him, who is
meek and lowly, and become the followers of the humble Jesus; who being
partakers of his grace, have low thoughts of themselves, as if the least
of saints and chief of sinners; and higher thoughts of others; who
ascribe all they have and are to the grace of God; and who make no boast
of nor place any trust in anything they do; who quietly submit to every
adversity; patiently bear all the injuries, affronts, and reproaches of
men; and are silent under every afflictive dispensation of Providence:
these humble ones the Lord exalts in due time; he lifts up their
spirits, he cheers and refreshes their souls; raises them to a high
estate of grace, sets them among princes, gives them honour here, and a
crown and kingdom hereafter; these shall inherit the new earth, in which
will dwell righteousness; see [Mat
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#005);

he casteth the wicked down to the ground; or "humbles them to the
ground" (p); he abases the proud and brings them into a low estate,
sometimes in this world; however in the next he casts them down to hell,
even into the lowest hell, which is the portion of all wicked men, of
all proud and haughty sinners; see [Isa
26:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#005); compare with these expressions
[Luk 1:51](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#051). Aben Ezra by the "meek"
understands the outcasts of Israel, and by the "wicked" the kings of the
Gentiles, subject to Israel.

\(p\) "humiliaus", V. L. Montanus; "humiliat", Pagninus, Cocceius,
Michaelis.

[Psalms 147:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 147:7</span></span>

Sing unto the Lord with thanksgiving,.... These are the words of the
psalmist unto the Israelites, according to Aben Ezra and Kimchi; but may
be an exhortation to all men, especially good men; who are capable of
observing the following things concerning providential goodness and
special grace, on account of which they are called upon to "sing unto
the Lord": or to "answer" (q); to sing alternately, or by responses; the
word is used for singing, [Hos 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos002.htm#015);
see [Exo 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#021); and intends vocal
singing, as the next clause instrumental singing, as Kimchi observes.
However, the Lord is the object of it, to whom praise is to be sung for
all the great and good things done by him, and that "with thanksgiving"
to God for them; which, though a distinct thing from singing, and may be
done without it, as in prayer; yet singing ought never to be without
that; see [Eph 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#019);

sing praise upon the harp unto our God; an instrument of music used in
the times of the Old Testament; an emblem of the heart, and of making
melody in it to the Lord: the hearts of believers are the harps of God,
on and with which they sing unto him, when they sing aright, and these
are in proper tune.

\(q\) "respondete", Montanus, Cocceius; "alternis canite", Tigurine
version, Piscator, Michaelis.

[Psalms 147:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 147:8</span></span>

Who covereth the heaven with clouds,.... Which are exhalations of
vapours out of the earth, and of waters out of the sea, by the sun, and
formed into clouds; which are carried about in the air, and let down in
showers of rain upon the earth, in proper places, for the good of the
inhabitants; and sometimes, when necessary, the heavens are covered and
become black with them, as in the times of Ahab, [Kg2
18:35](../../../bib/kjv/kg2018.htm#035); and though they look dark,
dull, and melancholy, yet are for great usefulness: hereby, as it
follows, rain is prepared for the earth, to make it fruitful, to bring
forth an increase for men and beasts; and is a wonderful display of the
wisdom, power, and goodness of God, for which he is to be praised. This
may be either an emblem of afflictive dispensations of Providence, which
sometimes make a dark and cloudy day, a day of clouds and thick
darkness; especially when the Lord covers himself with a cloud, or hides
his face from his people; their sins, as clouds interposing between him
and them; and yet these afflictions and desertions, though not joyous,
but grievous, tend to make the saints more holy, humble, and fruitful:
or else of the churches being supplied with Gospel ministers; the
"heaven", and so the "kingdom of heaven", often signifies the church of
God or Christ; consisting of men, partakers of the heavenly calling,
being born from above; and in which the Gospel and ordinances, that come
from heaven, are ministered; and which, for the communion had with God,
and the privileges of it, is as it were the suburbs and gate of heaven.
Ministers of the word are "clouds" full of the rain of heavenly and
evangelic doctrine, which they drop and distil as the rain and dew upon
the mown grass; and the covering the heavens with them may denote the
plenty of them, or a sufficient number of them, as in the first times of
the Gospel: all which are of God, who gives to his churches pastors
after his own heart; and commands and directs those where to drop the
rain of doctrine, and where not, for which he is to be praised; see [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006);

who prepareth rain for the earth; which is purely his preparation,
production, and gift, to water the earth and make it fruitful, and is
what none of the vanities or idols of the Gentiles could give; and what
he prepares in the clouds, the heavens are covered with: to this the
word of God and the evangelic doctrine is compared, because of its
original; it is of God, and from heaven; it is dispensed and falls by
divine direction, and sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another;
and often in great plenty, as at the first, so in the last times of the
Gospel dispensation; and brings many blessings of grace and goodness
with it; and, like rain, is cooling, softening, refreshing, and
fructifying; and this is prepared of God, and ordained by him before the
world was, for the good of his people; see [Deu
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002), [Co1
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/co1002.htm#006);

who maketh grass to grow upon the mountains; which would be otherwise
dry and barren; but, by the clouds letting down rain upon them, grass
grows on them for the cattle on a thousand hills. "Mountains", in a
figurative sense, signify churches, high, strong, well-rounded, visible,
and where God makes a feast of fat things for his people, [Isa
25:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa025.htm#006); "grass" denotes true believers,
they of the city which flourish like grass; to which they are like, for
their weakness in themselves, their number, verdure, and fruitfulness,
and for their growth in the church; which is greatly owing to the Gospel
and ordinances as means, the ram of Gospel doctrine, the pure, sincere,
and unadulterated word of God; by which souls grow in grace, and in the
knowledge of divine things; see [Psa
72:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#016).

[Psalms 147:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 147:9</span></span>

He giveth to the beast his food,.... Through the plenty of grass growing
upon the mountains, by the rain falling from the clouds of heaven upon
them: these cannot provide for themselves, but the Lord feeds them; and
they wait upon him for their food, and receive it of him, [Psa
104:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#027). How much more will he feed his
own people, both with temporal and spiritual food; though in their
fallen state they are become like the beasts, of which they are sensible
when called by grace, and own and acknowledge it! [Psa
49:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa049.htm#012);

and to the young ravens which cry: which are particularly mentioned,
because contemptible creatures, and of no use and service to men, and by
the ceremonial law were impure to the Jews; and the rather, because, as
naturalists observe, they are very early turned out of their nests, or
forsaken by their dams: and this particular instance of the care of
Providence is elsewhere observed, [Job
38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041). Arama takes notice of the
preservation of this creature in the ark, and the use of it to Elijah.
The Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Ethiopic, and Arabic versions, render it,
"that call upon him"; that is, upon God and to him; they are expressly
said to cry, [Job 38:41](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#041). The ancient
fathers interpret this figuratively; and by the "ravens" understand the
Gentiles; and by their "young ones" Christians that spring from them,
who call upon the true God.

[Psalms 147:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 147:10</span></span>

He delighteth not in the strength of the horse,.... It has been his will
and pleasure to give the horse strength for the use and service of men,
both for labour and war; and as this is a creature of his, and the work
of his hands, it must be agreeable to him, [Job
39:19](../../../bib/kjv/job039.htm#019) yet a horse, though prepared for
the battle, is a vain thing for safety, which is only of the Lord;
neither can it deliver any by its great strength; nor are a king and his
country saved by the multitude of an host, or by a large cavalry: nor
are these what the Lord delights in, nor does he save men for the sake
of them; though a well-mounted cavalry may be a pleasing sight to men,
and they may raise their expectations, and promise themselves great
things from them; yet these are of no account with God, who can save as
well without them as with them, [Pro
21:31](../../../bib/kjv/pro021.htm#031). The Targum is,

"he delighteth not in the strength of those that ride on horses;''

that are well mounted, and pride themselves in it; and are equipped for
war, and are mighty to engage in it, and prepared to make their escape
in danger: Kimchi's note is,

"he delighteth not in man, who puts his confidence in the strength of
the horse;''

see [Psa 20:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#008);

he taketh not pleasure in the legs of a man; in which his strength lies,
and of which he is apt to glory; but should not, it being displeasing to
God; who delights not therein, but in lovingkindness, judgment, and
righteousness, [Jer 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#023); not in the
legs of a man of war, as Arama; which are strong to stand his ground, or
swift to flee away when hard-pressed; see [Amo
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/amo002.htm#014); so the Targum,

"he takes no pleasure in the legs of men that run;''

that are swift to run races, or to flee in battle; to this sense are the
notes of Jarchi and Kimchi. It seems to intend the infantry in an army,
as the cavalry before; and both intimate that neither horse nor foot are
to be trusted in for safety, how pleasing or promising they may be,
since God seeth not as man does: or reference may be had to athletic
exercises of horse and foot races, of wrestling, combats, &c. men may
delight in, but God does not. What are pleasing to him are exercises of
a spiritual kind; such as fleeing to Jesus, the strong tower; running
the Christian race, to obtain the incorruptible crown; wrestling against
principalities and powers, and such acts of grace as are next mentioned.

[Psalms 147:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 147:11</span></span>

The Lord taketh pleasure in them that fear him,.... With a filial and
godly fear; that serve and worship him, privately and publicly, with
reverence and love: as, appears by the goodness he lays up for them; the
good things he communicates to them; the discoveries of his love,
covenant, and grace, they have from him; the guard he sets about them;
his eye of providence and grace over them; and his heart full of love,
pity, and compassion to them; see [Psa
33:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#018);

in those that hope in his mercy; not general, but special; not in the
absolute mercy of God, but as displayed in Christ; and great
encouragement there is to hope in it, from the plenty of it in his
heart, from the instances of it among men, and from the blessings of
grace and salvation that spring from it: and in such the Lord takes
pleasure; hope is his own grace, and mercy is his delight; and he is
pleased with those that exercise hope upon it: not that the graces of
fear and hope, and the exercise of them, are the cause and motives of
God's delight in his people, which, as they were considered in Christ,
was before the world was, or those graces were in them; but these
describe and point out the persons who are openly and manifestly the
objects of his delight and pleasure. Plutarch (r), an, Heathen writer,
seems to have been acquainted with this and [Psa
147:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#010), and to refer to them, when he
says,

"it is somewhere said, that God is not a lover of horses, nor of birds,
but of men, and desires to dwell with those that are eminently good; nor
does he refuse nor despise the familiar converse of a man divine and
wise.''

\(r\) In Vita Numae, vol. 1. p. 62.

[Psalms 147:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 147:12</span></span>

Praise the Lord, O Jerusalem,.... The inhabitants of it, as Kimchi; not
Jerusalem in a literal sense, for this respects future time, as Aben
Ezra; the world to come, the times of the Messiah: and intends the
spiritual Jerusalem, as Arama; that which is free, the mother of us all;
the Gospel church, and the members of it; which have great reason to
praise the Lord, for their special blessings and peculiar privileges;
see [Gal 4:26](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#026);

praise thy God, O Zion; not the house and family of David, as R.
Obadiah; nor the priests and Levites in the temple, as others; but the
same as before, the church and people of God; the Mount Zion God has
loved and chose for his habitation; the city of our solemnities in
Gospel times; the perfection of beauty and joy of the whole earth; whose
God and King is Christ; and whom Zion and all her children should
praise, being her incarnate God, Immanuel, God manifest in the flesh.
With this verse, the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Ethiopic versions, begin the psalm.

[Psalms 147:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 147:13</span></span>

For he hath strengthened the bars of thy gates,.... Of Jerusalem, of
Zion the church of God. Gates are for the letting in of persons into the
city of our God; which are Christ, faith in him, and a profession of it;
see [Isa 26:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa026.htm#001), "bars" are for the
security of those that, are in it, and to keep out the enemy: and these,
"strengthened", denote the utmost safety of the true members of Christ
and his church; who have nothing to fear from their spiritual enemies,
sin, law, Satan, the world, death, and hell: God is on their side;
Christ is the munition of rocks unto them the Holy Spirit is in them,
who is greater than he that is in the world; and angels are guards about
them; all which is matter of praise, and a sufficient reason for it;

he hath blessed thy children within thee; multiplied them and made them
fruitful, increased the number of them; even the spiritual children of
the church, brought forth to Christ by her; born in her, through the
ministry of the Gospel; and brought up by her, with the ordinances of
it. These in the first times of the Gospel were very numerous, and will
be so again in the latter day, like the drops of the morning dew; and
are and will be blessed with all spiritual blessings, with pardoning,
justifying, adopting, and sanctifying grace, and with eternal life; for
which the Lord's name is to be praised.

[Psalms 147:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 147:14</span></span>

He maketh peace in thy borders,.... Which are usually most infested by
enemies, It may denote the universality of peace throughout the land, in
all the parts and borders of it; and be understood of the outward peace
of the church with her enemies, and of the abundance and continuance of
it in the latter day; and of that concord and harmony that shall be
among the members of it; and also of that inward spiritual conscience
peace each enjoy through believing; and which is in and from Christ, and
flows from his blood and righteousness, applied for pardon and
justification; and is another reason for praising the Lord;

and filleth thee with the finest of the wheat; or, "fat of the wheat"
(s); the best of it; see [Deu 32:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#014);
which is the choicest of grain, and makes the best of bread, and
especially the finest flour of it; and to be filled and satisfied with
this, or to have enough of it, is a great temporal blessing. Here it may
be understood spiritually of the Gospel, which may be compared to wheat,
and the finest of it, for its excellency and purity, for its solidity
and substantiality; with which the chaff of human doctrine is not to be
mentioned, [Jer 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#028); and for its
salutary nourishing and strengthening virtue; and especially of Christ,
the sum and substance of it, sometimes compared to a corn of wheat, [Joh
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#024); for his superior excellency to
all others, and the purity of his nature; for his great fruitfulness,
and for being suitable food to his people; the bread of life, for which
he is prepared by his sufferings and death; which may be signified by
the beating out of the corn, and grinding the wheat, and making it into
bread, fit for use: and for this spiritual food believers are abundantly
thankful, and have reason to praise the Lord.

\(s\) "adipe", Montanus, Pagninus, Tigurine version, Musculus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 147:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 147:15</span></span>

He sendeth forth his commandment upon earth,.... Which Kimchi interprets
of rain, which causes the wheat to grow; since afterwards mention is
made of snow, and of hoar frost and ice. Aben Ezra understands it of the
decree of God, which he executes on earth. The Targum, of the "Memra",
or Word of the Lord; the essential Word, the Messiah; whom the Lord sent
on earth to perform the great work of redemption and salvation; and who
came speedily, and tarried not when the fulness of time was come, as
follows. It may design God's word of providence, which answers to his
word of power in the first creation of all things; and which orders
everything done in the earth, and is instantly obeyed; which agrees with
[Psa 147:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#018). Or rather the word of the
Gospel; the doctrines and ordinances of divine revelation, agreeably to
[Psa 147:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019); and so may have respect
to the mission of the apostles of Christ, and ministers of the word, to
go into all the earth, and preach the Gospel to every creature;

his word runneth very swiftly; so the Gospel did in the first times of
it, like lightning, from one end of the heaven to the other; the words
of it went into all the world, and the sound of it unto the ends of the
earth; it had a free course, and was glorified: and so it will in the
latter day, when many shall run to and fro, and knowledge shall be
increased; see [Rom 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018).

[Psalms 147:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 147:16</span></span>

He giveth snow like wool,.... For colour as white as wool; so the Targum
and Kimchi: and for the manner of its falling, lightly and gently as a
lock of wool; which for its thinness and fineness it also resembles.
Hence the ancients used to call snow , "woolly water" (t); and Martial
(u) gives it the name of "densum veilus aquarum", "a thick fleece of
waters": so another poet (w) calls clouds flying fleeces of wool, to
which they sometimes seem like; Pliny (x) calls it the from of the
celestial waters. And it is like wool for its usefulness to the earth;
for as wool covers the sheep, and clothes made of it cover men, and keep
them warm; so snow filling upon the earth covers it and keeps it warm,
and secures the wheat and other fruits of the earth from the injuries of
the cold: and this lies among the treasures of the Lord, and he brings
it out from thence, and commands it to be on the earth; and it is an
useful gift of his providence, for which his name is to be praised; see
[Job 37:6](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#006). The Jews have a saying, as
Arama observes, that one day of snow is better than five of rain. In the
third year of Valens and Valentinianus, with the Atrebates (a people in
the Netherlands), real wool fell from the clouds, mixed with rain (y).
Several blessings of grace are signified by this figure; as pardon of
sin, the justifying righteousness of Christ, and the efficacy of the
word of God, [Psa 51:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#007);

he scattereth the hoar frost like ashes; which is the dew congealed by
the intense cold of the air in the night season (z): this for its colour
looks like ashes, and for its infinite number of particles may be
compared to them; which are spread here and there, and everywhere; over
gardens, fields, lands, herbs, plants, and trees, as if they were
strewed with ashes. And to hot ashes it may be compared, because of its
burning nature, shrivelling up leaves, herbs, and plants, as if burnt;
hence called "pruina" in the Latin tongue (a). The manna is compared to
this for its smallness, [Exo 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#014);
which was typical of Christ, the hidden manna, and of the ministry of
the Gospel; little, mean, and contemptible, in the eyes of carnal men;
torturing and tormenting to them, as the fire that came out of the
mouths of the witnesses; and is the savour of death unto death to some,
while it ii the savour of life unto life to others.

\(t\) Eustathius in Dionys. Perieget. p. 91. (u) Epigram. l. 4. Ep. 3.
(w) Aristoph. Nubes, p. 146. (x) Nat. Hist. l. 17. c. 2. (y) Orosii
Hist. l. 7. c. 32. p. 131. (z) lsidor. Origin. l. 13. c. 10. (a)
"Frigora nec tantum cana concreta pruina", Virgil. Georgic. l. 2. v.
376.

[Psalms 147:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 147:17</span></span>

He casteth forth his ice like morsels,.... Divided like morsels, as the
Targum; cut into pieces, like morsels of bread. This seems to have
respect to hail stones, which sometimes fall like pieces of ice, and are
very prejudicial to the fruits of the earth: this was one of the ten
plagues of Egypt; and whereby also many of the Canaanites were destroyed
in the times of Joshua, [Exo 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo009.htm#023); and
there is an exceeding great storm of hail yet to come, very dreadful;
see [Rev 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#021). This is expressive of
the wrath, vengeance, and judgments of God upon men, by which he is
known in various perfections of his nature; as his power, justice, and
holiness, for which he is celebrated, [Isa
30:30](../../../bib/kjv/isa030.htm#030);

who can stand before his cold? which he has purposed and promised shall
be; for he has said, that "cold and heat shall not cease, as long as the
earth remains"; and which he appoints and orders to be, for "by the
breath of God frost is given", [Gen
8:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen008.htm#022); and this is sometimes and in
some places so very vehement, that it is intolerable; men are obliged to
keep within doors, to make them fires, and put on more clothes; and the
"hands" of every man are sealed up from business; even "the beasts go
into their dens, and remain in their places", or get what shelter they
can; see [Job 37:7](../../../bib/kjv/job037.htm#007). And if there is no
standing before his cold, who can stand before the heat of his anger, or
his furious wrath and indignation, when it is poured out like fire? see
[Psa 76:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#007).

[Psalms 147:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 147:18</span></span>

He sendeth out his word, and melteth them,.... The snow, the hoar frost,
and ice: this he does by a word of his, who can freeze the earth and
waters, and thaw them at his pleasure; by ordering the sun to break
forth with great heat, or rain to fall in great plenty; of both which
Kimchi interprets his word; as well as by causing a warm wind to blow,
as follows,

he causeth his wind to blow, and the waters to flow: the south wind
particularly; then the waters, which were still and motionless, flow as
before, or more abundantly. Thus the hearts of men in a state of nature
are like frozen earth or waters; they are cold, and without the heat of
love, and affection to God and Christ, and spiritual things; they are as
hard as a stone, and without any motion or desire after things divine
and heavenly: but when the Lord sends his word, attended with a divine
power and efficacy, it breaks and melts them; when the south wind of the
blessed Spirit blows upon them, or his grace becomes effectual in
convincing them of sin, righteousness, and judgment; and when the sun of
righteousness arises on them with healing in his wings; with which being
warmed, they are loosened, and flow to the Lord and his goodness for all
spiritual blessings.

[Psalms 147:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 147:19</span></span>

He showeth his word unto Jacob,.... From the things of nature and
providence, the psalmist passes to the blessings of grace and goodness;
for which the Lord is to be praised, particularly for his word and
ordinances. The Targum interprets this of the words of the law; and
indeed the law, or decalogue, was given only to the Israelites, the
posterity of Jacob; as also the ceremonial and judicial laws; and even
the whole Scripture, the oracles of God, were committed to them in a
very peculiar manner: all which distinguished them from the Gentiles,
and gave them the preference to them; see [Deu
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006), [Rom
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001). But the Gospel part of the word
is also included; the word of grace, peace, reconciliation,
righteousness, eternal life, and salvation, which was first published to
the Jews: it was "shown" unto them, for it cannot be known by any
without a revelation; the Gospel, and the things of it, are hidden
things to natural men, and could never have been discerned by any, had
they not been shown by the Lord; as they are externally in the
ministration of the word, and internally and effectually by the Spirit
of God; who is the Spirit of wisdom and revelation in the knowledge of
divine things;

his statutes and his judgments unto Israel; the ordinances of divine
worship under the former dispensation, which were peculiar to literal
Israel; and those of the Gospel dispensation, which belong to the
spiritual Israel, Jews and Gentiles; and which are shown and directed to
in the word, to be observed by them; and both the Gospel and the
ordinances of it are instances of divine favour, for which the Lord is
to be praised.

[Psalms 147:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa147.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 147:20</span></span>

He hath not dealt so with any nation,.... Or "every nation" (b); or all
the nations under the heavens; only with the Jewish nation: these only
for many hundreds of years were favoured with the divine revelation,
with the word and ordinances of God; with the law, and with the Gospel,
and with the service and worship of God; as well as with promises and
prophecies of Christ, and good things to come by him. These were not
communicated to anyone nation or body of people besides them; only now
and then, to one here and there among the Gentiles: the Gospel was first
preached to them at the coming of Christ, and after them to the
Gentiles, when rejected by them;

and as for his judgments, they have not known them; by which are meant,
not the providential dispensations of God, which are unsearchable, and
past finding out, till made manifest; nor punishments inflicted on
wicked men, unobserved by them; but the word of God, and the ordinances
of it, which the Gentile world for many ages were unacquainted with; see
[Psa 19:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#009);

praise ye the Lord: as literal Israel had reason to do, for those
distinguishing instances of his favour and goodness; and as the
spiritual Israel of God everywhere have; and particularly our British
ones, who are highly favoured with the privileges of having the word of
God purely and powerfully preached, and his ordinances truly and duly
administered; at least in some parts of it, and that more than in any
other nation under the heavens.

\(b\) "omni genti", Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus; "omni nationi", V. L.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 148](psa148)

</div>
