<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa130)  [Next](psa132.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 131](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 131:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 131

A Song of degrees of David. This psalm was written by David in his
younger days, before he came to the throne; while he was in Saul's
court, or persecuted by him. The occasion of it, as is generally
thought, was a calumny cast upon him, as if he had some ill designs
against Saul; was ambitious of the crown, and aspiring to the throne,
and was plotting and forming measures to get the government into his
hand; see [Sa1 24:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#009.md); with respect to
all which he declares himself as innocent as a weaned child; and was as
far from any such ambitious views as he was when in such a state; for
the truth of which he appealed to God. Kimchi thinks that David, by his
example, taught the Jews how to behave in captivity; that as he behaved,
so should they, in great humility. The Syriac inscription is,

"it is said concerning Jesus the son of Josedech the high priest; and
concerning humility.''

But the psalm no doubt was written by David of himself.

[Psalms 131:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 131:1</span></span>

Lord, my heart is not haughty,.... The heart of every man is naturally
so, and everything in civil life tends to make it more so; as riches and
honour, birth and blood, wisdom, knowledge, and learning, strength and
beauty, especially where there is a superiority of those to others; and
in religious if persons have not the true grace of God, their hearts
will be haughty; if they have a notion of the purity of human nature,
and the goodness of their hearts, and are pure in their own eyes, and of
the power of their free will to do this and the other, and of their
perfection in good works, and are full of their own righteousness, and
have some external gifts, and some degree of notional knowledge; but if
the heart is made truly contrite under a sense of sin, and is melted
with discoveries of pardoning love, it will be humble and not haughty:
and those have such hearts who have seen the haughtiness of their
hearts, and the exceeding sinfulness of sin; their impotency to that
which is spiritually good; their imperfection in all they do; the
excellency and suitableness of Christ's righteousness, and that all
their salvation is of grace, and that grace is entirely free; and the
more spiritual knowledge and experience they have, the more humble they
are: and this was David's case, and what he here said was no doubt true,
since he hated lying; and besides he speaks this in the presence of and
to God the searcher of hearts; though he had been anointed by Samuel,
and knew that he was to be successor in the kingdom, yet his heart was
not elated with it;

nor mine eyes lofty; or "lifted up" (l), they were lifted up to God in
prayer often, out not above his fellow creatures; he behaved himself
humbly as well as wisely in Saul's court, where he was raised to great
dignity, which gained him the affections of the court, and of all
Israel; but there are too many whose eyes are lofty, and their eyelids
lifted up, who disdain to look upon those that are inferior to them, as
the rich on the poor, the Pharisee on the publican; see [Pro
30:13](../../../bib/kjv/pro030.htm#013.md). This is the character of
antichrist, that his look is more stout than his fellows, and is
abominable in the sight of God, even a proud look as well as a proud
heart, [Pro 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#017.md). But this was not
David's case; as he could not bear this in others he would not suffer it
in himself, [Psa 101:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa101.htm#005.md);

neither do I exercise myself in great matters; or, "walk" (m) in them;
these were not the subject of his employment and conversation; he did
many great things, in killing the lion and the bear that came into his
father's flock; in slaying Goliath with a sling and stone only; in
leading out the armies of Israel, and slaying his ten thousands; and he
exercised himself in the great things of the law, which he was careful
to observe, and studied the great things of the Gospel, which he had the
highest esteem of, and desired to understand; but he did not seek human
greatness, or the great things of this world, for himself; he had no
ambitious views, or was desirous of the kingdom he was anointed to,
before the proper time; see [Sa1
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#018.md);

or in things too high for me: or "too wonderful" (n); see [Job
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/job042.htm#003.md). He contemplated the wonderful
make and frame of his body, the texture, symmetry, and use of each of
its parts; he observed the wonderful providences of God towards him ever
since he had a being; and particularly he took notice of the wonderful
love of God to him, and remembered and talked of, and declared, the
wonderful works of grace and redemption; but not things above his
capacity, out of his reach, and which are secret, or not clearly
revealed: and such things we should be content to be ignorant of, or not
to have adequate ideas of, or be capable of accounting for; as the being
and perfections of God, particularly his immensity and eternity; the
mode of subsisting of the Persons in the Godhead; the generation of the
Son and procession of the Spirit; the incarnation of Christ, and the
union of the two natures in him; present providences, unsearchable and
past finding out; and future things, especially the times and seasons of
them; see [Psa 139:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa139.htm#006.md).

\(l\) "elati", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, &c. (m)
"ambulavi", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Cocceius, &c. (n) "in
mirabilibus prae me", Montanus, Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 131:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 131:2</span></span>

Surely I have behaved and quieted myself,.... Or "my soul" (o); behaved
quietly and peaceably towards all men, even his inferiors in Saul's
court and elsewhere, and had given no tokens of a restless, turbulent,
and ambitious spirit; as well as behaved patiently under all his
troubles and afflictions, reproaches and calumnies: or "if I have not"
(p), being in the form of an oath or imprecation, as Kimchi and Aben
Ezra observe; if I have not thus behaved, let it come to me so and so,
or let me be as a weaned child. Noldius renders it by way of
interrogation, "have I not composed and quieted myself?" &c. The Targum
is,

"if I have not put the hand to the mouth, and caused my soul to be
silent, until it heard the words of the law;''

as a child that is weaned of his mother: and, for the further
confirmation of it, it is added,

my soul is even as a weaned child; innocent and harmless, had no more
ill designs against Saul than a weaned child; humble, meek, and lowly,
and had no more aspiring and ambitious views than such an one; like
that, weaned from the world, the riches, honours, pleasures, and profits
of it; as well as from nature, from self, from his own righteousness,
and from all dependence on it; and as a child that is weaned from the
breast wholly depends on its nurse for sustenance, so did he wholly
depend upon God, his providence, grace, and strength; and as to the
kingdom, he had no more covetous desires after it than a weaned child
has to the breast, and was very willing to wait the due time for the
enjoyment of it. The Targum,

"as one weaned on the breasts of its mother, I am strengthened in the
law.''

This is to be understood not of a child while weaning, when it is
usually peevish, fretful, and froward; but when weaned, and is quiet and
easy in its mother's arms without the breast.

\(o\) "animam meam", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (p) "si non",
Montanus; "male sit mihi si non", Tigurine version.

[Psalms 131:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa131.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 131:3</span></span>

Let Israel hope in the Lord from henceforth and for ever. What he did
himself, and found it good for him to do, that he knew was good for
others, and therefore exhorts and encourages to it, to hope in the Lord
and wait for his salvation; and which should be done constantly, and to
the end of life, or till the thing hoped for is enjoyed; see [Heb
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/heb003.htm#006.md). Perhaps some respect is here had
to the people of Israel, especially the friends of David, who were weary
of Saul's government, and impatient to have David on the throne; whom he
advises to wait patiently, and not take any indirect steps to bring it
about, but leave it with God, and hope and trust in him; compare with
this [Sa1 24:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#007.md); See Gill on [Psa
130:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa130.htm#007.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 132](psa132.md)

</div>
