<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa110)  [Next](psa112.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 111](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 111:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 111

This psalm, though without a name, is thought to be penned by David; it
is composed in an artificial manner, in an alphabetical order, each
clause or sentence beginning with a letter of the Hebrew alphabet in
course, till the whole is finished; this perhaps was done to recommend
the psalm, to make it more observed, and to help the memory; the general
design of it is to excite to praise the Lord, from the consideration of
his great and wonderful works.

[Psalms 111:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 111:1</span></span>

Praise ye the Lord,.... Or "hallelujah"; this is the title of the psalm,
and is expressive of the subject matter of it; and so it stands in the
Targum, Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Ethiopic, and Arabic versions; as it
should, as appears from the psalm being alphabetical; for the first
letter of this word is the fifth and not the first of the alphabet; it
is wanting in the Syriac version, which gives the title in this manner,
without a name, concerning the glorious virtues of

"the works of God; but it exhorts us to give thanks to Christ; and it is
said in the person of the apostles.''

I will praise the Lord with my whole heart; the psalmist excites to
praise God by his own example; the object of his praise is Jehovah, the
self-existent Being, the Being of beings, the author of his Being, and
in whom all men live and move, and have their being; the God of their
mercies, temporal and spiritual, and therefore should praise him, even
Jehovah, Father, Son, and Spirit; especially Jehovah the Messiah may be
here intended, whose work of redemption is particularly attended to: the
manner in which he determines to perform this service is, "with his
whole heart": which ought to be engaged in every religious exercise,
even the whole of it, all the powers and faculties of the soul, without
being divided between other objects, and distracted or drawn off from
the Lord by them; the phrase is not expressive of perfection, which is
not to be expected in any duty, but of sincerity and cordial affection.
The place where follows,

in the assembly of the upright, and in the congregation: which may
signify one and the same; even the place where upright persons assemble
and gather together for divine worship, the tabernacle in David's time,
and the temple afterwards; and may point at any place of worship in
Gospel times, and the people that meet there; who being for the most
part upright persons, or in a judgment of charity so accounted, though
every individual among them may not be such, are thus called; and that
because they have the uprightness, righteousness, and holiness of Christ
imputed to them; and have right spirits renewed in them, and so are
upright in heart; and, in consequence of this, walk uprightly according
to the rules of the Gospel. It may be rendered, as it is by the Targum,

"in the secret (e) of the upright, and the congregation;''

because here the secret of the Lord is made known to his people; the
mysteries of his grace are revealed; and his ordinances, which are his
counsel, are administered: or it may design some particular friends and
acquaintance of the psalmist's, who privately met and took sweet counsel
together, and communicated their secrets to one another, as the other
word "congregation" may intend the public assembly of the people; and
then the sense is, that he would sincerely praise the Lord both in
private and public, and that because of his works; as follows.

\(e\) "in secreto", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 111:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 111:2</span></span>

The works of the Lord are great,.... His works of creation are great,
being made out of nothing, are the effects of great power, and the
produce of great wisdom, and which greatly display the glory of their
Maker; the works of providence are great, which are daily wrought,
especially such as concern the church and people of God, for whom he
does great things, whereof they have reason to be glad and praise his
name; the miracles of Christ he wrought here on earth were surprisingly
great, some of them such as had not keen known from the creation of the
world; and yet greater things were shown him, and done by him,
particularly the work of redemption, a work which angels and men were
unequal to, a work which none but the great God and our Saviour could
effect, and is truly called the great salvation; the work of grace upon
the heart is a great work, and requires the exceeding greatness of the
divine power, and which is exerted in the beginning, carrying on, and
finishing that work; and for all which the Lord is to be praised: and
the rather since they are such as are

sought out of all them that have pleasure therein; or "sought out
because of all the pleasures of them, or that are in them" (f), which
comes to much the same sense: there is a pleasure in the contemplation
of the works of nature and providence; to behold the power, wisdom, and
goodness of God in them, and his care over all his creatures; and
particularly how he makes all things to work together for the good of
his people; and especially it is delightful to observe the works of
grace, how the glory of all the divine perfections is displayed in them;
angels themselves take pleasure in looking into them: now these are
sought and found out by those who delight in them; the works of creation
are to be sought and found in the book of nature, the works of
providence in the book of experience, and the works of grace in the book
of God; and indeed all of them are recorded there, which are searched
with pleasure by those that are inquisitive after them.

\(f\) "ob omnes amabilitates eorum", Cocceius; "secundum omnia desideria
eorum", Gejerus.

[Psalms 111:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 111:3</span></span>

His work is honourable and glorious,.... Or "honour and glory" (g)
itself; there is nothing mean and trifling done by him; nothing unworthy
of him in nature, providence, and grace; every work of his serves to
display his glory, and set off the greatness of his majesty; the heavens
and the earth are full of his glory; and he does all things well and
wisely in the government of the world; and whatever he does in a way of
grace is for the glory of it, and tends to make his people honourable
and glorious, as well as manifests his own glory, and makes for the
honour of his own name.

And his righteousness endureth for ever; his justice and holiness, which
appear in all his ways and works; for there is no unrighteousness in
anything done by him, just and true are all his ways; there is a
constant tenor of righteousness in them all; his faithfulness in
fulfilling every word of promise, in making his words good by his works,
is to be seen in all generations; and true evangelical righteousness,
the righteousness of Christ, which is so considerable a branch of the
work of redemption and salvation, is an everlasting one; it can never be
abolished, it will answer for the saints in a time to come.

\(g\) "gloria et decor", Pagninus, Montanus, Gejerus, Michaelis; "gloria
et splendor", Musculus; "majestas et magnificentia", Piscator.

[Psalms 111:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 111:4</span></span>

He hath made his wonderful works to be remembered,.... All his works are
marvellous ones; his works of creation, that they should rise out of
nothing at a word of command; his works of providence, which have such a
depth of wisdom and knowledge in them, are unsearchable and past finding
out; and his works of redemption and grace; and these are so wrought by
him, and such methods taken to continue the memory of them, that they
cannot well be forgotten: all things in nature are as they were from the
beginning; the sun, moon, and stars, keep their course and station; cold
and heat, summer and winter, seedtime and harvest, are as they always
were; remarkable providences have been carefully recorded, and memorials
of them handed down to posterity. The deliverance of Israel out of Egypt
was annually remembered in the passover; the feeding of them with manna
in the wilderness was caused to be remembered by a pot of manna
preserved in the tabernacle and temple; and the great work of our
redemption by Christ is brought to remembrance in the ordinance of the
Lord's supper, appointed for that purpose.

The Lord is gracious and full of compassion; so he was in eternity, and
is in time; this appears in all his works, and especially in our
salvation by Jesus Christ; see [Psa
86:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa086.htm#005.md).

[Psalms 111:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 111:5</span></span>

He hath given meat to them that fear him,.... Or a "prey" (h), alluding
to the spoil of the Egyptians; or to the manna; corporeal food, daily
bread, which they that fear him shall not want, [Psa
34:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa034.htm#009.md) spiritual meat, such that endures
for ever; the flesh of Christ, which is meat indeed; the word and
ordinances, in which are milk for babes, and meat for strong men;
savoury meat does God give his people, such as their souls love, and the
world knows nothing of; all is given, and freely given, and in plenty.

He will ever be mindful of his covenant; made with Abraham, and that at
Sinai; and especially which he made with his people in Christ before the
world was; and which is the ground and foundation of all his works of
grace and redemption, and the reason why he gives food unto them; he
never forgets that, his promises in it, nor the blessings of it, nor the
people for whom they are made and provided, nor his love unto them; he
is a covenant keeping God.

\(h\) "praedam", Montanus, Vatablus, Musculus; so Ainsworth.

[Psalms 111:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 111:6</span></span>

He hath showed his people the power of his works,.... Or his works of
power, his mighty works, in which his great power was shown; as to the
people of Israel in Egypt, at the Red sea, in the wilderness, and in
bringing them to and settling them in the land of Canaan; these he
showed to them in fact, they saw them with their eyes; and he showed or
declared them to them in prophecy, before they came to pass, as Kimchi
observes, that it might not be said they came by chance. So he hath
showed his works of power to his people in Gospel times, as the miracles
of Christ, his resurrection from the dead, redemption by him, and the
work of grace on the hearts of men in all ages.

That he may give them the heritage of the Heathen; the Lord did the
above works of his power for the people of Israel, that he might put
them into the possession of the land of Canaan, inherited by Heathens;
that it might become their inheritance, and they might enjoy their
houses, vineyards, and fields; and he wrought powerfully through the
ministration of the Gospel, by his Spirit and grace, upon the hearts of
men in the Gentile world; that the Christian church might possess the
dominions of it, as it did in the times of Constantine and of others,
and as it will more largely in the latter day; see [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md).

[Psalms 111:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 111:7</span></span>

The works of his hands are verity and judgment,.... His works of
providence are just and true, particularly these which respected the
driving the Canaanites out of their land, and settling the Israelites in
it; these were done according to the truth of the divine promises and
prophecies, and so were "verity" or "truth"; and for the sins of the
Heathen, and by him who has a right to dispose of the earth and the
fulness of it to whom he pleases, and so are "judgment" or righteous;
and this holds good of his work of grace upon the heart, which is the
work of his hands, and is "truth in the inward parts": and is created in
righteousness and true holiness; and of all his acts of grace in
election, redemption, &c. which are according to the truth of the divine
nature and its perfections, and in which there is no unrighteousness.
Some interpret this of the two tables of stone, which were the work,
writing, and engraving of God, and on which were inscribed the judgments
of the Lord; and are "true and righteous altogether". Aben Ezra
understands it of the law implanted in the hearts of men.

All his commandments are sure: firm, and to be believed and complied
with, either to destroy the nations, or to possess their land; or rather
the commands of the moral law, which are firm and sure, one jot or
tittle of which shall never pass away; all have been fulfilled by
Christ, and remain with him a rule of walk and conversation; or the word
which the Lord has commanded to a thousand generations, [Psa
105:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#008.md) the covenant which is ordered in
all things and sure; the promises of which are yea and amen in Christ;
and the blessings of it, the sure mercies of David; and even the
doctrines of the Gospel are the commandments and testimony of the Lord,
which are sure, [Psa 19:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#008.md) and to be
believed, being the word of truth, the Gospel of our salvation, and
coming from God, who cannot lie.

[Psalms 111:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 111:8</span></span>

They stand fast for ever and ever,.... Not only the covenant and its
promises do, but both law and Gospel, the commandments of the one and
the doctrines of the other; the law is an eternal law, as to the matter
of it, and is not made void by faith, but established; and the Gospel is
an everlasting Gospel, which lives and abides for ever, being
established upon the word of God, which cannot be broken; and is
continued in the church, the pillar and ground of truth, from whence it
can never be removed.

And are done in truth and uprightness; either made by the Lord according
to the truth of things, the moral perfections of his nature and will,
and the rectitude of it; or observed by men that truly fear the Lord
with great truth and sincerity.

[Psalms 111:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 111:9</span></span>

He sent redemption unto his people,.... Or one to redeem them, who
effected it; Moses to redeem Israel out of Egypt, and Christ to redeem
his people from sin, Satan, and the law, and who has done it; and having
obtained eternal redemption, he sent his ministers to publish it in the
world, and his Spirit to apply it, and to show his people their interest
in it; and make it over to them, and the blessings of it, that they may
enjoy it, and all the comforts and advantages arising from it; temporal
redemption, as typical of the spiritual and eternal one, is here meant.

He hath commanded his covenant for ever; which cannot be the covenant of
circumcision, or that at Sinai, neither of which were for ever; but the
covenant of grace made with Christ, and which stands fast with him for
ever; it is everlasting, sure, and can never be removed; its blessings
and promises are for ever; and it is so made and framed, and so kept and
observed, as that it shall always continue, which is meant by its being
"commanded": as well as it may denote the decree and resolution of God
never to break and alter it; see [Psa
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003.md).

Holy and reverend is his name; the name of God is "holy"; it is his
nature, and appears in all his works; and in which he is glorious, and
so is reverend; he is to be feared and reverenced by all his creatures,
and among his saints, as he is by the angels in heaven.

[Psalms 111:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 111:10</span></span>

The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom,.... The fear of the
Lord, whose name is revered, is not a fear of his judgments here or
hereafter, but of his goodness and grace; it is a reverential affection
for him, a fiducial fear of him, a fear of offending so good a Being as
he is; and it includes all religious worship of him, inward and outward,
private and public; and at this true wisdom begins; a man begins to be
wise when he fears the Lord, and not till then; this is his highest
wisdom, and this is, as it may be rendered, "the chief of wisdom" (i),
the principal part of it; see [Pro
9:10](../../../bib/kjv/pro009.htm#010.md).

A good understanding have all they that do his commandments; or "that do
them" (k); the fear of the Lord and wisdom; that exercise them, that do
as they oblige and direct to; so R. Moses in Aben Ezra connects the
words; such have a good understanding of the Lord, know him as the
object of their fear and reverence, and of their duty to him, and of
their own interest, it being their wisdom to fear him; since by
attending to their duty, to the word and ordinances of God, such arrive
to a greater degree of knowledge and understanding of divine things.
Some render it "good success (l)" or "prosperity", as Kimchi; such
usually have prosperity in soul and body, in things temporal and
spiritual; see [Jos 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos001.htm#008.md).

His praise endureth for ever; or "its praise" (m); the praise of the
fear of the Lord, of divine wisdom, and of a good understanding; just as
of circumcision in the heart, [Rom
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029.md) or the praise of him that does
the above things, that does the commandments of God, or acts under the
fear of God, and as a wise man, [Co1
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#005.md) or rather the praise of God, which
shall be given him by angels and men now and for evermore, as it ought
to be; and to stir up to which is the design of the psalm throughout;
and which men are encouraged to from the works and word of God, from his
name, nature, and covenant, and from his blessings and acts of grace and
goodness.

\(i\) "caput sapientiae", Junius & Tremellius; "vel praecipuum",
Cocceius; "summa", Michaelis. (k) "facientibus ea", Pagninus, Montanus,
Junius & Tremelilius, &c. (l) "successus optimus", Junius & Tremellius;
so Ainsworth. (m) "quorum laus", Tigurine version; i.e. "uniuscujusque
facientium", Gejerus, Michaelis.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 112](psa112.md)

</div>
