<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa106)  [Next](psa108.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 107](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 107:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 107

This psalm, from its style, and from its connection with the preceding
psalms, seems to have been written by David. The two foregoing psalms
respect the children of Israel; this is generally thought to concern all
mankind, and its view to assert a general providence which attends all,
in whatsoever condition and circumstance; and to encourage men in their
distresses to cry unto the Lord. According to Kimchi, Aben Ezra, and
others, four sorts of persons are mentioned, travellers through a
wilderness, prisoners, sick persons, and such who use the seas; to which
some add a fifth, husbandmen; these are instanced in, not to the
exclusion of others, but from them it may be concluded that whatsoever
state or condition persons may be in, they are known and taken notice of
by the Lord, and are relieved by him when they call upon him. Some
restrain the whole to the Israelites, as the Targum, R. Obadiah, Arama,
and others, where they make any application; and others apply the psalm
to New Testament times; and indeed, though the literal sense should be
attended unto and preserved, yet it seems to be applicable to spiritual
persons and things. The title of it in the Syriac version is pretty
remarkable,

"it is said concerning Joab and Abiah the sons of Samuel, who recited
the commandments of the Lord. God gathered the Jews out of captivity,
and brought them out from Babylon. Also the only begotten Son of God,
Jesus Christ, gathered the Gentiles from the four corners of the world,
by preaching to baptism.''.

[Psalms 107:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 107:1</span></span>

O give thanks unto the Lord,.... As all men should do, at all times and
for all things; the psalm begins as the former does, and gives the same
reasons for thanksgiving.

For he is good; and does good, and is the author of all good.

For his mercy endureth for ever; and men in every age are partakers of
it.

[Psalms 107:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 107:2</span></span>

Let the redeemed of the Lord say so,.... That the Lord is good, and his
mercy everlasting; since their redemption is a proof of his goodness,
and an instance of his mercy; this is not to be understood of the
Israelites redeemed from Egyptian bondage, or from the Babylonish
captivity, though they had abundant reason to say as above; but rather
of all such who are delivered from any sort of slavery, bondage, and
confinement; whether from the power of a disease, or from a prison, or
from wicked and unreasonable men; and from captivity in an enemy's
country, where they have been used very severely; and as the providence
of God is concerned in all such deliverances, thanks should be given
him: it seems best to understand it of those who are spiritually
redeemed by Christ, this phrase being frequently used of such, [Isa
35:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#010.md), who may be said to be so, since
Christ is the author of their redemption; they are redeemed, not by
themselves, nor by any creature, but by the Lord; who being their God,
and near kinsman, had a right to redeem them, and, being God, was able
to do it, and who has effected it by his precious blood; so that he has
a right unto them and a property in them, which this phrase also
suggests; and for all which they have great reason to praise the Lord
and his goodness, and sing the new song of redeeming love. Whom he hath
redeemed from the hand of the enemy from all their sins which war
against their souls; from Satan their implacable adversary, who is
stronger than they; from the law, which curses and threatens them with
damnation and death; from death itself, the last enemy, and indeed from
the hand of all their enemies, be they who they may.

[Psalms 107:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 107:3</span></span>

And gathered them out of the lands,.... This cannot have respect to the
bringing of the children of Israel out of Egypt; for they were not then
brought out of several countries, but from one land only: nor to the
Babylonish captivity; for, though some might be gathered out of
different provinces, yet not from east, west, north, and south, as here
expressed. It best suits with the gathering of the redeemed in the
effectual calling, and particularly the calling of the Gentiles in
Gospel times; to which the title of the Syriac version before mentioned
has respect. The elect of God are gathered in consequence of being
redeemed, [Zac 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#008.md), they are gathered
out of the world, and from among the men of it; they are gathered to
Christ, and by him; they are gathered into his churches, and to
communion with them, and to a participation of all privileges and
ordinances: and this is usually done by the ministering of the Gospel,
which is sent into all the world for this purpose; and a distinguishing
blessing of grace it is to be gathered out from the rest of the world,
and favoured with such rich mercies. Such have reason to adore the grace
of God, and to show forth his praise, who has called them by his grace,
and separated them from others for himself.

From the east and from the west, and from the north and from the south;
or, "from the sea" (f); the southern sea, as the Targum; or the Red sea,
the Arabian or Persian sea. The elect of God, and redeemed of the Lord,
lie in all parts of the world; and from thence they are gathered by the
ministry of the word unto Christ: this was fulfilled in the first times
of the Gospel, and will be more so in the latter day; see [Isa
43:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#005.md).

\(f\) "et a mari", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, &c.

[Psalms 107:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 107:4</span></span>

They wandered in the wilderness in a solitary way,.... Not the people of
Israel, as the Targum. These seem not to be particularly intended,
whatever allusion there may be to their passage through the wilderness
to Canaan's land; but rather, in general, travellers through waste
places, especially the wild deserts of Arabia; where the wind blowing
the sand, covers the roads with it, so that frequently travellers lose
their way, and wander about, till directed to it by one providence or
another. Some compare this with the case of the Old Testament saints,
mentioned in [Heb 11:37](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#037.md) others with
the church in the wilderness, and the witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth, [Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002.md). But it is
certain that the redeemed and gathered are here meant; and this fitly
describes their case, before and at effectual calling: they are in the
wilderness of the people, [Eze 20:35](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#035.md),
from whence they are gathered; are in a state of error and ignorance;
are like straying sheep, gone out of the right way; and are as lost
sheep, they have lost their way; and though there may be many ways that
present unto them, and which they think bid fair to be the right way;
yet the true way of peace, life, and salvation by Christ, they know not,
while in a state of nature and unregeneracy; and when they come to be
effectually called, they see themselves to be in a bewildered state and
condition.

They found no city to dwell in; nor even to call at or lodge in, for
miles together; which is the case of travellers in some parts,
particularly in the deserts of Arabia. Spiritual travellers find no
settlement, rest, peace, joy, and comfort, but in Christ; nor any indeed
in this world, and the things of it; here they have no continuing city,
[Heb 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#014.md).

[Psalms 107:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 107:5</span></span>

Hungry and thirsty,.... As travellers in deserts sometimes are; their
provisions being spent they bring with them, and none to be had on the
road; there being no inns to stop at, nor any sort of food to eat, nor
springs of water to drink of. In such a condition are souls, when, like
the prodigal, they come to themselves, and are thoroughly convinced of
their state and condition by nature; they find themselves starving and
famishing, and no provision to be had from themselves or the creature:
they hunger after Christ, the bread of life, and thirst after his grace,
the water of life, and the blessings of it; they hunger and thirst after
his righteousness, and justification by it; after the pardon of their
sins through his blood, and after salvation by him, and an interest in
it; after more knowledge of him, and communion with him.

Their soul fainted in them; for want of food and drink; as men do, in a
spiritual sense, for want of Christ, the blessings of his grace,
particularly salvation; for want of views of interest in it, of the joys
and comforts of it; see [Psa 119:81](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#081.md).
Some refer all this to the apostles and apostolic men, wandering in the
Gentile world, hungry, thirsty, and without any certain dwelling place;
see [Co1 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#011.md).

[Psalms 107:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 107:6</span></span>

Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble,.... To be directed in
their way, and for food and drink, as travellers do when in such
distress. Natural men, even the very Heathens, when in distress, will
cry unto God for relief, as Jonah's mariners did, [Jon
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#005.md). It is a time of trouble with
awakened sinners, when they are convinced of sin by the Spirit of God;
when they are pricked to the heart with a sense of it; when the terrors
of death and hell get hold of them; when they see themselves lost and
undone, and in a wrong way, and know not what to do; when they find
themselves starving and ready to perish; and then they cry, that is,
pray, unto the Lord, the God of their lives, whose ears are open to
their cries.

And he delivered them out of their distresses; by leading them in a
right way, and by satisfying and filling their hungry souls with good
things, as it is explained, [Psa
107:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#007.md).

[Psalms 107:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 107:7</span></span>

And he led them forth by the right way,.... Thus God by his providence
directs travellers that have lost their way, and puts them into the
right way. There is no doubt a very great concern of Providence in such
a case, and which ought to be acknowledged with thankfulness. And thus
the Lord leads awakened and inquiring souls to the right way of
salvation; to Christ, who is the way, the truth, and the life; and
directs and enables them to believe in him, to walk by faith, and to
continue to walk in him, as they have received him; and which is a plain
and straight way, in which they shall not stumble; yea, in which men,
though fools, shall not err, wander, or lose themselves: and though this
way is attended with many afflictions and tribulations, and so may be
said to be a narrow and a rough way; yet it is a right one, and a safe
one, it brings at last to eternal life: the Syriac version renders it,
"by the way of truth".

That they might go to a city of habitation; a city to dwell in; the
Targum is,

"to Jerusalem, a city to dwell in:''

but any city nearest for travellers is here meant; and in a spiritual
sense may be intended, either Christ, the city of refuge, where awakened
sinners are directed to flee to, and where they find safety and plenty
of provisions; or the church of God, the strong city, about which
salvation is as walls and bulwarks; and to which they come when
effectually called, and become citizens of it; or the New Jerusalem
church state, in which the tabernacle of God will be, and he will dwell
with men, and they with him; or the ultimate glory and happiness of the
saints in heaven, that city which has foundations, whose builder and
maker is God; in which are everlasting habitations, and mansions of
peace and rest for the people of God to dwell in, after they have gone
through their troublesome passage in this wilderness.

[Psalms 107:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 107:8</span></span>

O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,.... For his
providential goodness, in providing food and drink for them, when
fainting; in directing them to their right way, when they had lost it;
and in bringing them safe to the place they were bound for: and
particularly for his special grace and goodness, in redemption and
effectual calling; for bringing out of a wilderness state and condition,
and supplying them with all spiritual provisions, and putting them in
the right way to eternal glory and happiness.

And for his wonderful works to the children of men! as all the above
things are wonderful ones, both in providence and grace. This verse is
repeated at the close of each of the instances produced; in which the
goodness of God appears to persons in distress, and who being delivered,
ought to acknowledge it, and be thankful for it: or "confess": that is,
declare to God his goodness, and to the children of men his wonderful
works; so the Targum.

[Psalms 107:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 107:9</span></span>

For he satisfieth the longing soul,.... The soul that is hungry and
thirsty, and longs for food and drink, when nature in such circumstances
craves. And so such who long for Christ and his grace, for an interest
in him, and fellowship with him, the Lord satisfies with these things,
as with marrow and fatness.

And filleth the hungry soul with goodness; with the goodness and fatness
of his house; with good things; with the good things laid up in Christ
and in the covenant; with the good things of the Gospel; with the grace
and goodness of God in Christ; see [Psa
65:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa065.htm#004.md).

[Psalms 107:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 107:10</span></span>

Such as sit in darkness, and in the shadow of death,.... This is the
second instance of persons in distress calling on the name of the Lord;
and who, being delivered, are under obligation to praise him, such as
are captives and prisoners. The Targum applies it to the Israelites in
the Babylonish captivity; but it is much better to interpret it of
prisoners in common; whose prisons are generally dark cells or dungeons,
and where they are alone, and deprived of the company of the living; and
so are not only in darkness, but seem as if they were in the state of
the dead; their condition is the shadow of it, and bears some
resemblance to it. And it may be applied, in a spiritual sense, to the
case and condition of the people of God in a state of unregeneracy,
which is described in the same language, [Isa
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#002.md), and which is a state of darkness
and ignorance; they are darkness itself, and are ignorant of themselves
and their case; of the nature of sin, and the evil of it; of the
spirituality of the law; of God in Christ; of Christ, and the way of
salvation by him; of the Spirit, and his work; of the Scriptures, and
the doctrines of the Gospel contained in them; and, like persons in a
dark prison, cannot behold the sun, nor see to read nor work; and are
like those that are in the state of the dead; and indeed are dead in
Adam, dead in law, dead in trespasses and sins; having no spiritual
life, sense, nor motion. And here they sit, continue and remain, during
the time of their ignorance, till it pleases the Lord to enlighten,
quicken, and convert them. These phrases are used of the people of God
after conversion, when in darkness and desertion, and under afflictive
providences, [Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004.md). Being bound in
affliction and iron; that is, with fetters of iron, which is very
afflicting; see [Psa 105:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa105.htm#018.md), and fitly
describes the people of God in a state of nature, who are led captive by
Satan, at his will; are held with the cords and fetters of their own
sins, and are shut up under the law, as a ministering of condemnation
and death: or, bound with affliction, as with iron; hence we read of
fetters and cords of affliction, [Job
36:8](../../../bib/kjv/job036.htm#008.md), with which good men may be held
for their iniquities; or, however, are chastened with them for their
good, Some refer all this to the state of the Christian church under the
ten persecutions, [Rev 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010.md).

[Psalms 107:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 107:11</span></span>

Because they rebelled against the words of God,.... All afflictions, as
captivity and imprisonment, are generally for sin; which is a rebellion
against God, and a transgression of his laws. Adam rebelled against the
words of God, not giving credit to them, but believing the words of the
devil; and so brought himself and all his posterity into that state of
darkness, captivity, and death, before described. Some understand this
only of the light of nature, and the dictates of it, against which men
rebel; but rather it designs any and every revelation of the will of
God, either in the law or in the Gospel; disobedience to which is
rebellion against the words of God, and is highly resented by him.

And contemned the counsel of the most High; the advice he gives in his
law, and by his prophets, what to do, and what to avoid: and which he
gives by the ministers of the word, in his Gospel and in his ordinances;
which are both called his counsel, [Luk
7:30](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#030.md), the contempt of which is very
displeasing to him, [Pro 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#025.md).

[Psalms 107:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 107:12</span></span>

Therefore he brought down their heart with labour,.... Humbled them
under his mighty hand; brought down their haughty spirits and proud
stomachs by one afflictive providence or another; by which the Lord
humbles men, as he did the Israelites in the wilderness, and hides pride
from them: or with trouble of mind, under a conviction of sin; when
pride, which is the cause of rebellion against God, and of contempt of
his counsel, is brought down, and the haughtiness of man laid low; and
when men, humbled under a sense of sin, are made willing to submit to
Christ and his righteousness, to God's way of saving sinners by him, to
the law of God, and to the Gospel of Christ.

They fell down; they threw themselves prostrate at his feet for mercy;
their heart and strength failed them, as the word signifies, and is used
in [Psa 31:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa031.htm#010.md), terrified with a sense
of divine wrath, they could not stand before the Lord, nor brave it out
against him.

And there was none to help; they could not help themselves, nor was
there any creature that could. There is salvation in no other than in
Christ; when he saw there was none to help him in that work, his own arm
brought salvation to him; and when sinners see there is help in no
other, they apply to him, as follows.

[Psalms 107:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 107:13</span></span>

Then they cried unto the Lord in their trouble,.... Their affliction,
their hearts being brought down with labour, and they being and finding
themselves in a state of darkness, in the shadow of death, in affliction
and iron; or in soul troubles, under a sense of sin, and in a view of
wrath and displeasure; under apprehensions of imminent danger, as the
disciples in the storm; and therefore cry to the Lord, as they did,

Lord, save us, we perish, [Mat 8:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#002.md).

And he saved them out of their distresses; from all their sins; from the
curse of the law; from wrath to come; from hell and death; being both
able and willing. The following verse further explains this.

[Psalms 107:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 107:14</span></span>

He brought them out of darkness,.... In which they were by nature, into
marvellous light; to see their interest in Christ, and his salvation;
and to have the light of joy and comfort in him.

And the shadow of death; quickening them by his Spirit and grace;
causing them to live by faith upon him; entitling them to eternal life,
and securing them from eternal death.

And brake their bands in sunder; their cords and fetters of affliction;
or their bands of sin, and the power of it; and loosed them whom Satan
had bound and kept so for many years, and brought them into the glorious
liberty of the children of God.

[Psalms 107:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 107:15</span></span>

O that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,.... Or, "confess to
the Lord his goodness or grace", or "mercy" (g); own and acknowledge it,
in delivering them from such a state of darkness and death, of thraldom
and captivity; see [Rom 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom006.htm#017.md).

And for his wonderful works to the children of men! or, "confess" them
before them; relate and declare them to them, what wonderful things he
has done for them; that they may be affected with them, and that they
may praise his name together; See Gill on [Psa
107:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#009.md).

\(g\) So Pagninus, Montanus, Cocceius, Michaelis.

[Psalms 107:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 107:16</span></span>

For he hath broken the gates of brass,.... The prison doors made of
brass, as sometimes of iron, for the security of the prisoners; see [Act
12:10](../../../bib/kjv/act012.htm#010.md). And cut the bars of iron in
sunder; with which they were barred and secured. Hyperbolical phrases
these, as Kimchi, expressing how exceeding strong the prison doors were,
and the impossibility of an escape out of them, unless the Lord had
delivered them; but when he works, none can let; all obstructions are
easily removed by him; which is the sense of the words, see [Isa
45:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#002.md). Vitringa, on [Rev
12:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev012.htm#002.md), interprets this of the
subjection of the Roman emperors to the faith and obedience of Christ.

[Psalms 107:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 107:17</span></span>

Fools, because of their transgression,.... Or, "because of the way" (h)
"of it"; their sinful course of life; for it is not for a single
transgression they are afflicted, but for a continued series of sinning,
which is a transgression of the law of God. By "fools" are meant not
idiots, men devoid of common sense and natural understanding, but
immoral persons; such who have no understanding of divine and spiritual
things; are destitute of the fear of God, which is the beginning of
wisdom; without the true knowledge of God himself; place their happiness
in sensual enjoyments; seek only the gratification of their lust; scoff
at religion, make a mock at sin, and have no concern about a future
state, and the welfare of their immortal souls.

And because of their iniquities, are afflicted; or "afflict themselves",
or "find themselves afflicted" (i); rather "bring affliction on
themselves" (k). Not that these are the only persons that are afflicted;
for many truly wise, good, and gracious persons, have a large share of
afflictions; though not in a way of punishment for sin, or in wrath and
hot displeasure, but in a way of fatherly chastisement, and in love: nor
are fools for the most part afflicted, nor so much as others; they are
not in trouble and plagued as other men; which has been a stumbling to
good men: however, sometimes they are afflicted in this life, and in a
way of punishment for sin; and very often are but the more hardened by
it; though to some it is an ordinance for good; they are awakened by it
to a sense of sin, and acknowledgment of it, and to seek for pardoning
grace and mercy. This is the "third" instance of persons in distress
calling on the Lord, and finding relief (l), and being under obligation
to praise him.

\(h\) "propter viam", Pagninus, Montanus, Piscator. (i) "sese adflictos
sentiebant", Michaelis. (k) So Tigurine version. (l) "Flectitur iratus
voce rogante Deus", Ovid. de Arte Amandi, l. 1.

[Psalms 107:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 107:18</span></span>

Their soul abhorreth all manner of meat,.... Not only bread and common
food, but dainty meat, the most delicious fare, [Job
33:20](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#020.md), in which they most delighted in
time of health, and too much indulged themselves in; and by that means
brought diseases upon them, which caused this loathing in them, as is
common. Thus to those who are distempered with sin, whose taste is not
changed, nor can it discern perverse things, the word of God, the Gospel
of Christ, which is delicious food, is not relished by them; the
doctrines of it are insipid things, they loath them as light bread, as
the Israelites did the manna.

And they draw near unto the gates of death; that is, the grave; the
house appointed for all living; the dwelling place of men till the
resurrection; and so is said to have gates and doors; see [Job
33:22](../../../bib/kjv/job033.htm#022.md) and men sometimes are brought so
low by affliction as that they seem to be near to death, just upon the
brink of eternity, ready to enter into the grave, and lie down among the
dead.

[Psalms 107:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 107:19</span></span>

Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble,.... A time of affliction
is a time of trouble, and a proper season for prayer; and by it persons
are brought to the throne of grace, when humbled under the mighty hand
of God, to seek for relief. Hezekiah in his affliction prayed to the
Lord, though Asa sought to the physicians only, and not to the Lord;
this is to be understood of such who are convinced of their folly,
brought to a sense of sin and danger, and therefore cry to the Lord for
his sparing mercy, and pardoning grace.

And he saveth them out of their distresses: their afflictions, which
were distressing to them, by removing their disorders and restoring them
to health again; as follows.

[Psalms 107:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 107:20</span></span>

He sent his word, and healed them,.... It was his will and pleasure they
should be healed, and accordingly they were; he issued his orders for
the removal of the affliction, and it was done; diseases are his
servants, which come and go at his command; so Christ, in the days of
his flesh, healed by speaking a word, [Mat
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#003.md). This is true of Christ the
essential Word, who was sent in the fulness of time, and was made flesh
and dwelt among men, and went about healing all manner of diseases among
the people; and who is also the physician of souls who came with healing
in his wings; that is, with pardon of sin, for which his blood was shed:
he is the only physician, the skilful, universal, and infallible one,
and does all freely, and in a most marvellous manner, by his stripes,
blood and wounds, and by an application of these to diseased persons
sensible of their case. It may also be applied to the word of the
Gospel; the law is the means of wounding, it is the killing letter; the
Gospel is the means of healing, the doctrines of it are the leaves of
the tree of life, which are for the healing of the nations; it is the
doctrine of remission of sins by the blood of Christ, and by it Christ
speaks peace and pardon to wounded consciences.

And delivered them from their destructions; from the destruction of the
body, of the beauty and strength of it by diseases; restoring to health
is a redeeming of the life from destruction; from the grave, the pit of
corruption and destruction, so called because in it bodies corrupt,
putrefy, and are destroyed by worms; and such who are savingly convinced
of sin, and blessed with pardoning grace and mercy, are delivered from
the everlasting destruction of body and soul in hell.

[Psalms 107:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 107:21</span></span>

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,.... Both in
restoring to bodily health, which is an instance of divine goodness; and
in healing the diseases of the soul, or in the pardon of sin, which is
according to the multitude of his mercies, and the riches of his grace.

And for his wonderful works to the children of men; bodily health is
sometimes restored in a wonderful manner, when all means used are
without success, and the prescriptions of doctors fail; and pardon of
sin is a wonder of grace now, and will be to all eternity; and for these
things praise ought to be given to the Lord, and they should be declared
to men for his glory.

[Psalms 107:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 107:22</span></span>

And let them sacrifice the sacrifices of thanksgiving,.... Not legal
sacrifices, but spiritual and evangelical ones, the sacrifices of praise
and thankfulness which God has enjoined are well pleasing to him through
Christ, glorify him, and are but our reasonable service; see [Heb
13:15](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#015.md).

And declare his works with rejoicing: tell them to the children of men,
what he has done for them, for soul and body; let them come to Zion with
joy and everlasting joy on their heads; to the gates thereof, or to the
public assemblies of the saints, and there declare what great things the
Lord has done for them; and has had compassion upon them in healing
their bodily diseases, and curing them of their soul maladies.

[Psalms 107:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 107:23</span></span>

They that go down to the sea in ships,.... This is the fourth instance
of persons in distress crying to the Lord for help, and, having it, are
laid under obligation to praise him; the case of seafaring men: so the
Targum introduces it,

"mariners that go down to the sea in ships;''

the same form of expression as here is used in [Isa
42:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#010.md). Some affirm the sea to be
higher than the earth, but by this it should be lower; besides the earth
is said to be founded on the seas, which suggests superiority; and all
the rivers run into the sea, which supposes a declivity; but, be it so
that it is higher than the earth, yet this phrase is to be justified by
the shores being higher than the sea, from whence men go down to take
shipping, as Kimchi observes; though Kimchi's father is of opinion that
it respects persons going down into the ship, which is deep, as Jonah is
said to do, [Jon 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#003.md).

That do business in great waters: which refers either to the steering
and working of the ship, and everything relating to the management of
the ropes and sails, and other affairs; and in a storm much business is
done, all hands are employed: or else to the business they go to sea
about, as catching fish, curing them, and carrying them to market; or
else to traffic and merchandise of goods, they convey from place to
place. The phrase is much like that, "as many as trade by sea", [Rev
18:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#017.md).

[Psalms 107:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 107:24</span></span>

These see the works of the Lord,.... In creation, the sea itself, its
flux and reflux; the creatures in it, fishes of various forms and sizes:
and in providence, in preserving ships and men in the most imminent
danger, and even to a miracle; sometimes causing the wind to change or
to subside in a moment, whereby deliverance is wrought.

And his wonders in the deep; the strange and wonderful creatures that
are in the deep waters of the sea, and to be seen nowhere else; and the
amazing appearances of divine providence, in delivering when in the
greatest distress, and none at hand to help, and all hope of salvation
gone.

[Psalms 107:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 107:25</span></span>

For he commandeth, and raiseth the stormy wind,.... Winds are not raised
by men, nor by devils, nor by angels, but by the Lord himself; who has
created them, holds them in his fist, brings them out of his treasures,
and sends them forth to do his will; if he speaks the word, gives but
the order, a storm arises at once, and executes what he pleases, [Psa
148:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa148.htm#008.md).

Which lifteth up the waves thereof; that is, the waves of the sea; it
comes down into it, and causes surges; which rise above the ship, and
sometimes cover it, and ready to sink it; yea, even they are lifted up
to the heavens, as it follows.

[Psalms 107:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 107:26</span></span>

They mount up to the heaven,.... The waves which are lifted up by the
stormy wind, and the ships which are upon them, and the men in them.

They go down again to the depths: one while they seem to reach the
skies, and presently they are down, as it were, in the bottom of the
sea, and are threatened to be buried in the midst of it; distress at sea
is described in much the same language by Virgil and Ovid (m).

Their soul is melted because of trouble; because of the danger of being
cast away; so it was with Jonah's mariner's, and with the disciples in
the storm; sea roaring, and men's hearts failing for fear, are joined
together in [Luk 21:25](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#025.md).

\(m\) "Tollimur in coelum", Virgil. Aeneid 3. prope finem. "Coelumque
aequare videtur pontus". Ovid. Metamorph. l. 12. Fab. 10.

[Psalms 107:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">psa 107:27</span></span>

They reel to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man,.... Through the
agitation of the water, and motion of the ship, not being able to stand
upon deck.

And are at their wit's end; or, "all their wisdom is swallowed up" (n);
their wisdom in naval affairs, their art of navigation, their skill in
managing ships, all nonplussed and baffled; they know not what method to
take to save the vessel and themselves; their knowledge fails them, they
are quite confounded and almost distracted. So Apollinarius paraphrases
it,

"they forget navigation, and their wise art does not appear;''

so Ovid, describing a storm, uses the same phrase, "deficit ars",

"art fails.''

\(n\) "omnis sapientia eorum absorpta est", Pagninus, Montanus,
Vatablus; so Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Psalms 107:28](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">psa 107:28</span></span>

Then they cry unto the Lord in their trouble,.... As in a storm
seafaring persons are used to do; so did Jonah's mariners, though
Heathens, everyone cried to his god. With the Romans (o) tempests were
reckoned deities, and had temples erected, and sacrifices offered to
them; but these persons were such as knew and owned the true Jehovah,
and called upon him in their distress: so did the apostles of Christ.

And he bringeth them out of their distresses; by stilling the winds and
the waves, causing them to proceed on their voyage with pleasure, and
landing them safe on shore, as follows.

\(o\) Cicero, de Nat. Deor. l. 3. c. 20. Virgil. Aeneid. l. 5. v. 772.
Horat. Epod. Ode 10. v. 23, 24. Ovid. Fast. 6. v. 193.

[Psalms 107:29](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">psa 107:29</span></span>

He maketh the storm a calm,.... As Christ did by a word speaking, [Mar
4:39](../../../bib/kjv/mar004.htm#039.md).

So that the waves thereof are still; and roar and toss no more, but
subside; and the sea becomes smooth and quiet, its raging ceases: the
angry sea, as Horace (p) calls it, becomes calm and peaceable; see [Psa
89:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#009.md).

\(p\) "Nec horret iratum mare", Horat. Epod. Ode 2. v. 6. "Nec maris ira
manet", Ovid. Metamorph. l. 12. Fab. 7.

[Psalms 107:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">psa 107:30</span></span>

Then are they glad because they be quiet,.... The mariners are glad that
the waves are quiet, and they free from danger, and at ease and in
repose themselves.

So he bringeth them unto their desired haven; the port, city, border or
tract of land (q), they are bound to; which they desire to be at, and
eagerly look out for, and rejoice when arrived at it. This is all the
Lord's work in providence: mariners too often take it to themselves, as
if it was owing to their own skill and management that they have brought
home the ship safe to the appointed port; but it is owing to the secret
guidance and protection of divine Providence, which should be
acknowledged. The late Mr. Hussey (r) thinks, that all this is not to be
understood of seamen and naval affairs in common, but is a prophecy of
what should befall the disciples of Christ, when on shipboard with him;
who are the persons that went "down to the sea of Galilee" in a ship;

whose business in the great waters was fishing; when, by the will of
God, there came down a "stormy wind", which "lifted up the waves" of the
sea, so that the ship in which they were was filled with them, and in
danger of being sunk; when they went up and down, as here described, and
reeled as they went along on the deck, to awake their Master their
hearts melting, and they at their wit's end through fear, when they saw
such wonders, what no common mariner ever did; the Godman and Mediator
rising and in a majestic manner rebuked the winds and waves, and caused
a calm, and so brought them to the country of the Gadarenes, whither
they were bound; see [Luk 8:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk008.htm#023.md). But it
may be applied, in a more spiritual manner, to the people of God in
common who are embarked in the cause of Christ, and in a church state,
comparable to a ship, of which Christ is the master, governor, and
pilot; and who are sailing through the tempestuous sea of this world,
and are tossed with tempests in it; and have business to do here, not
only of a civil, but of a spiritual nature and who not only see the
wondrous works of creation and providence, but of grace and redemption;
the deep things of God, the mysteries of his grace and love: and who
sometimes are covered with the billows and waves of affliction, and in
the utmost distress; which are all under the direction and at the
command of God, to whom they apply for relief; and he commands a calm in
their breasts, and causes their afflictions to cease, which produce joy
and gladness in them; and at last they are brought safe to heaven, their
desired haven, which they are bound unto, are seeking after, and
desirous of; and where they are at entire rest, brought hither by the
Lord himself.

\(q\) Vid. Kimchii Sepher Shorash. rad. (r) Warning from the Winds, p.
21-26.

[Psalms 107:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">psa 107:31</span></span>

Oh that men would praise the Lord for his goodness,.... Seafaring men
particularly, before mentioned, as Jonah's mariners did, [Jon
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/jon001.htm#016.md), or all the four sorts of persons
instanced in, as Kimchi thinks: and even all men whatsoever should do
this, high and low, rich and poor, of every age, sex, and condition;
since they all receive favours from the Lord, and should return thanks
to him; and especially good men, who are blessed with spiritual
blessings by him: these should all

confess to the Lord his goodness; as it may be rendered; see Gill on
[Psa 107:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#015.md), they should own the mercy
received as the Lord's doing, and acknowledge their unworthiness of it,
and give him the glory of it.

And for his wonderful works to the children of men! or, "confess and
declare his wonderful works to the children of men": the wonderful works
of creation and providence, which those that go to sea, see in the
deeps, and everything of the same kind which others observe; and
especially the wonderful works of grace, or what God has done in a
wonderful manner for the souls of his people; see [Psa
66:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa066.htm#016.md).

[Psalms 107:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">psa 107:32</span></span>

Let them exalt him also in the congregation of the people,.... Of the
people of God, who are gathered out of the world into a church state;
and who gather themselves together to attend the worship and service of
God in some one place; and here the Lord should be praised, and his name
exalted, by those who have received favours from him; see [Psa
111:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001.md), the Targum explains it,

"in the congregation of the people of the house of Israel.''

And praise him in the assembly of the elders; or, "in the seat", or
"chair of the elders (s)": not of the Scribes and Pharisees, and elders
of the people, that sat in Moses's chair; but rather of the four and
twenty elders, who are said to have four and twenty seats round the
throne, where they worship and praise God; and which are emblems of
Gospel churches; the members of which, for their grace, gravity, and
prudence, are called elders; and over which elders in office preside,
and who rule well, and labour in the word and doctrine; see [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004.md). The Targum renders it,

"the sanhedrim of the wise men.''

\(s\) "in cathedra", Pagninus, Montanus.

[Psalms 107:33](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">psa 107:33</span></span>

He turneth rivers into a wilderness,.... A country abounding with
rivers, as the country round about Sodom and the land of Canaan were,
[Gen 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#010.md). Such an one is sometimes,
by the just judgment of God, turned into a desert.

And the water springs into dry ground: what was like a well watered
garden becomes like dry and barren earth, on which nothing grows.

[Psalms 107:34](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#034.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">psa 107:34</span></span>

A fruitful land into barrenness,.... Or, "into saltness" (t); as Sodom
and the land adjacent became a salt sea; and the land of Canaan was
threatened to become brimstone, salt and burning, like Sodom; in which
nothing was sown, and which bore no grass; see [Gen
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/gen014.htm#003.md) and so the Targum,

"the land of Israel, which brought forth fruit, he hath destroyed, as
Sodom was overthrown.''

For the wickedness of them that dwell therein; this was the cause of the
overthrow of Sodom, and of the destruction of that fine country, as also
of Canaan afterwards; see [Gen 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/gen013.htm#013.md).
The very Heathens had a notion that barrenness and unfruitfulness in
countries were owing to the sins of men; hence the sterility and famine
at Mycenas were attributed to the wickedness of Atreus (u). This may
figuratively be understood of the present state and condition of the
Jews; who were once a people well watered with the word and ordinances,
and had the first preaching of the Gospel among them; but, rejecting and
despising it, are now become like a desert, barren and unfruitful in the
knowledge of divine things: and it might be illustrated by the case of
several Christian churches; the seven churches of Asia, and others, once
as well watered gardens, but now are no more; and the places where they
stood are destitute of spiritual knowledge, and the means of it.

\(t\) "in salsuginem", Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus, Vatablus, Piscator,
Gejerus, Michaelis; so Junius & Tremellius; "in salsam", Cocceius. (u)
Hygin. Fab. 88.

[Psalms 107:35](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#035.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">psa 107:35</span></span>

He turneth the wilderness into a standing water,.... On the other hand,
when it is the pleasure of God, a country uncultivated and like a
desert, he makes it fruitful as one that is well watered and tilled; as
this country of ours, and the land in America, once waste places, now
fruitful ones.

And dry ground into water springs: which is expressive of the same
thing, and may he figuratively understood of the Gentile world; which,
before the coming of Christ, and the preaching of the Gospel, and the
pouring down of the Spirit, was like a wilderness and dry ground; but
now watered with the word and ordinances, and the grace of God, and in
many places has become fruitful in grace and good works. The Targum
prefaces this verse thus,

"when they return unto the law, he turneth, &c.''

[Psalms 107:36](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#036.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">psa 107:36</span></span>

And there he maketh the hungry to dwell,.... In those fruitful places
which they find agreeable to them, and so fix upon them as the places of
their abode, and build houses, and dwell there; having all the
conveniences of life, which they wanted elsewhere: so such as hunger and
thirst after righteousness make to such places where the waters are, the
word is preached, and ordinances administered; and here they take up
their dwelling, their bread being given them, and their waters sure unto
them.

That they may prepare a city for habitation; those poor necessitous
persons, as they were when they first came; building houses, and others
continually coming to them, by degrees form a well regulated city, which
are a large number of inhabitants: which may be considered as an emblem
of the church of God, often compared to a city; and is an habitation for
God, and where saints desire and delight to dwell.

[Psalms 107:37](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#037.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">psa 107:37</span></span>

And sow the fields, and plant vineyards,.... And so raise a sufficient
supply of corn and wine for the support of themselves and families. In a
spiritual sense the "fields" are the world, and the seed which is sown
is the word; the persons that sow it are the ministers of the Gospel,
which, by a divine blessing, brings forth fruit, in some thirty, some
sixty, and some an hundred fold: the "vineyards" are the churches,
planted by Christ and by his ministers, as his instruments; believers
are the pleasant plants in them, and young converts are the tender
grapes

Which may yield fruits of increase; or "fruit" and "increase"; the
fields yield all sorts of grain for food, and the vineyards wine for
drink. So the seed of the word being sown, and churches planted, they
increase with the increase of God, and bring forth fruits of
righteousness to the glory of his name.

[Psalms 107:38](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#038.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">psa 107:38</span></span>

He blesseth them also, so that they are multiplied greatly,.... Not only
their fields and vineyards are blessed with an increase, but these
husbandmen themselves; as man at his first creation was bid to do, being
blessed of God; and as the Israelites were in Egypt, [Gen
1:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#028.md) and which may spiritually denote
the great number of converts to Christian churches, especially in the
latter day, [Jer 30:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#019.md).

And suffereth not their cattle to decrease; their sheep and oxen, which
is reckoned a great temporal happiness, [Psa
144:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa144.htm#013.md), and may signify that God does
and will give a sufficient number of Gospel ministers, comparable to
oxen for their laboriousness, that shall in all ages minister to his
churches; see [Co1 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#009.md).

[Psalms 107:39](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#039.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">psa 107:39</span></span>

Again they are minished,.... Or "lessened", in their families, cattle,
and substance; either the same persons as before, or others. The Targum
paraphrases it,

"but when they sin, they are lessened:''

for sin is the cause of it, as follows:

and brought low through oppression, affliction and sorrow; either
because of their oppression of the poor, the evil they do to them, and
the sorrow they bring upon them; or they are brought into a low estate
through the tyranny and oppression of others, and by the afflictions and
sorrows they are brought into by them. This may be applied to the Jews,
at their destruction by the Romans, when they were greatly lessened and
brought low by their oppression of them: or rather to the Christians;
not under the Heathen persecutions, for then they increased more and
more; but under antichristian tyranny, when the beast had power over
them, and overcame and slew them; and their numbers were so reduced,
that the whole world is said to wonder after the beast, [Rev
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#003.md), and which will be the case
again, when the witnesses will be slain: the number of Christians is
greatly lessening now; there are but a few names in Sardis; Jacob is
small, but will be smaller and fewer still.

[Psalms 107:40](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#040.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">psa 107:40</span></span>

He poureth contempt upon princes,.... That is, the Lord does, who is
above them; he laughs at them, and has them in derision, when they are
raging against his people, cause, and interest; he sets them up and
pulls them down at his pleasure; he hurls them from their seats and
thrones, and makes them contemptible to their subjects; he sometimes
brings them to a shameful end, as Herod, who was eaten with worms; and
wicked princes, if they are not brought to disgrace in this world, they
will rise to shame and everlasting contempt in the other; and will stand
with the meanest and lowest before the Judge of the whole earth; and
seek to the rocks and mountains to cover them from his wrath. This
particularly will be true of the antichristian princes, when the vials
of God's wrath will be poured out upon them, [Rev
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#001.md).

And causeth them to wander in the wilderness; where there is no way; no
beaten track or path; whither being driven out of their kingdoms, they
flee for shelter, and wander about in untrodden paths; as
Nebuchadnezzar, when he was driven from men, and had his dwelling with
the beasts of the field: or this may be interpreted, as it is by Aben
Ezra and Kimchi, the infatuation of their wisdom, and of their being
left without counsel, and erring through it; being at their wits' end,
not knowing what step to take, or measures to concert; being in a maze,
in a wilderness, at an entire loss what they should do; see [Job
12:17](../../../bib/kjv/job012.htm#017.md).

[Psalms 107:41](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#041.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">psa 107:41</span></span>

Yet setteth he the poor on high from affliction,.... On the other hand,
the Lord sometimes exalteth men of low degree, raiseth men of mean
extract and parentage, who have made a poor figure in life, to high
places of honour, free from adversity and distress; as David from the
sheepfold, and from following the ewes great with young, to be king of
Israel. This may be applied to the saints and people of God, who for the
most part are poor in purse, the poor of this world, whom he chooses,
calls, and saves; poor knowledge, capacity, and gifts; poor as to their
spiritual circumstances, having neither food nor clothing, nor money to
buy either; poor in spirit, and sensible of it; and poor by reason of
afflictions: these the Lord sets on high, sets them among the princes of
his people, makes them kings and priests; sets them on Christ the Rock,
who is higher than they, higher than the angels and than the heavens;
sets them above the angels, their nature being advanced above theirs in
Christ, and they being represented by him in heavenly places; and
standing in the relation of sons to God, and of spouse and bride to
Christ, and angels being their ministering servants; and ere long they
will be set on thrones, and have a crown of glory, life, and
righteousness, put upon them, and be possessed of an everlasting
kingdom, and be out of the reach of affliction. They are not clear of it
in this world; it is needful for them, they are appointed to it, and
through it they must enter the kingdom; but then they will come out of
all tribulation, and there will be no more pain, sorrow, and death: it
may be rendered, "after affliction", after their time of affliction is
over, then God will exalt and glorify them; see [Pe1
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#010.md), this may respect the prosperity
of the church in the latter day; see [Dan
7:27](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#027.md).

And maketh him families like a flock; that is, the Lord makes the poor
families like a flock of sheep, so greatly does he increase them; this
is a very apt figure that is here used, since the people of God are
often compared to sheep, and to a flock of them; and these are creatures
that greatly increase; and here it denotes the large number of the
saints, as in the first times of the Gospel, both in Judea and in the
Gentile world; and as it will be in the latter day, when they shall be
multiplied and not be few, glorified and not be small; and that they
should be branched out into families, or particular churches, which,
like families, consist of children, young men, and fathers, of which
Christ is master, and ministers stewards; so it has been from the
beginning of the Gospel dispensation and will be much more so in the
latter day, when the earth will be full of these families every where.
The Targum introduces this verse thus,

"when they turn to the law he setteth, &c.''

[Psalms 107:42](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#042.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">psa 107:42</span></span>

The righteous shall see it, and rejoice,.... Shall see the increase and
prosperity of the saints, the glory of the church in the latter day, and
rejoice at it; the judgments of God upon the wicked, upon antichristian
princes and states, and rejoice on that account; see [Rev
18:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev018.htm#020.md) and the several deliverances of
persons in distress before mentioned, and rejoice with them that
rejoice; which is what good men ought to do, [Rom
12:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#015.md).

And all iniquity shall stop her mouth; men of iniquity, very bad men,
the man of sin and his followers, and all profane and atheistical
persons, who will be silenced and have nothing to say against the
providence of God; will be confounded, and through shame lay their hand
on their mouths and be struck with admiration at the wonderful things
done by the Lord for his people; nor will they have anything to say
against their own condemnation.

[Psalms 107:43](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#043.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">psa 107:43</span></span>

Whoso is wise,.... Or as it may be read interrogatively, "who is wise?"
as in [Jer 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer009.htm#012.md), that is, spiritually
wise, wise unto salvation; who is made to know wisdom in the hidden
part; for not such as are possessed of natural wisdom, or worldly wise
men, much less who are wise to do evil, are here meant.

And will observe these things; the remarkable appearances of divine
Providence to persons in distress; the various changes and vicissitudes
in the world; the several afflictions of God's people, and their
deliverances out of them; the wonderful works of God in nature,
providence, and grace; these will be observed, taken notice of, laid up
in the mind, and kept by such who are truly wise, who know how to make a
right use and proper improvement of them.

Even they shall understand the lovingkindness of the Lord; everyone of
the wise men; they will perceive the kindness of God unto all men, in
the several dispensations of his providence towards them, and his
special love and kindness towards his own people, even in all their
afflictions; they will perceive this to be at the bottom of every mercy
and blessing; they will understand more of the nature and excellency of
it, and know more of the love of God and Christ, which passeth
knowledge. Or "the kindnesses of the Lord shall be understood": that is,
by wise men; so R. Moses in Aben Ezra renders the words.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 108](psa108.md)

</div>
