<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa127)  [Next](psa129) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 128](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 128:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 128

A Song of degrees. This psalm very probably was written by the same hand
as the former, and seems to have some connection with it; as that shows
that all things depend on the providence and goodness of God; and that
all blessings, particularly children, are the gift of God; this points
out the blessings, civil and religious, that belong to good men; and,
among the rest, a numerous offspring. According to the Syriac version,

"it is said concerning Zerubbabel, prince of Judah; and the care of the
building: and it intimates in it the calling of Gentiles.''

Manythings in it may be applied Christ and his church.

[Psalms 128:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 128:1</span></span>

Blessed is everyone that feareth the Lord,.... Be he who he will; of
whatsoever nation, Jew or Gentile; of whatsoever sex, age, or condition,
high or low, rich or poor, [Act 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/act010.htm#035);
such an one is blessed now, and will be hereafter; See Gill on [Psa
112:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa112.htm#001);

that walketh in his ways: which God has prescribed and directed his
people to walk in, his ordinances and commands; which, to walk in, is
both pleasant and profitable: it supposes life, requires strength and
wisdom; and is expressive of progression, or going on and continuance in
them: and where the true fear of God is, which includes every grace, and
the whole of religious worship, there will be a conscientious regard to
the ways of God: such avoid evil, and do good, because of the fear of
God, [Job 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#001).

[Psalms 128:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 128:2</span></span>

For thou shall eat the labour of thine hands,.... That is, thou that
fearest the Lord, and walkest in his ways. It is an apostrophe, or
address to such, even to everyone of them; instancing in one part of the
blessedness that belongs to them, enjoyment of what their hands have
laboured for; which may be understood both in a literal and spiritual
sense: man must labour and get his bread with the sweat of his brow; he
that will not work should not eat, he that does should; and a good man
may have a comfortable enjoyment of the good of his labour; than which,
as to temporal blessings, there is nothing better under the sun, [Ecc
5:18](../../../bib/kjv/ecc005.htm#018); and, in a spiritual sense, good
men labour in prayers at the throne of grace, there lifting up holy
hands to God, wrestling with him for a blessing, which they enjoy; they
labour in attendance on the word and ordinances, for the meat which
endures to everlasting life; and they find the word and eat it, and
Christ in it, whose flesh is meat indeed; and feed by faith on it, to
the joy and comfort of their souls;

happy shall thou be, and it shall be well with thee; or, to thy soul, as
the Syriac version; happy as to temporal things, and well as to
spiritual ones: such having an apparent special interest in the love,
grace, mercy, and delight of God; in his providence, protection, and
care; in the supplies of his grace, and in his provisions for his
people, in time and eternity. It is well with such that felt God, in
life and at death, at judgment and for ever: and the Targum is,

"thou art blessed in this world, and it shall be well with thee in the
world to come;''

and so Arama.

[Psalms 128:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 128:3</span></span>

Thy wife shall be as a fruitful vine by the sides of thine house,....
The vine being a weak and tender tree, which needs propping and
supporting; and often is fastened to the sides of a house, to which the
allusion here is; whereunto it cleaves, and on which it runs up, and
bears very agreeable fruit; it is properly used to express the weakness
and tenderness of the female sex, their fruitfulness in bearing
children, and their care of domestic affairs, being keepers at home; see
[Pe1 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#007). Kimchi observes, that the
vine is the only tree men plant within doors; which, when it is grown
up, they bring out at a hole or window of the house without, to have the
sun and air; and so its root is within the house, and the branches
without: and he observes, that a modest woman is within the house, and
does not go without, and is only seen by her husband; but her children,
like the branches of the vine, go out to work. This may be applied to
Christ and his church; to him the other characters agree: he, as man, is
one that feared the Lord; the grace of fear was in him; the spirit of
fear rested on him; and he was in the exercise of it, and walked in all
the ways of the Lord, [Isa 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#001); he
now sees and enjoys the travail or labour of his soul to satisfaction,
and is made most blessed for evermore, [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011). The church is the bride, the
Lamb's wife, the spouse of Christ; and may be compared to a vine for her
weakness in herself, her fruitfulness in grace and good works, and in
bringing forth souls to Christ, through the ministry of the word; all
which is pleasant and grateful to him; see [Psa
80:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa080.htm#014);

thy children like olive plants round about thy table; a numerous
offspring was always accounted a very great blessing; and it must be
very pleasant to a parent to see his children round about his table,
placed in their proper order according to their age, partaking of what
it is furnished with: Job, in his time of prosperity, had many children;
and, next to the presence of the Almighty with him, he mentions this of
his children being about him; see [Job
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#002). This may be applied to the
spiritual seed and offspring of Christ, which are like to olive trees or
olive plants; to which David is compared, [Psa
52:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa052.htm#008); the two anointed ones in [Zac
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#011); the two witnesses in [Rev
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#004); and all true believers in Christ
may; because of their excellency, these being choice plants; because of
their fruitfulness and beauty; because of their fatness, and having oil
in them; and because of their perpetuity, being ever green; see [Jer
11:16](../../../bib/kjv/jer011.htm#016). Now Christ has a table, which
he has well furnished, at which he himself sits, and places these his
children all around; and whom he welcomes to the entertainment he makes,
and takes delight and pleasure in them, [Sol
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012). Kimchi observes, the olive trees
do not admit of a graft from other trees; see [Rom
11:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#024); and so this denotes the
legitimacy of those children, being free from all suspicion of being
spurious, being born of such a wife as before described; and being green
and moist all the year long, denotes their continuance in good works.

[Psalms 128:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 128:4</span></span>

Behold, that thus shall the man be blessed that feareth the Lord. In the
manner before described, and in the instances already given, as well as
in the following; this is said to raise attention, and fix a sense of
the blessedness of such persons; and who are further addressed, and
pronounced happy, in the next verses.

[Psalms 128:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 128:5</span></span>

The Lord shall bless thee out of Zion,.... The church of God, where he
dwells, out of which he shines, even the Word of the Lord, as the Targum
in the king's Bible; and where he commands his blessings of grace to
descend on his people, even life for evermore, [Psa
133:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa133.htm#003). Here he blesses them with his
word and ordinances, which are the goodness and fatness of his house,
and with his presence in them; so that the man that fears God is
blessed, not only in his person, and in his family, but in the house of
God; see [Psa 118:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#026);

and thou shall see the good of Jerusalem all the days of thy life; the
goodness of God in Jerusalem, which is another name for the church of
God; the beauty of the Lord in his house and ordinances; his power and
his glory in the sanctuary: or should see the church of God in
prosperous circumstances all his days; true religion flourish, the power
of godliness in the professors of it; the word and ordinances blessed to
the edification of saints, and many sinners converted and gathered in.
This may be applied to Christ, [Isa
53:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#011).

[Psalms 128:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa128.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 128:6</span></span>

Yea, thou shall see thy children's children,.... A numerous race of
descendants from him, which are the crown and glory of old men, [Pro
17:6](../../../bib/kjv/pro017.htm#006); this is also true of Christ's
spiritual children by his church in successive ages, [Isa
59:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#021);

and peace upon Israel: all kind of prosperity, temporal and spiritual;
peace, and abundance of it; as will be in the latter day, in the
spiritual reign of Christ, [Psa 72:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa072.htm#008).
It may be considered as a wish or prayer, with which the psalm is
concluded; let "peace be upon Israel" (a), as in [Psa
125:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa125.htm#005); see [Gal
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/gal006.htm#016).

\(a\) "pax sit super Israele", Cocceius; so Gejerus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 129](psa129)

</div>
