<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa131)  [Next](psa133) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 132](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 132:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 132

A Song of degrees. Some think this psalm was written by Solomon, since
[Psa 132:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008), are much the same with
which he concluded his prayer at the dedication of the temple, [Ch2
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041); on account of which it is
supposed to be written; though he might borrow these words from hence,
as he sometimes did recite the words of his father, [Pro
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro004.htm#004). Others are of opinion that it was
written by David, either when he brought the ark from Baale or
Kirjathjearim to the house of Obededom, and from thence to Zion, [Sa2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001); or when he had that conversation
with Nathan the prophet, in which he expressed such a strong desire to
build a house for God, [Sa2 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#001); or,
as Aben Ezra and Kimchi think, after he had numbered the people, which
brought the pestilence on them; and when he and the elders of Israel
were in distress on that account, and he was ordered to build an altar
in the threshingfloor of Ornan the Jebusite, [Ch1
21:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#018); by which it appeared to him
that this was the place for the house of the Lord God he had been so
desirous of building, [Ch1 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001). It
seems by [Psa 132:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#006), that more persons
than one were concerned in this psalm, at least the psalmist represents
more; and Theodoret takes it to be a prayer of the captives in Babylon,
and a prophecy of the Saviour of the world; and this is favoured by the
Syriac inscription, which is,

"an anonymous psalm, when they would build the house of the Lord of
hosts; and a prayer of David, and a revelation of Christ.''

And certain it is that Christ is spoken of in it, if not principally
designed.

[Psalms 132:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 132:1</span></span>

Lord, remember David, and all his afflictions. Which prayer might be put
up by David on his own account, as Nehemiah does, [Neh
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/neh013.htm#022); and be considered as a petition
to the Lord that he would remember his mercy and lovingkindness to him,
and him with the favour he bears to his own people, as he elsewhere
prays; that he would remember his covenant with him, and his promise to
him, on which he had caused him to hope; and sympathize with him, and
support him under all his trials and exercises, in his kingdom and
family. Or, if it is considered as Solomon's, it may be a request that
the Lord would remember the promise he had made to David, that his son
should build a house for him, which he desired he might be enabled to
do; that he would remember the covenant of royalty he had made with him,
that he should not lack a son to sit upon his throne; and particularly
that he would remember the promise of the Messiah, that should be of his
seed. Also "his afflictions", his toil and labour of mind, his great
anxiety about building a house for God; the pains he took in finding out
a place for it, in drawing the pattern of it, in making preparations for
it, and in the charges he gave his son concerning it: the Septuagint and
other versions render it "his humility" (q); which agrees with the
subject of the preceding psalm, and may particularly respect what he
expressed to Nathan when this affair of building the temple was much
upon his mind, [Sa2 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002). Moreover,
respect in all this may be had by the authors of this psalm, or those
herein represented, to the Messiah, who is the antitype of David; in his
name, which signifies "beloved"; in his birth, parentage, and
circumstances of it; in the comeliness of his person, and in his
characters and offices, and who is often called David, [Psa
89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003); see [Jer
30:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer030.htm#009), [Hos
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos003.htm#005); and so is a petition that God
would remember the covenant of grace made with him; the promise of his
coming into the world; his offering and sacrifice, as typified by the
legal ones; and also remember them and their offerings for his sake; see
[Psa 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#003). Likewise "all his
afflictions" and sufferings he was to endure from men and devils, and
from the Lord himself, both in soul and body; and so as to accept of
them in the room and stead of his people, as a satisfaction to his
justice. Or, "his humility" in the assumption of human nature, in his
carriage and behaviour to all sorts of men, in his ministrations to his
disciples, in seeking not his own glory, but his Father's, and in his
sufferings and death, which was foretold of him, [Zac
9:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac009.htm#009).

\(q\) , Sept. "mansuetudinis ejus", V. L. so Syr. Arab. Ethiop.

[Psalms 132:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 132:2</span></span>

How he sware unto the Lord, and vowed unto the mighty God of Jacob. Whom
Jacob called so, [Gen 49:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#024); and to
whom he vowed a vow, and is the first we read of that did make one, and
it was concerning the house of God, [Gen
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#017); and who had an experience of
the might and power of God in protecting and defending him from his
brother Esau: of this oath and vow of David no mention is made
elsewhere, but no doubt they were made; see [Psa
119:106](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#106); of the Messiah's swearing,
though upon another account, to whom this may be applied, see [Isa
45:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#023).

[Psalms 132:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 132:3</span></span>

Surely I will not come into the tabernacle of my house,.... The new
house and palace David built for himself after he came to the throne,
made of cedar, [Sa2 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011); not that he
should never enter into it till he had found a dwelling for God, but
that he should not go into it with pleasure till that was done; for this
and what follows are hyperboles, as Kimchi observes, and signify that he
should have no peace nor satisfaction of mind till this was
accomplished. It may be applied to our Lord's ascension to heaven, which
was not till after he had purchased the church with his blood, which is
the temple and habitation of God;

nor go up into my bed; or "the bed that made for me" (r); the royal bed,
a bed of down, with soft pillows, fit for a person of such dignity to
lie down on. Ainsworth renders it "the pallets of my bed"; the phrase of
going up agrees with the custom of the eastern countries, who have
galleries in their chambers where they are set; at one end of each
chamber in their houses there is a little gallery raised three, four, or
five feet above the floor, with a balustrade in the front of it, with a
few steps likewise leading up to it; here they place their beds (s); so
that when they went to bed they might with great propriety be said to go
up to it; but this David could not do with pleasure, so long as there
was no place and habitation for God.

\(r\) "lectum strati mei, vel stratorum meorum", Gejerus, Michaelis. (s)
Dr. Shaw's Travels, p. 209. Ed. 2.

[Psalms 132:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 132:4</span></span>

I will not give sleep to mine eyes, or slumber to mine eyelids. Not that
he never would or did take any sleep till this thing was brought about
he had so much at heart; but that he could not and would not suffer
himself to sleep comfortably and quietly because of it. Aben Ezra
interprets it of sleep at noon; the phrases express his great desire and
solicitude to have this affair accomplished, and his eager and diligent
pursuit of it; see [Pro 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/pro006.htm#004); of the
eager desire of Christ to suffer and die for his people, that they might
be brought near to God, and be his dwelling place, see [Luk
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/luk012.htm#050).

[Psalms 132:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 132:5</span></span>

Until I find a place for the Lord,.... To build a house on for the Lord;
which it seems was unknown till the times of David; for though mention
had been made of a place the Lord would choose to cause his name to
dwell in, yet the particular place was not pointed out, [Deu
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#011). David was very solicitous to
find it out, and did, [Ch1 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001);

an habitation for the mighty God of Jacob; See Gill on [Psa
132:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#002); or "habitations", or
"tabernacles" (t); the temple, which is meant, consisting of three
parts, the court, the holy place, and the holy of holies; this was
typical of the human nature of Christ, the temple of his body, the
tabernacle of God's pitching, [Joh
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019); in which the fulness of the
Godhead dwells, the glory of God is seen, and through whom he grants his
presence to his people; and also of the church of God, the temple of the
living God, where he dwells and is worshipped: and that this might be a
fit habitation for God was the great desire of the Messiah, and not only
the end and issue of his sufferings and death, but also the design of
his preparations and intercession in heaven, [Joh
14:2](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#002).

\(t\) "habitacula", Pagninus, Montanus; "tabernacula", Musculus,
Vatablus, Cocceius.

[Psalms 132:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 132:6</span></span>

Lo, we heard of it at Ephratah,.... Either of the ark which David and
others had heard of, that it formerly was at Shiloh, [Jos
18:1](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#001); here called Ephratah, as some
think; so the Ephraimites are called Ephrathites, [Jdg
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#005); and Elkanah of Ramathaimzophim,
of Mount Ephraim, is said to be an Ephrathite, [Sa1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001); but this tribe the Lord chose
not, but the tribe of Judah, for his habitation; and rejected the
tabernacle of Shiloh, and removed it from thence, [Psa
78:60](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#060);

we found it in the fields of the wood; at Kirjathjearim, which signifies
the city of woods; being built among woods, and surrounded with them:
here the ark was twenty years, and here David found it; and from hence
he brought it to the house of Obededom, and from thence to Zion, [Sa1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001). Or else the place where the
temple was to be built; which was not known till the times of David, who
was of Ephratah or Bethlehem: here he was born and brought up; and here
he was, as Arama supposes, when it was revealed to him where the temple
should be built. According to R. Moses, the sense is, We have heard of
it by the hand of David, who was of Ephratah: but Aben Ezra thinks the
meaning is, that in former times men used to say, We have heard from the
mouths of the prophets that the chosen place was near to Bethlehem
Ephratah; only the precise place was not known, whether to the east or
west, or north or south, of Bethlehem. Some think that not any
particular city is intended, but a country, even all the neighbourhood
of Bethlehem Ephratah; and took in Jerusalem, where the temple was
built, it being but a few miles from the place; so Adrichomius (u) says,
the country round about Ephratah had its name from thence; see [Kg1
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026). Now the place found for the
building of the temple was "the fields of the wood", or the
threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite, and was on Mount Moriah; David
found by the order he had to build an altar here, and by the acceptance
of his sacrifices, that this was the place for the house of God, [Ch1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#001); and here Solomon built the
temple, [Ch2 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch2003.htm#001); and which was
formerly a woody place, as mountains generally are; and this seems to
have been when Abraham offered his son on it, who then spied a ram
caught in the thickets, [Gen 22:2](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#002). The
Targum is,

"we found it in the field of the forest of Lebanon, the place where the
ancient fathers prayed;''

the temple being built of the wood of Lebanon. But all this is to be
understood of the Lord, the mighty God of Jacob, who was heard of at
Ephratah; the Shechinah, of divine Majesty; so Kimchi, Arama, and Ben
Melech. And indeed the Messiah is meant, the antitype of the ark and
temple; of whom the saints or believers in him, a chorus of which is
here introduced, had heard that he should be born at Ephratah, which is
Bethlehem; see [Gen 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019). And if this
psalm was written by the captives in Babylon, they might have heard of
this from the prophecy of Micah, [Psa
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#002); the shepherds heard from the
mouths of the angels that Christ was born there; and we Christians have
heard the same, and know and believe it, [Luk
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#004). And he has been "found in the
fields of the wood"; in a low, mean, abject state, as this phrase
signifies; [Eze 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#005). The shepherds
found him rejected from being in the inn, there being no room for him,
and lying in a manger, [Luk 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#007); the
angels found him in the wilderness, among the wild beasts of the field,
[Mar 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/mar001.htm#013); nor had he the convenience
even of foxes, and birds of the air; had no habitation or place where to
lay his head, [Mat 8:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat008.htm#020); And he is to
be found in the field of the Scriptures, where this rich treasure and
pearl of great price lies hid, [Mat
13:44](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#044); and being preached among the
Gentiles, after his incarnation, sufferings, death, resurrection, and
ascension, who are compared to wildernesses, and desert places, was
found by many of them, [Isa 35:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa035.htm#001); and
which serves to set off with a foil his glory; being like the apple tree
among the trees of the wood, [Sol 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#003).

\(u\) Theatrum Terrae Sanct. p. 41.

[Psalms 132:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 132:7</span></span>

We will go into his tabernacles,.... The tabernacles of him that was
heard of at Ephratah; born in Bethlehem, and found in the ministry of
the word among the Gentiles: enter into his churches, raised and formed
there, which are the tabernacles or dwelling places of Christ; where he
has his residence, takes his walks, and dwells; and which are very
lovely, amiable, and pleasant, and so desirable by believers to go into;
because of the presence of God in them, the provisions there made for
them, the company there enjoyed; the work there done, prayer, praise,
preaching, and hearing the word, and administration of all ordinances.
Some render it as a mutual exhortation, "let us go into his tabernacles"
(w); see [Isa 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002);

we will worship at his footstool; any place of worship on earth may be
called the footstool of God, with respect to heaven his throne, [Isa
66:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa066.htm#001); particularly the ark is so
called, [Ch1 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1028.htm#002); in which the law
was; over which was the mercy seat, and over that the cherubim of glory,
and between them the Majesty of God dwelt; so that the ark was properly
his footstool: and all this being typical of Christ may direct us to
observe, that all religious, spiritual, and evangelic worship, is to be
performed in his name, and in the faith of him, and by the assistance of
his grace and Spirit; see [Psa 99:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#005).

\(w\) So Tigurine version, Vatablus, Musculus, Gejerus, Cocceius,
Michaelis.

[Psalms 132:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 132:8</span></span>

Arise, O Lord, into thy rest,.... Which words, and what follow, were
used by Solomon at the dedication of the temple; and with which he
concluded his prayer, [Ch2 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041); and
so may be a request to the Lord, that he would take up his residence in
the temple built for him, where he would have a firm and stable place of
rest; who, from the time of Israel's coming out of Egypt, had not dwelt
in a house; but had walked in a tent or tabernacle from place to place,
[Sa2 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006); and that he would take up
his abode in his church, the antitype of the temple, and rest in his
love there, and cause his people to rest also; see [Psa
132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013);

thou, and the ark of thy strength; the Targum is,

"thou, and the ark in which is thy law.''

This is sometimes called the strength of the Lord; because by it he
showed his great strength in destroying the enemies of his people, the
Philistines and others; see [Psa
78:61](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#061). It was a type of Christ, who is
the power of God, and the mighty God; and, as man, made strong by the
Lord; and, as Mediator, has all strength in him for his people. And so
the words may be considered as a request to him, either to arise and
enter into his rest in heaven, having done his work of redemption and
salvation here on earth, for which he became incarnate; or to grant his
presence with his church, and take up his rest there, and give them
spiritual peace and rest for their souls.

[Psalms 132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 132:9</span></span>

Let thy priests be clothed with righteousness,.... In [Ch2
6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041); it is, "with salvation", as in
[Psa 132:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#016). Either the ministers of
the word; who may be said to be clothed with righteousness when they
perform their work righteously, and faithfully dispense the word, keep
back nothing that is profitable, and administer the ordinances according
to the rules of Christ; and when their lives and conversations are
agreeable to the Gospel they preach; see [Job
29:14](../../../bib/kjv/job029.htm#014); or else all true believers; who
are priests as well as kings unto God; and who are clothed with the robe
of Christ's righteousness; and with the internal graces of the Spirit,
the new man created in righteousness and true holiness; and with
conversation garments, becoming the Gospel, and their profession of it;

and let thy saints shout for joy; the Levites; thy Holy Ones, as the
Targum; so Kimchi, Arama, and others; the singers in the temple: but
rather the Lord's sanctified ones, true believers under the Gospel
dispensation, are meant; who shout for joy, and have reason so to do, at
the incarnation of Christ, at his ascension to heaven, at the Gospel
preached by his ministers, and at the robe of righteousness with which
they are clothed. In [Ch2 6:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#041) it is,
"rejoice in goodness"; in the goodness of the Lord; in the good things
bestowed on them, or promised to them.

[Psalms 132:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 132:10</span></span>

For thy servant David's sake,.... Not for any virtues, or excellencies
or merits, of David, literally understood; rather for the sake of the
covenant and promises made with him: but for the sake of the antitypical
David, the Messiah, the son of David according to the flesh, and the
servant of the Lord as Mediator; for whose sake, and in whose name,
prayers and supplications are made and presented;

turn not away the face of thine anointed; not David; rather Solomon, as
the Targum expresses it; so Jarchi: but any of the Lord's anointed,
every Christian, or believer in Christ, is an anointed one; and has
received the unction from the Holy One, the oil of true grace. And the
request is, that God would not turn such away from him, and cause them
to depart from his throne of grace, ashamed and disappointed; but hear
and answer their petitions, for his Son's sake. In [Ch2
6:42](../../../bib/kjv/ch2006.htm#042); it is added, "remember the
mercies of David thy servant"; the kind and good things promised to him,
and perform them.

[Psalms 132:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 132:11</span></span>

The Lord hath sworn in truth unto David,.... By Nathan the prophet; when
he assured him that his house, kingdom, and throne, should be
established for ever, [Sa2 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#005); and
though there is no mention made of the oath of God, no doubt there was
one; or however his word was his oath, as Kimchi observes: besides, the
Apostle Peter is express for it that there was one, which was added to
his word for the confirmation of it; who is said to swear by himself,
because there is no greater; and sometimes by one or other of his
perfections, as by his holiness elsewhere; so here in or by his truth,
his faithfulness, being the God of truth that cannot lie. Or it may be
rendered, "the Lord hath sworn truth unto David" (x); that which is
truth: and we may be assured he could not possibly assert or swear
anything else; see [Psa 89:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#003);

he will not turn from it; change his mind, repent of his oath; make it
void, or not fulfil it; for he is unchangeable in his perfections,
purposes, and promises; whatever he says and swears to he will certainly
perform;

of the fruit of thy body will I set upon thy throne; a king upon thy
throne, as the Targum: meaning not Solomon; though it is true that the
Lord chose him, above all the sons of David, to be his successor in the
kingdom, and did place him upon his throne before his death; but a
greater than Solomon is here, even the Messiah; as is clear from the
testimony of the Apostle Peter, [Act
2:30](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#030), by which it appears not only
that this promise and oath relate to the Messiah; but that David knew
they did, and so understood them; and which have been fulfilled in Jesus
of Nazareth: who, as he was notoriously the fruit of David's body
according to the flesh, or his human nature; or was of his seed, being
born of the Virgin Mary, who lineally descended from him; so he was set
upon the throne of David, as it was foretold both by the prophet Isaiah,
and by the angel to the virgin, he should, [Isa
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa009.htm#006), [Luk
1:32](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#032); not in a literal sense; for
though he was no doubt right heir to the throne of David so understood,
yet his kingdom was not of this world; but he was set as King over God's
holy hill of Zion, the church; and reigned over the house of Jacob, the
whole Israel of God; the mystical and spiritual Israel, consisting of
Jews and Gentiles: his throne, or the seat of his kingdom, is the
church; his sceptre the Gospel; his crown the glory true believers in
him give him; his laws, by which he rules, are its his word, and written
in the hearts of his subjects; and his kingdom shall continue for ever.

\(x\) "juravit veritatem", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version,
Junius & Tremellius, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 132:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 132:12</span></span>

If thy children will keep my covenant, and my testimony that I shall
teach them,.... The former part of the promise and oath is absolute,
respecting the Messiah; but this is conditional, and relates to the seed
of David, both immediate, and in succeeding generations; proposing their
observance of the law of God, as the condition of their enjoying the
kingdom after him. By the "covenant" and "testimony" are meant the same
thing; the law, which was given to the people of Israel in the form of a
covenant, and was a testimony of the will of God to them: in this the
kings of Israel were to read continually, and conduct according to it in
their personal walk and conversation, and by it to rule the people they
were set over; and which the Lord promises to teach them by his
prophets, whose business it was not to promulgate new laws, but to
explain what were given. Now in case this was attended to, and the
instructions of prophets observed, then thus it would be,

their children also shall sit upon thy throne for evermore; but, the
condition not being fulfilled, this did not take place: Solomon, his
immediate successor, fell into idolatry in the latter part of his life;
and Rehoboam, his son, slighted the advice of the old men, founded upon
the laws of God, and ten tribes revolted from him: several succeeding
kings of Judah, of the house of David, were very wicked princes; and the
race of them ended in Zedekiah, who was carried captive into Babylon.
Indeed all this is true of Christ and his spiritual offspring; he kept
the covenant of grace made with his divine Father; and the law or
testimony; and fulfilled it in the room and stead of his people; and did
the whole will and work of his Father, and in all things pleased him:
and his children also lay hold by faith on the covenant and the promises
of it; and receive, observe, and retain the testimony of the Gospel; and
shall reign with Christ, on the same throne with him, for ever and ever.

[Psalms 132:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 132:13</span></span>

For the Lord hath chosen Zion,.... Not only to build upon it the temple
in a literal sense, and for the place of his worship; but also for the
seat of his majesty, and over which he has set his Son as King; and all
this from the love he bears to Zion, which, in a figurative and
spiritual sense, is his church; whom he has chosen to privileges, to
grace and glory, and for his service and honour; see [Psa
78:67](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#067);

he hath desired it for his habitation; heaven is the habitation of his
holiness and glory; Christ is his dwelling place, in whom all the
fulness of the Godhead dwells bodily: yet his desire is to his church
and people; his heart is set upon them, and upon their salvation; his
delight is in them, and he takes pleasure in walking with them, and
dwelling among them; they being built up an habitation for God through
the Spirit; see [Psa 68:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#016).

[Psalms 132:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 132:14</span></span>

This is my rest for ever,.... The rest of my majesty, as the Targum; the
place of his rest: and this being for ever shows that not Mount Zion
literally, nor the temple, are meant; but the church and people of God,
in whom he rests in his love, and rejoices over with joy; who are the
objects of his delight, and with whom he abides for ever; for this
phrase is expressive of pleasure and delight, and of permanency and
perpetuity;

here will I dwell, for I have desired it; not merely by his
omnipresence, in which sense he dwells everywhere, both in heaven and in
earth; nor only by his omnipotence, by which he upholds all creatures in
their being, and so is present with them all; and they all live and
move, and have their being, in him: but by his Spirit and grace reviving
and refreshing the hearts of his people with his gracious presence;
which is enjoyed in his house and ordinances, and makes them lovely and
delightful; and may be expected there, since he has promised it, and it
is so desirable and agreeable to himself to dwell there.

[Psalms 132:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 132:15</span></span>

I will abundantly bless her provision,.... The provision of Zion, the
church of God, the word and ordinances, of which Christ is the sum and
substance; the Gospel is milk for babes, and meat for strong men; the
ordinances are a feast of fat things; Christ's flesh is meat indeed, and
his blood drink deed; the whole provision is spiritual, savoury,
salutary, strengthening, satisfying, and nourishing, when the Lord
blesses it; as he does to those who hunger and thirst after it, and feed
upon it by faith; so that their souls grow thereby, and they become fat
and flourishing; grace increases in them, and they are fruitful in every
good work: and this the Lord promises to do "abundantly", in a very
large way and manner; or "certainly", for it is, in the original text,
(y) "in blessing I will bless", that is, will surely bless, as this
phrase is sometimes rendered. Arama observes that the second blessing is
because of the greatness of it; and says, that their Rabbin's understand
it of the fertility of the land of Israel in the time to come, when
there will be no poor in it; but all is to be understood spiritually of
the church in Gospel times;

I will satisfy her poor with bread; Zion has her poor; persons may be
poor and yet belong to Zion, belong to Zion and yet be poor; there are
poor in all the churches of Christ: our Lord told his disciples that
they had the poor, and might expect to have them always with them; and
particular directions are given to take care of Zion's poor under the
Gospel dispensation, that they may not want bread in a literal sense:
though by the "poor" are chiefly designed the Lord's afflicted and
distressed ones; or who in a spiritual sense are poor, and sensible of
their spiritual poverty, and seek after the true riches; or are poor in
spirit, to whom the kingdom of heaven belongs: these the Lord promises
to satisfy, to fill them to the full with the bread of the Gospel, made
of the finest of the wheat, of which there is enough and to spare in his
house; and with Christ the bread of life, of which those that eat shall
never die, but live for ever.

\(y\) "benedicendo benedicam", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Musculus,
Cocceius, Gejerus.

[Psalms 132:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 132:16</span></span>

I will also clothe her priests with salvation,.... With the garments of
salvation, as the Targum; in answer to the petition, [Psa
132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009); but more is promised than
prayed for, "salvation" including "righteousness" and all other
blessings; and may be interpreted, as there, either of the ministers of
the Gospel clothed with the doctrine of salvation by Christ, coming
forth full fraught with it, openly publishing and proclaiming it;
salvation being made public and manifest by them as a garment, as Aben
Ezra observes: moreover Gospel ministers are instruments of saving
others; the Gospel preached by them being the power of God unto
salvation, as well as they themselves are saved in the same way, [Ti1
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016); besides, they are kept by the
power of God, and in the hands of Christ, who protects them, and as it
were covers them with the garment of salvation, while they are
publishing it to the world, to whose reproaches and insults they are
exposed: or else this may be interpreted of the people of God in common,
who are all kings and priests to God, and are all clothed with the
garments of salvation, [Isa 61:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa061.htm#010).
Salvation by Christ is brought near to them, is applied to them, and put
upon them as a garment; it is from Christ, and without them, though upon
them; it is their clothing and their ornament, as well as their security
from sin, law, death, and hell; see [Psa
149:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa149.htm#004);

and her saints shall shout aloud for joy; not only "shout", as is
entreated, [Psa 132:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#009); but "shout
aloud"; it shall be a jubilee time with them on account of the Gospel of
salvation, the joyful sound sounded in their ears by the ministers of it
clothed with it; and on account of the salvation itself, so great, so
suitable, so free, so complete and full, and in which the glory of God
is so much displayed; and on account of the application of it to
themselves, being clothed with it and possessed of the joys of it. These
the Jewish writers generally understand of the Levites.

[Psalms 132:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 132:17</span></span>

There will I make the horn of David to bud,.... Which the Targum
interprets "a glorious" King; and both Kimchi and Ben Melech, and also
Arama, understand it of the Messiah, and very rightly; called the horn
of the Lord's Anointed, and the horn of salvation, [Sa1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010), [Luk
1:69](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#069); expressive of his power and
strength, in allusion to the horns of cattle, with which they push their
enemies and defend themselves; so horns are interpreted kings, [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024); and is fitly applied to Christ,
raised up of the seed of David, the man of God's right hand, made strong
for himself, who is a mighty King and an able Saviour; as appears by
what he has done and suffered, by the deliverance and salvation of his
people, and by the destruction of all their enemies: and it is here
promised that God would make this horn to "bud" or branch out, in
allusion to another name of the Messiah, the "branch"; and it is the
same as raising up to David a righteous branch, or causing the Messiah
to spring forth as a branch out of his roots, for which reason he is
called the Lord's servant, the branch, and the man the branch; see [Jer
23:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#005); and it should be further
observed that the Lord says, "there" will I do it; that is, either at
Ephratah, which is Bethlehem, the place where the Messiah was to be
born, and was born; or else at Zion or Jerusalem, where he appeared and
showed himself, where he taught his doctrines and wrought many of his
miracles, and near to which he suffered and died; and this shows that
the Messiah must be come, that this horn of David must have budded, or
the man the branch brought forth, since Bethlehem and Jerusalem are long
ago demolished;

I have ordained a lamp for mine anointed; which Jerom understands of
John the Baptist, the forerunner of Christ, who was a burning and
shining light, but was not "that light", that famous light, that was to
come, but was sent to bear witness of it; he being but as a candle, as
the word here used signifies, in comparison of the sun of righteousness;
but rather it means a son and successor of David, the Lord's anointed;
in which sense the phrase is often used, [Kg1
11:36](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#036); and here the famous and
illustrious Son and successor of his, the Messiah, the light which
lightens every man with the light of reason; and who is the light of the
world of his people, enlightening them with the light of grace, and will
be the light of the New Jerusalem state, and of the ultimate glory; him
God has "ordained" as such, even foreordained him before the foundation
of the world; this lamp, or light, he prepared in eternity, and it dwelt
with him, and therefore was desired to be sent out from him, [Dan
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#022); which places are to be
understood of the Messiah; See Gill on [Dan
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/dan002.htm#022) and See Gill on [Psa
43:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa043.htm#003).

[Psalms 132:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 132:18</span></span>

His enemies will I clothe with shame, With the garments of shame, as the
Targum; very different from the clothing of Zion's priests; all that are
incensed against Christ as a King and Saviour shall sooner or later be
ashamed; either here, when brought to a sense of their evil, to
repentance for it, and faith in him; or hereafter, at the resurrection,
when they will rise to shame and everlasting contempt, and when they
shall see him come in the clouds of heaven, in power and great glory, to
judge the world in righteousness, [Isa
45:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#024);

but upon himself shall his crown flourish; being crowned with glory and
honour, as he now is at the right hand of God, he reigns, and will
reign, till all his enemies become his footstool; his throne is for ever
and ever, and his kingdom an everlasting one; and will be very
flourishing in the latter day, when his subjects shall be many, and when
there shall be an abundance of peace and prosperity, and of that no end;
the crown of the Messiah shall flourish on him as a king, shine out and
be very conspicuous, as Aben Ezra and Jarchi interpret the word used;
and so his crown as a priest; the same word is used of the holy crown of
the priests put upon the mitre, on which Holiness to the Lord was
inscribed; and the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, Arabic, and
Ethiopic versions, render it, "my holiness"; and, as his own crown is a
never-fading one, such an one he will give to his ministers, and all
that love him appearing, [Pe1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 133](psa133)

</div>
