<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa137)  [Next](psa139) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 138](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 138:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 138

A Psalm of David. This psalm is generally thought to have been written
by David upon his being advanced to the throne; on account of which he
praises the Lord, who had supported him under many exercises, and had
made good his promise to him, at least in part; and he firmly believed
the accomplishment of the rest, that he would perfect what concerned
him, [Psa 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008). It seems as if this
psalm was composed between his being king over Judah and over all
Israel. Though Theodoret understands the psalm as a thanksgiving of the
Jews upon their return from Babylon, which David prophesied of. The
Syriac version calls it a thanksgiving with a prophecy; as indeed it is
a prophecy of the Messiah's kingdom, and of the calling of the Gentiles
in the latter day, as appears from [Psa
138:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004).

[Psalms 138:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 138:1</span></span>

I will praise thee with my whole heart,.... Cordially and sincerely, in
the uprightness and integrity of his heart; which denotes not the
perfection of his service, but the sincerity of it; his heart was in it,
and his whole heart; all the powers and faculties of his soul were
engaged in it, being deeply sensible of the great favours and high
honours bestowed upon him; and though the object of praise, to whom he
was obliged for them, is not so fully expressed; yet is easily
understood to be Jehovah, the Being of beings, the Father of mercies,
even Jehovah, Father, Son, and Spirit, and especially the Messiah; see
[Psa 111:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#001);

before the gods will I sing praise unto thee; before the princes, as
Jarchi; before the kings, as the Syriac version; with which agrees [Psa
119:46](../../../bib/kjv/psa119.htm#046); and who would join therein,
[Psa 138:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004); or before the judges, as
the Targum, Aben Ezra, Kimchi, and Ben Melech; or civil magistrates, who
are sometimes called gods, [Psa 82:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa082.htm#001);
and they are the powers ordained of God, and represent him on earth; or
the sanhedrim, as the Midrash; or before the gods of the Gentiles, those
fictitious deities, above whom Jehovah is; and over whom the psalmist
triumphs, having conquered the nations where they were worshipped; and
therefore in their presence, and notwithstanding them, or in opposition
to them, praised the Lord; see [Psa
18:49](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#049); or rather before the ark, the
symbol of the presence of the true God; or, as Gussetius (l) interprets
it, "before thee, O God, will I sing praise"; or I will sing praise to
thee, the Son the Messiah, one divine Person before another; the Son
before God the Father, and it may be added before God the Holy Spirit,
the two other divine Persons; the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Ethiopic,
and Arabic versions, render it, "before the angels", who are sometimes
called gods, [Psa 8:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#005); and who attend
the assemblies of the saints and churches of Christ, [Co1
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#010).

\(l\) Comment. Ebr. p. 50.

[Psalms 138:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 138:2</span></span>

I will worship towards thy holy temple,.... Not the temple at Jerusalem,
which was not yet built, though, when it was, the Jews in their
devotions at a distance looked towards it, [Kg1
8:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1008.htm#038); but rather the tabernacle of
Moses, in which was the ark, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi observe; and over
that the mercy seat and cherubim, between which Jehovah dwelt; and this
being a type of Christ's human nature, which was perfectly holy, and is
called by himself a temple, and is the true tabernacle God pitched, and
not man, [Joh 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/joh002.htm#019); he may be
designed, and to him, as Mediator, should we look, and with him deal in
all our devotions for acceptance with God; see [Jon
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/jon002.htm#004); unless heaven itself is meant,
which is the palace of Jehovah, the habitation of his holiness, his
temple where he dwells, [Psa 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa011.htm#004);

and praise thy name, for thy lovingkindness and for thy truth; which may
primarily regard the goodness and grace of God in promising David the
kingdom, and his faithfulness in making good the promise, and for both
which he was under obligation to praise the name of the Lord; and holds
good with respect to all other promises: and it may also signify the
free favour and love of God to his people, which is from everlasting, is
the source of all blessings, and is better than life; and the
faithfulness of God to himself, his perfections, purposes and promises,
council and covenant: it may be rendered, "for thy grace, and for thy
truth" (m), which both come by Christ, [Joh
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#017); grace may intend both the
doctrine of grace, the Gospel of the grace of God preached by Christ,
and the blessings of grace which come through him; as justification,
pardon, adoption, sanctification, and eternal life, which are all of
grace, and by Christ: and truth also may signify the word of truth, or
solid substantial blessings, in distinction from typical ones; or the
good things that come by Christ our High Priest, of which the law was
only a shadow; and these are all of them things the name of the Lord is
to be praised for;

for thou hast magnified thy word above all thy name; or "above every
name of thine" (n); which Aben Ezra interprets of the glorious name
Jehovah; the word God spake to Moses, the name in which he made himself
known to him, and to the Israelites, he had not to their fathers, [Exo
3:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#014); but rather it is to be
understood of God's word of promise, and his faithfulness in fulfilling
it; which, though not a greater attribute than any other, yet is made
more known and more illustrious than the rest; and particularly may
regard the promise of the coming of the Messiah, and of the blessings of
grace by him; Jarchi interprets it particularly of the pardon of sin. It
may with propriety be applied to Christ, the essential Word, that was
made flesh, and dwelt among men; whom God has highly exalted, and not
only given him a name above every name of men on earth, but also above
any particular name or attribute of his: or however he has magnified him
"according" (o) to every name of his, it being his will that men should
honour the Son as they honour the Father; or "with" (p) every name along
with each of them; or "besides" (q) every name; for all these senses the
word will bear. Some render them, as Ben Melech, "thou hast magnified
above all things thy name" and "thy word"; or, as others, "thy name by
thy word" (r); see [Psa 8:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa008.htm#001); The
Targum is,

"the words of thy praise above all thy name;''

or "over all thy name": everything by which he has made himself known in
creation and providence; "thou hast magnified thy word", all being done
according to the word said in himself, his decrees and purposes; or
declared in his word and promises, whereby he has glorified it.

\(m\) So Cocceius, Gejerus, Michaelis. (n) "super omne nomen tuum",
Cocceius, Michaelis. (o) "Secundum omne nomen tuum", Gejerus. (p) "Cum
toto nomine tuo", Junius & Tremellius. (q) "Vel praeter omne nomen
tuum", Piscator. (r) "Nomen tuum sermone tuo"; so some in Piscator.

[Psalms 138:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 138:3</span></span>

In the day when I cried thou answeredst me,.... When in distress through
Saul's persecution, he cried to the Lord, and he immediately answered
him, and delivered him out of his troubles; and such immediate answers
of prayer are to be remembered with thankfulness: see [Psa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa018.htm#006);

and strengthenedst me with strength in my soul; put him good heart and
spirit, when before ready to faint; strengthened his heart and grace in
it, particularly faith, and drew it forth into lively act and exercise
so that he sunk not under the weight of affliction and trouble, but was
filled with courage to withstand his enemies, and with strength to do
the will and work of God; this is to be understood of inward spiritual
strength; see [Eph 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/eph003.htm#016).

[Psalms 138:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 138:4</span></span>

All the kings of the earth shall praise thee, O Lord,.... Or "let them
confess", or "praise thee" (s); a wish or prayer. Not only the kings
known to David, as Kimchi limits it; or that lived in his days, as Hiram
and others; but in the latter day, when they shall come to Zion, the
church, and be nursing fathers to it, and shall serve and worship the
King Messiah, [Isa 49:23](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#023);

when they hear the words of thy mouth; either the promises of it
fulfilled not only with respect to David; but the Messiah, and his
church and people, in the latter day, even the glorious things spoken
thereof: or the doctrines of the Gospel, which are the words of his
mouth, and more desirable than thousands of gold and silver; and which,
when kings shall hear so as to understand, they will praise the Lord for
them; see [Isa 52:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#015). The Targum is,

"the words of thy praise.''

\(s\) "confiteantur tibi", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus.

[Psalms 138:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 138:5</span></span>

Yea, they shall sing in the ways of the Lord,.... Which are all mercy
and truth; ways of pleasantness, and paths of peace: so the eunuch went
on his way, and in the ways of the Lord rejoicing, [Act
8:39](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#039); Or, "they shall sing of the ways
of the Lord" (t); of the excellency, pleasure, and usefulness of them;

for great is the glory of the Lord; shown in the works of creation; more
especially in the person of Christ, and in the glorious work of
redemption and salvation by him; and of which there will be a great
display throughout the earth in the latter day, by means of the Gospel,
the great spread of it, and the multitude of persons converted by it;
which will make the ways of the Lord still more pleasant; see [Isa
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa006.htm#003).

\(t\) "de viis Jehovae", Piscator, Schmidt; so some in Vatablus.

[Psalms 138:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 138:6</span></span>

Though the Lord be high,.... Above all the earth, and all the nations of
it, and the highest of men in it; above the heavens, and the angels
there, who are his creatures and at his command; above all the blessings
and praises of his saints: the perfect knowledge of him is so high as
not to be attained; and his thoughts and ways are higher than ours, as
the heavens are higher than the earth; he is indeed the most High,
higher than the highest; see [Psa
113:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#004). According to Arama, here begins
the song,

"the kings of the earth shall sing in the ways of the Lord?''

yet hath he respect unto the lowly; for good, as the Targum; that are
low in their own eyes, humbled under a sense of sin, convinced, of the
insufficiency of their own righteousness to justify them, and made to
submit to the righteousness of Christ; ascribe the whole of their
salvation to the free grace of God; patiently and quietly bear every
afflictive providence; think the worst of themselves, and the best of
others; and, being the followers of the lowly Jesus, learn of him,
imitate him, and become like unto him: these the Lord has a gracious
respect unto; he looks upon them with a look of love; he has respect to
their persons in Christ, and to their sacrifices for his sake, which are
those of a broken and contrite heart; he regards their prayers, though
low and destitute, and gives more grace unto them; yea, he condescends
to dwell with them, and in due time highly exalts them; see [Isa
57:15](../../../bib/kjv/isa057.htm#015). David may have in view his own
low state and condition as a shepherd, in which he was when the Lord
took him, and raised him to the throne of Israel;

but the proud he knoweth afar off; the Targum adds,

"to destroy them:''

such who are proud of themselves and what they have; of their wisdom and
knowledge, of their strength or beauty, of their wealth and riches; or
of their righteousness and holiness; of the purity and goodness of their
hearts, and power of their free will, they vainly think themselves
possessed of; and despise others below them in these things, or the
practice of them: these the Lord takes notice of, and looks upon them at
a distance with scorn and contempt; nor will he admit them to nearness
to him, nay, opposes himself to them, and sooner or later abases them;
see [Pro 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#034). The Septuagint and
Vulgate Latin versions render it, "high things he knoweth afar off";
things too high for creatures, that are out of their reach; he sees and
knows all persons and things, whether in heaven or in earth. Others
render them, "and the high One knoweth afar off" (u); knows the lowly,
owns and acknowledges them for his own; takes care of them, provides for
them, and protects them: and then the sense is the same with the
preceding clause.

\(u\) So Pagninus; "quamvis", Junius & Tremellius.

[Psalms 138:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 138:7</span></span>

Though I walk in the midst of trouble,.... Trouble attends the best of
men; both outward and inward trouble, from sin, Satan, and the world;
yea, they are in the midst of it, surrounded with it; and it is a way in
which they walk through this world, and enter the kingdom of heaven; it
is continued unto them; it is a long walk, and yet will have an end; see
[Psa 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa023.htm#004);

thou wilt revive me; preserve his life amidst all his troubles, support
him under them, make him cheerful and fearless; revive his work of grace
in him, quicken him to the lively exercise of grace, and fervent
discharge of duty: this the Lord does by his gracious presence, by the
discoveries of his love, and by the application of precious promises;

thou shalt stretch forth thine hand against the wrath of mine enemies;
to stop and restrain it; which he can easily do, when most violent and
outrageous, [Psa 76:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa076.htm#010). Or, "against
the nose of mine enemies" (w); strike them on the nose, as men do unruly
horses to stop them: or give a slap on their face with the left hand, as
Arama observes, the right being after mentioned;

and thy right hand shall save me; for that has saving strength in it,
[Psa 20:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa020.htm#006). This may be understood of
Christ, who is not only the man of his right hand, but is the right hand
of his righteousness; by whom he saves his people with a spiritual and
eternal salvation, as well as with a temporal one, [Isa
41:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#010).

\(w\) "super nasum inimicorum meorum", Montanus, Tigurine version; so
Gussetius; "in faciem", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Psalms 138:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa138.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 138:8</span></span>

The Lord will perfect that which concerneth me,.... Or "will", or "may
the Lord perform for me" (x): all things in providence; all that he had
appointed for him, that would be for his good and his own glory, [Psa
57:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa057.htm#002); and particularly what concerned
him as a king. He had made him king over the house of Judah; he had
begun to fulfil his promise concerning the kingdom; and he would perfect
it, by setting him over all the tribes of Israel. Also he believed he
would perfect what concerned him as a saint, even the good work of grace
upon his heart; which is but a begun work, is imperfect, is gradually
carried on, and will be completed; God is able to do it, and none can
hinder him; he has promised to do it, and he is faithful who will do it;
and his glory is concerned in it; and it may be depended on it will be
finished; he is a rock, and his work is perfect; see [Phi
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#006);

thy mercy, O Lord, endureth for ever; a phrase often used by the
psalmist, with which his heart was affected; and here used, both as an
argument by which he concluded God would perfect his begun work, and as
an encouragement to make the following request:

forsake not the works of thine own hands; as are all the works of
providence and grace: the work of grace upon the heart may be expressed
in the plural number, because of the several branches of it; which are
all so many works, as the work of faith, labour, of love, &c. [Th1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#003); and which is the Lord's
handiwork; and a curious work it is, a new creation work, a work of
almighty power; and which he will never cease from, or be remiss in, as
the word (y) signifies, until he has accomplished it, [Th2
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#011). It is a prayer of faith, and may
be most confidently believed: and some indeed render it as an expression
of faith, "thou wilt not forsake the works of thine hands" (z); David
himself was the work of God's hands, as Kimchi observes, as a creature,
as a king, and as a saint; and so are all the people of God, [Isa
45:11](../../../bib/kjv/isa045.htm#011); and whom he will never leave
nor forsake; for they are his church, his chosen, his children, his
portion and inheritance, [Psa 94:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa094.htm#014).

\(x\) "perficiet pro me", Montanus, Musculus; "perficiat pro me", Junius
& Tremellius. (y) "ne dimittas", Pagninus, Montanus. (z) "Non deseres",
Musculus, Piscator.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 139](psa139)

</div>
