<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Psalms Index](psa.md)  
  [Previous](psa113)  [Next](psa115.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 114](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 114:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 114

The title of this psalm in the Arabic version is "hallelujah", as in
some preceding ones; it is part of the great "Hallel" sung at the
passover, and with great propriety; since the subject matter of it is
the departure of the children of Israel out of Egypt, typical of our
spiritual redemption by Christ; and of the effectual calling of God's
elect out of a state of nature into a state of grace; and particularly
of the conversion of the Gentiles, and the bringing of them from
Paganism to Christianity: the inscription of the Syriac version is,

"a psalm without a name, out of the ancient writing; concerning Moses,
who sung praise at the sea; but unto us the calling of the Gospel, by
which we become a new people; spiritual to God, who is incarnate; to
Jesus Christ, who redeemed us by his blood from the curse of the
Scripture (the law), and hath cleansed us from sin by his Spirit.''.

[Psalms 114:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 114:1</span></span>

When Israel went out of Egypt,.... The people of Israel in a body,
publicly, openly, and not by stealth; freely and willingly, not forced
and drove out; though urged by the Egyptians to go, through the hand of
God upon them; and so went out with the mighty hand and outstretched arm
of the Lord, and with great riches, and in health, not one feeble or
sick among them.

The house of Jacob from a people of strange language; or barbarous; as
every language was reckoned by the Jews but their own; the Egyptian
language they did not understand; see [Psa
81:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa081.htm#005.md), no doubt many of them learned it
during their long stay there, but in general they retained their own
language. This was an emblem of the Lord's people in effectual calling,
coming out of bondage into liberty, out of darkness into light, out of
superstition, and idolatry and profaneness, to the service of the true
God in righteousness and true holiness; and from a people of a strange
language to those that speak the language of Canaan, a pure language, in
which they can understated one another when they converse together,
either about experience or doctrine; and the manner of their coming out
is much the same, by strength of hand, by the power of divine grace, yet
willingly and cheerfully, with great riches, the riches of grace, and a
title to the riches of glory, and with much spiritual strength; for,
though weak in themselves, yet are strong in Christ.

[Psalms 114:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 114:2</span></span>

Judah was his sanctuary,.... Meaning not the tribe of Judah only, though
that in many things had the preeminence; the kingdom belonging to it,
the chief ruler being out of it, especially the Messiah; its standard
was pitched and moved first; it offered first to the service of the
Lord; and the Jews have a tradition, mentioned by Jarchi and Kimchi,
that this tribe, with its prince at the head of it, went into the Red
sea first; the others fearing, but afterwards followed, encouraged by
their example: but rather all the tribes are meant, the whole body of
the people; for this is not to be understood of the tabernacle or temple
in the tribe of Judah, sometimes called a sanctuary; for neither of
these were in being when Israel came out of Egypt; but it may be
rendered, "Judah was his holiness" (u), or was holiness to the Lord, the
Lord's holy people; see [Jer 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#002.md), not
all internally holy; for there were many that came out of Egypt that
were unholy, rebellious, and disobedient, and whose carcasses fell in
the wilderness; but externally, when brought out of Egypt they were
separated from all other people, and in this sense sanctified, and
became a holy and special people, chosen by the Lord to be so; with
whom, he made a covenant, and to whom he gave holy laws and righteous
statutes: and in this they were typical of those who are effectually
called by grace with an holy calling, and unto holiness; have principles
of grace and holiness wrought in them, and have Holiness to the Lord
written upon them; they have the sanctification of the Spirit, and
Christ is made sanctification to them; and they are the Lord's
sanctuary, in which he dwells.

And Israel his dominion: for, though all the world is his kingdom and
his government, yet the people of Israel were in a very particular and
remarkable manner his dominion; from the time of their coming out of
Egypt to their having a king, their government was properly a theocracy;
God was their King, and by him they were immediately ruled and governed,
and had a body of laws given them from him, and were under his immediate
care and protection, [Exo 19:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#005.md). In
this they were typical of the saints called by grace, who are then
translated from the power of Satan into the kingdom of Christ; whom they
acknowledge to be their Lord and King, and whose laws, commands, and
ordinances, they willingly observe; the people of God are often
represented as a kingdom, and Christ as King of saints; the Targum is

"the congregation of the house of Judah was united to his holiness, and
Israel to his power.''

\(u\) "sanctificatio ejus", Pagninus, Vatablus; "sanctitas ejus",
Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 114:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 114:3</span></span>

The sea saw it, and fled,.... When the Word of the Lord appeared at it,
as the Targum in the king's Bible; the Red sea, to which the Israelites
came when they went out of Egypt; this saw that Judah was the Lord's
holy and peculiar people, and that Israel were the subjects of his
kingdom; it saw the presence of the Lord among them; it saw him in the
glory of his perfections, and felt his power; see [Psa
77:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa077.htm#016.md), at which its waters fled and
parted, and stood up as a wall to make way for Israel to pass through as
on dry land, [Exo 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021.md). This was
typical of the nations of the Gentile world, comparable to the sea, [Dan
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#002.md), who saw the work of God going on
among them under the ministry of the Gospel in the first times of it,
whereby multitudes were turned from idols to serve the living God; this
they saw and trembled at, and they and their kings fled for fear; see
[Isa 41:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa041.htm#005.md), and of the stop put to the
ocean of sin in a man's heart, and to the torrent of wickedness that
breaks out from thence, by powerful and efficacious grace, much more
abounding where sin has abounded.

Jordan was driven back; this was done not at the time of the departure
of the Israelites from Egypt, but just before their entrance into the
land of Canaan, and in order to it; and being an event similar to the
former is here mentioned, and done by the power and presence of God; for
as soon as the feet of the priests who bore the ark of the Lord, the
symbol of the divine Presence, were dipped in the brim of the waters,
the waters below were cut off from those above, and stood up on an heap,
and all the Israelites passed through on dry ground, [Jos
3:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos003.htm#013.md), this was an emblem of death,
through which the saints pass to glory, which is abolished by Christ,
its sting and curse taken away; which when the saints come to, they find
it like Jordan driven back, and have an easy and abundant passage
through it; and when on the brink of it, and even in the midst of it,
sing, "O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory?" [Co1
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#055.md).

[Psalms 114:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 114:4</span></span>

The mountains skipped like rams,.... The mountains of Sinai and Horeb
quaked and moved at the presence of the Lord, when he descended thereon
to give the law; these saw his glory and trembled, [Exo
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo019.htm#018.md).

And the little hills like lambs; very beautiful are the larger mountains
of Sinai and Horeb compared to rams, and the motion of them to their
skipping; and the little hills adjacent to them to lambs: these may
represent the greater and lesser governors in the Roman empire at the
time when such large conversions were made in it as before observed; and
which skipped, and trembled, and fled, and were moved out of their
places at the downfall of Paganism and progress of Christianity, [Rev
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#014.md) and also may be an emblem of the
difficulties which lie like mountains and hills in the way of a sinner's
conversion and effectual calling, which yet give way to and are
surmounted by the efficacious grace of God; all mountains become a plain
before him, and when he works none can let.

[Psalms 114:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 114:5</span></span>

What ailed thee, O thou sea, that thou fleddest?.... What was the matter
with thee? what appeared to thee? what didst thou see? what didst thou
feel, which caused thee to flee in such haste?

Thou Jordan, that thou wast driven back? what is the meaning that thou
didst not continue to flow as usual? what was it that stopped thy
flowing tide? that cut off thy waters? that drove them back as fast or
faster than they came?

[Psalms 114:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 114:6</span></span>

Ye mountains, that ye skipped like rams,.... Not for joy, but fear; what
caused these trembling motions, these violent agitations, and quakings,
and movings to and fro like the skipping of rams?

And ye little hills, like lambs? what was it that disturbed you, and put
you into a panic, that you skipped like frightened lambs? These
questions are put, by a beautiful and poetical figure, to inanimate
creatures; the Red sea, the river of Jordan, the mountains of Sinai and
Horeb, and the hills about them; to which an answer is turned in the
next verse.

[Psalms 114:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 114:7</span></span>

Tremble, thou earth, at the presence of the Lord,.... Or, "the earth has
trembled at the presence of the Lord"; so the Syriac and Arabic versions
render it; the imperative is sometimes put for the preterite or past
tense, see [Psa 22:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#009.md), likewise the
Septuagint and Vulgate Latin versions thus render it, "the earth is
moved at the presence of the Lord"; and then the sense is by a
prosopopoeia. Is it to be wondered at, that we, the sea, the river of
Jordan, the mountains and hills, have fled, or have been driven back, or
have skipped like rams and lambs, when the whole earth, of which we are
a part, has trembled at the presence of God? who, when he does but look,
the earth trembles; and when he touches the hills, they smoke, [Psa
104:32](../../../bib/kjv/psa104.htm#032.md). It is at the same presence of
God we have been thus moved, the power of which we have felt, even

at the presence of the God of Jacob; who brought Jacob out of Egypt, led
him through the sea, and gave him the law on Sinai. This is not to be
understood of the general and common presence of God, which is
everywhere, and with all his creatures for this is not attended with
such wonderful phenomena as here mentioned, either in the literal or
mystic sense; but of the majestic, powerful, and gracious presence of
God; such as he sometimes causes to attend his ministers, his word, his
churches, his martyrs and confessors; and so as to strike an awe upon,
and terror into, their greatest enemies, as well as to convert his own
people.

[Psalms 114:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa114.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 114:8</span></span>

Which turned the rock into a standing water,.... Both at Rephidim and at
Kadesh; which being smitten, streams of water flowed out like rivers, as
if the rock itself was changed into water; and which came a constant and
continual supply for the Israelites, for it is said to follow them; see
[Exo 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/exo017.htm#006.md).

The flint into a fountain of waters; referring to the same thing, the
rocks were flinty ones. This was a type of Christ the Rock; who has an
abiding fulness of grace in him; is the fountain of it, from whence it
flows in great abundance for the supply of his people's wants, while
passing through this wilderness to Canaan's land.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 115](psa115.md)

</div>
