<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa112)  [Next](psa114) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 113](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 113:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 113

With this psalm begins the great "Hallel", which ends with Psalm 118;
and was used to be sung at the Jewish festivals, particularly at the
feast of tabernacles and of the passover; and is thought by some to be
the hymn sung by Christ and his apostles, after the celebration of the
Lord's supper; in which there are many things pertinent to that occasion
as well as to the above feasts. This psalm is a song of praise for
redemption by Christ, to be sung in Gospel times, when the name of the
Lord should be known among all nations, from the rising to the setting
sun. It is thought by some to be an abridgment of the song of Hannah,
[Sa1 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001), there is an agreement.

[Psalms 113:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 113:1</span></span>

Praise ye the Lord,.... Or, "hallelujah". This is the title of the
psalm, as in the two preceding, and directs to the principal matter of
it.

Praise, O ye servants of the Lord; meaning not the angels, nor all men,
nor the priests and Levites only; but all the saints, who are a holy
priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifices to God; who are servants,
not of sin, nor of Satan, nor of men, but of God and Christ; and who
serve the Lord willingly and cheerfully, with much pleasure and delight,
in righteousness and holiness, with reverence and godly fear, and
without trusting to and depending on their service for salvation: and
one principal branch of their service is praise, especially under the
Gospel dispensation; in which all legal sacrifices are abolished, and
the sacrifice of praise is continued; and which is pleasant and
delightful work, and yet there is a backwardness to it; and therefore
there is need of such an exhortation to excite unto it, and to repeat
it, as follows:

praise the name of the Lord; not any particular name, as Jehovah; but
him himself, and the perfections of his nature; his holiness, justice,
truth, faithfulness, power, goodness, grace and mercy. The repetition of
the exhortation denotes either the abundance of praise to be given to
the Lord, or the constancy and continuance of it; which ought to be done
at all times, every day, since his mercies are new every morning. Some
have thought the threefold repetition respects the trinity of Persons,
who are each to be praised, as in [Num
6:24](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#024), but this is doubtful, and
perhaps not sufficient to build such a doctrine on; and especially since
the first of these exhortations is the title of the psalm: however, this
is a certain truth, that Jehovah, Father, Son, and Spirit, are to be
praised.

[Psalms 113:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 113:2</span></span>

Blessed be the name of the Lord,.... Some prefix the word "saying", as
directing to the matter and manner of praising the Lord, and to express
themselves thus; "let the name of the Lord be blessed"; honoured,
glorified, spoken well of.

From this time forth and for evermore; from the beginning of time, or as
soon as time began, the Lord's name was to be praised, and was praised
by the holy angels, who were present at laying the foundation of the
earth, [Job 38:4](../../../bib/kjv/job038.htm#004), and all the works of
the Lord, in their way, have praised him ever since. Here it may respect
the time of penning this psalm, or the time when the persons called upon
commenced the servants of the Lord, the time of their conversion; a time
of love, life, light, and deliverance, and therefore a time to begin to
praise the Lord: or the whole time of the Gospel dispensation, to which
this psalm refers; the accepted time and day of salvation, and of the
Gentiles glorifying God for his mercy; in which the Lord is to be and is
praised, as he will be to all eternity, by angels and glorified saints.

[Psalms 113:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 113:3</span></span>

From the rising of the sun unto the going down of the same,.... Meaning
not from morning tonight; for it designs not time, but place, even all
the space from east to west, or that lies between the rising and setting
sun; even all nations, and the inhabitants of them; and who ought to
praise the Lord for the rising sun, and the benefit and advantages of
it; and yet many of them have worshipped the sun, and served the
creature more than and besides the Creator. All within this compass are
the creatures of God, and the care of his providence, and therefore are
bound to praise him and yet he has had this tribute due unto him but
from a few. Here it respects Gospel times, when the Gospel should be
sent into all the world; and many should be called from the east and
west, from the north and south, and fear the Lord and worship him, and
offer a pure offering of praise unto him; and his name be great among
the Gentiles, from the rising of the sun to the going down of the same,
[Mal 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/mal001.htm#011). For within this wide space

the Lord's name is to be praised; it ought to be, though it is not; and
ere long it will be, when all nations shall come and worship before him,
[Rev 15:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev015.htm#003).

[Psalms 113:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 113:4</span></span>

The Lord is high above all nations,.... He is the most High in all the
earth; he is higher than the highest; he is King of kings and Lord of
lords: all nations are made by him, and are under his government and
dominion; he is the Governor among the nations; they are in comparison
of him as the drop of a bucket, as the small dust of the balance; as
nothing, yea, less than nothing, and vanity. Here it seems to respect
the time when the Lord shall be more visibly King over all the earth,
and the kingdoms of this world shall be the kingdoms of our Lord and of
his Christ, [Zac 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac014.htm#009).

And his glory above the heavens; it is above what the heavens do or can
declare; they declare something of it, but not all. Christ, who is the
brightness of his Father's glory, is made higher than the heavens, and
has ascended far above them; and is above the angels in them, both as to
nature, name, office, and place, [Heb
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#004).

[Psalms 113:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 113:5</span></span>

Who is like unto the Lord our God,.... Among the gods of the nations, as
Kimchi; or among the angels of heaven, or among any of the mighty
monarchs on earth; there is none like him for the perfections of his
nature, for his wisdom, power, truth, and faithfulness; for his
holiness, justice, goodness, grace, and mercy; who is eternal,
unchangeable, omnipotent, omniscient, and omnipresent; nor for the works
of his hands, his works of creation, providence, and grace; none ever
did the like: and what makes this reflection the more delightful to
truly good men is, that this God is their God; and all this is true of
our Immanuel, God with us; who is God over all, and the only Saviour and
Redeemer; and there is none in heaven and earth like him, or to be
desired besides him.

Who dwelleth on high? in the high and holy place, in the highest heaven,
which is his throne; or "who exalteth himself to dwell" (s); so the
Targum,

"he exalteth his habitation to dwell,''

suitable to the dignity and the greatness of his majesty; as he is high
and above all, so he has fixed his habitation in the highest heavens; as
he is self-existent, he is self-exalted, and none can exalt him as
himself; he is exalted above all blessing and praise; and if it is an
exaltation of him to dwell in the highest heavens, what an exaltation
will it be of the saints to dwell with him there, in those mansions in
his house which Christ is gone to prepare for them! This clause may be
applied to Christ, who, both previous to his humiliation, and after it,
dwelt in the highest heavens with his Father, in his bosom, from whence
he came down on earth, and whither he is gone again, and is highly
exalted there.

\(s\) "sustollens se ad habitandum", Montanus; "qui se elevat",
Pagninus.

[Psalms 113:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 113:6</span></span>

Who humbleth himself to behold the things that are in heaven, and in the
earth. The persons the highest heavens, the angels whom he upholds in
their beings, and admits into his presence; who always behold his face,
and he beholds them, delights in their persons, and accepts their
services; which, though pure and perfect, it is a condescension in him
to do, since they are but creature services, and chargeable with folly
and weakness; and who themselves are as nothing in comparison of him,
and veil their faces before him; [Job
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/job004.htm#018), also glorified saints are
continually in his view, and favoured with intimate communion with him:
and he humbles himself to look lower than this, and behold the things in
the starry heavens, the sun, and moon, and stars; whom he preserves in
their being, directs their courses, and continues their influence;
brings out their host by number, calls them by their names, and because
of his power not one fails: he looks lower still, and beholds the things
in the airy heavens; there is not a meteor or cloud that flies, or a
wind that blows, but he observes, guides, and directs it; nor a bird in
the air but his eye is on it; he feeds the fowls of the air, and not so
much as a sparrow falls to the ground without his knowledge and will:
and he also humbles himself to behold persons and things on earth, even
every beast of the forest, the cattle on a thousand hills, all the fowls
of the mountains, and the wild beasts of the field; and their eyes are
on him, and he gives them their food in due season; he looks down from
heaven and beholds all the children of men, and is the Saviour of them
in a providential way; in an especial manner his eye, both of providence
and grace, is on his own people, whom he beholds in Christ as fair and
comely: and rejoices over them to do them good; and he has respect to
their services for his sake, and condescends to dwell on earth with
them. This may also be applied to Christ, who humbled himself to look
upon the angels in heaven, and take them under his care and protection,
be the head of them, and confirm them in that estate in which they were
created: and who from all eternity vouchsafed to look with delight upon
the sons of men, rejoicing in the habitable parts of the earth, where he
knew they would dwell; and in the fulness of time he humbled himself to
come down on earth in human nature and dwell among men, and become very
man in that nature; made himself of no reputation, and humbled himself
so as to become obedient to death, the death of the cross, and be made
sin and a curse for his people. This was an humiliation indeed!

[Psalms 113:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 113:7</span></span>

He raiseth up the poor out of the dust,.... Persons of mean extraction
and in low life are sometimes raised by him to great honour and dignity,
as Saul, David, and others; and is true of many who are spiritually poor
and needy, as all men are, but all are not sensible of it; some are, and
these are called poor "in spirit", and are pronounced "blessed", for
"theirs is the kingdom of heaven": they are raised out of a low and mean
estate, out of the dust of sin, and self-abhorrence for it, in which
they lie when convicted of it.

And lifteth the needy out of the dunghill; which denotes a mean
condition; so one born in a mean place, and brought up in a mean manner,
is sometimes represented as taken out of a dunghill (t): and also it is
expressive of a filthy one; men by sin are not only brought into a low
estate, but into a loathsome one, and are justly abominable in the sight
of God, and yet he lifts them out of it: the phrases of "raising up" and
"lifting out" suppose them to be fallen, as men are in Adam, fallen from
a state of honour and glory, in which he was created, into a state of
sin and misery, and out of which they cannot deliver themselves; it is
Christ's work, and his only, to raise up the tribes of Jacob, and to
help or lift up his servant Israel, [Isa
49:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa049.htm#006).

\(t\) "Ex sterquilinio effosse", Plauti Casina, Act. 1. Sc. 1. v. 26.

[Psalms 113:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 113:8</span></span>

That he may set him with princes,.... As all the saints are by birth,
being the sons of God, the King of kings; born of him, and not of the
will of man; and are of a princely spirit, have a free spirit, and offer
themselves and services willingly to the Lord; have the spirit of
adoption, in opposition to a spirit of bondage; and, as princes, have
power with God and prevail; and are also heirs of God, heirs of
salvation, heirs of a kingdom, as princes be; now such as are raised by
Christ and his grace from a low estate and condition are set among those
princes here; they are brought to Zion, and have a place and a name in
the house of God, better than that of sons and daughters; and become
fellowcitizens with the saints; and they are set among princes hereafter
in the kingdom of heaven.

Even with the princes of his people; the more eminent among the people
of God, such as Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, with whom they shall sit down
in the kingdom of heaven; and with the prophets of the Old Testament,
and the apostles of the New; and even with all the saints, who are made
kings and priests unto God; see [Psa
45:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#016).

[Psalms 113:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa113.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 113:9</span></span>

He maketh the barren woman to keep house,.... Or "to dwell in the
house", as the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, and other versions; or rather
"to cause the house to be inhabited"; to fill the house with
inhabitants, to build up the house, as the barren woman, when made
fruitful, does, as Rachel and Leah built up the house of Israel, [Rut
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#011). This may be applied to the
church of God, as it is to the congregation of Israel by the Targum,

"who makes the congregation of Israel, which is like to a barren woman,
that sitteth sorrowful, to dwell with the men of her house, full of
multitudes.''

Jarchi interprets it of Zion, who was as a barren woman; see [Isa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#001), [Gal
4:27](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#027). It may be illustrated by the
case of the primitive and apostolic church, which at first had but very
few converts, but afterwards, both in Judea and in the Gentile world,
had large numbers; as the church in the latter day will also have, when
the fulness of the Gentiles is brought in, and the nation of the Jews
born at once.

And to be a joyful mother of children; as the barren woman is when she
becomes the mother of children; and indeed every woman rejoices when a
man is born into the world, [Joh
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#021), and so does the church of
Christ and people of God, when souls are born again among them; this
causes great joy among the saints; see [Psa
87:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa087.htm#004).

Praise ye the Lord; not only for the church's fruitfulness, but for all
the great and good things the Lord has vouchsafed to do for his people,
mentioned in this psalm.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 114](psa114)

</div>
