<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa120)  [Next](psa122) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 121](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 121:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 121

A Song of degrees. The inscription of the Syriac version is,

"one of the songs of ascent out of Babylon.''

Aben Ezra thinks it was composed on account of Israel, when in a siege
and distress; or, adds he, on account of the children of our captivity;
the present state of the Jews. Grotius is of opinion it was written by
David, at the time of the battle with Absalom. Some take it to be a
military psalm, proper for soldiers engaged with an enemy: others, that
it is suitable for travellers when on a journey; and why not for persons
also, when they commit themselves to God in the night watches, and about
to take rest? And indeed it is suitable at all times; when the good man
may, with the psalmist, expect divine help, and be secure of protection
and preservation.

[Psalms 121:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 121:1</span></span>

I will lift up mine eyes unto the hills,.... Not to the hills and
mountains in Judea, looking about to see if the inhabitants of them, or
any bodies of men, appeared upon them to his help in distress; rather to
the hills of Moriah and Zion, where the ark of God, the symbol of his
presence, was, and to whom he looked for assistance and deliverance: or
to heaven, the holy hill of the Lord, and to him that dwelleth there;
see [Psa 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa003.htm#002). The lifting up of the
eyes is a prayer gesture, [Joh 11:41](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#041);
and is expressive of boldness and confidence in prayer, and of hope and
expectation of help and salvation, [Job
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/job011.htm#015); when, on the contrary, persons
abashed and ashamed, hopeless and helpless, cannot look up, or lift up
their eyes or face to God, [Ezr 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/ezr009.htm#006).
Some read the words, "I will lift up mine eyes upon the hills" (f);
standing there and looking up to the heavens, and God in the heavens;
who is the most High over all the earth, higher than the highest, and
above all gods. Others render them interrogatively, "shall I lift up
mine eyes to the hills?" (g) to the idols worshipped on hills and
mountains, and pray unto them, and expect help from them? No, I will
not; salvation is not to be had from them, [Jer
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#023); or to the kings of the nations,
as R. Obadiah interprets it; and to powerful kingdoms and states he was
in alliance with, comparable to mountains and hills, [Psa
46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002)? No, I will not; "it is better to
trust in the Lord than to put confidence in princes", [Psa
118:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa118.htm#009). And so the following clause may
be read,

from whence shall my help come? (h) not from hills and mountains; not
from men, for vain is the help of man; not from kings and princes, the
great men of the earth, nor from the most powerful nations; but from the
Lord, as in [Psa 121:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#002), which may be
an answer to this.

\(f\) "super montes", Vatablus, Amama; so Kimchi. (g) "attollerem oculos
meos ad illos montes?" Junius & Tremellius; "attollamne", &c. Piscator;
so Gejerus and Ainsworth. (h) So Musculus, Cocceius, Gejerus, Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator, Michaelis.

[Psalms 121:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 121:2</span></span>

My help cometh from the Lord, which made heaven and earth. Who helps his
people out of the hands of all their enemies, and out of all their
troubles and afflictions; he helps them in the performance of duty, in
the exercise of grace, in bearing the cross, in fighting the Lord's
battles, and on in their journey; he helps them to all blessings,
temporal and spiritual; to all needful supplies of grace here, and glory
hereafter; and this help he gives is quick and present, suitable and
seasonable, is sufficient, and sometimes with, and sometimes without
means; and they have great encouragement to expect it from him, since he
is able to give it, being the Maker of heaven and earth; for what is it
that he cannot do, who has made both them? And besides, he has promised
to help them, and he is faithful that has promised; he has laid help on
Christ for them, and set up a throne of grace, where they may hope to
find grace and mercy, to help them in time of need; and they have had
past experiences of his help and salvation. Arama connects this with the
preceding psalm, and interprets this help of help from an evil tongue.

[Psalms 121:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 121:3</span></span>

He wilt not suffer thy foot to be moved,.... This is either an address
of the psalmist to his own soul; or to any other good man, his friend
and acquaintance, assuring of stability, and of final perseverance in
grace to glory. The Lord keeps the feet of his saints from falling: he
will not suffer them to be moved out of the spiritual estate in which
they stand; nor off of the Foundation and Rock of ages, on which their
feet are set, and their goings established; nor out of the house of God,
where they are as pillars; nor out of his ways, where he upholds their
goings; moved in some sense they may be, yet not "greatly moved"; their
feet may be "almost" gone, and their steps "well nigh" slipped, and yet
shall not fall finally and totally, or so as to perish; see [Psa
62:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa062.htm#002);

he that keepeth thee will not slumber; neither angels nor men are the
keepers of the saints, but the Lord himself; he is the keeper of every
individual saint, of every regenerate person, of everyone of his sheep,
of every member of his church; he keeps them by his power, he preserves
them by his grace, he holds them with his right hand; guides them by his
counsel, keeps their feet from falling, and brings them safe to glory:
and a watchful keeper he is, he does not so much as slumber; he keeps
them night and day, lest any harm them, [Isa
27:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa027.htm#003). Gussetius reads the whole as a
prayer, "let him not suffer thy foot", &c. "let not thy keeper slumber"
(i); to which the answer follows.

\(i\) "ne permittat--ne dormitet", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator; so
Ainsworth.

[Psalms 121:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 121:4</span></span>

Behold, he that keepeth Israel shall neither slumber nor sleep. He that
kept Israel or Jacob, when asleep, and appeared to him in a dream, and
promised to keep him in all places, and did; who found his posterity in
the wilderness, and kept them as the apple of his eye: he keeps his
spiritual Israel, whom he has chosen, redeemed, and calls; and he that
is in general their keeper, is the keeper of every particular believer,
who may promise themselves the utmost safety under his care; since,
though he may sometimes seem to sleep, when he withdraws his gracious
presence, defers help, and does not arise so soon to the assistance of
his people as they wish for and expect; yet does not in reality sleep,
nor is any ways negligent of them; no, not so much as slumber, nor is in
the least indifferent about them, and careless of them; see [Gen
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen028.htm#015). So Homer (k) represents Jupiter
as not held by sleep, while other gods and men slept all night; and
hence Milton (l) has the phrase of "the unsleeping eyes of God": but the
Phrygians had a notion that their god slept in winter, and was awake in
summer (m).

\(k\) Iliad. 2. v. 1, 2. (l) Paradise Lost, B. 5. v. 647. (m) Plutarch.
de Iside & Osir. prope finem.

[Psalms 121:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 121:5</span></span>

The Lord is thy keeper,.... This explains more fully who it is that
keeps Israel and particular believers, and confirms the same; not a
creature, but the Lord; the Word of the Lord, as the Targum, in [Psa
121:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#007), Christ, the Word and Wisdom of
God; who is the keeper of his people by the designation of his Father,
who has put them into his hands to be kept by him; and by their full
will and consent, who commit the keeping of their souls to him; for
which he is abundantly qualified, being able as the mighty God; faithful
to him that has appointed him; tender and compassionate to those under
his care, whom he keeps as the apple of his eye; and diligent and
constant, for he keeps them night and day, lest any hurt them: he keeps
them as they are his flock, made his care and charge; as they are the
vineyard of the Lord of hosts; as they are a city, which, unless the
Lord keeps, the watchmen watch in vain; as they are his body and members
of it, and as they are his jewels and peculiar treasure: these he keeps
in the love of God; in his own hands; in the covenant of grace; in an
estate of grace; and in his own ways, safe to his kingdom and glory;

the Lord is thy shade upon thy right hand; he is at the right hand of
his people, to hold their right hand; to teach them to go, lead them
into communion with himself, and hold them up safe; and to strengthen
their right hand, assist them in working, without whom they can do
nothing; and to counsel and direct them, and to protect and defend them
against all their enemies. So a shadow signifies defence; see [Num
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/num014.htm#009), [Ecc
7:12](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#012); and such great personages are to
others; in which sense Virgil (n) uses the word "shadow"; and much more
true is this of God himself. And he is like the shadow of a great rock
in a weary land; or of a spreading tree, which is a protection from
heat, and very reviving and refreshing; see [Isa
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa032.htm#002). The allusion may be to the
pillar of cloud by day, which guided and guarded the Israelites in the
wilderness, and was a shadow from the heat, [Isa
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#005); as Christ is from the heat of a
fiery law, the flaming sword of justice, the wrath of God, and the fiery
darts of Satan.

\(n\) "Et magnum reginae nomen obumbrat", Aeneid. l. xi.

[Psalms 121:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 121:6</span></span>

The sun shall not smite thee by day,.... With its rays, which it shoots
forth like darts, and which fly swiftly, and pierce and hurt: hence
Apollo, the same with the sun, is represented with a bow and arrows (o);
so the rays of the sun seem to be called in [Hab
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/hab002.htm#011);

nor the moon by night; this clause should be supplied, as a learned man
(p) observes, thus, "neither shall the moon cool thee by night"; for
that has no warmth in it, and cannot smite with heat, as the sun does:
for even, as he observes, its rays focused by a magnifying glass will
not communicate the least degree of sensible heat to bodies objected
thereunto; yet some say (q) the moon is not only moist, but heats bodies
as the sun. And Isaac Vossius (r) observes, that there can be no light,
which, separately considered, does not contain some heat at least: and
Macrobius (s) speaks of the lunar heat; and Plutarch (t) ascribes heat
and inflammation to it, and asserts it to be fire. It is said (u) that
some men of good credit, in a voyage to Guinea, strongly affirmed, that,
in the night season, they felt a sensible heat to come from the beams of
the moon. The Septuagint version is, "the sun shall not burn thee by
day, nor the moon by night". And burning may be ascribed to the cold
frosty air in a moonlight night, as to the north wind, as in the
Apocrypha:

"20 When the cold north wind bloweth, and the water is congealed into
ice, it abideth upon every gathering together of water, and clotheth the
water as with a breastplate. 21 It devoureth the mountains, and burneth
the wilderness, and consumeth the grass as fire.'' (Sirach 43)

see [Gen 31:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040); and our English poet
(w) expresses a sentiment to this effect; yet not what affects the
bodies of men, but plants, trees, &c. and this not owing to the moon,
but to the air. However, these clauses are not to be understood
literally; for good men may be smitten and hurt by the heat of the one
and the cold of the other, as Jacob and Jonah, [Gen
31:40](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#040); but mystically, of persecuting
antichristian tyrants, which are sometimes signified by the sun and
moon, as both in Rome Pagan and Papal, [Rev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012); and of persecution and
tribulation itself, [Mat 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#006); and is
sometimes applied to the perfect state of the saints, either in the New
Jerusalem, or ultimate glory, when there will be nothing more of this
kind, [Rev 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#015). And there are some
periods in the present state, when those entirely cease; nor are the
saints ever really hurt by them, they being always for their good; or,
however, not so as to affect their eternal happiness. The Targum is,

"in the day, when the sun rules, the morning spirits shall not smite
thee; nor the nocturnal ones in the night, when the moon rules.''

\(o\) Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c. 17. (p) Scheuchzer. Physic. Sacr. p.
976, 977. (q) Suidas in voce so Theodoret. (r) De Motu Marium & Vent. c.
6. Vid. Senecae Nat. Quaest. l. 5. c. 9. (s) Saturnal. l. 7. c. 16. (t)
De Facie Lunae, in tom. 2. p. 933. (u) The Second Voyage in Eden's
Travels, p. 350. 2. (w) "----The parching air----Burns frore (frosty)
and cold performs the effect of fire". Milton's Paradise Lost, l. 2. v.
594.

[Psalms 121:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 121:7</span></span>

Thee Lord shall preserve them from all evil,.... The Word of the Lord,
as the Targum. Not from the evil of affliction, though from that as a
penal evil; or as a real one, it being made to work for good: but from
the evil of sin; not from the being or commission of it; but from its
dominion and damning power, or from a final and total falling away by
it: and from the evil of the world; not from tribulation in it, nor from
the reproach or persecution of it; but from the wickedness and lusts
that are in it, and from the wicked men of it, their power, rage, and
fury: and from the evil one, Satan; not from his temptations, but from
sinking under them, and perishing by them; see [Joh
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/joh017.htm#012);

he shall preserve thy soul: he preserves the bodies of his people,
oftentimes from diseases and disasters, and from death, till the
appointed time comes; and then he preserves their dust in the grave, and
raises it up at the last day; but more especially their souls, the
redemption and salvation of which he undertook, and has effected; and
which are preserved by him safe to his coming, kingdom, and glory.

[Psalms 121:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa121.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 121:8</span></span>

The Lord shall preserve thy going out, and thy coming in,.... In
transacting all the business of life, in going in and out about it; in
all ways, works, and conversation; in journeying and travelling; in all
affairs, civil and religious; and not only preserve, but prosper in all,
[Psa 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#003); the Lord blessing him,
coming in and going out, [Deu 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu028.htm#006);
and such, with the poet (x), are said to go with a good or prosperous
foot. And such persons, in the Punic language, are called Namphanians,
as Austin observes (y); who says the word signifies a man of a good
foot: and the word seems to be the contraction of , which signifies "his
good" or "pleasant foot" (z); and so one that, wherever he comes and
goes, things prosper with him, and with those that are in connection
with him: such an one was Jacob in the house of Laban, whom the Lord
blessed, as he says, "since my coming", or at "my foot"; see Gill on
[Gen 30:30](../../../bib/kjv/gen030.htm#030); and such a foot Joseph had
wherever he went, [Gen 39:5](../../../bib/kjv/gen039.htm#005). Arama
interprets it of a man's going out into the air of this world, and of
his entrance into the world to come. The Targum is,

"the Lord will keep thy going out to business, and thy coming in to
study in the law.''

from this time forth, and even for evermore; for the Lord not only
preserves his people in life and at death, but in heaven, to all
eternity; in the utmost safety and peace from all molestations by men or
devils, and from their wrath and malice: not only his purpose and
decree, but his power and providence, are the vast gulf between the one
and the other; by means of which the wicked cease from troubling, and
the weary are at rest, [Luk 16:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk016.htm#026).

\(x\) Virgil. Aeneid. l. 8. "Adi pede sacra secundo"; & l. 10. "adsis
pede diva secundo." (y) Epist. 44. (z) Vid. Sterringae Philol. Sacr. p.
169. Reinesium de Lingua Punica, c. 8. s. 10.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 122](psa122)

</div>
