<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Psalms Index](psa)  
  [Previous](psa135)  [Next](psa137) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Psalms Chapter 136](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#001)

[Psalms](../../../bib/kjv/psa001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">psa 136:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO PSALM 136

This psalm was very probably composed by David, and given to the Levites
to sing every day, [Ch1 16:41](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#041). Solomon
his son followed his example, and made use of them in singing at the
dedication of the temple, [Ch2 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch2007.htm#003); as
Jehoshaphat seems to have done when he went out to war against his
enemies, [Ch2 20:21](../../../bib/kjv/ch2020.htm#021). The subject of it
is much the same with the preceding psalm; its composition is very
singular; the half of every verse: in it is, "for his mercy endureth for
ever"; this is the burden of the song; and the design of it is to show,
that all blessings of every kind flow from the grace, goodness, and
mercy of God, which is constant and perpetual; and to impress a sense of
it upon the minds of men: the inscription of the Syriac version is,

"it is said of Moses and Israel praising the Lord for those who were
delivered; and concerning the deliverance of souls out of hell from
Pharaoh, the devil, by Christ our Saviour, the Redeemer of them.''

R. Obadiah says it is an exhortation to the children of God in the days
of the Messiah to praise the Lord.

[Psalms 136:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">psa 136:1</span></span>

O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is good,.... In himself, and to all
his creatures; and especially to his chosen people, who therefore should
give thanks to him daily in the name of Christ, for all blessings
temporal and spiritual, in faith and fervency, and in the sincerity of
their souls, with their whole heart;

for his mercy endureth for ever; it is the same with his love, which is
from everlasting to everlasting; and continues notwithstanding the sins
of his people, the hidings of his face from them, and his chastisements
of them; the covenant which is founded on mercy, and all the blessings
of it, which are the sure mercies of David, last for ever; and hence the
vessels of mercy shall certainly be saved, and not lost; see [Psa
106:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa106.htm#001).

[Psalms 136:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">psa 136:2</span></span>

O give thanks unto the God of gods,.... Not only of the gods of the
Gentiles, who are by name and not by nature gods; or of civil
magistrates, who are so called, and seem to be designed in the next
verse; but the angels, as Aben Ezra and Kimchi. Christ, our Immanuel, is
the God of them, the object of their worship and adoration, being their
Creator and Preserver, [Psa 97:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa097.htm#007). So
the Heathens say (r) of the Maker of all things, him you may properly
call the God of gods, the Supreme and Best; this title Janus has with
them (s);

for his mercy endureth for ever; in the preservation of those excellent
creatures from apostasy, when many of their species fell; and in the
continuance and confirmation of them in the state in which they were
created; and in making use of them as ministering spirits to the heirs
of salvation; and as a guard about them while they live, and at death to
convey their souls to heaven.

\(r\) Hierocles in Carm. Pythagor. p. 10. (s) Macrob. Saturnal. l. 1. c.
9.

[Psalms 136:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">psa 136:3</span></span>

O give thanks to the Lord of lords,.... Which is not only the title of
the God of Israel, as the former, [Deu
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#017); but of the Messiah, [Rev
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#016); who is the Prince of the kings
of the earth; under whom they are, by whom they reign, and to whom they
are accountable, being higher than they; as nature, so by office, [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005), [Psa
89:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa089.htm#027);

for his mercy endureth for ever; in putting it into the hearts of kings
and princes, which he has in his hands, to show favour to his people,
even to be their nursing fathers; and in curbing the power, restraining
the wrath, of oppressors; and protecting his people from their rage and
violence.

[Psalms 136:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">psa 136:4</span></span>

To him who alone doeth great wonders,.... As in the works of creation at
first, having no help from angels or men; so in the works of providence,
many of which are unsearchable, and past finding out, and in which he
has no assistance from creatures; and in the works of grace, redemption,
and salvation, which his own arm has wrought out; as well as what he did
when here on earth in our nature; the miracles then wrought by his
omnipotent arm alone; and even all the wonders which Moses and Elijah
did under the Old Testament, and the apostles of Christ under the New,
were done, not by their power, but by his alone; who will do still
greater wonders, when he shall create all tidings new, raise the dead,
and summon all nations before him, and render to everyone according to
his works;

for his mercy endureth for ever: towards his people, for whose sake all
these wonders are wrought.

[Psalms 136:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">psa 136:5</span></span>

To him that by wisdom made the heavens,.... In such a curious manner, in
such a proper and delightful situation, with such furniture, and for
such uses, [Pro 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#019);

for his mercy endureth for ever; which appears in the continued
influences of the heaven; the dew, rain, and snow, that descend from it
on the earth to water and make it fruitful, and to produce those rich
and valuable blessings called the "precious things of heaven", [Deu
33:13](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#013); and which are of the utmost
importance for the service of man and beast: and, besides, God has of
his infinite mercy, which continues, provided an inheritance in the
heavens, a house eternal in the heavens, mansions of bliss and glory
there, which Christ is now preparing for his saints, that they may dwell
with him in them for evermore.

[Psalms 136:6](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">psa 136:6</span></span>

To him that stretcheth out the earth above the waters,.... Or, "besides
the waters" (t), close by them, and yet secures the earth from being
covered with them; see [Psa 24:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa024.htm#002);

for his mercy endureth for ever; it was in mercy he caused the waters to
go off the earth which first covered it; that trees, plants, and herbs,
might spring up out of it, and that it might be a fit habitation for
man; and though for the sins of the old world these waters were let in
upon it, which drowned it, and destroyed man and beast upon it, except a
few that were in mercy preserved; yet the Lord has promised and swore to
it, that these waters shall no more go over the earth to destroy it; he
has set a bound for the sea that it cannot pass, by a decree of his;
even the sand on the shore, which, as weak as it may seem to be, is a
bound unpassable; though they may toss and rage and roar, they shall not
prevail, nor pass over it, which is a perpetual miracle of mercy, [Jer
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#022).

\(t\) "juxta aquas", Tirinus, Gejerus, Michaelis.

[Psalms 136:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">psa 136:7</span></span>

To him that made great lights,.... For the inhabitants of the world to
walk and work by, to do all the business of life in a comfortable
manner; and which is an instance of mercy and goodness; see [Gen
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#014);

for his mercy endureth for ever; these lights continuing for the benefit
of mankind.

[Psalms 136:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">psa 136:8</span></span>

The sun to rule by day,.... Which is the greater light, [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016);

for his mercy endureth for ever: this great light, so beneficial to the
earth and the inhabitants of it, which was made near six thousand years
ago, still continues, and will to the end of time; enlightening the
world, warming the air and earth, imparting its light and heat to all
creatures on it, and influencing the earth to bring forth a variety of
things for the use and delight of mankind, called "the precious things
brought forth by the sun", [Deu 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#014);
an emblem of a more beneficial light, in which the rich grace and mercy
of God appear, and for which we have reason to give thanks; even the sun
of righteousness, the Messiah, the light of the world, the author of the
light of nature, grace, and glory; and who will continue as long as the
sun, and when that shall be no more, [Mal
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/mal004.htm#002).

[Psalms 136:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">psa 136:9</span></span>

The moon and stars to rule by night,.... The lesser lights, and which
indeed receive all their light Front the sun, [Gen
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#016);

for his mercy endureth for ever; in continuing these lights, so useful
to men, as well as in making of them: the moon and stars have their
benign influences upon the earth, to produce things out of it useful to
men; see [Deu 33:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#014); and are of
singular service to benighted travellers, and to those that go down to
the sea in ships; see [Act 27:20](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#020). The
moon is an emblem of the church, that receives her light from Christ,
the sun, and which will continue for ever; and, stars are emblems of
Gospel ministers, who are the means of enlightening dark souls, and of
refreshing disconsolate saints; and are a continued mercy to an ignorant
world, as well as to the church, and will be continued as long as it
stands; see [Sol 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol006.htm#010), [Mat
5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014).

[Psalms 136:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">psa 136:10</span></span>

To him that smote Egypt in their firstborn,.... In a tender part, in the
dear part of themselves, in their sons and heirs, and who were to
inherit their lands and estates, and perpetuate their names; this was an
act of justice for using ill the Lord's firstborn, the people of Israel,
slaying their sons, and refusing to let them go, [Exo
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo001.htm#013); and yet there was mercy in it,
for which thanks were to be given to God;

for his mercy endureth for ever; the Israelites, in a very merciful
manner, were distinguished by the blood sprinkled on their door posts,
when the destroying angel passed through the land of Egypt to destroy
their firstborn; and when they were destroyed, it was owing to the kind
providence of God that the Egyptians did not rise as one man to cut off
the Israelites in vengeance; and yet not a dog was suffered to move his
tongue against them when the dismal cry was made; yea, this was the
means of their deliverance, which could not be obtained by all the other
plagues; but now they not only bid them go, but were urgent upon them to
be gone, [Exo 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/exo011.htm#005).

[Psalms 136:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">psa 136:11</span></span>

And brought out Israel from among them,.... A wicked and idolatrous
people, among whom they suffered great hardships; and this was done by
means of God's judgments on them, and especially that before related;
and was an instance of the mercy of God, as follows, for which thanks
should be given;

for his mercy endureth for ever; and this is a proof of it, bringing the
children of Israel out of Egypt, the house of bondage; when they cried
unto him by reason of it, and he sent them a Saviour to deliver them out
of their distress, [Exo 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#023); an
emblem of the grace and mercy of God, in delivering his people from a
worse than Egyptian bondage; from the bondage of sin, Satan, the law,
and through fear of death, into the glorious liberty of the children of
God.

[Psalms 136:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">psa 136:12</span></span>

With a strong hand, and with a stretched out arm,.... Exerting his power
in a very open manner, and continuing it till he had effected the work;
bringing his people out of Egypt, which is always ascribed to his great
strength and mighty power, [Exo 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#003).
The redemption of the mystical Israel of God is by a mighty Redeemer,
the Lord of hosts; who has redeemed them out of the hands of their
enemies, that were stronger than they, and too strong for them: the
conversion of them is by the power of the grace of God, even by the
exceeding greatness of his power, and yet both acts of grace and mercy;

for his mercy endureth for ever; it was mercy put the Lord on stretching
out his arm, and showing the strength of his right hand, in delivering
Israel out of Egypt; and in his love and in his pity he redeemed them,
[Isa 63:9](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#009). It is owing to the tender
mercies of our God, and is a performing the mercy promised to the
fathers, that Christ, the dayspring from on high, was sent to visit and
redeem us, [Luk 1:68](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#068); and the
regeneration, quickening, and conversion of sinners, are acts of mercy
as well as of power, [Eph 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/eph002.htm#004).

[Psalms 136:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">psa 136:13</span></span>

To him which divided the Red sea into parts,.... Into two parts, so that
the waters of it stood as a wall on the right and left hand of the
Israelites, as they passed through; this was done by means of a strong
east wind, [Exo 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#021). The Jews have a
tradition, which Jarchi, Kimchi, and Arama, make mention of, that the
sea was divided into twelve parts, according to the twelve tribes of
Israel, and every tribe had a path by itself to walk in; but for this
there is no foundation: however, the dividing it into parts was a
wonderful work, and a rich display of mercy to Israel;

for his mercy endureth for ever; the children of Israel were encompassed
about, and in the utmost distress: the rocks were on each side, Pharaoh
and his host behind them, the Red sea before them; and so no visible way
of escape; but the Lord cut a way for them through the sea, and saved
them. The sea is an emblem of this world, which is like a tempestuous
troubled sea; where everything is restless, fluctuating, and passing
away; where the people of God are tossed with tempests; and where
afflictions, like the waves and billows of the sea, come over them one
after another; and through which they must pass and enter the kingdom:
and God, that wills, orders, and appoints them, sets these proud waves
of the sea their bounds, or makes them a calm; and, sooner or later,
makes a way through them and out of them, which is owing to his enduring
mercy, [Co1 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#013).

[Psalms 136:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">psa 136:14</span></span>

And made Israel to pass through the midst of it,.... Willingly, without
reluctance; with great spirit and courage, fearless of danger, and with
the utmost safety, so that not one was lost in the passage; see [Psa
78:53](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#053); and thus the Lord makes his
people willing to pass through afflictions, he being with them; and able
to bear them, he putting underneath the everlasting arms, even when in
the valley of the shadow of death; and carries safely through them, so
that they are not hurt by them; the waters do not overflow them, nor the
fire kindle upon them; nor are any suffered to be lost, but all come
safe to land;

for his mercy endureth for ever; to which, and to his never failing
compassion, it is owing that they are not consumed, [Lam
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#022).

[Psalms 136:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">psa 136:15</span></span>

But overthrew Pharaoh and his host in the Red sea,.... In the same sea
which was parted for the Israelites, and through which they passed
safely as on dry land; into which Pharaoh and his army entering in
pursuit of them in their chariots, the Lord "shook" (u) him and them out
of them, as the word signifies; and causing the waters to return and
cover them; they were drowned in them, [Exo
14:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#028). This was an emblem of the
destruction of Satan, and of his principalities and powers, by Christ,
who thereby has saved his spiritual Israel out of their hands; and of
the casting of the sins of God's people into the depths of the sea,
never to be seen more, or to appear any more against them to their
condemnation; and of the everlasting ruin and perdition of ungodly men;

for his mercy endureth for ever; it was in mercy to Israel that Pharaoh
and his host were destroyed, who threatened them with ruin; and
therefore they sung of judgment and of mercy, and gave thanks to God for
this instance of his vengeance on their enemies, and of goodness to
them, [Exo 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#001).

\(u\) "excussit", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator, &c.

[Psalms 136:16](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">psa 136:16</span></span>

To him which led his people through the wilderness,.... Where there was
no path. This the Lord did by going before them in a pillar of cloud by
day, and in a pillar of fire by night, to show them the way in which
they should go, [Exo 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#021); see [Psa
78:14](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#014);

for his mercy endureth for ever; among the manifold mercies of God,
shown to Israel in the wilderness, this is one taken notice of by
Nehemiah, [Neh 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/neh009.htm#019); that the pillar
of cloud and fire, to direct them, never departed from them while in it:
and this act of "leading" them not only includes the guidance of them in
the way, but the provision made for them; of water out of the rock, and
of manna that fell about their tents every day; and of flesh and
feathered fowl, like dust, so that they wanted nothing; and also the
protection of them from their enemies: all which were proofs of his
constant care over them, and continual mercy to them; see [Psa
78:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#015).

[Psalms 136:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">psa 136:17</span></span>

To him which smote great kings,.... Either the thirty one kings in the
land of Canaan; or those who are after particularly mentioned; which
seems best, since the kings of Canaan were petty kings, when these were
greater ones;

for his mercy endureth for ever; the smiting of those kings were in
mercy to Israel; both to preserve them from falling into their hands,
and that they might possess their countries, as is later declared.

[Psalms 136:18](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">psa 136:18</span></span>

And slew famous kings,.... Famous for their power and strength, their
courage and valour who were not only smitten and discomfited, but slain
in battle;

for his mercy endureth for ever; towards his own people, for whose sake
these kings were slain.

[Psalms 136:19](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">psa 136:19</span></span>

Sihon king of the Amorites,.... A strong and warlike people, and their
king a great and mighty one; see [Psa
135:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#011);

for his mercy endureth for ever; since this king would not suffer Israel
to go through his borders, but came out and fought against them; and had
not the Lord smote him, they must have fallen a prey into his hands,
[Num 21:23](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#023).

[Psalms 136:20](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">psa 136:20</span></span>

And Og the king of Bashan,.... A country large and fruitful, and the
king of it of a gigantic stature, see [Psa
135:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#011);

for his mercy endureth for ever; for this mighty king came out against
Israel, and threatened their destruction, and it was of the Lord's
mercies they were not consumed by him. And it may be observed, whenever
tyrannical princes and oppressors are cut off, it is in mercy to the
inhabitants of the earth, and especially to the people of God.

[Psalms 136:21](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">psa 136:21</span></span>

And gave their land for an heritage,.... This was taken away from them
and their subjects by the Lord, who has the disposing of kingdoms, and
given to another people, for an inheritance;

for his mercy endureth for ever; while his justice is exercised on some,
in a strict manner, with severity and rigour, his mercy is shown to
others.

[Psalms 136:22](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">psa 136:22</span></span>

Even an heritage unto Israel his servant,.... The land of those that
served idols, the Lord took and gave to Israel for an inheritance, who
served him, the true God. Thus the Lord rewards his servants in a way of
grace and mercy, though not as of debt; for it follows,

for his mercy endureth for ever; Aben Ezra and Kimchi make the mercy to
lie in this peculiarly, that the lands of these kings were not in the
covenant with Abraham; only the seven nations or kingdoms of Canaan,
which are not here mentioned, as in [Psa
135:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#011); but the Amorites were given in
the covenant, [Gen 15:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#021); and the one
as the other were given as an inheritance to Israel, and equally owing
to the mercy of God; see [Psa 135:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa135.htm#011).
And thus the heavenly glory, of which Canaan was a type, is an
inheritance owing to the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ, [Jde
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#021).

[Psalms 136:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">psa 136:23</span></span>

Who remembered us in our low estate,.... The Israelites; either in
Egypt, as Jarchi, when in bondage and distress there, and sent them a
deliverer; or in the times of the Judges, whom God raised up one after
another, to save his people out of the hands of their enemies, by whom
they were oppressed; or in the Babylonian captivity, as Aben Ezra and
Kimchi: though the latter thinks their present captivity is rather
intended; but as yet they are not remembered in a gracious way and
manner. This may be applied to the people of God in a spiritual sense;
who, before conversion, are in a low estate through sin, which has
brought them into deep poverty, into debt they are not able to
discharge, but are liable to a prison; it has stripped them of their
original righteousness, instead of which at best they are clothed with
filthy rags; it has left them, starving and famishing, to feed on ashes,
sensual lusts and pleasures; it has brought them to a dunghill, from
whence they are taken as beggars; yea, to a ditch, a pit wherein is in
no water; even an horrible pit, the mire and clay of corrupt nature.
Man, that was lord of all, is by sin reduced to the utmost slavery to
it, and to Satan; and is in the greatest distress and misery; filled
with diseases, loathsome and incurable by him; quite lost and undone,
helpless, and hopeless, and under the sentence of condemnation and
death: but the Lord has remembered his chosen people, and provided a
Saviour for them; who has paid all their debts; brought in an
everlasting righteousness to clothe them; given his flesh for the life
of them; healed all their diseases; delivered them from thraldom and
bondage; saved them from condemnation and death, and raised them to sit
in heavenly places with him: and not only so, but he sends down his
Spirit to convince and convert them, renew and sanctify them; to bring
them from death to life; out of darkness into marvellous light; from
bondage to liberty; from fellowship with wicked men, into communion with
Christ and his people; and to make them meet for heaven and happiness.
These are sometimes in a low estate after conversion; when corruptions
prevail, and the temptations of Satan are strong; when grace is weak; or
God hides his face; or they are grown carnal and secure, lukewarm and
indifferent to spiritual things; yet the Lord remembers them again, his
lovingkindness, his covenant and promises; and with everlasting kindness
has mercy on them, heals their backslidings, and loves them freely [Hos
14:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos014.htm#004). The Targum is,

"he hath remembered his covenant with us;''

so Kimchi;

for his mercy endureth for ever; which appears in the mission of his Son
to save; in giving his Spirit to regenerate and quicken when dead in
sin, and to revive and restore when backslidden.

[Psalms 136:24](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">psa 136:24</span></span>

And hath redeemed us from our enemies,.... Temporal enemies, tyrants,
and oppressors: and spiritual ones, sin, Satan, the world, the law,
death, and hell;

for his mercy endureth for ever; as is clearly seen in redemption by
Jesus Christ, where mercy and truth have met together; and which is a
distinguishing mercy to the sons of men, not granted to angels.

[Psalms 136:25](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">psa 136:25</span></span>

Who giveth food to all flesh,.... To all creatures; the beasts of the
field, and fowls of the air, the young ravens that cry, [Psa
145:15](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#015). To all men their daily food;
to Jews and Gentiles, good men and bad men, [Mat
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#011); and spiritual food to all that
belong to Christ, who are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his bone; even
himself, the bread of life, the wholesome truths of the Gospel, and its
refreshing ordinances;

for his mercy endureth for ever; he continues to have compassion on his
creatures, and opens his hand of providence, and supplies their wants;
he is ever mindful of his covenant of grace and mercy, and therefore
gives meat to them that fear him, [Psa
111:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa111.htm#005).

[Psalms 136:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa136.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">psa 136:26</span></span>

O give thanks unto the God of heaven,.... the Maker of it, in which the
glory of his wisdom and power is displayed; the possessor of it, where
he dwells, has his throne, and keeps his court; from whence all
blessings, temporal and spiritual, come and where he has prepared glory
and happiness for his people hereafter, a house eternal in the heavens,
an inheritance reserved there, a better and a more enduring substance;

for his mercy endureth for ever; for though the above character is
expressive of his sovereignty and dominion, yet he exercises it in a way
of grace and mercy to the sons of men; and therefore they have reason to
give thanks unto him and praise him for his kindness and favours shown
to them on earth.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Psalms Chapter 137](psa137)

</div>
