<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Revelation Index](rev.md)  
  [Previous](rev001)  [Next](rev003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001.md)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION 2

This chapter contains the epistles to the churches at Ephesus, Smyrna,
Pergamos, and Thyatira. It begins with that to Ephesus, in which the
sender of it describes himself by some of his characters mentioned in
the preceding chapter; takes notice of some things commendable in this
church, [Rev 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001.md), reproves her for
leaving her first love; gives some advice upon it; threatens her in case
of non-repentance; yet notwithstanding commends her for her detestation
of some bad practices; and concludes the epistle with a phrase exciting
to attention to what is written, and with a promise to them that are
constant and conquering, [Rev 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004.md),
next follows the epistle to the church at Smyrna, in which the sender
assumes some of his former titles; takes notice of her works in general,
and of her afflictions in particular, and of the blasphemy of others,
[Rev 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008.md), fortifies her against a
great affliction to be endured, described by its author, kind, use, and
duration; and exhorts to faithfulness and constancy, with a promise of a
crown of life, [Rev 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010.md), and closes
the epistle in the same form as the preceding, promising security from
the second death to the persevering and conquering Christian, [Rev
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011.md), and next in order is the epistle
to the church at Pergamos, in which the sender takes to him one of the
above characters in the description of him; observes her works and place
of abode, and commends her faithfulness to him in the worst of times and
places, [Rev 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012.md), yet exhibits a
complaint against her for having, and conniving at persons of bad
principles and practice, called Balaamites and Nicolaitans, [Rev
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014.md), exhorts to repentance, and in
failure of it threatens to come and fight against them; and closes the
epistle in the same manner as the two former, with a promise of hidden
manna, a white stone, and a new name to him that overcomes, [Rev
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016.md), and the last epistle in this
chapter is that to the church at Thyatira, in which the sender makes use
of some other titles and characters of his before mentioned; takes
notice of her good works, and yet signifies he had a controversy with
her, for permitting a false prophetess to teach in her, who seduced men
to fornication and idolatry, [Rev
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018.md), whose impenitence is complained
of, and which was aggravated by having space for repentance given her,
[Rev 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#021.md), wherefore, in case of
continuance in impenitence, he threatens both her and her followers with
tribulation and death, whereby the omniscience and justice of Christ
would be manifest to all the churches, [Rev
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#022.md), and then another and better sort
of men in this church are addressed, who are described as not having
imbibed the doctrine of the false prophetess, and as not approving the
depths of Satan, or her doctrines of devils; and these are told that no
other burden should be laid on them than was, and are exhorted to hold
fast what they had, until the coming of Christ, [Rev
2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024.md), and for their encouragement to
hold on to the end, many promises are made unto them respecting their
power and rule over their enemies, and the happy days that they should
enjoy, [Rev 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026.md), and the epistle is
concluded with the usual epiphonema, [Rev
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#029.md).

[Revelation 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 2:1</span></span>

Unto the angel of the church of Ephesus write,.... Of the city of
Ephesus; see Gill on [Rev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011.md) and see
Gill on [Act 18:19](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#019.md). The church here
seems to have been founded by the Apostle Paul, who continued here two
years, by which means all Asia heard the word of the Lord Jesus, [Act
19:10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010.md); of this church; see Gill on
[Act 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017.md); it is named first, because
it was the largest, most populous, and famous, and was nearest to
Patmos, where John now was, and most known to him, it being the place
where he had resided; and it was the place from whence the Gospel came
to others, and spread itself in lesser Asia; but especially it is first
written to, because it represented the church in the apostolic age; so
that this letter contains the things which are, [Rev
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#019.md); and in its very name, to the
state of this church in Ephesus, there may be an allusion; either to
"ephesis", which signifies "desire", and may be expressive of the
fervent love of that pure and apostolic church to Jesus Christ at the
beginning of it; their eager desire after more knowledge of him, and
communion with him; after his word and ordinances, and the maintaining
of the purity of them; after the spread of his Gospel, and the
enlargement of his kingdom in the world; as well as after fellowship
with the saints, and the spiritual welfare of each other: the allusion
may be also to "aphesis", which signifies "remission", or an abatement;
and so may point out the remissness and decay of the first love of these
primitive Christians, towards the close of this state; of the abatement
of the fervency of it, of which complaint is made in this epistle, and
not without cause. This epistle is inscribed to the angel of this
church, or the pastor of it; why ministers are called angels; see Gill
on [Rev 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020.md); some think this was
Timothy, whom the Apostle Paul sent thither, and desired him to continue
there, [Ti1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003.md), there was one
Onesimus bishop of Ephesus, when Polycarp was bishop of Smyrna, of whom
he makes mention in his epistle (x) to the Ephesians, and bids fair to
be this angel; though if any credit could be given to the Apostolic
Constitutions (y) the bishop of this place was one John, who is said to
be ordained by the Apostle John, and is thought to be the same with John
the elder (z), the master of Papias; but though only one is mentioned,
yet all the elders of this church, for there were more than one, see
[Act 20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017.md); are included; and not they
only, but the whole church over whom they presided; for what was written
was ordered to be sent to the church, and was sent by John, see [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004.md); the letter was sent to the pastor
or pastors, to the whole body of ministers, by them to be communicated
to the church; and not only to this particular church did this letter
and the contents of it belong, but to all the churches of Christ within
the period of the apostolic age, as may be concluded from [Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007.md).

These things saith he that holdeth the seven stars in his right hand;
the Syriac version reads, "that holds all things, and these seven stars
in his right hand"; for the explanation of this character of Christ; see
Gill on [Rev 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016.md); only let it be
observed how suitably this is prefixed to the church at Ephesus, and
which represents the state of the churches in the times of the apostles;
in which place, and during which interval, our Lord remarkably held his
ministering: servants as stars in his right hand; he held and protected
the Apostle Paul for two years in this place, and preserved him and his
companions safe amidst the uproar raised by Demetrius the silversmith
about them; here also he protected Timothy at a time when there were
many adversaries, and kept the elders of this church pure,
notwithstanding the erroneous persons that rose up among them; and last
of all the Apostle John, who here resided, and died in peace,
notwithstanding the rage and fury of his persecutors: likewise Christ in
a very visible manner held all his faithful ministers during this period
in his right hand, safe and secure, until they had done the work they
were sent about, and preserved them in purity of doctrine and
conversation; so that their light in both respects shone brightly before
men. Moreover, as this title of Christ is prefixed to the epistle to the
first of the churches, and its pastor or pastors, it may be considered
as relating to, and holding good of all the ministers of the Gospel and
pastors of the other churches; and likewise of all the churches in
successive ages to the end of the world, as the following one also
refers to all the churches themselves:

who walketh in the midst of the seven golden candlesticks; see Gill on
[Rev 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012.md); see Gill on [Rev
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#013.md); Christ was not only present
with, and took his walks in this church at Ephesus, but in all the
churches of that period, comparable to candlesticks, which held forth
the light of the Gospel, and that in order as the antitype of Aaron, to
him these lamps, and likewise in all his churches to the end of the
world; see [Mat 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/mat028.htm#020.md).

\(x\) Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 36. (y) L. vii. c. 46. (z) Euseb.
Eccl. Hist. l. 3. c. 39.

[Revelation 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 2:2</span></span>

I know thy works,.... The good works, both of ministers and churches; no
evil works are mentioned, nor anything complained of in this church but
an abatement of the fervour of her first love. Christ, as the omniscient
God, knows all the works of his people, and the springs, and principles,
and ends, and views of them, whether they are done in obedience to him,
and spring from love to him, and are performed in his strength, and by
his grace, and are directed to his glory; and such he takes notice of,
approves of, and is well pleased with, not as the ground of his delight
in their persons, but as the fruits of his own grace; and during the
apostolic age, churches and ministers were very diligent in working;
yea, they were laborious, as follows:

and thy labour: particularly the labour of ministers of the Gospel, in
these times, in the frequent preaching of it, in season and out of
season; and in the constant administration of the ordinances; and in the
diligent exercise of church discipline. The work of the ministry is a
laborious work to the mind in studying, and to the body in the outward
discharge of it; and it becomes more so, through the malice and
opposition of enemies, and the weakness of friends; and such as are
diligent and laborious deserve respect, even double honour; and though
they may not have it from men, yet Christ takes notice of them and their
labours, and commends them for them, and will reward them,

And thy patience; as this may refer to the ministers of the word, it may
denote their patience in suffering reproaches and persecutions for the
sake of the Gospel, which they bore patiently, cheerfully, and
constantly; and in bearing the infirmities of weak saints, in their
several communities; and in reclaiming and restoring persons out of the
way; and in waiting for the success of their ministry, and their
continuance and perseverance in it. And as this may respect members of
churches, it may point at their patience under afflictions from the hand
of God, and under reproach and persecution from men, for their embracing
and professing the Gospel; and their patient waiting for the heavenly
glory, and their firm expectation of it, and their perseverance unto it,

And how thou canst not bear them that are evil; that were so either in
their principles or in their practices, or both; men that lived immoral
lives, and held erroneous doctrines, these the primitive ministers and
churches could not bear; they had an inward abhorrence and detestation
of them in their minds; they could not bear them in communion with them;
they admonished them according to the nature of their offence, and cast
out such as were obstinate and incorrigible; they withdrew from such as
were disorderly, and rejected heretics after the first and second
admonition; their zeal for church discipline is here taken notice of to
their commendation,

And thou hast tried them which say they are apostles, and are not,

and hast found them liars; this doubtless was done in the church at
Ephesus, where, after the Apostle Paul's departure, grievous wolves, in
sheep's clothing, entered, and men arose from among themselves, speaking
perverse things, [Act 20:29](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#029.md); yet it
was not peculiar to that church, though it was to the apostolic age; for
in no other could men with any face pretend to be the apostles of
Christ; and such there were, who sprung up in the several churches at
Jerusalem, Corinth, Galatia, and elsewhere, who called themselves the
apostles of Christ, but were false apostles, deceitful workers; they
pretended to have their doctrine, call, mission, and commission,
immediately from Christ, as the true apostles had, and a power to work
miracles, and talked of inspirations and revelations by the Spirit of
God. Now the apostles, ministers, and churches of those times, tried
their pretensions and doctrines by the word of God, and by the fruits
which they produced in themselves and others; and through that
discerning of spirits which they had, they found them to be liars; that
they were not, nor had they what they pretended to be, and have, and
exposed them as such.

[Revelation 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 2:3</span></span>

And hast borne,.... Not evil men, nor false apostles, but "burdens", as
the Ethiopic version reads, and as the word signifies; meaning
afflictions, reproaches, and persecutions, which pressed sore, and lay
heavy on these ministers and churches; and yet they bore them with
constancy and cheerfulness, and were not moved by them. The Arabic
version reads, "and thou hast borne me"; my name and Gospel, among the
Gentiles, and carried it from place to place; see [Act
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#015.md),

and hast patience; which they had from God, as his gift, and which they
had in their hearts, and in exercise, and found it useful to them. It
was in exercise in a suitable time, and it continued with them; it was
not worn out through the length and greatness of their trials,

And for my name's sake hast laboured: which may refer either to enduring
sufferings for Christ's name's sake, for his Gospel's sake, for
righteousness sake, for the sake of the elect, and for the sake of the
honour, glory, and interest of Christ; or to labouring in the ministry,
not for filthy lucre sake, nor for party sake, but for the honour of
Christ, and the good of souls; and there never was an interval in which
this was more true:

and hast not fainted: so as to sink under the burden borne; to have
patience quite tired out; to, be weary of labouring for Christ's name's
sake; and so as to give out, and quit the service of Christ.

[Revelation 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 2:4</span></span>

Nevertheless I have somewhat against thee,.... So the Jews represent God
saying, concerning their fathers, "Abraham", &c. "I have something
against them" (a). Christ has nothing against his people, his faithful
ministers, and true churches, in a judicial way, or to their
condemnation, for there is none to them that are in him; but he has
often many things to complain of in them, and to rebuke and chastise
them for, in a way of providence: and what he had against the church at
Ephesus, and against the churches in the period which that represents,
follows,

because thou hast left thy first love: by which is meant, not
hospitality to strangers, or an affectionate care of the poor of the
church, or a zealous concern to feed the flock, and maintain church
discipline; but the love of the saints to God, and Christ, and one
another, which appeared at the beginning of this church state, when they
were all of one heart and one soul, as generally at first conversion
love is the warmest; and so it was at the first planting of Gospel
churches, and therefore here called first love. Now this, though it was
not lost, for the true grace of love can never be lost, yet it was left;
it abated in its heat and fervour; there was a remissness in the
exercise of it; what our Lord had foretold should be before the
destruction of Jerusalem was fulfilled in this period of time, the love
of many waxed cold, [Mat 24:12](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#012.md);
through the prevalence of corruption in some; and through an over love
to the world, as in Demas, and others; and through a desire of ease and
freedom from reproach and persecution; and through the introduction of
errors, which damp the heat of love, and spirit of religion; and through
the contentions and divisions among themselves, as at Corinth, Galatia,
and elsewhere, which greatly weakened their love to one another, and to
divine things; and which was very displeasing to Christ, who, for the
restoring of them, gives the following advice. Compare with this [Ti2
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#015.md).

\(a\) Pesikta Rabbati apud Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 60. 4.

[Revelation 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 2:5</span></span>

Remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,.... Believers cannot
totally and finally fall away from the grace which they have received;
but they may fall into sin, and from a degree of grace, and the exercise
of it, as these first and pure churches did, from some degree of their
love to God, and Christ, and one another; and therefore are called upon
to remember, mind, and observe from what degree of it they were fallen;
in order to bring them under a conviction and acknowledgment of their
evil, and a sense of their present state, and to quicken their desires
after a restoration to their former one:

and repent; of their coldness and lukewarmness, of the remissness of
their love, and of those evils which brought it upon them:

and do the first works; of faith and love, with the like zeal and
fervour, which will show the repentance to be sincere and genuine; so
the Arabic version reads, "and exercise the former works, to wit,
charity" or "love". The Jews have a saying (b),

"if a man repents, do not say to him, "remember" , "thy first works";

which they seem to understand of evil works; but former good works are
to be remembered and done, to show the truth of repentance for evil
ones,

Or else I will come unto thee quickly; not in a spiritual way, to pay a
love visit, nor in a judicial way, to take vengeance or inflict
punishment, but in a providential way, to rebuke and chastise:

and will remove thy candlestick out of his place, except thou repent; or
thee out of the candlestick, the pastor from the church, either by
persecution or by death; or else the church, and church state itself,
signified by a candlestick; See Gill on [Rev
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#012.md); and may design a shaking and an
unsettling of it, which is sometimes done by violent persecutions, and
by false teachers and their doctrines, and by the divisions and
contentions of saints among themselves; and by the former particularly
was there a change made in the state of this apostolic church, when it
passed into the Smyrnean one, which was a period of great persecution
and distress; for this cannot be understood of the total removing of the
church state itself quickly, no, not of Ephesus itself; for though there
is not now indeed, nor has there been for many hundred years, a church
of Christ in that place, yet there was one till the times of
Constantine, when there was none in any of the other seven cities, and a
long time after; See Gill on [Act
20:17](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#017.md); which shows, that this was not
a commination or threatening of divine vengence to that church
literally, but to the state of the church, which that represented; nor
does it intend the utter abolition of that church, for the apostolic
church still continued, though it ceased to be in the circumstances it
was before,

\(b\) Misn. Bava Metzia, c. 4. sect. 10.

[Revelation 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 2:6</span></span>

But this thou hast, that thou hatest the deeds of the Nicolaitans,....
Though these Christians had left their first love, yet they bore an
hatred to the filthy and impure practices of some men, who were called
"Nicolaitans"; who committed fornication, adultery, and all uncleanness,
and had their wives in common, and also ate things offered to idols; who
were so called, as some think (c), from Nicolas of Antioch, one of the
seven deacons in [Act 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/act006.htm#005.md); though as
to Nicolas himself, it is said (d), that he lived with his own lawful
married wife, and no other, and that his daughters continued virgins all
their days, and his son incorrupt; and that these men, so called, only
shrouded themselves under his name, and abused a saying or action of
his, or both, to patronize their wicked deeds: he had used to advise ,
by which he meant a restraining of all carnal and unlawful lusts; but
these men interpreted it of an indulgence in them, and so gave
themselves up to all uncleanness; and whereas, he having a beautiful
wife, and being charged with jealousy, in order to clear himself of it,
he brought her forth, and gave free liberty to any person to marry her
as would; which indiscreet action of his these men chose to understand
as allowing of community of wives. Dr. Lightfoot conjectures, that these
Nicolaitans were not called so from any man, but from the word
"Nicolah", "let us eat", which they often used to encourage each other
to eat things offered to idols. However this be, it is certain that
there were such a set of men, whose deeds were hateful; but neither
their principles nor their practices obtained much in this period of
time, though they afterwards did; see [Rev
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015.md). Professors of the Christian
religion in general abhorred such impure notions and deeds, as they were
by Christ:

which also I hate; all sin is hateful to Christ, being contrary to his
nature, to his will, and to his Gospel; and whatever is hateful to him
should be to his people; and where grace is, sin will be hateful, both
in themselves and others; and men's deeds may be hated when their
persons are not; and hatred of sin is taken notice of by Christ, with a
commendation,

\(c\) Vid. Irenaeum adv. Haeres, l. 1. c. 27. & Tertull. de Praescript.
Haeret. c. 46, 47. (d) Clement. Alex. Strom. l. 3. p. 436. & Euseb,
Hist. Eccl. l. 2. c. 29.

[Revelation 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 2:7</span></span>

He that hath an ear,.... Such who have new ears given them, as all have
who are made new creatures; such who have their ears circumcised, and
opened by the Spirit of God; who hear with understanding, affection, and
faith; who try what they hear, and approve, embrace, and retain that
which is good,

Let him hear what the Spirit saith unto the churches; let such hearken,
and listen with attention to what is said by the Spirit, in what goes
before, and follows after, in this epistle, designed for the use of all
the churches; from whence it appears, that this epistle was endited by
the Spirit of God, and is of divine inspiration; that it was not
intended for the single use of the church at Ephesus, but of all the
churches; and not of the seven churches only, though the Alexandrian
copy reads, "to the seven churches": but of all the churches in that
period of time, which the Ephesine church represents; and which may also
be useful to the churches of Christ in all other ages and periods of
time. And moreover, it may be concluded from hence, that there are in
this epistle, and so in all the rest, for the same words are subjoined
to them all, some things which are parabolical and prophetic, and not
obvious to everyone's understanding and view; for a like expression is
used by our Lord, when he had delivered anything in a parabolical way,
or was obscure; see [Mat 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/mat011.htm#015.md).

To him that overcometh: the false apostles, false teachers, and their
doctrines; coldness, lukewarmness, and remissness in love; the impure
tenets and practices of the Nicolaitans:

will I give to eat of the tree of life; by which is meant Jesus Christ
himself, in allusion to the tree of life in the garden of Eden; and is
so called, because he is the author of life, natural, spiritual, and
eternal; and because of his fruit, the blessings of life and grace, that
are in him, of which believers may eat by faith, and which they find to
be soul quickening, comforting, strengthening, and satisfying; and which
are Christ's gift to them, even both the food they eat, and the faith by
which they eat, are his gifts. So Christ, under the name of Wisdom, is
called the Tree of life, in [Pro 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/pro003.htm#018.md);
and this is a name which is sometimes given by the Jews to the Messiah
(e):

which is in the midst of the paradise of God; as the tree of life was in
the garden of Eden, [Gen 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen002.htm#009.md). The
Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic versions read, "the paradise of my
God"; the God of Christ, as well as of his people; and by which may be
meant, either the church on earth, which is as a paradise, [Sol
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012.md); in the midst of which Christ is,
affording his gracious presence, and reaching forth his grace, and the
benefits of it, to his people; or heaven; see Gill on [Co2
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/co2012.htm#004.md), said to be of God, because it is
of his preparing, and where he dwells, and in the midst of which Christ,
the Tree of life, is; and this shows, that he is to be come at by faith,
and his fruit to be eaten, and lived upon; and he is to be beheld and
enjoyed by all his saints, as he is now, and will be more perfectly
hereafter,

\(e\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 33. 3.

[Revelation 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 2:8</span></span>

And unto the angel of the church in Smyrna write,.... Of the city of
Smyrna; see Gill on [Rev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011.md). That
there was a church of Christ here is not to be doubted, though by whom
it was founded is not certain; very likely by the Apostle Paul, who was
in those parts, and by whose means all Asia heard the Gospel of Christ,
[Act 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#010.md). Some think the present
angel or pastor of this church, was Polycarp, the disciple of John.
Irenaeus (f), who knew him, says he was appointed bishop of Smyrna by
the apostles. Here he suffered martyrdom, and was buried: the large
amphitheatre, in which he was put to death, is still to be seen, and his
sepulchre is yet preserved in this place (g): a very famous epistle,
sent by this church at Smyrna to the churches at Pontus, giving an
account of the martyrdom of Polycarp, and others, is extant in Eusebius
(h). According to the Apostolical Constitutions (i), the first bishops
of Smyrna were Aristo Strataeas and Aristo the second, and Apelles, of
whom mention is made in [Rom 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#010.md);
and who is reckoned among the seventy disciples; See Gill on [Luk
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk010.htm#001.md); and is said to be bishop of
Smyrna before Polycarp; who succeeded Polycarp, I do not find; but it is
said there was a church at Smyrna in the "third" century; and so there
was in the beginning of the "fourth", since there was a bishop from
hence in the council at Nice: and in the "fifth" century, mention is
made of several bishops of this place; as of Cyrus, a native of
Constantinople; and Protherius, who, it is thought, succeeded him, and
was present in the synod at Chalcedon; and Aethericus, who assisted at
three synods in this century, at Constantinople, Ephesus, and Chalcedon:
and in the "sixth" century, there was a bishop of Smyrna in the fifth
synod held at Rome and Constantinople: and even in the "eighth" century,
one Antony, a monk, supplied the place of the bishop of Smyrna in the
Nicene synod (k). The Turks have in this place now thirteen mosques, the
Jews two synagogues, and of the Christians there are two churches
belonging to the Greeks, and one to the Armenians (l). This church, and
its pastor, represent the state of the church under the persecutions of
the Roman emperors. Smyrna signifies "myrrh", which being bitter of
taste, is expressive of the bitter afflictions, and persecutions, and
deaths, the people of God in this interval endured; and yet, as myrrh is
of a sweet smell, so were those saints, in their sufferings for Christ,
exceeding grateful and well pleasing to him; wherefore nothing is said
by way of complaint to this church; not that she was without fault, but
it was proper to use her tenderly in her afflicted state: and, as Dr.
More observes, as myrrh was used in the embalming of dead bodies, it may
point to the many deaths and martyrdoms of the saints in this period,
whereby their names and memories are perpetuated and eternized,

These things saith the first and the last, which was dead, and is alive.
Of these characters of Christ; see Gill on [Rev
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008.md), [Rev
1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011.md), [Rev
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#017.md), [Rev
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#018.md); and they are very appropriately
mentioned, to encourage the saints under their sufferings of death;
since Christ, who is the eternal God, had in human nature tasted of the
bitterness of death for them, and was risen again; suggesting, that
though they were called to undergo the bitterest deaths for his sake,
they should be raised again as he was, and live with him for ever. The
Ethiopic version reads, "thus saith the holy Spirit"; but it cannot be
said of him that "he was dead",

\(f\) Adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 3. (g) Vid. Smith. Notitia septem Eccles.
Asiae, p. 164, 165. (h) Hist. Eccles. l. 4. c. 15. (i) L. 7. c. 46. (k)
Hist. Eccles. Magdeburg. cent. 3. c. p. 2. cent. 4. c. 2. p. 3. cent. 5.
c. 2. p. 3. c. 10. p. 595, 596. cent. 6. c. 2. p. 4. cent. 8. c. 2. p.
4. (l) Smith. Notitia, p. 167.

[Revelation 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 2:9</span></span>

I know thy works,.... Good works, as before in [Rev
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#002.md),

and tribulation; this is Christ's legacy to his people, and which lies
in their way to heaven; and never was the way of any to heaven more
strewed with it than was the way of the saints in this period. But
Christ took notice of it, and of them in it; he knew their souls in
adversity, and remarked their patience under it, and their constancy,
and close adherence to him:

and poverty; which was true in a literal sense, through the spoiling of
their goods, to which they were exposed for the profession of Christ:
nothing is more contemptible among men than poverty, yet Christ takes
notice of it, and owns his people in it; for this poverty came not by
sin, but by sufferings for his sake:

but thou art rich; they were rich, in faith, and heirs of a kingdom,
though poor in this world; they were rich with the riches of Christ,
with the blessings of the covenant, with the graces of the Spirit, and
in good works; they were kings and priests unto God, had a kingdom of
grace here, and a right to the kingdom of glory hereafter; and were
heirs of God, and joint heirs with Christ,

And I know the blasphemy of them which say they are Jews, and are not;
who asserted themselves to be the true Israel of God, Jews that were so
inwardly, regenerate persons, or truly Christians; for the Christians,
baptized persons (m), were by the Heathens called Jews; but these were
not, they professed Christianity in words, but in works denied it; they
were men of bad principles and practices, and both blasphemed the ways
and doctrines of Christ themselves, and caused them to be blasphemed by
others also; they were false Christians, nominal professors, and shunned
persecution for the Gospel; who were not what they would be thought to
be: these were the broachers of heresies in this period of time, in
which there was a multitude of them, and which chiefly respected the
doctrine of the Trinity, and the person of Christ; and they were
introducers of Pagan and Jewish rites into the church, and were men of
flagitious lives and conversations, and paved the way for the man of
sin:

but are the synagogue of Satan: were the children of the devil, imitated
him, and were influenced by him, and were the forerunners of antichrist,
whose coming was after the working of Satan,

\(m\) Vid. Arrian. Epictet. l. 2. c. 9.

[Revelation 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 2:10</span></span>

Fear none of those things which thou shalt suffer,.... God's people
undergo sufferings of various sorts, as the Christians of those times
did, scourgings, imprisonment, confiscation of goods, and death itself
in various shapes; and these are certain, they shall suffer them; they
are all known beforehand to Christ, and he sometimes gives his people
previous notice of them, nor should they indulge a slavish fear about
them. It is reported of Polycarp, bishop of this church at Smyrna, in a
letter written by the church itself (n) that three days before he
suffered, he dreamed his pillow, on which he laid his head, was on fire;
upon which, awaking, he said to those that were by him, that he should
be burnt for Christ; and when he came to suffer, as he was led along, a
voice was heard by the bystanders, Polycarp, be strong, and play the
man,

Behold, the devil shall cast some of you into prison; which has been the
lot of many of the saints, and was of some, even of the faithful
ministers of the word in this interval; in which Satan had an hand,
instigating their enemies to prevent and stop the progress of the
Gospel, and deter others both from preaching and professing it: the end
was in the permission of it,

that ye may be tried; that their graces might be tried, their faith,
love, zeal, courage, faithfulness, and constancy. Suffering times are
trying times, whether men are real Christians or not; whether they have
the true grace of God or not; and whether the principles they hold are
right and true, and are worth, and will bear suffering for:

and ye shall have tribulation ten days: meaning it may be the ten
persecutions under the Roman emperors; the "first" was under Nero, in
the year 64 or 66; the "second" was under Domitian, about the year 93;
the "third" was under Trojan, in the year 104; the "fourth" was under
Hadrian, in the year 125; the "fifth" was under Marcus Antoninus, in the
year 151; the "sixth" was under Septimius Severus, in the year 197; the
"seventh" was under Maximinus, in the years 235, 236, 237; the "eighth"
was under Decius, in the year 250; the "ninth" was under Valerianus, in
the year 257; and the "tenth" was under Dioclesian, in the year 303.
Austin (o) reckons the ten persecutions thus: the first by Nero, the
second by Domitian, the third by Trojan, the fourth by Antoninus, the
fifth by Severus, the sixth by Maximus, the seventh by Decius, the
eighth by Valerianus, the ninth by Aurelianus, the tenth by Dioclesian
and Maximianus. Others, inasmuch as Nero's persecution was before this
vision, reckon the ten persecutions thus: Domitian, Trojan, M.
Antoninus, Verus and Lucius, Severus, Maximinus, Decius, Valerianus,
Aurelianus, Dioclesianus, Licinius: the Dioclesian persecution lasted
ten years almost throughout: and some think that this last persecution,
which held ten years, is here particularly meant, and not without some
good reason; since it is usual in prophetic writings, and in this book
of the Revelation, to put days for years; so that these ten days may be
the ten years the last persecution held, and at which time the period of
this church state ended, and that of Pergamos took place,

Be thou faithful unto death: which is an address to the ministers in
this interval, to be faithful in preaching the pure and unmixed Gospel
of Christ; in a constant administration of the ordinances, as they were
delivered; in watching over the souls of men under their care,
reproving, exhorting, &c. with all longsuffering; continuing in the
discharge of duty, though in continual danger of death, and though it
issued in it. And also to the churches and the members of them, to
continue believing in Christ, professing his name, striving for his
Gospel, attending on his ordinances, and following him whithersoever he
went; though this should expose them to sufferings, even unto death,
which it became them cheerfully to undergo: and to which they are
encouraged by what follows,

and I will give thee a crown of life; which may refer not only to
eternal life, which is so called, [Jam
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#012.md); because of the glory of that
state, and its everlasting continuance, and is in the possession and
gift of Christ; but to the deliverance of the Christians from
persecution, by Constantine; who coming to the imperial crown, that
became not only a crown of glory to him, but of life to the church, and
was as life from the dead unto the saints: to dead men is promised a
crown of life, in allusion to the Gentiles, who crowned their dead (p),

\(n\) Apud Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. (o) De Civitate Dei, l. 18.
c. 52. (p) Vid. Minut. Felix, p. 42.

[Revelation 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 2:11</span></span>

He that hath an ear, let him hear,.... See Gill on [Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007.md),

he that overcometh; and is not intimidated by poverty, confiscation of
goods, tribulation, persecution, and death itself, but through Christ is
a conqueror, and more than a conqueror over all these things:

shall not be hurt of the second death; by which is meant eternal death,
in distinction from a corporeal and temporal one; and lies in a
destruction of both body and soul in hell, and in an everlasting
separation from God, and a continual sense of divine wrath; but of this
the saints shall never be hurt, they are ordained to eternal life; this
is secured for them in Christ, and he has it in his hands for them, and
will give it to them. The phrase is Jewish, and is opposed to the first
death, or the death of the body; which is the effect of sin, and is
appointed of God, and which the people of God die as well as others; but
the second death is peculiar to wicked men. So the Jerusalem Targum on
[Deu 33:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#006.md); paraphrases those words,
"let Reuben live, and not die", thus,

"let Reuben live in this world, and not die , "by the second death",
with which the wicked die in the world to come.

Of which sense of the text and phrase Epiphanius makes mention (q). See
the same phrase in the Targum of Jonathan ben Uzziel, in [Isa
22:14](../../../bib/kjv/isa022.htm#014.md); and in [Jer
51:39](../../../bib/kjv/jer051.htm#039); and in Philo the Jew (r.md),

\(q\) Contr. Haeres. Haeres. 9. (r) De Praemiis & Poenis, p. 921.

[Revelation 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 2:12</span></span>

And to the angel of the church in Pergamos write,.... Of the city of
Pergamos; see Gill on [Rev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011.md). In it
was a church of Christ, but when it begun, and how long it lasted, is
not certain. Antipas, who is mentioned, [Rev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013.md); is thought, by some, to have
been the pastor of it. Though, according to the Apostolical
Constitutions (s), Caius was the first bishop of it; and it appears,
that in the "second" century there were several in this place that
suffered martyrdom for Christ, as Carpus, Papulus, and a woman whose
name was Agathonice (t). Attalus, the martyr, who suffered in the same
century, was also a native of this place (u). In the "fifth" century
there was a bishop of Pergamos in the council at Ephesus; and in the
"sixth" century, there was one in the "fifth" synod at Constantinople;
and in the "seventh" century, Theodorus, bishop of the church here, was
in the sixth synod held at the same place; and in the "eighth" century
one Pastilas was bishop of Pergamos; and in the same age, Basil, bishop
of this place, was in the Nicene synod (w); and the Christian name now
is not wholly, though almost extinct; for when our countryman, Dr. Smith
(x), was there, there was a little church called St. Theodore's, whither
a priest was frequently sent from Smyrna, to perform divine service,
there being but a very few Christian families in it. This church
represents the church from the time of Constantine, and onward, rising
up to, and enjoying great power, riches, and honour Pergamos signifies
high and lofty; things that were sublime and lofty, were, by the Greeks,
called , and also all high and lofty towers (y). It was built under a
very high and steep mountain, upon the top of which a tower was erected,
by the lords of the lesser Asia, which still continues (z). The church
it represents had its principal seat at Rome, where Satan dwelt, [Rev
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013.md); which signifies exalted
likewise; and it introduces the man of sin, antichrist, the popes of
Rome, who exalted themselves above all that is called God, princes,
kings, and emperors; whom they excommunicated, dethroned, trod upon
their necks, kicked off their crowns, and obliged them to hold their
stirrups while they mounted their horses, with other haughty action, too
many to name,

These things, saith he, which hath the sharp sword with two edges: of
which See Gill on [Rev 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016.md); This
title is used partly to show, that the only weapon this church, and the
true ministers and members of it had, to defend themselves against the
growing corruptions of antichrist, who in this interval rose up by
degrees, and was revealed, and came to the height of his power, was the
word of God, the Scriptures of truth; and partly to show, that in
process of time, though not in this period, the man of sin should be
destroyed, with the breath of Christ's mouth, and the brightness of his
coming; of which his fighting against the Nicolaitans, with the sword of
his mouth, [Rev 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016.md); is an emblem,

\(s\) L. 7. c. 46. (t) Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 4. c. 15. (u) Ib. l. 5. c.
1. (w) Hist. Eccl. Magdeburgh. cent. 5. c. 2. p. 3. cent. 6. c. 2. p. 4.
cent. 7. c. 2. p. 3. c. 10. p. 254. cent. 8. c. 2. p. 4. (x) Notitia, p.
120. (y) Servius in Virgil. Aeneid. l. 1. p. 403, & l. 2. p. 633. Ed
Basil. 1586. (z) Smith. Notitia, p. 112.

[Revelation 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 2:13</span></span>

I know thy works,.... Both good and bad, and which in that pure part of
this church, which opposed the growing corruptions of antichrist, were
for the most part good,

And where thou dwellest, even where Satan's seat is. Pergamos was a city
very much given to idolatry, here Satan reigned while it was Pagan, and
so was a fit emblem of the idolatrous church of Rome. Pausanias says
(a), the country the Pergamenes inhabited was sacred to the Cabiri, the
chief gods of the Heathens. And the same writer (b) observes, that
Aesculapius particularly was worshipped at Pergamos; and hence he is
called by Martial (c) the Pergamean god; to his temple here, men used to
go from different parts of the world for cure of diseases; hither
Antoninus the emperor went for such a purpose, as Herodian (d) relates;
and this being a common thing, hence Lucian (e) scoffingly says, that
Aesculapius had an apothecary's shop at Pergamos. As Rome, and its
dominions, were the principal seat of the church in this period of time,
it may well be called Satan's seat or throne; not only because it had
been the seat of the Roman emperors, the ten horned and seven headed
beast, [Rev 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#002.md); but because it was
the seat of antichrist, which the great dragon Satan gave him, whose
coming was after the working of Satan, and he was influenced by him; and
who, like Satan, exalted himself above all that is called God; yea,
placed himself in the temple of God, the church, as God, showing himself
to be God, assuming that power to himself which only belonged to God.
Moreover, he may be called so for his enmity and malice against the
saints, and for his art and subtlety, and insidious methods to ensnare
and destroy them. Now to dwell where such an one has his seat, his
throne, has a kingdom, power, and authority, must be very uncomfortable,
as well as dangerous; and required great care, circumspection, and
prudence how to behave: and yet to the commendation of this church it is
said,

and thou holdest fast my name, and hast not denied my faith: the pure
members of this church are the two witnesses, which rose up at the
beginning of the apostasy of Rome, and bore their testimony against it,
and for the truth; and continued to do so amidst all the corruptions and
persecutions of that state: these are the two olive trees, that, through
the golden pipes of the word and ordinances, emptied the golden oil of
Gospel truths out, of themselves, pure and incorrupt, and the two
candlesticks that held forth the light of the Gospel in the darkest
times of Popery; these held fast the name of Christ, or the Gospel, and
denied not, but confessed the doctrine of faith in the worst of times.
They had the truths of the Gospel in their possession, which were dear
and valuable to them; and whereas there was danger of losing them, they
held them fast, with great courage, magnanimity, and strength, though
the greater number was against them, and they were attended with
reproach and persecution:

even in those days wherein Antipas was my faithful martyr, who was slain
among you, where Satan dwelleth. Antipas is the proper name of a man; so
a son of Herod was called (f), even he that beheaded John, and mocked
Christ: and there might be a man of this name at Pergamos, that might
suffer martyrdom for the Gospel of Christ; and who was an emblem of the
confessors, witnesses, and martyrs, that suffered for Christ, in this
period of time, through their opposition to the popes of Rome; for
Antipas is the contraction of Antipater, and is the same with Antipapas,
or Antipappas, which signifies one that is against the pope, an opposer
of that holy father; and so intends all those that made head against
him, upon his rising and revelation, and when he assumed the power he
did to himself; such as the Waldenses and Albigenses particularly, who
set themselves against him, openly declared that the pope was
antichrist, and that his government was tyrannical, and his doctrines
the doctrines of devils, abominable and fabulous. They bore a faithful
testimony against all his corruptions and innovations, and became
martyrs in the cause of Christ, many thousands of them being slain for
his sake within the dominions of this firstborn of Satan. The
Alexandrian copy reads "Anteipas"; and his name is left out in the
Syriac and Arabic versions,

\(a\) L. 1. sive Attica, p. 8. (b) L. 3. sive Laconica, p. 215. (c) L.
9. Epig. 14. (d) Hist. l. 4. c. 14. (e) In Icaro Menippo. (f) Joseph.
Antiqu. l. 17. c. 1. sect. 3. De Bello Jud. l. 1. c. 28. sect. 4.

[Revelation 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 2:14</span></span>

But I have a few things against thee,.... The members of this church
before their open separation from the apostasy; who still continued in
the communion of the corrupt church of Rome, though they remonstrated
against the errors and evil practices that crept in; and so were a
stumbling block, and a snare to others to join in their idolatry and
superstition:

because thou hast there them that hold the doctrine of Balaam, who
taught Balak to cast a stumbling block before the children of Israel,

to eat things sacrificed unto idols, and to commit fornication: which
latter was in order to the former: the instruction Balaam gave to Balak,
which is here called his doctrine, was, that Balak should get some of
the most beautiful women in his kingdom to ply the men of Israel, and
draw them into uncleanness, and so to idolatry; by which means, God
being angry with them, he might get an advantage over them: that the
Israelites did commit whoredom with the daughters of Moab, and eat
things sacrificed to idols, and bowed down to Baal Peor, is certain,
[Num 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#001.md); but that this was brought
about through the counsel of Balaam is not so plainly expressed, though
it is hinted at in [Num 31:15](../../../bib/kjv/num031.htm#015.md); but the
Jewish writers are very express about this matter. Jonathan ben Uzziel,
one of their Targumists on [Num 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#014.md),
has these words of Balaam,

"Come, and I will counsel thee, (speaking to Balak,) go and set up inns,
and place in them whorish women, to sell food and drink at a low price:
and this people will come and eat and drink, and be drunken, and will
lie with them, and deny their God; and they will be quickly delivered
into thine hands, and many of them shall fall.

This now was the stumbling block he taught Balak to lay before them. And
elsewhere (g) it is said,

"that Balaam, the wicked, gave counsel to Balak, the son of Zippor, to
cause the Israelites to fall by the sword; he said to him, the God of
this people hates whoredom, cause thy daughters to commit whoredom with
them, and ye shall rule over them.

And then they go on to relate how they built shops, and placed an old
woman without, and a young woman within; and when the Israelites came to
buy, how well they used them, and what familiarity they admitted them
to; how they made them drink of Ammonitish wine, which inclined to lust
and when the signified their desire, oblige them to worship Baal Peor,
and renounce the law of Moses. Both Philo (h) and Josephus (i) speak of
this counsel of Balaam, much to the same purpose. The Samaritan
Chronicle says (k) that this counsel pleased the king, and he sent into
the camp of Israel, on a sabbath day, twenty four thousand young women,
by whom the Israelites were so seduced, that they did everything they
desired them, which was just the number of those that were slain, [Num
25:9](../../../bib/kjv/num025.htm#009.md). By Balaam may be meant the pope
of Rome, for that name signifies, "the lord of the people"; and is very
appropriate to him, who in this interval took upon him to be universal
bishop, and lorded it over both church and state, in a most haughty and
tyrannical manner; and the Balaamites were those who submitted to his
power and authority, and received his doctrines; and by Balak, king of
Moab, may be intended the secular powers, the emperors, kings, and
princes of the earth, who were instructed by the popes of Rome, to draw
their subjects into idolatry, which is spiritual fornication, to eat the
breaden God, to worship the host, images, and saints departed; and which
proved a snare, and a stumbling to some of this church, as to the
Israelites of old, to do the same things,

\(g\) T. Hieros. Sanhedrin, fol. 28. 4. & Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 106. 1.
Bemidbar Rabba, sect. 20. fol. 229. 1. Yalkut, par. 1. fol. 244. 3, 4. &
par. 2. fol. 76. 4. (h) De Vita Mosis, l. 7. p. 647, 648. (i) Antiqu. l.
4. c. 6. sect. 6, 7, 8, 9. (k) Apud Hottinger. Exercit. Antimorin. p.
109.

[Revelation 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 2:15</span></span>

So hast thou also them that hold the doctrine of the Nicolaitans,....
These impure heretics sprung up in the time of the apostolic church, but
their doctrines were not received, and their deeds were hated, see [Rev
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#006.md). This seems to design the
doctrines of the church of Rome, which in this period took place; which
forbid marriage to the priests, and recommended celibacy and virginity
to others also; which were the source of all uncleanness and abominable
lusts; for which pardons and indulgences were given, and, in process of
time, brothel houses were set up, and licensed and encouraged by
authority,

Which thing I hate; the doctrine of these men, as well as their deeds.

[Revelation 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 2:16</span></span>

Repent,.... This is said to those who were truly godly in those times,
but still retained their communion with these corrupt men, and had not,
as yet, separated from then; nor had they protested against these evil
doctrines and practices, at least but very coldly, and had too much
connived at them; and therefore are called upon to repent of their
lukewarmness, negligence, and sinful compliances:

or else I will come unto thee quickly: in a providential way, to rebuke
and chastise for such remissness, indifference, and evil communication:

and will fight against them with the sword of my mouth; of this sword;
see Gill on [Rev 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#016.md). And it is
observable, that Christ does not say, "I will fight against thee"; the
true members of his mystical body, though lax and supine, for Christ
does not fight against his people, but for them; but he says, "and will
fight against them"; the Balaamites and Nicolaitans, for their idolatry
and uncleanness.

[Revelation 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 2:17</span></span>

He that hath an ear, let him hear,.... See Gill on [Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007.md).

To him that overcometh; the Balaamites and Nicolaitans, and do not give
in to the doctrines and practices of the one, or of the other, whatever
persecution and trouble he meets with, and endures on that account:

will I give to eat of the hidden manna; in opposition to eating things
sacrificed to idols, refused by him. The allusion is to the manna which
the Israelites ate of in the wilderness, which may be called "hidden":
either because they knew not what it was, when they first saw it; or
because it was laid up in a golden pot, and put in the most holy place,
where it was secret, and none but the high priest could see it, and who
entered there but once a year: or rather, because it was at first,
hidden under the dew; for according to the account the Jews give of it,
a dew first fell upon the ground, then the manna upon that, and then
another dew upon the manna; so that there was a dew under it, and a dew
over it; insomuch that it was as if it was laid up, they say, in a box
or chests (l); and they supposed the manna had respect to things future
(m) and do expect it in the times of the Messiah. They say (n), as the
first, so the last Redeemer will cause manna to descend from heaven; and
the clouds are by them reckoned the mills which will grind manna for the
righteous in the world to come (o): yea, they speak (p) of , "hidden
manna", as the food of the righteous, the very phrase here used. Now
this being the food of the children of Israel in the wilderness, is very
fitly mentioned here; since the church, in this period of time, in which
antichrist arose, was obliged to flee into the wilderness, and there
abide during his reign, and where she is nourished with this hidden
manna; by which may be meant the Gospel, which is soul quickening,
comforting, strengthening, and satisfying food, by which the saints are
nourished up unto everlasting life, and which is hid to the world, which
the men of it know nothing of; and especially Jesus Christ, the sum and
substance of it, may be meant, and that secret spiritual consolation
enjoyed in communion with him, and by eating him, or feeding by faith
upon him; in what respects Christ may be compared to manna; see Gill on
[Joh 6:32](../../../bib/kjv/joh006.htm#032.md). And he may be said to be
"hidden", because he is unknown to men, until revealed; and is wholly
hidden from carnal and unregenerate men, and is enjoyed only by
believers; and it may denote the private way, in which the true church
of Christ had communion with him in his word and ordinances in the
wilderness, and during the dark times of Popery. Philo the Jew (q) often
interprets the manna by the "Logos", the Word of God, the most ancient
Word of God,

And will give him a white stone. The phrase, "to add a white stone",
with the Latins, is used to give one's approbation of anything; and
could it be applied here, might signify the approbation Christ gives of
his church and people here, amidst the testimonies they bear, and the
persecutions they endure for his name's sake, and that which he will
give of them before his Father, angels, and men, at the last day: white
stones were used on various accounts. The Grecians used them to mark
good or lucky days with them, as they called them; and could the
allusion be thought to be to this custom, the sense would be, that
Christ promises, to his people that overcome, happy days, after the
times of Popish darkness and persecution were over: white stones were
also given to the conquerors in the Olympic games, with their names upon
them, and the value of the prize they won; and, here applied, may
respect the crown of life and glory given to them who are more than
conquerors through Christ, with their right and title to it, and the
excellency of it. The Romans in judgment used to give their suffrages
for condemnation by casting black stones into the urn, and for
absolution white stones; to which Ovid has respect, when he says (r),

"Mos erat antiquis, niveis atrisque lapillis, His damnare reos, illis
absolvere culpa.

And this is thought by many to be referred to here, and may denote, that
though the pure members of Christ, and who abhorred and protested
against the abominations of the church of Rome, were charged with heresy
and schism, and what not, yet Christ would absolve them, and justify
them from all those charges. But rather the allusion is to a custom
among the Jews, who used to examine the priests and Levites before they
went to their service, or to the sanhedrim, to judge and pass sentence,
whether their ways and works were right; and if they were as they should
be, they gave them , "the stone of the sanctuary": if not, they might
not enter on business, as it is said; "and of Levi he said, thy Urim and
thy Thummim be with thy Holy One", [Deu
33:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#008) (s.md). Now on the Urim and Thummim,
the stones in the high priest's breastplate, were engraven the names of
the children of Israel; and, as the Jews say, the name Jehovah, to which
reference may be had in the following clause; and may denote that the
church, though in the wilderness, is regarded by Christ, is bore upon
his heart and cared for by him; and also its spotless purity in him, and
justification by him,

And in the stone a new name written, which no man knoweth, saving he
that receiveth it; by this name may be meant, either the name of
"Jehovah" our righteousness, which is the name both of Christ, and of
his church, [Jer 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#006.md), or the name of
a child of God, sometimes called a new name; see [Isa
56:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa056.htm#005.md); and so designs the blessing of
adoption; this may be said to be a new name, because renewed, manifested
to, and put upon the people of God, when they are made new creatures,
though provided in predestination, and in the covenant of grace from
eternity; and because a renowned and excellent one, better than that of
the sons and daughters of the greatest prince on earth; and because a
wonderful one, being an instance of amazing love and grace; and is what
"no man knoweth", but the receiver of it; the Father of these adopted
ones is unknown to natural men; and so is Christ, through whom this
blessing is bestowed; and the Spirit of God also, who witnesses to it;
and the persons that enjoy it, and the blessing itself, and the
inheritance to which they are adopted: and this new name being on the
white stone, may show that the blessings of justification and adoption,
though they are two distinct ones, yet they are inseparable: they go
together, and both give a right to the heavenly inheritance; and they
are also, as well as the hidden manna, gifts of free grace, and not
owing to the works and merit of men, and are given by Christ, and in and
through him. At Rome, some white stones have been dug up, some lesser,
some greater, with names and letters, and other engravings upon them,
which Pignorius (t) has given the figures of; and to such some have
thought the allusion here is, and may serve to illustrate this passage.
The Ethiopic version, instead of a "white stone", reads, a "famous
book",

\(l\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 75. 2. Jarchi in Exod. xvi. 13, 14. Mitzvot
Tora, pr. affirm. 30. (m) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 38. 4. (n) Midrash
Shirhashirim, fol. 11. 2. Midrash Ruth, fol. 33. 2. & Midrash Kohelet,
fol. 63. 2. Pesikta in Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 75. 4. (o) Raya
Mehimna in Zohar in Numb. fol. 96. 2. Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 68.
4. (p) Zohar in Numb. fol. 88. 1. (q) Alleg. l. 2. p. 93. Quod det.
potior. p. 176. Quis rer. divin. Haeres. p. 491, 492. & Leg. Alleg. l.
3. p. 1103. (r) Metamorphos. l. 15. fol. 1. (s) Zohar in Lev. fol. 8. 1.
(t) De Servis, p. 342.

[Revelation 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 2:18</span></span>

And unto the angel of the church in Thyatira write,.... Of the city of
Thyatira; see Gill on [Rev 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#011.md); a
church was formed here very likely by the Apostle Paul; Lydia was a
native of this place, who, and her household were converted and baptized
by him at Philippi, [Act 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#014.md); though
Epiphanius (u) seems to grant, what some heretics objected to the
authority of this book, that there was no church at Thyatira when this
letter was written; however, it is certain, there was one in the
"second" century, as the same writer observes, since, as he relates, it
was overrun with the Cataphrygian heresy; and in the "fourth" century
there was a bishop from Thyatira in the council of Nice; and even in the
"eighth" century there was one Esaias a presbyter, who supplied the
place of the bishop of Thyatira in another council at Nice (w): the
Turks have now eight mosques in it, but there is not one Christian
church or place of worship to be found in it (x). Who was the angel, or
pastor of this church at the writing of this epistle, is not certain;
however, it is designed for all the ministers and churches in the
interval this church represents; and this period takes in the darkest
and most superstitious times of Popery, until the Reformation. Thyatira
is the same as Thygatira, which signifies a "daughter"; and it had its
name, as Stephanus Byzantius says (y), from hence: Seleucus, the son of
Nicanor, being at war with Lysimachus, and hearing that he had a
daughter born, called this city Thygatira, which was before called
Pelopia, and Semiramis; which is a very fit name for this church, and
expresses the effeminacy of it, when the virgin Mary, whom the Romanists
call the daughter of God, was more worshipped than her son; and was not
only made a partner with him in the business of salvation, but even set
above him; when there were such swarms of monks and friars, and
religious orders of several sorts, as Franciscans and Dominicans, who
claimed her as their patroness; when such numbers of them clad
themselves in cowls and long garments, that they looked more like women
in hoods and petticoats, than really men; hence also the corrupt part of
this church is signified by the woman Jezebel, the daughter of Ethbaal
the Zidonian; and it should not be forgot that there was once a she
pope, a woman that sat in the papal chair, a whore in a literal sense;
wherefore antichrist, or the popes of Rome, are filly called the great
whore, the mother of harlots. Mr. Daubuz observes, that the first
Christian of Thyatira was a woman, and that the false prophets which
first enticed the Christians to apostasy in this church were women, as
Maximilia, Quintilia, and Priscilla; to which I would add, that
according to Epiphanius, that among those heretics, and which swallowed
up this church, their bishops were women, and so were their presbyters,
or elders; and Dr. Smith (z) is of opinion, that the inhabitants of this
place, when Heathen, were worshippers of the goddess Diana; so that,
upon all accounts, the church here was a fit symbol of the effeminate
Church of Rome,

These things saith the Son of God; he who is truly, properly, naturally,
and essentially the Son of God: this character Christ makes use of to
assert his proper deity, as being of the same nature, and having the
same perfections with his Father, as well as to command the greater
regard to what he ordered to be written to the churches; and chiefly in
opposition to the effeminate state of this church; it was time for him
to take to him his highest name, as expressive of his highest nature,
and to assert himself the Son of God, when Mary, his mother according to
the flesh, and who was but a mere creature, was called the daughter of
God, and set upon a level with him, and even preferred unto him:

who hath his eyes like unto a flame of fire; quick and sharp, and
penetrating through the darkness of this state; seeing into,
discovering, and exposing the horrid actions and wickednesses of men
done in the dark; expressing fury, wrath, and vengeance against the
Romish antichrist and his followers; and may also design the light of
Gospel doctrine, which broke out in those times at certain seasons, to
the dispelling of Popish darkness in some measure; see Gill on [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014.md),

and his feet are like fine brass; in the description of Christ in [Rev
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014.md); it is added, as if they burned
in a furnace; see Gill on [Rev 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#014.md);
and may denote the strength, stability, and support Christ gave his
people while suffering for his sake, when in the furnace and burning for
him, which kind of death was much used in those times: hence Dr. More,
to whom I am much obliged for many hints in this exposition of the
epistles to the churches, thinks that Thyatira is an allusion to which
signify "altars" for the burning of sweet odours; and so may be
expressive of the burning of the saints, those sweet odours, as they are
to God and Christ, with fire and faggot; which was now practised, as in
the other period killing with the sword was chiefly used; in the midst
of which Christ was present, supporting his people,

\(u\) Contra Haeres. l. 2. Haeres. 51. (w) Eccl. Hist. Magdeburgh. cent.
4. c. 2. p. 3. cent. 8. c. 2. p. 4. (x) Smith. Notitia, p. 130. (y) De
Urbibus. (z) Notitia, p. 126.

[Revelation 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 2:19</span></span>

I know thy works,.... Good works, as appears from the particular
enumeration of them afterwards, and the commendation of proficiency in
them, the last being more than the first, and the distinction from the
evil ones in [Rev 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020.md); this is said
to the faithful followers and professors of Christ in this interval:

and charity; by which is meant not a relieving the wants of the poor;
much less such a charity as connives at the errors and heresies of men;
but the divine grace of love to God nod Christ, and the saints, without
which a profession of religion is a vain thing; and, generally speaking,
this grace is most in exercise in a time of trouble and persecution:

and service; or "ministry", meaning either the ministry of the word,
which was exercised by many with great zeal, diligence, and
faithfulness, as by Wickliff, John Huss, Jerom of Prague, and others; or
the ministering to the necessities of the poor saints, as an evidence of
their charity or love; or else the service of God is here intended,
which is but reasonable, and is his due, and ought to be performed to
him only, and that with fear and fervency, in faith, and with a pure
conscience, with humility, and without mercenary views, and in
righteousness and true holiness; or the service of love which the saints
perform to one another, as praying for one another, bearing one
another's burdens, admonishing and reproving for sin, restoring such as
are gone astray, comforting the distressed, building up one another in
their most holy faith, and exhorting and stirring up each other to the
duties of religion:

and faith; not the doctrine of faith, as preached by the ministers of
the word, and held and maintained by the true professors of it; but
either the grace of faith, or the profession of both; or rather the
faithfulness, both of the ministers and private believers of those
times, as the Waldenses and Albigenses, the Lollards and Wickliffites,
who abode by, and were faithful to the light which they had received:

and thy patience; in suffering for the sake of Christ and the Gospel:
and very much it was they did endure, and yet held out to the end:

and thy works, and the last to be more than the first; that is, that
their works or acts of love to God and Christ and one another, and of
service to God and to the saints, and of faith and faithfulness in the
cause of God, and of patience in suffering for the Gospel of Christ,
were more in quantity, and greater in quality, toward the close of this
period, which brought on the Reformation, than at the beginning of it;
and which were done by the persons before mentioned, and by others.

[Revelation 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rev 2:20</span></span>

Notwithstanding, I have a few things against thee,.... By way of
complaint; so the Arabic version renders it, "I have a certain complaint
against thee". The impartiality of Christ may be observed in taking
notice of the bad deeds, as well as of the good ones of his people, and
his tenderness in representing them as few; and these things he had
against them not in a judicial way to their condemnation, but in a
providential way, in order to chastise them for them, for their good;
and they are as follow:

because thou sufferest that woman Jezebel; or "thy wife Jezebel", as the
Complutensian edition and Syriac version read; the name of King Ahab's
wife, who seduced him, in the Hebrew language is "Izebel", but is read
by the Septuagint in [Kg1 16:31](../../../bib/kjv/kg1016.htm#031.md),
Jezebel, as here; and by Josephus (a) Jezabela; she had her name from
"Zebel", "dung", to which Elijah has reference in [Kg2
9:37](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#037.md); the Ethiopic version calls her
"Elzabel". By her is meant the apostate church of Rome, comparable to
Jezebel, the wife of Ahab; as she was the daughter of an Heathen, so is
Rome Papal the daughter of Rome Pagan; and as she was the wife of Ahab,
and therefore a queen, so the whore of Babylon calls herself; and as
Jezebel was famous for her paintings, so the church of Rome for her
pretensions to religion and holiness, and for the gaudiness of her
worship; and as she was remarkable for her idolatry, whoredoms,
witchcrafts, and cruel persecution of the prophets of the Lord, and for
murder, and innocent blood she shed; so the church of Rome, for her
idolatrous worship of images, for her whoredoms, both in a literal and
spiritual sense, and for the witchcrafts, magic, and devilish arts many
of her popes have been addicted to, and especially for her barbarities
and cruelties exercised upon the true professors of Christ, and for the
blood of the martyrs, with which she has been drunk; and as Jezebel
stirred up Ahab against good and faithful men, is has this church
stirred up the secular powers, emperors, kings, and princes, against the
true followers of Christ: and the end of both of them is much alike; as
scarce anything was left of Jezebel, so Babylon the great, the mother of
harlots, shall be cast into the sea, and be found no more at all:
compare [Kg2 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#007.md) with [Rev
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001.md),

which calleth herself a prophetess; as perhaps Jezebel might do, since
she was such a favourer of the prophets of Baal, and so familiarly
conversed with them, and kept them, even a hundred of them, at her
table: and certain it is, that the antitype of her pretends to an
infallible interpretation of the Scriptures, and to have a bulk of
unwritten traditions; and which interpretations and traditions are to be
regarded as an infallible rule of faith and practice. Now what is
complained of in the true members and followers of Christ is, that they
suffered this woman

to teach; when it was insufferable for a woman to teach, and especially
such a strumpet:

and to seduce my servants to commit fornication; to deceive such who
called themselves the servants of Christ, and draw them into the
commission of spiritual fornication, which is idolatry; as the
idolatrous worship of the Mass, and of images and saints departed:

and to eat things sacrificed unto idols; as Balaam, or the pope, before
had done, [Rev 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#014.md). This may have
respect to the latter part of this period, when the eyes of many began
to be opened to see these false doctrines and idolatrous practices, and
yet had not courage enough to oppose them as they should,

\(a\) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 13. sect. 1. 4, 7.

[Revelation 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rev 2:21</span></span>

And I gave her space to repent of her fornication,.... Of idolatry. This
may have respect to the time of the witnesses, the Waldenses, and
others, who bore a testimony against the Romish idolatry, and reproved
for it, and denounced the judgment of God in case of impenitence; and as
these things were repeated time after time, this may be called a space
given to repent in; just as Jezebel had a space given her to repent in,
from the time that Elijah declared the word of the Lord, that the dogs
should eat her: so the Jews (b) say of the old world, that God gave them
, "space to repent", but they repented not, as here:

and she repented not; see [Rev 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev009.htm#020.md);
for the time for, and means leading to repentance may be given, yet if
the grace of repentance itself is not given, men, either particular
persons, or whole bodies of men, will never repent of their sins. The
Alexandrian copy, Complutensian, Vulgate Latin, and all the Oriental
versions, read, "and she would not repent",

\(b\) Juchasin, fol. 7. 1.

[Revelation 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rev 2:22</span></span>

Behold, I will cast her into a bed,.... Of sickness and languishing; and
which denotes the sickly, pining, and languishing state of the church of
Rome, as a just retaliation for her bed of luxury and deliciousness,
adultery and idolatry, she had indulged herself in; this was threatened,
and was yet to come, and began at the time of the Reformation, signified
by the next church state; and, ever since, the whore of Rome has been
visibly sickening and decaying. The Alexandrian copy reads, "into a
prison":

and them that commit adultery with her into great tribulation: the kings
of the earth, and their subjects, who have joined in the idolatries and
corruptions of the Romish church, [Rev
17:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#002.md), which may be understood either
of that distress and uneasiness the Reformation in some countries gave
them; or those outward troubles, wars, and desolations they have been
since attended with, particularly the empire of Germany; which has been
in great tribulation, formerly by the Turks, and of late by internal
broils among themselves, and by the armies of other princes entering
into it; or it may regard that eternal vengeance that will be
recompensed to all such persons:

except they repent of their deeds; their spiritual fornication or
idolatry, and all the abominations the members of that apostate church
are guilty of. There seems to be an allusion in this verse to Ahaziah
and Joram, sons of Ahab and Jezebel, who followed their mother's
idolatrous practices, and were cast upon a bed of sickness, [Kg2
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg2001.htm#002.md).

[Revelation 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rev 2:23</span></span>

And I will kill her children with death,.... Her popes, cardinals,
priests, Jesuits, monks, friars, and all that join in the Romish
apostasy, they shall be killed with death; there shall be an utter
extirpation of them in God's own time; or they shall be killed with the
second death: when used alone, or as distinct from any other kind of
death, signifies the plague; compare with this [Kg2
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#024.md),

and all the churches: that shall be in being at the time of Rome's
destruction:

shall know that I am he that searcheth the reins and heart; or am the
omniscient God; which will be known by inflicting punishment on the
followers of antichrist; when their hidden things of darkness will be
brought to light, and exposed by him; and they shall receive the
righteous reward of their evil practices, which they have coloured over,
and glossed with specious pretences of religion and holiness, and a zeal
for God and his glory, when they only meant themselves, the gratifying
their carnal lusts, and securing their worldly interests, and amassing
riches and honours to themselves:

and I will give unto everyone of you according to your works; who have
connived at, and joined with them in their evil deeds; as many as were
seduced by the false prophetess to commit spiritual fornication with
her: as Christ is omniscient, and does not judge according to the
outward appearance of things, but knows the principles and ends of all
actions, however covert they may be; so he is righteous in judging and
in punishing, which will be according as men's works are; and not one
shall escape his righteous judgment, nor the due desert of their sins,
though the punishment of some may be greater than that of others.

[Revelation 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rev 2:24</span></span>

But unto you I say, and unto the rest in Thyatira,.... The copulative
and is left out in the Alexandrian copy and Complutensian edition, and
if retained, it may be rendered thus, "even unto the rest"; the persons
spoken to are the same, the pastor of this church, with his colleagues,
and all the rest of the faithful in it; which shows that this epistle,
and so the rest, were not written to the pastors only, but to the
churches; and that the pastor and his colleagues, with others, were free
from the abominable errors and corruptions before spoken of; and that,
in the worst of times, God does, and will reserve a people for himself,
who are described as follows:

as many as have not this doctrine; who had not given into, and embraced
this doctrine of the antichristian church of Rome, concerning
infallibility, the worshipping of images, transubstantiation, &c. the
Arabic version reads, "this new doctrine"; for notwithstanding the large
pretensions of the Romish church to antiquity, her doctrine is but a
novel doctrine:

and which have not known the depths of Satan, as they speak; that is,
had not approved of the doctrines of antichrist, which though his
followers called deep things and mysteries of their holy religion, such
as transubstantiation, &c. yet, to speak in the language of the pure and
faithful professors of the Gospel, they are no other than the depths of
Satan, or doctrines of devils; or else the sense is, as Jezebel and her
followers say, to the contempt of the faithful, arrogating knowledge to
themselves, and upbraiding them with simplicity and ignorance, as not
knowing Satan's devices, nor how to rescue souls out of them, as they
did; but the former sense seems best:

I will put upon you none other burden; meaning not any affliction or
tribulation than the present one; nor any other errors and heresies than
what were broached; but no other precept or command than what follows;
see [Kg2 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/kg2009.htm#025.md).

[Revelation 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rev 2:25</span></span>

But that which ye have already,.... Which was something good, even the
faithful word, the form of sound words, the mystery and doctrine of
faith; this they had received from Christ and his apostles; they had it
in their hearts, and a comfortable experience of the truth and power of
it, and had made a profession of it, which they now held, and are here
exhorted to hold fast:

hold fast till I come; meaning the coming of Christ, either at the
Reformation by Luther, Calvin, and others, which began at the close of
this church state, when the hands and hearts of those professors would
be more strengthened, which seems to be the first sense of the words; or
to judge Jezebel, destroy antichrist, which will be by the brightness of
his coming; till which time the doctrine of the Gospel is to be held
fast: and such an exhortation will be always necessary, since, till
then, there will be always more or less an opposition to it, and
attempts made to wrest it out of the hands of its professors, to cause
them to hesitate about it, and to intimidate them in the profession of
it, by loading them with reproaches, calumnies, and persecution.

[Revelation 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rev 2:26</span></span>

And he that overcometh,.... Jezebel and her idolatries, her children,
and all that commit adultery with her; such as are not drawn into the
same evil practices with them, but bravely stand their ground against
the Romish antichrist and his followers, and bear their testimony
against his impious doctrines and idolatrous practices:

and keepeth my works unto the end; either of life, or of this church
state, or of time, when Christ will personally appear, even at the end
of the world; and by his works are meant, not the works which were done
by him, as his miracles and works of mercy to the souls and bodies of
men, and works of righteousness in obedience to the law, and the work of
redemption and salvation; though these are works to be observed, and
kept in view, and to be preserved in memory, and for the encouragement
of faith and hope; but the works which are commanded, and required by
Christ to be done by his people; as the public work of the ministry, by
the preachers of the Gospel; and every private work, both internal and
external, as the work of faith, the labour of love, and every act of
obedience, which is constantly to be discharged. The Arabic version
reads, "and keepeth my words and my works"; things both relating to
doctrine and practice:

to him will I give power over the nations; or Gentiles, the Papists; so
called because of the Pagan notions and worship introduced by them; and
because they consist of many nations, tongues, and people, who are
deceived, and drawn into idolatry by them: and this power over them may
be understood in a spiritual sense, through the preaching of the Gospel,
which being attended with the power of God, is the means of converting
sinners, and so of weakening the kingdom of Satan, and of antichrist;
and which had its fulfilment, at least in part, at the time of the
Reformation, and onward, and will have still a greater accomplishment in
the spiritual reign of Christ and his people, under the Philadelphian
church state; and it may also design the temporal power which the saints
shall have over antichrist, when they shall take away his dominion, and
consume and destroy it, and the kingdom and the dominion under the whole
heaven shall be given to the saints of the most High; [Dan
7:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#025.md).

[Revelation 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rev 2:27</span></span>

And he shall rule them with a rod of iron,.... Either with the Gospel,
which is the rod of Christ's strength, and is the power of God unto
salvation, and by which the kingdom of Christ is enlarged, and the power
of the church of Christ over the antichristian party is increased; or it
may design great strictness and severity, with which the man of sin will
be used by the saints of the most High, when they shall take away his
dominion from him:

as the vessels of a potter shall they be broken to shivers; which may be
expressive either of the breaking of rocky hearts in pieces at
conversion, and of making souls humble and contrite; or of the
irreparable ruin and destruction of antichrist, when the saints shall
consume and destroy him:

even as I received of my Father; Christ, as God, has an underived power
and government; but, as Mediator, his rule and power over the nations
are asked by him, given to him, and received by him, [Psa
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#008.md). This "as" does not intend
equality, but similitude; and denotes the participation the saints will
have with Christ in the judgment and destruction of antichrist, and in
his kingdom and power.

[Revelation 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rev 2:28</span></span>

And I will give him the morning star. So Christ is called, [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016.md); and here it designs an
illustrious appearance of Christ at the close of this church state, and
a communication of much light and grace from him, which introduced the
Sardian church state, or the reformation by Luther, Calvin, &c. which is
the phosphorus, or morning star, to the spiritual reign of Christ under
the Philadelphian church state; which will be the bright, clear, day of
the Gospel, when the present twilight, which is between the appearance
of the morning star and that glorious day, will be removed: for by this
morning star is not meant the glory that shall be put upon the bodies of
the saints in the resurrection morn; nor the heavenly glory itself, or
the hope of it; but the dawning of the latter day glory, which began at
the Reformation, and is promised the faithful professors in the
Thyatirian church state, who lived in the darkness of Popery.

[Revelation 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rev 2:29</span></span>

He that hath an ear, let him hear,.... See Gill on [Rev
2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev002.htm#007.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 3](rev003.md)

</div>
