<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev004)  [Next](rev006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION 5

This chapter contains the vision of the sealed book, and the opening of
it by Christ, which occasions universal joy among all ranks and sorts of
creatures. The book is described by the place where it was, in the right
hand of God; by the uncommon manner in which it was written within and
without; and by the seven seals it was sealed with, [Rev
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001), next follows a proclamation made
by a mighty angel, with a loud voice, to find out a person worthy and
able to open this book, and loose its seals, [Rev
5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#002), upon which a declaration is made,
that none could be found in heaven, earth, or hell, [Rev
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#003), which had such an effect upon
John, that it set him a weeping, [Rev
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#004), but was comforted by one of the
elders suggesting, that there was a person that could, and would do it,
when he calls the lion of the tribe of Judah, and the root of David,
which are names of Christ, [Rev 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005),
of which he was assured by what he quickly saw, namely, the same person
the elder spoke of, described by his position, standing between the
throne, and the living creatures, and elders; and by his similitude and
likeness, as a Lamb that had been lately slain, with seven horns and
eyes in him; and by what he did, he went and took the book out of the
right hand of God, his Father, [Rev
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006). This occasioned a general joy
among all kind of creatures; first among the four living creatures, and
four and twenty elders, who are described by what they had, harps and
golden vials, the one for praise, the other for prayer; and by what they
did, they fell down in a worshipping posture before the Lamb, and sung
the new song of redeeming love to him; in which they ascribe worthiness
to him, to take the book and open its seals; declare their redemption
unto God, by his blood, out of all nations of the earth; take notice of
the honour done them by him, in making them kings and priests to God;
and express their assurance that they shall reign with him on earth,
[Rev 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008), and next an innumerable
company of angels join the living creatures and elders, in a doxology or
ascription of glory to him, [Rev 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011),
yea, every creature in heaven and earth, upon it, and under it, and in
the sea, are introduced as giving glory both to him that sat upon the
throne, and to the Lamb, [Rev 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013),
and the whole is closed by the living creatures saying "Amen", to all,
and by the elders prostrating themselves, and worshipping the living and
eternal God, [Rev 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#014).

[Revelation 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 5:1</span></span>

And I saw on the right hand of him that sat on the throne,.... Of this
throne, and who it was that sat upon it; see Gill on [Rev
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#002); and who had "in" his right hand,
or "at", or "upon" his right hand, as the Syriac and Arabic versions
render it, lying by, or near his right hand; though according to [Rev
5:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#007), the book appears to have been in
his right hand, as our version, and others render it:

a book written within, and on the backside, sealed with seven seals:
this book was very much like Ezekiel's roll, [Eze
2:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#009); which was written , "within" and
"without", before and behind, and indeed it was in the form of a roll:
the manner of writings in those times was on sheets of parchment, which,
when finished, were rolled up in the form of a cylinder; hence a book is
called a "volume". This book seems to have consisted of seven rolls, to
which was annexed seven seals; and there being not room enough within,
contrary to the common way of writing, some things were written upon the
backside of the outermost roll; and such writings were by the ancients
called "Opistographi": and the word is used by them sometimes for very
prolix writings (b). By this book some understand the Scriptures of the
Old Testament, which were written in rolls; see [Heb
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/heb010.htm#005); and which came out of the right
hand of God, and were given forth by him; and being written within, and
on the backside, may denote the fulness of them, they containing a
variety of matter, useful and profitable, for different purposes; or
else the literal and mystical, or spiritual meaning of some parts of
them: or, as others think, the more clear explanation of the books of
the Old Testament, by those of the New Testament; and its being sealed
may signify the authenticity of those writings, having the seal of God's
truth, and the impress of his wisdom, power, and goodness on them; and
also the hidden sense and meaning of them, they being, especially in the
prophetic and spiritual part of them, a sealed book to natural men, and
of which Christ is the truest and best interpreter; but then this book
was opened, and looked into, and read, and, in some measure, understood,
even by the Old Testament saints, and had been before this time
expounded by Christ, concerning himself; yea, he had opened the
understandings of his disciples to understand those Scriptures, and had
counted them, and others, worthy to open and explain this book to
others, and had sent them into all the world for this purpose; and for
the same reasons it cannot be understood of the Gospel published to Jews
and Gentiles, the one within, and the other without; rather therefore
the book of God's decrees is here meant, which respects all creatures,
and all occurrences and events in the whole world, from the beginning to
the end of time; and so Ezekiel's roll, according to the Targum on [Eze
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze002.htm#010); which was written before and
behind, signified that which was , "from the beginning", and which ,
"shall be in the end", or hereafter. This book God holds "in his right
hand", as the rule and measure of all he does, and of the government of
the world, and which he constantly fulfils and executes; and its being
written "within and without" may denote the perfection and
comprehensiveness of it, it reaching to all creatures and things, even
the most minute; and its being "sealed" shows the certainty of its
fulfilment, and the secrecy and hiddenness of it, until accomplished;
though it seems best of all to understand it of that part of God's
decrees relating to the church and world, particularly the Roman empire,
which from henceforward, to the end of time, was to be fulfilled; and so
is no other than the book of the Revelation itself, exhibited in the
following scenes and visions; and this may be truly said to be in the
right hand of God, and from thence taken by the Lamb, it being the
revelation of Jesus Christ, which God gave unto him, [Rev
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001); and may be said to be written,
both "within and on the backside", to show that it contains a large
account of things, a long train of events to be accomplished; as also to
signify, that it regards the church, and the members of it, who are
those that are within, in the several ages of time, and the world, or
those that are without; for this book prophecy regards both the state of
the Roman empire, and of the Christian church; and its being "sealed"
shows the authenticity, certainty, and also the obscurity of what was
contained therein; and with "seven" seals, with respect to the seven
periods of time, in which the prophecies in it are to be fulfilled.

\(b\) Vid. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 2. c. 30. & Salmuth in
Panciroll. rer. Memorab. par. 1. tit. 42. p. 145.

[Revelation 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 5:2</span></span>

And I saw a strong angel proclaiming with a loud voice,.... This was not
the uncreated angel, Jesus Christ; for he is after spoken of as the lion
of the tribe of Judah, and as the Lamb in the midst of the throne, but a
created one; though who he was, whether Gabriel, as some say, because
his name signifies the strong or mighty One of God, is not material to
be known; angels are said to be mighty, and to excel in strength: this
is called so here, chiefly with respect to his voice, which he, by
reason of his great strength, exerted so loudly, as to be heard by all
the creatures in heaven, and in earth, and under the earth however, this
was not John the Baptist, but if a minister of the Gospel, rather some
one since, making the following proclamation:

who is worthy to open the book, and to loose the seals thereof?
suggesting, that if there was any such person, that he was desired to
come, and do it; and it seems, that he must not only be one of power and
ability, but of dignity and authority, a person of greatness and worth,
from whence his ability arises; as he ought to be that can engage his
heart to draw nigh to God, and take a book out of his right hand, this
mysterious book of the Revelation, as it was indeed while sealed; and
open and explain it to others, unseal it or exhibit it, as it afterwards
was in the following scenes and visions, and gave a view of all that is
contained in it; and not only so, but fulfil and accomplish all the
prophecies in it; and who can, or is worthy to do all this, but he that
sits at the right hand of God, and who is God as well as man? and this
proclamation was made to stir up an earnest desire in John, and all the
saints he represents, to know what was in this book; and to show the
impotence of all creatures to make any discovery of it; and to
illustrate, and set off with a greater foil, the glory, excellency,
ability, and worth of Jesus Christ. There seems to be an allusion to the
president of the temple calling to the priests under him, to attend to
the several parts of service assigned them, saying unto them, ,
"whosoever is worthy, let him" do so and so (c).

\(c\) Misna Tamid, c. 1. sect. 4. & c. 5. sect. 4. 5.

[Revelation 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 5:3</span></span>

And no man in heaven,.... Or "no one in heaven", whether angels, or the
souls of departed saints; neither the one nor the other know anything of
what is to come, until it is revealed unto them:

nor in earth: among all the men on earth, even those of the greatest
sagacity and penetration, the wise, the prudent, the scribe, the
disputer of this world, such who are most conversant with books, and
have the greatest reach into the things of nature, or of grace:

neither under the earth; the dead buried there, good or bad; which may
be said agreeably to the notions of the ancient Jews, who believed the
immortality of souls, and that they were rewarded or punished, , "under
the earth", according to their virtue or vice in life (d): or the devils
in hell; or whoever on the earth are influenced by them, as magicians,
sorcerers, soothsayers, and necromancers:

was able to open the book, neither to look thereon; or in it, so as to
read it, understand it, and show to John what was in it; for the sense
is, there was no creature in heaven, earth, or hell, who were masters of
the deepest knowledge, and made pretensions to any, that were able to
foresee and foretell things to come; or to exhibit the prophecies in
this book, and represent them to John in the manner they afterwards
were, and much less to accomplish them.

\(d\) Joseph. Antiqu. l. 18. c. 1. sect 3.

[Revelation 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 5:4</span></span>

And I wept much,.... Not so much on his own account, because he feared
his curiosity would not be gratified, and that strong desire answered,
which were raised in him upon sight of the book, and increased by the
angel's proclamation; but for the sake of the church of God, whose
representative he was, and to whom the knowledge of this book, and the
things contained in it, he judged must be very useful and profitable.
The Ethiopic version reads, "and many wept"; many of those that were
about the throne, as well as John:

because no man was found worthy to open and to read the book,

neither to look thereon; because there was no creature in heaven, earth,
or under it, that were of dignity and authority, as well as of ability,
to open the book by unsealing it; and read and deliver out the
prophecies in it upon the taking off of every seal; and so not to look
into it, and foresee and foretell what was hereafter to come to pass, in
the church and world: the phrase of being worthy to look on it seems to
be Jewish; of the book of the generation of Adam, [Gen
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen005.htm#001), the Jews say (e) that

"it descended to the first man, and by it he knew the wisdom which is
above; and this book came to the sons of God, the wise men of the age, ,
"whoever is worthy to look in it", knows by it the wisdom which is from
above.''

The whole verse is left out in the Alexandrian copy; and the phrase, "to
read", is neither in the Vulgate Latin, nor in any of the Oriental
versions.

\(e\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 28. 2.

[Revelation 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 5:5</span></span>

And one of the elders said unto me,.... The Ethiopic version reads, "one
of these elders"; that is, one of the four and twenty elders that were
round about the throne; not the first of the four and twenty books of
the Old Testament; nor the patriarch Jacob, because of the prophecy
concerning Shiloh, Judah's son, which stands in [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010), nor Moses, who spoke of the
Messiah as the great prophet of the church; nor John the Baptist, who
pointed out the Lamb of God; these are all fancies and conjectures. It
was one of the members of the Christian church, who was near the throne
of God, had communion with him, and knowledge of his will, who in this
visionary way is represented as comforting John under his sorrow and
concern, and giving him information: and sometimes persons of superior
abilities may receive instruction from meaner persons, as did Apollos
from Aquila and Priscilla: the same said unto John,

weep not; cease sorrowing, do not be cast down, nor despair;

behold the lion of the tribe of Judah; by whom is meant Christ, who,
according to the flesh, was to come of the tribe of Judah; and certain
it is, that our Lord sprang from thence: and he is said to be the lion
of that tribe, in allusion to the prophecy concerning Judah in [Gen
49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009), where he is said to be a lion,
an old lion stooping down and couching, and on whose standard was the
figure of a lion. Christ may be compared to one, because of his great
strength, he being the mighty God, the able Saviour, and strong
Redeemer, and protector of his church and people, and the avenger of
their enemies; and because of his courage and intrepidity when he
engaged with Satan, and his principalities and powers, when he bore the
sins of his people, sustained his Father's wrath, and the terrors of
death set themselves in array against him; and because of the fierceness
of his wrath, and fury against the wicked, and for his generosity and
lenity towards those that stoop unto him, and obey him. So the Jews say
(f), that

"of Messiah, the son of David, who comes forth from Judah, is it said,
[Gen 49:9](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#009), "Judah is a lion's
whelp";''

and a little after, Messiah, the son of David, who is "a lion", shall be
on his right hand, and Messiah, the son of Joseph, who is an ox, on his
left hand; so the word of the Lord frequently, in the Chaldee
paraphrase, is said to be a lion (g).

The root of David; in like manner is Christ called the root of Jesse in
[Isa 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa011.htm#010); and the meaning either is,
that he is a branch that springs out of the roots of Jesse and David, is
David's son and offspring, according to his human nature; see [Rev
22:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev022.htm#016); or that he is David's Lord,
according to his divine nature: and the metaphor of a root well agrees
with him as Mediator, he being hidden out of sight, and unknown to a
natural man; and may denote his meanness in his state of humiliation,
when he was as a root out of a dry ground; and because he is the root
from whence all the elect of God spring, in whom they have their being,
and by whom they are bore and supported, and from whom are derived to
them all the blessings of grace, all their spiritual life, holiness,
fruitfulness, and perseverance. Now this illustrious Person, so
described,

hath prevailed; or overcome all difficulties, being one of worth and
value, of great authority and ability:

to open the book, and to loose the seven seals thereof; and deliver out
all the prophecies in it, and fulfil them; and this through the merits
of his blood, and in consequence of his sufferings and death: hence, in
the next verse, he is represented as a lamb as it had been slain; and
the four living creatures, and the four and twenty elders, put his
worthiness to take the book, and open it, upon his having been slain,
and having redeemed them by his blood, [Rev
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009). And as he, upon his resurrection
from the dead, had all power in heaven and in earth given him, as
Mediator, for the protection of his church, so he was deserving; and it
was fit and necessary that he, as the great prophet of the church,
should have and deliver out the prophecies concerning the state and
condition of his redeemed ones in all ages.

\(f\) Raya Mehimna in Zohar in Exod. fol. 49. 3, 4. (g) Targum in Hos.
v. 14. & xi. 10. & xiii. 7.

[Revelation 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 5:6</span></span>

And I beheld, and, lo, in the midst of the throne and of the four
beasts,.... These words, "in the midst of the throne and of the four
beasts", are left out in the Syriac version:

and in the midst of the elders stood a Lamb; John, upon the intimation
given him by the elder, lift up his eyes, and with great earnestness
looked about, and saw the person he pointed at, though not in the form
of a lion, but in the appearance of a lamb, to which Christ, both in the
Old and New Testament, is often compared; and that very aptly, for his
innocence and purity of nature; for his harmless and inoffensive
conversation; and for his meek and humble deportment throughout the
whole of his life; and for his patience at the time of his sufferings
and death; and for his usefulness both for food and clothing to his
people; and chiefly for his sacrifice for them, typified both by the
passover lamb, and by the lambs of the daily sacrifice: hence it
follows,

as it had been slain; or "as having been slain"; Christ had been really
slain by the wicked hands of the Jews, and not in appearance only; the
as, here, is not a note of mere similitude and likeness, but of reality
and truth; see [Joh 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh001.htm#014); but he was
now risen from the dead, and therefore is said to have been slain some
time before, though now alive; and he appeared to have the marks of his
sufferings and death upon him, as he had after his resurrection the
print of the nails and spear, in his hands, feet, and side; and he was
as a lamb that had been newly or lately slain: and it may denote the
continued efficacy of his blood, to cleanse from all sin, and of his
sacrifice to take it away; he was as a Lamb slain from the foundation of
the world, with respect to the continual virtue of his blood and
sacrifice; and he will be, on the same account, the Lamb as it had been
slain, unto the end of the world. The position and situation of this
Lamb were, he "stood in the midst of the throne, and of the four beasts,
and in the midst of the elders"; he "stood", being risen from the dead,
and ascended up into heaven, but was not as yet set down upon the throne
with his Father, but was very near it; he stood before it, ready to be
placed upon it, and receive his power and his kingdom; he stood between
the throne, and between the living creatures, and the elders, being the
Mediator between God, and his church, and people; he, appeared before
the throne for them, as their advocate, and stood ready to give them all
the assistance, and to do them all the good he could: and this his
situation may also denote, that he is continually in view, is always in
the sight of God, as the Lamb that had been slain; his blood is carried
within the vail, is sprinkled upon the mercy seat, and is always in
sight, and calls for peace and pardon; and God the Father always looks
upon it, and to his righteousness, sacrifice, and satisfaction, on
account of his people: moreover, his being in the midst of the four
living creatures, and elders, may signify his presence in his churches,
and with his ministers, which he has promised them to the end of the
world. This Lamb is further represented,

as having seven horns; it is very unusual for a lamb to have horns, and
especially seven: these horns are expressive of the power of Christ, of
his dominion and government, even of his kingly power and authority; so
kings are signified by horns in [Dan
8:20](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#020); and Christ himself is called the
horn of David, and the horn of salvation, [Psa
132:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa132.htm#017); and signify, that upon his
resurrection from the dead, and ascension to heaven, he was made and
declared Lord and Christ; and the number "seven" expresses the fulness
and perfection of his power and authority, having, as Mediator, all
power in heaves and in earth given him; and what is above all power,
might, dominion, and every name in this world, and that to come; and may
have some relation to the seven states of his churches in so many
periods of time; and show not only that he has power sufficient to
protect and defend his people in all times, and to push at and destroy
his and their enemies, but to open the then sealed book, and unloose the
seals: and as another qualification for this work, it follows,

and seven eyes, which are the seven spirits of God sent into all the
earth; which some understand of angels, and of a sufficient number of
them, which belong to Christ, and are at his command, and who are ready
to do his will, and to be sent forth by him, into the several parts of
the earth, to execute his pleasure: but these rather design the Spirit
of God and his gifts, which Christ received without measure, both in his
human nature, at his incarnation, and after his resurrection from the
dead, and ascension; which he bestowed on his apostles and ministering
servants, whom he sent forth into all the world, to preach his Gospel
with them; and which he has, more or less, ever since continued to do.
The Ethiopic version reads in the singular number, "and this is the
Spirit of God which is sent into all the earth"; See Gill on [Rev
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004); these "seven eyes" may design the
perfect knowledge of Christ, his foresight of future events, and his all
wise providence, which is always and everywhere concerned to fulfil and
accomplish them; so that he is every way qualified to take the book of
future events, as to the church and world, and reveal it, open and
explain it, and fulfil the things contained in it; see [Zac
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac003.htm#009).

[Revelation 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 5:7</span></span>

And he came,.... He drew nigh to the throne of God, he engaged his heart
to approach unto him, and came up even to his seat, which a mere
creature, without a Mediator, cannot do:

and took the book out of the right hand of him that sat upon the throne;
See Gill on [Rev 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#001); it being given
unto him, as in [Rev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001); and a
commission and authority to open it, and make it manifest to others, and
to accomplish the several events, in the several periods of time, it
points unto.

[Revelation 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 5:8</span></span>

And when he had taken the book,.... The Vulgate Latin version reads,
"when he had opened the book", very wrongly; for the opening of it by
unloosing the seals, one after another, is hereafter mentioned, in [Rev
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#001), but when it was observed, that
the Lamb took the book, and his commission to open, unseal, and fulfil
it,

the four beasts, and four and twenty elders, fell down before the Lamb;
by way of religious worship and adoration of him; which shows that he
was not a mere creature, who assumed human nature, suffered, and died,
and is the Mediator between God and men, but is truly God, and is the
proper object of worship; and so he is regarded by all his faithful
ministers, and true churches, which are here signified by the four
living creatures, and four and twenty elders; who are represented as

having everyone of them harps; which were instruments of music, and with
which the saints formerly used to praise God, [Psa
33:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa033.htm#002); and so may here intend the
praises and thanksgivings of the saints, of everyone of them, greater or
lesser, upon the present occasion; having their hearts in right tune,
making melody with them to the Lord, and giving thanks unto him for all
their blessings, temporal and spiritual, and particularly for the Lamb,
and his worthiness to open the book, and unloose the seals:

and golden vials full of odours, which are the prayers of saints; this
is said in allusion to the golden censers full of incense, which
ascended upwards, and was of a sweet smell; the vessels on the shewbread
table, in which incense was put, are by Josephus (h) called "golden
vials", as here; his words are, upon the loaves were put two , "golden
vials", full of incense: the prayers of the saints are compared to
"odours", or "incense", as the word may be rendered, and as they are
called, [Psa 141:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa141.htm#002); partly because as
incense goes upwards, so do they go up to God, and are received,
regarded, and had in remembrance by him; and partly because as incense
is of a sweet smell, so the prayers of the saints, put up in the name
and faith of Christ, are very grateful and acceptable to God: the
"golden vials" said to be "full" of them, may design the hearts of
believers, in which they first are, and from whence they proceed; true
prayer is that which is inwrought in the soul, and comes from the heart,
even from a heart pure like gold, purified by faith in the blood of
Christ, a true heart, that asks in faith, nothing wavering; such as are
really saints, true believers in Christ, are praying souls; they are
full of prayers for themselves and others; they pray always, and for all
saints: this makes nothing for praying to angels and saints departed;
for these prayers were their own, and not others; and besides, these
four living creatures, and four and twenty elders, were not angels, for
they are said to be redeemed by the blood of Christ, and are
distinguished from angels in the following verses; nor the saints in
heaven, but ministers and churches on earth, and who were to reign with
Christ on earth, [Rev 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010); it may be
observed, that the Jews sometimes represent prayer in such like figures
as here;

"prayer (they say) ascends with those spices which are mentioned in [Sol
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#014); and at the time that prayer
ascends it is perfumed with myrrh and frankincense, and of this the holy
blessed God asks, "who is this that comes up", &c. (i) [Sol
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#006);''

and they say, prayer is greater than all offerings (k). See [Rev
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#003).

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 3. c. 6. sect. 6. (i) Raya Mehimna in Zohar in Exod.
fol. 48. 3. (k) Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 40. 3.

[Revelation 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 5:9</span></span>

And they sung a new song,.... Upon a new occasion and subject,
redemption by the blood of the Lamb, and his worthiness to open the
sealed book; and in distinction from the old song of Moses and the
children of Israel at the Red sea; and this was a most famous and
excellent song, an unheard of one, and which none could learn, or sing,
but the redeemed of the Lamb:

saying, thou art worthy to take the book, and open the seals thereof.
The Arabic version reads, "thou, O Lamb"; the reasons why they ascribe
such fitness, ability, and dignity to him, are as follow:

for thou wast slain: by men, and for the sins of men; whereby, as he
became worthy in his priestly office to take away the sins of his
people, and to have all the glory of their salvation, and, in his kingly
office, to have all power and authority, and to be exalted above every
name, so, in his prophetic office, to have perfect knowledge, as man and
Mediator, of all the future events that were to befall his church and
people, and to make them known, and fulfil them:

and hast redeemed us to God by thy blood, out of every kindred, and
tongue, and people, and nation; this shows, that as the four living
creatures, and four and twenty elders, were not angels, so they were not
representatives of the Jewish church; or the patriarchs and prophets of
the Old Testament; not even the apostles of the New; for they were all
Jews, and could not be said to be redeemed out of every tongue, nation,
and people; and also that not the Jews only were redeemed by Christ, but
the Gentiles also, and not all mankind, or every individual of human
nature, but some out of all the nations of the earth; for God hath
chosen some, both of Jews and Gentiles, and these Christ has redeemed
and therefore the Gospel is sent unto all nations, that these among them
may be called and saved. The redemption of them supposes them to have
been in a state of slavery and bondage, as they are by nature, to sin,
Satan, and the law; and signifies a deliverance from such a state, which
Christ has obtained, not barely by power, but by price, as the word here
used signifies, and may be rendered, "and hast bought us" and the price
with which he has bought them in his own "blood", and which is of full
and sufficient value, it being not only the blood of a man, of an
innocent man, but of one that is God as well as man: and this price was
paid "to God", and to his justice, against whom men have sinned, whose
law they have broken, and whose justice they have injured and affronted,
that he might reconcile them to God, bring them near to him, and that
they might serve him in righteousness and true holiness.

[Revelation 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 5:10</span></span>

And hast made us unto our God kings and priests,.... See Gill on [Rev
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#006). The Alexandrian copy, and
Complutensian edition, and the Syriac, Arabic, and the Ethiopic
versions, read "them", instead of "us":

and we shall reign on the earth; meaning not merely in a spiritual
sense, through grace reigning over sin and corruption, through Satan
being bruised under their feet, and through the victory they have in
Christ over the world, but in the millennium state, in the thousand
years' reign with Christ in the new earth, wherein dwelleth
righteousness; see [Rev 20:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev020.htm#004). The
Alexandrian copy, and the Complutensian edition, Syriac and Arabic
versions, read "they shall reign".

[Revelation 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 5:11</span></span>

And I beheld, and heard the voice of many angels,.... Immaterial
spirits, made by Christ, and worshippers of him, and ministering spirits
to him and his, the holy and elect angels, who are confirmed in their
state by Christ; these John beheld in a visionary way, and heard the
voices and articulate sounds formed by them; and there were many of
them; how many there are, or were here, cannot be said; we read of a
multitude of heavenly host that appeared at the incarnation of Christ,
and of more than twelve legions of angels, that Christ could have had of
his Father for a word speaking, at the time of his apprehension, who
would have rescued him out of the hands of his enemies; yea, that
company is innumerable. The Syriac version reads, "as the voice of many
waters"; these were

round about the throne; were near to God, stood before him, behind his
face, hearkened to his voice, and observed his orders: so with the Jews,
the four angels, Michael, Gabriel, Uriel, and Raphael, are said (l) to
be , "round about his throne", the throne of God: it follows here,

and the beasts and the elders; the sense is not, that John heard the
voice of the living creatures, and of the elders, as well as, and
together with, the voice of many angels; for he had heard their voice
and song before, but that the angels whose voice he heard, as they were
round about the throne, so they were round about the living creatures,
and round about the elders: the angels are near unto, and encompass the
ministers of the Gospel; they are about them, and give them intimations
and discoveries of the mind and will of God, as an angel did to John,
[Rev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001), and another to Paul, [Act
27:23](../../../bib/kjv/act027.htm#023), and sometimes direct them where
to go and preach the Gospel, as in [Act
16:9](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#009), and surround them for their
safety and protection: so horses and chariots of fire, by whom angels
are meant, were round about the prophet Elisha, [Kg2
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/kg2006.htm#016), and they were also round about
the elders, the churches, and particular believers; angels and saints
are near to one another; and angels are very friendly to the saints, and
so them many good offices; they all belong to the same family, and are
social worshippers of God; the angels are the guards that encamp round
about them that fear the Lord, and often protect them from enemies and
dangers; and it may be observed, that the saints are nearer the Lamb and
the throne than the angels be; according to this account, there was a
throne, and one that sat on it, who is the living God; nearest to the
throne stood the Lamb; next to the Lamb stood the four living creatures,
the ministers of the Gospel; next to them the elders, or churches, and
members thereof; and in the outermost ring, and as encompassing all,
stood the ministering angels, they being servants; whereas the saints
are the heirs of salvation, and the bride, the Lamb's wife, and
therefore nearer him:

and the number of them was ten thousand times ten thousand, and
thousands of thousands; that is, an innumerable company of them; a like
number is mentioned in [Dan 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#010) to
which this seems to refer; see [Psa
68:17](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#017). The Jews speak of nine hundred
and six thousand millions of ministering angels, that stand constantly
before the Lord (m).

\(l\) Bemidbar Rabba sect. 2. fol. 179. 1. (m) Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2.
fol. 69. 1.

[Revelation 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 5:12</span></span>

Saying with a loud voice,.... To signify their zeal, fervour, and
affection for Christ, and to make a free, open, and public
acknowledgment of him, and that all might hear of his worthiness, and of
the praise and glory that were due unto him:

worthy is the Lamb that was slain; they address him as the Lamb, and not
as the Lord of lords, and their Lord; and speak of him as having been
slain, and celebrate the virtue and efficacy of his sufferings and
death, and ascribe his worthiness to receive glory and honour thereunto;
but do not add, as the living creatures and elders do, "and hast
redeemed us to God by thy blood"; because, though they were the subjects
and objects of confirming grace by Christ, yet not of redeeming grace:
it follows,

to receive power and riches, and wisdom, and strength, and honour,

and glory, and blessing; as the book has seven seals to be unloosed, and
Christ had seven horns of power and ability to loose them, and fulfil
the things contained in it, and seven eyes to look into it, and discover
and reveal what is in it, so here are "seven" words made use of, to
express the praise that was due unto him; a like number is used by the
angels in [Rev 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev007.htm#012); and when he is
said to be worthy to receive these, it is not to be understood of his
receiving the things themselves, but of the praise of them; and that
these are to be observed in him, and to be ascribed to him: power
belongs to him, as he is the mighty God; and as the Saviour and Redeemer
of his people; and as risen from the dead, and as exalted at God's right
hand, and made or declared Lord and Christ; having all power in heaven
and in earth: "riches" may well be ascribed to him, who has all the
perfections of deity in him; whose are the heavens and the earth, and
the fulness thereof; and who, as Mediator, is heir of all things, and
has both the riches of grace and glory in his hands: "wisdom" also is
his; he is wisdom itself, he is the only wise God; and he is the author
of all wisdom, natural and spiritual; and, as Mediator, he has the
spirit of wisdom and knowledge resting on him, and the treasures of both
hid in him: and "strength" may be well attributed to him, which he has
shown in making and supporting all things; in saving and redeeming his
people with a mighty hand and outstretched arm; and in subduing and
vanquishing all his and their enemies; and in giving strength to them to
discharge their duty, resist temptations, oppose corruptions, and do
their generation work: "honour" is due to him, as the Son of God, he
being to be honoured equally as the Father; and who, as man and
Mediator, is crowned with glory and honour: "glory" is what ought to be
ascribed unto him, even the glory of true and proper deity, and also the
glory of salvation; and who, as Mediator, had a glory promised him, and
which was due unto him upon his having finished his work, and which he
now enjoys: wherefore "blessing" is to be given to him, who is God over
all, blessed for evermore, in himself and the perfections of his nature;
in whom all spiritual blessings are, and in whom all the nations of the
earth are blessed; and to whom praise and thanks are to be rendered, for
the blessings of pardoning, justifying, and redeeming grace, and for all
other.

[Revelation 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 5:13</span></span>

And every creature which is in heaven,.... Animate or inanimate, angels,
and the spirits of just men made perfect, sun, moon, and stars, and the
fowls of the air:

and on the earth; men and beasts, and every creeping thing, mountains,
hills, fruitful trees, and all cedars: and under the earth: in the
bowels of it, metals, minerals, and everything of that kind:

and such as are in the sea; that sail in ships upon the mighty waters,
and fishes great and small that are therein:

and all that are in them; in heaven, earth, and sea:

heard I saying, blessing, and honour, and glory, and power, be unto him
that sitteth upon the throne, and unto the Lamb for ever and ever; all
creatures in their way praise God, and are subservient to the glory and
interest of Christ, and are the occasion of glorifying of both; and even
the enemies of Christ, wicked men and devils, will be obliged to own
Christ to be Lord, to the glory of God the Father, as well as angels and
saints; and the same glory and honour which are given to the one are
ascribed to the other, which shows the proper deity of Christ, and his
equality with the Father. The Syriac version reads, "and I heard him who
sitteth upon the throne, saying, to the Lamb be given blessing and
honour", &c. with which compare [Joh
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#022).

[Revelation 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 5:14</span></span>

And the four beasts said, Amen,.... Giving their assent to what the
angels and every creature said, and expressing their desires and wishes
that so it might be, and also their faith, that so it was, and would be:

and the four and twenty elders fell down and worshipped him that liveth
for ever and ever; either God the Father, who sat upon the throne, and
is so described, [Rev 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009); or else the
Lamb who had been slain, and was now alive, and lives for evermore; or
both of them, for the Alexandrian copy, the Complutensian edition, and
the Syriac and Arabic versions, omit the words "him that liveth for ever
and ever"; and leave it to be understood of either of them, or both; and
the Ethiopic version reads, "and the elders worshipped him"; as the four
living creatures and four and twenty elders led the chorus, and begun
the song, so they close it, as being the persons more immediately
concerned in the death and sufferings of the Lamb, and redemption by
him, and in the sealed book, and in the things contained in it; the
seals of which are next opened, and an account is given of them in some
following chapters.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 6](rev006)

</div>
