<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](rev010)  [Next](rev012) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Chapter 11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 11:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION 11

This chapter contains the order to measure the temple of God; an account
of the two witnesses, their prophesying: and power, their slaying,
resurrection, and ascension to heaven, with what followed upon it; and
the sounding of the seventh trumpet, and the effects of that. A
measuring rod is given to John, with an order to rise and measure the
temple, altar, and worshippers, and to leave out the outer court, which
was to be given to the Gentiles, who tread the holy city under foot
forty and two months, [Rev 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001), the
same date with the 1260 days the witnesses prophesy in sackcloth, [Rev
11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003), who are compared to two olive
trees and to two candlesticks, and are said to stand before God, [Rev
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#004), and who are further described by
their power to destroy those that hurt them with fire that proceeds out
of their mouths; to shut the heaven, that it rain not during their
prophecy; to turn water into blood, and smite the earth with all manner
of plagues at pleasure, [Rev 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#005); but
when the time of their prophecy and testimony is expired, their enemies
will have the advantage of them; the antichristian beast of Rome,
described by the place of his ascent, the bottomless pit, will fight
against them, overcome, and kill them; their dead bodies will be exposed
publicly within the Roman jurisdiction, and not suffered to be interred;
and their enemies will make a public and general rejoicing over them,
[Rev 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007); but after a short space of
time they will revive, and stand upon their feet, to the surprise of all
spectators; and being invited by a voice from heaven, will ascend
thither, in the sight of their enemies; upon which will be an
earthquake, in which the tenth part of the city of Rome will fall, and
seven thousand men be slain; which will cause consternation in the rest,
and put them upon giving glory to God, [Rev
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011); and this will put an end to the
second woe, and the third will quickly follow, [Rev
11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#014), which is the sounding of the
seventh trumpet; the effects of which are, voices heard in heaven,
declaring that the kingdoms of the world are become Christ's, and that
he shall reign for ever and ever, [Rev
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015); upon which the four and twenty
elders, that sat on their seats before God, congratulate him, worship,
and give thanks unto him, at the Lord God Almighty and eternal; partly
because of his visible power and kingdom he now takes to himself; and
partly because the time of avenging his people that had suffered for him
upon the nations, which makes them angry, was now come; as also because
now would be given rewards to all his prophets, saints, and those that
feared him, as well as antichrist and his followers would be destroyed,
[Rev 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#016); and other effects of this
trumpet are, the opening of the temple of God in heaven, a sight of the
ark of the testament, lightnings, voices, thunderings, an earthquake,
and great hail, [Rev 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#009).

[Revelation 11:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rev 11:1</span></span>

And there was given me a reed like unto a rod,.... A measuring reed,
which with the Jews was six cubits long, [Eze
40:5](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#005); with the Greeks and Romans, ten
feet long; the Ethiopic version here calls it a "golden reed", as in
[Rev 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#015). This was given unto John
very likely by the same angel that gave him the little book, since he
afterwards bids him arise and measure with it; and by it seems to be
designed the holy Scripture, or the word of God, which is sometimes
called a line, a rule, and rod, [Psa
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004), and which is the rule and
measure of doctrine and faith; and by it all doctrine is to be tried and
measured, and whatsoever is not agreeably to it is not of God, nor to be
received, but rejected; and it is the rule and measure of all
discipline, worship, and practice; it lays down the plan of a Gospel
church, which should be gathered out of the world, and separated from
it; it shows who are the proper materials of it, what officers are to be
constituted in it, and what ordinances are to be administered, and what
laws and rules should be observed in receiving and rejecting of members,
and according to which the whole community should walk; in short, it
directs to all the forms, laws, and ordinances of God's house; and this
is the use John, or those whom he represents, were to make of it:

and the angel stood; the same that stood with his right foot on the sea,
and his left foot on the earth, and gave to John the little book, [Rev
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#001); though it may be not in the same
place and situation, but rather at the gate of the temple, as in [Eze
40:3](../../../bib/kjv/eze040.htm#003). This clause is not in the
Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions, but is in the Syriac
version and Complutensian edition, and is rightly retained, or otherwise
it would seem as if the reed spoke:

saying, rise and measure the temple of God, and the altar, and them that
worship therein; the allusion is to the temple of Jerusalem, with its
appurtenances; there were the most holy place, and the holy place, which
was the inner court of the priests, into which they only entered, which
was strictly speaking the temple, and is referred to here; and there was
the altar of burnt offering, which was in the court of the priests, and
the altar of incense, which was before the vail that divided between the
holy and holy of holies; and then there was the outer court for all the
Israelites to worship in, referred to in [Rev
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002), and by "the temple of God" is
here meant the church, of which the temple was a type; and so particular
congregated churches are called temples, [Co1
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#016). Solomon, a man of peace, was the
builder of the one, and Christ, the Prince of peace, the builder of the
other; Solomon's temple was built of hewn stones, made ready before they
were brought thither, and a true church of Christ consists of lively
stones, hewed and fitted for this spiritual building by the Spirit of
God; the temple at Jerusalem was built on a high mountain, and on the
north of the city, the church is built upon the rock Christ Jesus, and
the Gospel church, or churches, in the times of the sixth trumpet, which
this vision refers to, and to the close of it, are in the northern parts
of Europe; and as the temple was for religious use and service, for the
worship of God and sacrifices, so is the Gospel church, and so are
Gospel churches, for the ministry of the word, and administration of
ordinances, and for the offering up the sacrifices of prayer and praise;
and as in the most holy place were the ark of the covenant, and the
mercy seat, and as it was the place of the divine Presence, where God
granted communion to his people, so in the church are held forth the
mysteries of the covenant, Christ as the mercy seat and the
propitiatory, in whom the displays of grace are made, and through whom
the saints have fellowship with God, and enjoy his presence: "the altar"
may design Christ himself, by whom the saints draw nigh to God, offer up
their sacrifices, and are accepted with him; or the whole of Gospel
worship and ordinances, as prayer, preaching, singing of praise, and the
administration of baptism and the Lord's supper: and they "that worship
therein", or "thereat", are the royal priesthood, or such who are made
kings and priests unto God, for none went into the inner court, or
served at the altar, but priests; and who make use of Christ, the altar,
of his person, blood, righteousness, and sacrifice, in their approaches
to God; and who are praying souls, wait at the altar of incense, and
draw nigh to the throne or grace with a true heart, and worship God in
Spirit and in truth: now "measuring" of these respects not the primitive
church for the first three or four hundred years, and the formation of
that according to the rule of God's word, and as a pattern to other
churches; for though the apostolic church, or the church as it was in
the apostles' time, and as described in their writings, was such a
church; yet the church for such a space of time as above was not; there
were great departures both from doctrine and discipline, the mystery of
iniquity began to work, and way was made for the man of sin and it was
far from being a pattern to be imitated; and besides, this measuring
refers to the times of the sixth trumpet, and the close of it: nor does
it respect the sealing of the 144,000 between the sixth seal and the
opening of the seventh seal, which was for the protection and security
of them during the times of the six trumpets, which brought desolation
into the empire, and apostasy into the church; though measuring
sometimes may seem to denote protection, as in [Zac
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001); and though the outer court is,
and will be, a protection to spiritual worshippers, so long as it is not
in the hands of the Gentiles, yet this is not the sense, at least not
the whole of it: nor does this refer to the hiding of the church in the
wilderness, during the reign of antichrist; which might seem to be
signified by the internal worshippers retiring to the altar, and to the
holy and the most holy place, and being concealed there; and especially
since the opening of the temple in [Rev
11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019), may seem to be opposed to this;
but that takes in too large a compass of time, this being an affair
relating only to the close of the sixth trumpet, and which was to be
before the seventh trumpet sounded: it seems rather to respect the times
of the Reformation by Luther, Calvin, and others, when the measuring
reed of the word was taken in hand, and used; but then it was used
chiefly for the restoration of pure doctrine, and with good success, but
not so much for the regulating and orderly discipline of the churches,
for the purity of Gospel worship and ordinances; most, if not all the
reformed churches, set out upon too broad a bottom, being national,
provincial, or parochial; there was a temple, and an altar erected for
God, and there were internal and spiritual worshippers; but then they
took in the outward court, which should not have been measured in, and
circumscribed with them, but should have been left out; but the time for
this was not yet come, but now is: in short, I take it that this
measuring refers to what was done in the last age, particularly in our
nation; and that it has respect to the separation from the national
church, when churches, more or less, were gathered and formed according
to the Gospel plan and the primitive institution; a work which never was
set about and so effectually done before since the age of the apostles:
the baptized and congregational churches are the temple, altar, and
worshippers measured, who have both the true doctrine, worship, and
discipline of God's house among them; a set of men in the last age were
raised up, who drew a plan of churches, and of church discipline,
according to the ancient model; gathered churches out of the world, and
constituted them according to the order of the Gospel; circumscribed
them, and enclosed them according to the rules of God's word, admitting
none but such into communion who were judged by the churches subjects of
the grace of God; and rejected and excluded from among them such as were
wicked and scandalous; and so reduced the pure members of churches to a
small number, a little flock, a few names in Sardis: and I am of opinion
that the measuring reed must be used again; we have got of late, through
negligence, or a want of a spirit of discerning, too many of the outward
court among us; who must be left out, in order to be given up to other
hands, as follows.

[Revelation 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rev 11:2</span></span>

But the court which is without the temple leave out, and measure it
not,.... The allusion is to the court of the Israelites, where was the
great crowd and company of worshippers, even the national church of the
Jews, called by Ezekiel the outer court, [Eze
42:14](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#014), and which was measured in [Eze
42:20](../../../bib/kjv/eze042.htm#020); but this must not be measured:
this designs not the visible church apostatized, as succeeding the pure,
primitive, and apostolical church, or the apostate church of Rome,
antichrist and his followers, for these are meant by the Gentiles, to
whom this outward court is given; this outward court, or the worshippers
in it, intend a distinct set of worshippers from the internal
worshippers, the priests of God in the temple, altar, and inner court,
and from the Gentiles, the Papists; and are no other than carnal
Protestants, the bulk of the reformed churches, who have only the name,
but not the nature of living Christians, have a form of godliness, but
deny its power, are Jews outwardly, but not inwardly, and worship only
in an external manner, attend to outward forms and ceremonies, but know
nothing of true doctrine, pure worship, or spiritual religion; and which
are very numerous, as the worshippers in the outward court were: now
these, upon a new measuring and regulating of the churches, are ordered
to be left, or cast out, and not taken into the dimensions of the Gospel
church; these were to be separated from, and have been, and not to be
admitted members of regular and orderly constituted churches, and which
is here reckoned a sort of casting of them out; the reason of which
follows;

for it is given unto the Gentiles; by whom are meant the Papists, who
are no other than Paganized Christians, having introduced a great deal
of Gentilism into the divine service; as the worshipping of the virgin
Mary, angels, and saints departed, which is in imitation of the demon
worship of the Heathens; as also the dedication of their churches to
saints, their saints' days, divers festivals, and many other rites and
ceremonies, are plainly of Pagan original; and therefore they may very
well be called by this name: now it seems by these words that the bulk
of the reformed churches, the crowd of outward court worshippers, will
be gained, over to the Popish party, and fall off to the church of Rome,
to which their doctrines and practices are plainly verging; the pope of
Rome, as low a condition as he now is in, will be set "in status quo",
before his utter destruction; he will regain all his former dominions,
and be in possession of them at the time of his ruin; the whore of Rome,
the antichristian Babylon, will sit as a queen, and promise herself a
great deal of peace and pleasure, the inward court worshippers and
witnesses being slain, and she restored to all her former power and
grandeur; when in one day, on a sudden, her destruction will come upon
her, when the term of the beast's reign will be expired, mentioned in
the next clause:

and the holy city shall they tread under foot forty and two months; by
"the holy city" is meant all the kingdoms of Europe, or what has, been
called Christendom, the western empire as Christian, the main seat of
the Christian religion, or all the churches styled Christian, and so
called in allusion to Jerusalem, which bears this name, [Mat
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#005); and which was still of a far
larger extent than the outward court: the "treading" of this "underfoot"
does not barely design possessing of it, or worshipping in the same
place, as the phrase of treading in the courts does in [Isa
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa001.htm#012); but a tyrannical power over it,
and a wasting, spoiling, and destroying it, in allusion to Jerusalem
being trodden under foot, wasted, and destroyed by the Gentiles or the
Romans, [Luk 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#024); and the duration
of this tyrannical and oppressive reign will be forty and two months;
see [Rev 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#005), which being reduced to
years, make just three years and a half: but then this date cannot be
understood strictly and literally; for such a term can never be
sufficient for the whore's reign, who was to rule over the kings of the
earth, and all nations were to drink of the wine of her fornication:
this is too short a time for her to gain so much power, honour, and
riches in, as the 13th, 17th, and 18th chapters of this book show, as
well as too short for the afflictions and persecutions of the saints by
her; wherefore this must be understood prophetically of so many months
of years; and a month with the Chaldeans consisting of thirty days, and
a year of 360 days, which account Daniel used, and John after him, forty
two months, reckoning a day for a year, after the prophetic style, make
1260 years; which is the exact time of the witnesses prophesying in
sackcloth, of the church's being hid and nourished in the wilderness,
and of the beast's reign, and so of the holy city being trodden under
foot. Now this date is not to be reckoned from the outer court being
given to the Gentiles, but from the first of antichrist's reign, when
the pope of Rome was declared universal bishop; and is only here
mentioned to show, that the giving of the outward court to his Gentiles
will be towards the expiration of this date.

[Revelation 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rev 11:3</span></span>

And I will give power unto my two witnesses,.... By whom are meant, not
Enoch and Elias, as some of the ancient fathers thought, who, they
supposed, would come before the appearance of Christ, and oppose
antichrist, and be slain by him, which sense the Papists greedily catch
at; nor are the Scriptures, the two Testaments, Old and New, designed,
though their name and number agree, and also their office, which is to
testify of Christ; but then to be clothed in sackcloth, to be killed,
and rise again, and ascend to heaven, are things that cannot so well be
accommodated to them: but these witnesses intend the ministers of the
Gospel and churches of Christ, who have bore testimony for Christ, and
against antichrist, ever since he appeared in the world; and
particularly the churches and ministers in Piedmont bid fair for this
character; who were upon the spot when antichrist arose, always bore
their protest against him, and were ever independent of the church of
Rome, and subsisted in the midst of the darkness of the apostasy; and
suffered much, and very great persecutions, from the Papists; and have
stood their ground, and continue to this day; and have been like olive
trees and candlesticks, imparting oil and light to others. Though they
ought not to be considered exclusive of other ministers and churches,
who also have bore, and still do bear a witness for Christ, and against
the idolatries of the church of Rome: no two individual persons can be
meant, since these witnesses were to prophesy 1260 days, that is, so
many years, but a succession of ministers and churches; and these are
called two, both on account of the fewness of them, and because the
testimony of two is sufficient to confirm any matter; and it may be in
allusion to the various instances of two eminent persons being raised up
at certain periods of time, as Moses and Aaron, at the deliverance of
the children of Israel out of Egypt; Caleb and Joshua, at their entrance
into Canaan; Elijah and Elisha in the idolatrous times of Ahab; and
Joshua and Zerubbabel at the rebuilding and finishing of the second
temple. Now the Angel, and who is Christ, here promises that he will
give something to these witnesses: some supply the words, "I will give
it"; that is, the holy city, or the church, to them, to be taken care of
and defended; others, "I will give" them a mouth and wisdom, which their
adversaries shall not be able to resist, according to the promise in
[Luk 21:15](../../../bib/kjv/luk021.htm#015). We supply the words, "I
will give power"; that is, authority to preach the Gospel, and strength
to profess it, and to continue to bear a testimony to it, signified by
prophesying; see [Co1 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/co1014.htm#001).

And they shall prophesy; that is, "that they may prophesy"; which is
supported by the Arabic and Ethiopic versions, the former rendering the
words, "I will give to my two witnesses to prophesy", and the latter, "I
will give in command to my two witnesses that they may prophesy"; the
sense is, that Christ will give to them a mission and commission,
sufficient authority, all needful gifts and grace, courage and presence
of mind to preach his Gospel, to hold forth his word, and bear a
testimony for him during the whole time of the apostasy, even

a thousand two hundred and threescore days; that is, so many years,
which, as before observed, is the date of the beast's reign, of the holy
city being trodden under foot of the Gentiles, and of the church's
retirement into the wilderness: it is observable, that the date of the
beast's reign and tyranny is expressed by months, and the date of the
church's being in the wilderness, and the prophesying of the witnesses,
is signified by days; and the reason which some give is not despicable,
as that the beast and his followers are the children of darkness and of
the night, over which the moon presides, from whence months are,
numbered; and the church and the witnesses are children of the day, over
which the sun rules. The habit of these witnesses during their time of
prophesying follows,

clothed in sackcloth; expressive either of their outward state and
condition, being poor, mean, and abject, while the followers of the
beast are clad in silks, and live deliciously; or else of the inward
frame of their minds, as mourning for the sad estate of the church of
Christ, groaning under the tyranny and persecutions of antichrist.

[Revelation 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rev 11:4</span></span>

These are the two olive trees,.... Or represented by the two olive trees
in [Zac 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#003), which there design Joshua
and Zerubbabel; and who in laying out themselves, their gifts and
wealth, in rebuilding and finishing the temple, were types of these
witnesses, the ministers of the Gospel, in the successive ages of the
apostasy; who may be compared to olive trees, because of the oil of
grace, and the truth of it in them; and because of the gifts of the
Spirit of God bestowed on them, or their having that anointing which
teacheth all things; and because they freely impart their gifts, and the
golden oil of the Gospel unto others, and also bring the good tidings of
peace and salvation by Christ, of which the olive leaf is a symbol; and
because they are like the olive tree, fat, flourishing, and fruitful in
spiritual things; they are sons of oil, and God's anointed ones:

and the two candlesticks; which hold forth the light of the word, in the
midst of Popish darkness: this shows that churches, as well as
ministers, are designed by the witnesses, since the candlesticks are
explained of the churches, [Rev 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#020),
though the simile well agrees with ministers of the word, who are the
lights of the world, or hold forth the light of the Gospel, which is put
into them by Christ: and these olive trees and candlesticks are
represented as

standing before the God of the earth; ministering unto him, enjoying his
presence, and having his assistance, and being under his protection. The
Alexandrian copy, the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions, read,
"the Lord of the earth"; and so the Complutensian edition; see [Zac
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac004.htm#014).

[Revelation 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rev 11:5</span></span>

And if any man will hurt them,.... Do any injury to their persons, or
properties, oppose their writings, blaspheme their doctrines, and hinder
their ministrations; whoever; they be, whether they be any that live
among them, or in other parts; whether they be secret or open enemies;
or whether they be of the outward court, or be really Gentiles or
Papists; and especially if they do them any injustice, if they wrong,
oppress, afflict, and distress them knowingly and willingly:

fire proceedeth out of their mouth; by which may be meant the word of
God, which they preach and hold forth, which is comparable to fire, [Jer
23:29](../../../bib/kjv/jer023.htm#029), both for light, it being a
means of enlightening sinners, who are darkness itself; and of directing
saints in their walk and conversation; and of detecting the errors,
immoralities, idolatry, and superstition of men, and particularly of the
church of Rome, who cannot bear the light of this word, and therefore
forbid the reading of it to the laity, and keep it locked up from them
in the Latin tongue: and also for the heat of it, it being the means of
quickening, or of conveying a vital heat to dead sinners; and of warming
and comforting the saints, causing their hearts to burn within them,
while they bear or read it, or meditate upon it; and of scorching and
tormenting reprobate sinners, and filling them with wrath, pain, and
anguish, especially the followers of antichrist; and this is greatly
designed, for this has a particular reference to the pouring out of the
fourth vial, [Rev 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#009). Likewise, the
word of God may be compared to fire for its purity in itself, for every
word of his is pure; and for its purifying nature, when faithfully
preached, and powerfully applied, it penetrates deep, it searches, and
discovers, and purges from the dross of profaneness, false doctrine, and
will worship; and for its consuming nature, as follows, it pronouncing
damnation to unbelievers and impenitent sinners, and it being the savour
of death unto death to such: or else the prayers of these witnesses are
intended by the fire that proceeds out of their mouth, for vengeance on
their enemies, who hinder their ministrations, blaspheme the truth, and
shed their blood; which do not arise from a passionate and revengeful
spirit, but from a pure zeal for the glory of God, and the honour of his
name, and truth; and which prayers are heard by God, who will avenge his
elect, that cry unto him day and night: the allusion is to the fire,
which, at the request of Moses, came forth from the Lord, and destroyed
two hundred and fifty persons, that opposed him and Aaron; and to the
fire which Elias called for from heaven, upon the captains, and the
fifties, that came to take him, who were types of these witnesses; see
[Num 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#003). And also this fire may
denote the denunciations of God's wrath by them upon the antichristian
party, these being as wood, and their words as fire, to consume them;
see [Jer 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/jer005.htm#014).

And devoureth their enemies: whether open or secret; just as the fire
devoured Nadab and Abihu, the offerers of strange fire, which the Lord
commanded not; so the fire out of the mouth of God's faithful servants
devours such who introduce divers and strange doctrines, and the
inventions of men, into the church of God; the light of God's word
convinces and confounds them, though it may not convert them; it flashes
in their consciences, and distresses them, so that they gnaw their
tongues for pain; there being nothing but a fearful looking for of
judgment, and fiery indignation, which shall devour and destroy them,
though not corporeally, yet spiritually and eternally; for even these
shall afterwards make war against them, conquer them, and slay them, and
shall see them ascend to heaven, [Rev
11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007).

And if any man will hurt them, he must in this manner be killed; this is
repeated, partly to show the certainty of this destruction; and partly
to point out the manner of it, which will be not by the use of carnal
weapons: these enemies of the witnesses will not be killed by the sword,
or any other weapon, but by the word of God, and through the prayers of
the saints, and by the denunciations of God's judgments on them. The
Jews express the doctrines and traditions of their Rabbins, delivered
from one to another, by fire, proceeding out of their mouths; who say
(r),

"Rab sat before Rabbi, and "there went forth" , "sparks of fire from the
mouth of Rab", into the mouth of Rabbi, and from the mouth of Rabbi,
into the mouth of Rab;''

which the gloss explains of their communicating their doctrines and
traditions to one another.

\(r\) T. Bab. Cholin, fol. 137. 2. Juchasin, fol. 113. 2.

[Revelation 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rev 11:6</span></span>

These have power to shut heaven,.... For these have the keys of the
kingdom of heaven given them, and whatever they bind or loose on earth
is bound or loosed in heaven; or in other words, having the true key of
knowledge in matters, both of doctrine and discipline, given them,
whatever they declare, according to the word of God, to be doctrines fit
to be received or rejected, and to be the ordinances of God, and matters
of worship to be attended to, and what are not, should be so: and in
particular,

that it rain not in the days of their prophecy; that is, on their
enemies, the antichristian party; for otherwise it must rain on those to
whom they minister, their prophecy itself being rain in a spiritual
sense: so rain is explained of prophecy in the Targum on [Isa
5:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa005.htm#006), which paraphrases the words thus;

"I will command the prophets that they do not prophesy upon them
prophecy:''

for this is to be understood not literally, since the days of their
prophecy, or preaching in sackcloth, are 1260, that is, 1260 years, and
which is the term and duration of antichrist's reign: wherefore, if this
was the case, there must be a famine and great distress, during this
long space of time; but as this is not matter of fact, so it would not
comport with that plenty, luxury, and deliciousness, in which the whore
of Babylon is said to live: but the words are to be taken in a spiritual
sense, and to be understood of the Gospel, and doctrines of it, or the
word of God, which is sometimes compared to rain, [Deu
32:2](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#002). God is the author and giver of
rain, and he only; none of the vanities, or idols of the Gentiles, can
give it; has the rain a father? it has, but not on earth, only God who
is in heaven; and so the Gospel is of God, and it is he only that can
make men able ministers of it; the rain comes down from above, from
heaven, and of the same original and descent is the Gospel, it is the
voice speaking from heaven; the rain falls, according to divine
direction, in one place, and not another, on one city, and not another;
and so the Gospel is sometimes in one place, and sometimes in another;
it is forbid here, and ordered there. Showers of rain moisten and soften
the earth, and make it susceptive of seed; and the Gospel is the means
of softening hard hearts, and of making them capable of receiving
suitable impressions: rain refreshes the earth, revives the plants and
trees, and makes them fruitful; and so the Gospel, attended with a
divine blessing, refreshes drooping saints, revives the work of God in
them, and is the means of filling them with all the fruits of
righteousness. Now the withholding of this rain denotes a famine, not of
bread, or a thirst for water, but of hearing the word of the Lord; and
as it is a judgment on a nation, or on a city, not to be rained upon, so
it is a spiritual judgment upon a people, when God commands his clouds,
his ministers, to rain no rain of the Gospel on them; and it is one of
the judgments upon the antichristian party, that they have not the
Gospel preached unto them, nor any dew of powerful and efficacious grace
distilled on them, but are left to their blindness, darkness, and
hardness of heart: and these witnesses carrying the Gospel along with
them, where they prophesy and preach, is called a shutting up heaven, so
that it rain not on the followers of antichrist, from whom they separate
themselves, or by whom they are cast out; and this is ascribed to them,
and is owing to their removal or ejection; much in the same sense as the
night and darkness are to the sun's remove; that is, these follow upon
it. The allusion is to the withholding of rain in the times of Elijah,
one of the types of these witnesses, because of the idolatries of Ahab
and Jezebel, [Kg1 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/kg1017.htm#001). In like manner
is the rain of the Gospel withheld during the reign of antichrist,
because of the idolatry and superstition of the apostasy.

And have power over waters to turn them to blood; by "waters" are meant
people, multitudes, nations, and tongues, and particularly those over
whom antichrist reigns, [Rev 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#015),
and turning of them into blood designs the confusions and wars raised
among them on account of the prophesying of these witnesses, and the
persecutions and bloodshed which followed upon it; which eventually are
the end and issue of preaching the Gospel; see [Mat
10:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#034). The allusion is to one of the
plagues of Egypt, and to Moses and Aaron, who were types of these
witnesses turning the waters of Egypt into blood, [Exo
7:20](../../../bib/kjv/exo007.htm#020); and answers to the second and
third vials, [Rev 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#003).

And to smite the earth with all plagues as often as they will; alluding
to the plagues of Egypt, one of the names of Rome, or the Roman
jurisdiction, in [Rev 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008), and which
is meant by the earth here; and referring to the rest of the seven vials
poured out by these witnesses, signified by seven angels; and their
having power so to do as often as they will, is to be understood of
these plagues being inflicted on the inhabitants of the earth, or
followers of antichrist, in answer to their prophecies and prayers,
which are made according to the will of God, and so always have their
effect, being such.

[Revelation 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rev 11:7</span></span>

And when they shall have finished their testimony,.... For Christ, his
truths and ordinances; when they are about to finish it, and almost
concluded it, even towards the close of the 1260 days or years, in which
they must prophesy in sackcloth: or else their testimony and their
prophesying may be considered as two distinct things, and the one be
finished before the other; their open public testimony, as witnesses, so
as to be heard, attended to, and received, will be finished before the
last war of the beast against them, in which they will be killed; but
their prophesying will continue to the end of the beast's reign, these
two being contemporary, of equal date, beginning and ending together;
for they will prophesy when they are dead; being dead they will yet
speak, and their very death will be a prophesying or foretelling that
the ruin of antichrist is at hand; and upon their resurrection and
ascension, that will immediately come on. But when their testimony is
finished, by a free and open publication of the Gospel,

the beast that ascended out of the bottomless pit; the same with that in
[Rev 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#011), with which compare [Rev
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#008); and which is no other than the
Romish antichrist; called a beast for his filthiness and cruelty; and
said to ascend out of the bottomless pit, out of hell, because his
coming is after the working of Satan: he is raised up, influenced, and
supported by him; he is a creature of his, and has his power, seat, and
authority from him, the great dragon, the old serpent, called the devil
and Satan; his original and rise are the same with those of his doctrine
and worship, the smoke of the bottomless pit; they all come out of it,
and they will return thither again. The Alexandrian copy, and some
others, read, "the fourth beast that ascendeth", &c. as if it was the
same with Daniel's fourth beast, [Dan
7:7](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#007), as it doubtless is. Now this
filthy and savage beast

shall make war against them; the witnesses; a war he has been making
against the saints ever since he was in power, by his decrees, his
counsels, his anathemas, and by sword, fire, and faggot, [Rev
13:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev013.htm#007); but this will be his last war,
and it will be a dreadful one; it will be the last struggle of the
beast; and though it will be attended with the conquest and slaughter of
the witnesses, yet it will lead on to, and issue in his own ruin; this
is "the hour of temptation", in [Rev
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#010);

and shall overcome them; not by arguments taken out of the word of God,
by which their mouths will be stopped, so as to be confounded, and have
nothing to say, or so as to yield to him, and give up the truths and
ordinances of the Gospel; but by outward force and tyranny, so as that
they shall be obliged to give way, and he will take possession of the
kingdoms and nations in which they have prophesied: he will first attack
the outward court, the bulk of formal professors, and will prevail over
them; and then, the outworks being taken, he will more easily come at
the inner court worshippers within the temple.

And kill them; not corporeally, but civilly; for as their dead bodies
lying three days and a half, that is, three years and a half, unburied,
and their resurrection from the dead, and ascension to heaven, cannot be
understood literally, so neither the killing of them; not but that in
this war there may be a great slaughter, and much blood shed, in a
literal sense: but the killing spoken of seems to regard them, not as
men, but as witnesses; they will not be suffered to bear an open
testimony any longer; they will be silenced; they will be banished, or
removed into corners; and they will not only be under the censures,
excommunications, and anathemas of the Romish antichrist, but they will
lose all credit and esteem among those, who once pretended to be their
friends; who will be ashamed of them, and will join in reproaching and
rejecting them; so that their ministrations will be quite shut up, and
at an end.

[Revelation 11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rev 11:8</span></span>

And their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great city,.... Not
Jerusalem, which was destroyed when John had this vision, and which
will; not be rebuilt at the time it refers to; nor is it ever called the
great city, though the city of the great King; however, not in this
book, though the new Jerusalem is so called, [Rev
21:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#010); but that can never be designed
here; but the city of Rome, or the Roman jurisdiction, the whole empire
of the Romish antichrist, which is often called the great city in this
book; see [Rev 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#019). The city of Rome
itself was very large, and the Roman empire still larger, so as to be
called the whole world and the antichristian see of Rome has been of
great extent. Now as the street of a city denotes a public open place in
it, a place of concourse and resort, [Pro
1:20](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#020), the dead bodies of those
witnesses being said to lie here, may design the publicness of their
silence, disgrace, and contempt; and that the silencing and degrading
them, and depriving them of all privileges, will be known all over the
antichristian empire; and that they will be exposed to public ignominy
and shame, their persons, their characters, their testimony, their
doctrines, their writings, their churches, and families, and all that
belong to them: or else this "street" may design some part of the Romish
jurisdiction, and it may be Great Britain may be particularly designed;
for where should the dead bodies of the witnesses lie, but where they
are slain? and where can they be slain, but where they are? and where
are they, at least where are there so many as in these islands? It may
be objected, that Great Britain is not a part of the see of Rome, does
not belong to the jurisdiction of it; to this it may be replied, that in
this last war of the beast, the outer court will be given to the
Gentiles, the bulk of the reformed churches will fall off to Popery, and
their countries again fall into the hands of the pope, and, among the
rest, Great Britain. The fears of Dr. Goodwin seem to be too just, and
well grounded, that the prophecy in [Dan
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#045) respects our island, which
speaks of antichrist planting "the tabernacles of his palace between the
seas, in the glorious holy mountain", or "the mountain of delight, of
holiness". Now where has God such a mountain of delight, or a people
that are the darling of his soul, as here? where in all the globe is
there such a spot where God has so many saints, so many Holy Ones, as in
this island? it may have been truly called a glorious holy mountain, or
a mountain of delight; and what place between the seas is there to which
these characters can agree, but Great Britain? Here then antichrist will
plant the tabernacles of his palace; but it will be but a tabernacle, or
tent; it will be but for a short time, as it follows, "yet he shall come
to his end, and none shall help him", [Dan
11:45](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#045). Now this great city, in the
street of which the bodies of the witnesses will lie exposed, is that

which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt; that is, it is called so in
a mystic and allegoric sense, in distinction from the literal sense; see
[Co1 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#003); it is called Sodom because
of the fulness of bread, plenty and abundance of all outward good things
in it; as well as for the pride and idleness of the priests, monks, and
friars which swarm in it; and also for the open profaneness and contempt
of true and serious religion in it; and particularly for the sin of
sodomy, so frequently committed here, with impunity, yea with allowance,
and even with commendation. This sin was extolled with praises, as
Brightman observes, by John a Casa, archbishop of Beneventum; and was
defended in a book, published for that purpose, by one Mutius; and which
was allowed by the bulls and letters patent of Pope Julius the Third;
and it is called Egypt, because of its tyranny and oppression; as the
Egyptians kept the Israelites in bondage, and made them to serve with
rigour, and embittered their lives, so the pope, and his Gentiles, or
Egyptians, have in a most oppressive and rigorous manner tyrannised over
the souls, bodies, and estates of men; and also because of its great
idolatry, Egypt being very remarkable for the number of its deities, and
the meanness of them; by which the idols and idolatries of the church of
Rome may be fitly expressed:

where also our Lord was crucified; that is, in the great city, which is
fitly compared to Sodom and Egypt; for Christ was crucified actually in
Judea, which was then become a Roman province, and under Pontius Pilate,
a Roman governor, and by his order, and suffered a Roman kind of death,
crucifixion, and for a crime he was charged with, though a false one,
against Caesar the Roman emperor; and Christ has been crucified at Rome
itself in his members, who have suffered persecution and death, and even
the death of the cross there; and he has been crucified afresh, both by
the sins and immoralities of those who have bore the Christian name
there, and by the frequent sacrifices of him in the Mass. Moreover, by
this periphrasis may be meant Jerusalem; and the sense be, that as the
great city, or jurisdiction of Rome, may be spiritually or mystically
called Sodom and Egypt, so likewise the place where our Lord was
crucified, that is, Jerusalem; and that for this reason, because that as
Jerusalem stoned and killed the prophets of the Lord, and upon the
inhabitants of it were found all the righteous blood shed upon the
earth, so in Rome, in mystical Babylon, will be found the blood of
prophets, and of saints, and of all that were slain upon earth, [Mat
23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035). The Alexandrian copy, the
Complutensian edition, the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Ethiopic versions,
read, "where also their Lord was crucified"; and the Arabic version more
expressly, "the Lord of these two", i.e. the two witnesses.

[Revelation 11:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rev 11:9</span></span>

And they of the people, and kindreds, and tongues, and nations,....
These are either the enemies of the witnesses, who consisted of the
people, kindred, tongues, and nations, out from among whom they were
chosen, redeemed, and called; and before or against whom John,
representing these witnesses, prophesied; and over whom the Romish
antichrist sits and rules, [Rev 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#009);
or else their friends, either real or pretended; since it is not said
"the people", nor "all the people, kindred, tongues, and nations", as it
is when the antichristian party are spoken of; and seeing "they that
dwell upon the earth", in [Rev 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010),
are mentioned as a distinct company from these; and these are said to be
some "of", or "out" of the people, &c. and accordingly the following
words will admit of different senses:

shall see their dead bodies three days and a half, and shall not suffer
their dead bodies to be put in graves. Now, though this is not literally
to be understood, yet it may have some reference to the usages of the
witnesses enemies, who sometimes have not allowed them a burial: so the
bodies of John Huss, and Jerom of Prague, were burnt, and their ashes
cast into the Rhine; the body of Peter Ramus was cast about the streets,
thrown into ponds and ditches, then dragged out, and beat with rods; and
some have had their bones dug up again, after they had been buried many
years, and then burnt, and their ashes scattered abroad, as Wickliff and
Bucer here in England: but as this is to be understood in a mystical and
allusive sense, the meaning is, as it may refer to enemies, that they
shall see, and look upon with joy and pleasure, and with scorn and
contempt, and insult over the witnesses, being silenced and deprived of
power and opportunity of prophesying:, and as quite dispirited, cast
down, and trodden under foot; and whereas not to have a burial granted
is always reckoned a piece of the greatest barbarity and inhumanity, as
well as of ignominy and reproach, and is expressive of a most unhappy
and miserable condition; see [Psa
129:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa129.htm#002); so it here signifies, that the
enemies of the witnesses having obtained power over them, will not only
insult them, but treat them in a very cruel and inhuman manner, and
expose them to scorn and contempt; and it represents their case as being
very uncomfortable, and deplorable: or as it may respect friends, real
or pretended, such as had been, or were, the sense is, that they shall
see them in their unhappy condition, and look upon them with pity and
compassion; and shall thoroughly consider, and lay to heart, their case
and circumstances; and shall remember then, their doctrine and
testimony, and their godly lives, and not suffer them to be buried in
oblivion; and shall also call to mind this prediction concerning them,
that they should continue in this state but three days and a half, and
then revive; and therefore they shall entertain hopes of them, as
persons sometimes do of their friends, when they are in doubt whether
they are dead or not, and therefore keep them above ground for some
time, and will not suffer them to be buried; for when put into the
grave, there is no more hope, or when a person has been dead, as in the
case of Lazarus, four days; so that this conduct may express the
kindness and hope of these friends: or it may be, the meaning is, that
they will not look at them but very shyly, and at a distance, as being
ashamed of them, and having no heart to succour, relieve, and encourage
them; but act as did the priest and the Levite towards the man that fell
among thieves, and was left half dead, looked upon him, and turned from
him, to the other side of the way; as also, that they will not entertain
them, or give them any shelter and refuge among them, when, in this
their distress, they shall apply to them: the grave is a resting place;
there the wicked cease from troubling, and there the weary are at rest,
[Job 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/job003.htm#017). Such resting places the
witnesses in former times have found, as the English in Queen Mary's
days found at Frankfort and Geneva, and other places, and since in
Holland; and as now the French refugees here, who being killed in a
civil sense in their own country, are put into graves, or are allowed
places of rest and security here: but now these witnesses will find
none; those who pretended to be their friends will look shy upon them,
and not harbour them, yea, will not suffer any to do it; they will by
some public act, through fear of the Popish party, forbid the reception
and entertainment of them. The time that this will last will be "three
days and a half"; after which, as in [Rev
11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011), they will live again, which
cannot be understood literally of so many precise days; for it will; not
be possible, that, in so short a time, the news of the slaying of the
witnesses should be spread among the inhabitants of the earth, md they
be able to express their general joy and rejoicing, and to send their
gifts to one another upon his occasion, as is signified in [Rev
11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010); nor does this design so long a
time, as the time and times, and half a time, elsewhere mentioned; or
that it is a period of the same date and duration with the forty two
months, in which the holy city is trodden under foot, and the 1260 days,
or years, in which the witnesses prophesy in sackcloth; for during that
time they will prophesy, and hold forth their testimony, though in
sackcloth; but now they will be killed, and during this space will lie
dead, and in entire silence: besides, it will be when they shall have
finished their testimony, or towards the close of the 1260 days or
years, that this war and slaughter will be, and when these three days
and a half will take place, which are to be understood of three years
and a half, according the prophetic style, a day for a year; and seems
intended for the comfort of the saints, that this most afflictive and
distressed condition of the witnesses should last but for a little
while. It is made a question, whether this war with the witnesses, and
the slaughter of them, and their lying unburied, are over or not: some
have thought that these things had their accomplishment in the council
of Constance, held about the year 1414, and which lasted three years and
a half exactly, when those two witnesses, John Huss, and Jerom of
Prague, were killed, insulted, and triumphed over by this council, which
was made up of almost all nations. Brightman refers it to the Smalcaldic
war in Germany in 1547, when the Protestant army was beaten, and John
Frederick, elector of Saxony, and Ernest, the son of the landgrave, and
after that the landgrave himself, were taken prisoners; which was a
grievous blow to the Protestant cause, and occasioned great rejoicing in
the Popish party; but in the year 1550, just three years and a half
after that defeat, the men of Magdeburgh rose up with great spirit and
courage, and revived the cause. About this time was the council of
Trent; to which also the same writer accommodates these things, which
consisted of men of all nations, and continued three years and a half;
when the authority of the Scriptures was destroyed, which he supposes
are the witnesses; when they were suppressed and silenced, and lay as a
mere carcass, a dead letter, without any life in them: and it is easy to
observe, that there have been several periods of time, in which there
has been a seeming fulfilment of these things; the persecution under
Queen Mary, and the burning of the martyrs in her time, continued about
three years and a half; the massacre in France, in 1572, threatened an
utter extirpation of the Protestant religion there, which yet revived in
1576, much about the same space of time here mentioned; and there are
several others that have been observed by writers; but what seems most
remarkable of all is the case of the Protestants in the valleys of
Piedmont, commonly called the Vaudois. The duke of Savoy, their
sovereign, by an edict, dated January 31, 1685-6, N. S. forbad the
exercise of their religion on pain of death, ordered their churches to
be demolished, and their ministers to be banished; which was published
in the valleys April the 11th, and was put in execution on the 22nd of
the same month, by Savoy and French troops, who killed great numbers of
them, took others, and put them into prisons, whom they released about
the beginning of December, 1686, and suffered them to depart into other
countries, where they were kindly received, relieved, and preserved,
particularly by the kingdoms and states of England, Holland,
Brandenburgh, Geneva, and Switzerland, while the Popish party were
rejoicing at their ruin: and toward the latter end of the year 1689,
about three years and a half after the publishing of the edict, these
people were inspired on a sudden with a spirit of resolution and
courage; and, contrary to the advice of their friends, who thought their
case desperate, secretly passed the lake of Geneva, and entered Savoy
with sword in hand, and recovered their ancient possessions; and by the
month of April, A. D. 1690, established themselves in it,
notwithstanding the troops of France and Savoy, to whom they were
comparatively few, and whom they slew in great numbers, with little loss
to themselves; when the duke perceiving they were encouraged and
assisted by foreign princes, and he having left the French interest,
recalled the rest of them, and reestablished them by an edict, signed
June 4, 1690, just three years and a half after their total dissipation,
and gave leave to the French refugees to return with them. Now I take
it, that these several things which have happened at certain times, in
particular places, are so many hints and pledges of what hereafter will
be universal to the witnesses in all places where they are. It would be
very desirable if it could be ascertained, and concluded upon a good
foundation, that this affair of the killing of the witnesses was over;
but because of the following things it cannot be; for the outward court
is not yet given to the Gentiles, at least not the whole of it, which
must be, ere they can come at the witnesses in the inner court to slay
them: they have indeed attacked it, and have taken some part of it, as
in Germany, Poland, &c. but as yet not in Great Britain, Holland, &c. at
least not thoroughly, though it is plain they are getting ground.
Moreover, the witnesses have not finished their testimony, they are
still prophesying: in sackcloth; whereas it will be when they have
finished it, and towards the close of the 1260 days or years, that they
will be killed: to which add, that the ruin of antichrist will quickly
follow their rising and ascension; so that if any of the above instances
had been the fulfilling of these things relating to the witnesses,
antichrist must have been destroyed before now. And it may be further
observed, that the second woe, which is the Turkish woe, will, upon the
fulfilment of these things, pass away; and the third woe, or the
sounding of the seventh trumpet, will immediately take place, which
brings on the kingdom of Christ; whereas the Turkish government is still
in being, and in great power (this was published in 1747. Ed.); and
there is no appearance, as yet, of the kingdoms of this world becoming
the kingdoms of our Lord Jesus Christ. There may be an allusion, in this
space of time, to the time that Antiochus, called Epiphanes, held
Jerusalem in his hands, after he had conquered it, which was just three
years and six months (s), during which time he spoiled the temple, and
caused the daily sacrifice to cease: this term of time is much spoken of
by the Jews; so long they say Nebuchadnezzar besieged Jerusalem, and
likewise Vespasian, and also three years and a half Adrian besieged
Bither (t).

\(s\) Joseph de Bello Jud. l. 1. c. 1. sect. 7. (t) Echa Rabbati, fol.
43. 4. & 46. 3. & 48. 1. & 52. 2. & 58. 3. T. Hieros. Taanith, fol. 68.
4. Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 93. 1.

[Revelation 11:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rev 11:10</span></span>

And they that dwell upon the earth,.... Out of which the beast arose,
and over which he reigns, even the inhabitants of the Roman empire,
often in this book called the earth, the followers of antichrist, men
that mind nothing but earth, and earthly things:

shall rejoice over them, and make merry, and shall send gifts one to
another; as is usual with persons, and was with the Jews, to do in times
of public rejoicing; see [Est 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/est009.htm#018).

Because these two prophets tormented them that dwelt on the earth; not
because they were tormented by them, but because they were now freed
from their tormenting ministry; they had tormented them by the preaching
of the Gospel, which is foolishness, and the savour of death to natural
men, and gives them pain, and fills them with vexation and wrath; by
their testimony which they had bore for Christ, and against antichrist;
by their sharp reproof of them for their false doctrine and will
worship, and their impure lives and conversations; by their own holy
lives, which would sometimes flash light into their consciences, and
make them uneasy; and by their foretelling the calamities and ruin,
temporal and eternal, that would come upon them; but now they are
silenced, and they hear and see no more of these things at which they
rejoice.

[Revelation 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rev 11:11</span></span>

And after three days and a half,.... When it was certain they were dead,
and all hope of reviving was over; see [Joh
11:39](../../../bib/kjv/joh011.htm#039); that is, three years and a
half:

the spirit of life from God entered into them; this phrase is expressive
of a resurrection the Jews frequently call the general resurrection "a
quickening", and have the very phrase here used; for, speaking of the
resurrection, they say (u), , "the spirit of life" does not dwell but in
the holy land. This resurrection of the witnesses is not to be
understood of a corporeal resurrection; for there is no reason to
believe that there will be a resurrection of any particular saints until
the general resurrection, which will be at the personal coming of
Christ, and at the beginning of the thousand years, and after the
sounding of the seventh trumpet; whereas this will be before that, and
towards the close of the sixth trumpet: and besides, the death of these
witnesses is not corporeal, as has been observed: nor is a spiritual
resurrection from the death of sin to a life of grace intended, which is
owing to the Spirit of life from Christ; for these witnesses were such
who had been quickened, and raised in this sense antecedent to their
prophesying and killing; but a civil resurrection of them, or a
resurrection of them as witnesses, when their spirits will revive, and
they will take heart and courage again to appear for Christ: and this
may be understood of the same individual persons that were silenced, or
of those that succeeded such that corporeally died in the war of the
beast, or during this interval; and so these witnesses may be said to
rise in them, they appearing in the same spirit they did; just as John
the Baptist came in the spirit and power of Elias: and this will be
owing to the Spirit of life from God entering into them; which is said
in allusion to the living soul of man, which returns to God, and at the
resurrection, whether particular or general, comes from him, and
reenters the body; and which also is owing to the Spirit of God, by whom
mortal bodies will be quickened; and in allusion to the breathing on the
dry bones in Ezekiel's vision, [Eze
37:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze037.htm#001); and the sense is, that the
Spirit of God will inspire these witnesses with fresh life and rigour,
zeal and resolution; so that though they have been so long silent,
lifeless, and dispirited, they shall now rise in high spirits, and
bravely exert themselves in the cause of Christ; and this will not be by
any worldly power and authority, or by any secular arm, that shall
encourage them, but by the Spirit of God, who shall breathe upon them,
and afresh quicken them, and fill them with resolution and courage:

and they stood upon their feet; in great numbers, like the army in
Ezekiel's vision; and will reassume their former station, and be in a
position and a state of readiness to serve the Lord, and to defend his
truths, and discharge their duty with boldness and courage, fearing the
face of none:

and great fear fell upon them which saw them; in this posture; either on
their enemies, who may fear that they should be tormented with them
again; that the things which they had foretold concerning their ruin are
now coming upon them; that they shall be turned out of their places of
profit, and lose all their worldly advantages, and carnal pleasures now,
and be miserable to all eternity: or upon their friends, either their
false hearted ones, that would not succour them when in distress, who
may fear that God, whose finger they will see in this matter, will by
them resent their conduct towards them; or else their real friends, who
may be filled with reverence and awe of the divine Majesty, as the
church was upon the business of Ananias and Sapphira, [Act
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/act005.htm#011).

\(u\) Zohar in Gen. fol. 79. 3.

[Revelation 11:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rev 11:12</span></span>

And they heard a great voice from heaven,.... The Complutensian edition
reads, "I heard", i.e. "John"; and so the Syriac and Arabic versions;
but the copies in general read "they"; not the enemies, but the
witnesses: and this seems not to come from any Christian civil
magistrate in the church, but from Christ himself; not but that Christ
may make use of, such for the bringing of his people into a more
glorious and comfortable state in this world:

saying unto them, come up hither; as the angel said to John, [Rev
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#001), and Christ will say to his
people, though on another account, [Mat
25:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat025.htm#034).

And they ascended up to heaven in a cloud; which is to be understood not
literally, for no man hath ascended to heaven, nor will any, until the
thousand years are ended, when the saints will, in a body, ascend
thither; but mystically, of a more glorious state of the church; so to
ascend to heaven signifies a more exalted state in a prince, or a
kingdom, [Isa 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#013); and here intends
a state of comfortable communion of the saints one with another, of
great purity and holiness, of large enjoyments of blessings and
privileges, and of great security from enemies, and of great glory, and
honour, and power, that shall be bestowed upon them; they now dwelling
on high, and their place of defence being the munition of rocks. This
will be the beginning of the spiritual reign of Christ; and this
ascension of the witnesses will be in a cloud, in allusion to our Lord's
ascension to heaven, and as expressive of that glory and majesty which
will be put upon these risen witnesses, and in which they shall enter
into this happy state of things; or it may be, that this may denote that
the first appearance of these happy times, and of Christ's spiritual
reign in his church, and their more comfortable enjoyment, will be at
first but dim and obscure, and yet such as, in comparison of their
former state, will be visible to, and be taken notice of, even by their
very enemies:

and their enemies beheld them; going up to heaven, or entering into a
purer, and more glorious, and spiritual state; for the mountain of the
Lord's house will be established upon the top of the mountains, and
Jerusalem shall be made the praise of the whole earth, an eternal
excellency, and the joy of many generations; and this shall be seen and
known of all, though to their grief and sorrow.

[Revelation 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rev 11:13</span></span>

And the same hour was there a great earthquake,.... Or the same day, as
the Complutensian edition, and some copies, read; that is, at the time
of the resurrection and ascension of the witnesses, as there was at the
resurrection of Christ; and is to be understood of a very great
commotion in the civil affairs of kingdoms and nations within the Roman
jurisdiction, as there was when Rome Pagan was near its ruin, [Rev
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#012).

And the tenth part of the city fell. Mr. Daubuz interprets the
"earthquake" of the irruption of the Ottomans upon the Grecian empire,
and the "tenth" part of the city, of the Greek church, and the falling
of it, of its loss of liberty, and falling into slavery; but something
yet to come is here intended. By "the city" is meant the city of Rome,
the great city, mentioned in [Rev
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#008); and by "the tenth part" of it
may be designed either Rome itself, which as it now is, according to the
observation of some, is but a tenth part of what it was once; so that
the same thing is meant as when it is said, "Babylon is fallen, is
fallen", [Rev 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev014.htm#008), or it may design
the tithes and profits which arise from the several kingdoms belonging
to the jurisdiction and see of Rome, which now will fall off from those
who used to share them, upon this new and spiritual state of things; the
Gospel daily gaining ground, and enlightening the minds of men, and
freeing them from the slavery they were held in; or else the ten fold
government of the Roman empire, or the ten kings that gave their
kingdoms to the whore of Rome, and are the ten horns of the beast, on
which she sits, who will now hate her, and burn her flesh with fire; or
rather one of the ten kingdoms, into which the Roman western empire was
divided. Dr. Goodwin seems inclined to think that Great Britain is
intended, which having been gained over to the Popish party, will now
fall off again: but I rather think the kingdom of France is meant, the
last of the ten kingdoms, which rose up out of the ruins of the Roman
empire, which will be conquered, and which will be the means of its
reformation from Popery.

And in the earthquake were slain of men seven thousand; the meaning is,
that in the commotions, massacres, tumults, and wars which will be
throughout the empire, such a number of men will be slain; which is
either put for a greater number; a certain for an uncertain, as in [Rom
11:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#004); and perhaps in reference to the
account there; otherwise seven thousand is but a small number to be
slain in battle; or as it is in the original text, "the names of men
seven thousand". Now it is observed by some, that the smallest name of
number belonging to men is a centurion, or captain of an hundred men;
and supposing that to be meant, then seven thousand names of men will
imply, that in an hour, or about a fortnight's time, may be slain
throughout all Europe, in battles and massacres, about seven hundred
thousand men, which is a very large number: or names of men may signify
men of name, of great renown, as in [Num
16:2](../../../bib/kjv/num016.htm#002); and then if seven thousand men
of name, officers in armies, should be slain, how great must be the
number of the common soldiers? Some have thought, that ecclesiastical
dignities, or men distinguished by names and titles, such as cardinals,
archbishops, bishops, priests, &c. and the whole rabble of the
antichristian hierarchy, which will now fall, and be utterly demolished,
are intended:

and the remnant were affrighted; who were not slain in this earthquake;
these will be affected with the judgments of God upon others, and be
made sensible of their danger, and of their deliverance, which will so
work upon them, as to reform them from Popery:

and gave glory to the God of heaven; will acknowledge the justice of
God, and the righteousness of his judgments upon those that were slain,
and his goodness to them who are spared; will confess their
transgressions and sins they have been guilty of; and give the glory of
their deliverance, not to their idols and images, but to the true God,
whose religion they now embrace; for this respects the large conversions
among the Popish party to the true religion, under the influence of the
grace of God, through the preaching of the Gospel, which will now be
spread throughout the world.

[Revelation 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rev 11:14</span></span>

The second woe is past,.... Not in John's time, only in a visionary way;
the meaning is, that the second woe trumpet, which is the sixth, will
now have done sounding, when the four angels, bound in the river
Euphrates, shall have been loosed, and they, with their horsemen, shall
have done what they were designed to do; when the two witnesses shall
have been slain, and are raised again, and ascended to heaven; and the
things attending, or following thereon, as the earthquake, and
slaughter, and the conversions of men, are accomplished.

And behold the third woe cometh quickly; immediately, upon the passing
of the other; namely, the sounding of the seventh trumpet, as follows.

[Revelation 11:15](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rev 11:15</span></span>

And the seventh angel sounded,.... The last of the seven angels, who had
trumpets given them to sound, [Rev
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev008.htm#002). The days of the voice of this
angel, as in [Rev 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/rev010.htm#007), cannot refer
to the times of Constantine; for though there was then a strange turn of
affairs in favour of the kingdom of Christ, when there was a great
spread of the Gospel, and large conversions in many places, and many
churches were raised and formed in several countries, and the whole
empire became Christian; yet this, as we have seen, came to pass under
the sixth seal, before any of the trumpets were sounded, and much less
this seventh and last; nor do they belong to the times of the
Reformation in Germany. Brightman fixes the sounding of this trumpet to
the year 1558, when the kings of Sweden and Denmark set up the Gospel in
their kingdoms, and reformed them from Popery; and when Queen Elizabeth
came to the throne of England, and rooted out great part of the Romish
superstition: but it is certain that this angel has not yet sounded his
trumpet, and therefore cannot refer to anything past, but to what is to
come; we are yet under the sixth trumpet; the outward court is not yet
given to the Gentiles; the witnesses are not slain, and much less risen
and ascended; the earthquake, the fall of the tenth part of the city,
and the slaughter of seven thousand names of men, with what will follow
thereon, are things yet to come; the Turkish woe is not over, and
antichrist still reigns, and the kingdoms of this world are far from
appearing to be the kingdoms of Christ. Some think, and indeed the
generality of interpreters, that this respects the voice of the
archangel, and trump of God, the last trump, which will sound at the
resurrection of the dead, and the day of judgment; but none of these
appear in the account of things under this trumpet; but rather the whole
has a view to the spiritual reign of Christ, when both the eastern and
western antichrist will be destroyed; the Gospel will be carried all
over the world, and there will be large conversions both among Jews and
Gentiles, and Christ will reign in a spiritual manner over all the
earth. Hence it follows,

and there were great voices in heaven; these are either the voices of
the angels in heaven, who rejoice at every appearance, and breaking
forth of Christ's kingdom and glory, as in [Rev
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/rev005.htm#011); and indeed, if they rejoice at
the conversion of one sinner, at a single addition to Christ's interest,
then much more will they, when the kingdoms of this world become his; or
rather these may be the voices of the multitude of the saints in the
churches, the same company with those in [Rev
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#001); who express their joy at the
judgment of the great whore, and at the marriage of the Lamb; and who,
as here, are attended with the thanksgivings and hallelujahs of the four
and twenty elders: and it may be, that these are also the voices of the
four living creatures, the ministers of the word, since the four and
twenty elders generally follow them, [Rev
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#009); they may be the witnesses, who
were silenced, but are now raised up, and are ascended into heaven, and
their mouths are opened, and their voices heard again:

saying, the kingdoms of this world are become the kingdoms of our Lord,
and of his Christ; by "the kingdoms of this world" are meant worldly
kingdoms, which are set up by worldly power, and are supported by
worldly policy, and subsist upon worldly principles and maxims; the
government of which proceeds upon worldly ends and views; in distinction
from the kingdom of Christ, which is not of this world, and is not
supported by any such methods; and they are the kingdoms, into which the
world is divided, which, and the glory of them, Satan showed to Christ,
and insolently offered to give him them, if he would worship him; but
these were to come to Christ in another way, and at another time. The
Alexandrian copy, and some others, the Complutensian edition, the
Vulgate Latin version, and all the Oriental versions, read in the
singular number, "the kingdom of this world"; the whole government of
it, which is his by right of nature, and will be overturned, and
overturned again and again, till he comes, whose right it is; and then
all power, rule, and authority, will be put down, and his kingdom, which
will tilt the face of the whole earth, will take place: all the
antichristian states and kingdoms are here intended, particularly the
kingdoms into which the Roman empire, sometimes called the whole world,
[Luk 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#001), is divided, which are ten;
one of the ten, a tenth part of the city or jurisdiction of Rome, will
fall at the close of the sixth trumpet, and the other nine, or the other
nine parts, will fall at the sounding of the seventh; the ten kings,
that have given their kingdoms to the beast, will have an aversion to
the whore, hate her, and burn her flesh, will fall off from her, and
into the hands of Christ; there will be a general and thorough
reformation from Popery in all the kingdoms of the Roman empire: but
though these are greatly intended, yet not only they, but the Mahometan
nations also, as the Turkish woe will now be over, and the great river
Euphrates dried up, to make way for the kings of the east, those large
kingdoms and countries of China, Tartary, and Persia; and these now
under the power of the Turk will embrace the Christian faith; and also
all the Pagan nations are to be taken into the account, and who will now
enjoy the light of the Gospel: and all, and everyone those Pagan, Papal,
and Mahometan kingdoms, will "become the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ"; by "our Lord" may be designed God the Father, who is the
Lord of the whole earth, the Lord God Almighty, and is acknowledged as
such by angels and men; and by "his Christ", his Son Jesus Christ, who
is equal with him; and what belongs to the one belongs to the other; and
who, as Mediator, is his anointed One; anointed to be prophet, priest,
and King; anointed with the oil of gladness, the Holy Ghost; see [Psa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#002), where the same distinction is. In
the Targum on [Isa 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa004.htm#002) mention is made
of , "the Messiah"; or "Christ of Jehovah": and in the same Targum on
[Isa 53:10](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#010), it is said, "they shall
look" , "upon the kingdom of their Messiah"; though it may be rather
that Christ is designed by both these phrases, and the words be
rendered, "our Lord, even his Christ"; since the phrase, "our Lord", as
well as Christ, is generally understood of Jesus Christ in the New
Testament; and who is Lord of all, of angels, and of men, and the Christ
of God. Now these kingdoms will become his, not merely by right, for so
they are his already, by right of nature, and creation, and
preservation; but these have shaken off his government, and have refused
to have him to reign over them, and have fallen into the hands of
usurpers, as Satan, the god of this world, the Romish antichrist, that
reigns over the kings of the earth, and Mahomet the king of the locusts;
but now these will, in fact, come into his hands, and be under his
government; they will acknowledge him as their Lord and Sovereign, and
fear and worship him, as King of saints: and this will be brought about,
not by force of arms, as Mahomet got his dominions; nor by policy and
fraud, by imposture and lying wonders, by which the pope of Rome has
obtained his authority over the nations; but partly by the pouring out
of the vials of God's wrath upon the seat of the beast, and upon the
river Euphrates, that is, both upon the pope and Turk, which will weaken
and destroy their power and authority, and make way for Christ to set up
his kingdom; and partly, and chiefly, by the preaching of the Gospel:
now will an open door be set, which none can shut; many will run to and
fro, and knowledge will be increased; the earth will be covered with it,
as the sea with waters; multitudes of souls everywhere will be
converted; a nation will be born at once; churches will be set up in
every place, which are Christ's kingdom, where he reigns, and where his
subjects are, and his laws are put in execution; where his word will be
now faithfully preached, his ordinances purely administered, and he, in
his person, office, and grace, will be alone exalted: the consequence of
which will be,

and he shall reign for ever and ever; no usurper will ever start up
more, or obtain, neither Satan, nor the beast, nor the false prophet,
shall ever regain their power and authority any more; neither Paganism,
nor Judaism, nor antichristianism, either Papal or Mahometan, shall ever
have place more: Christ will reign in this spiritual way, more or less,
until he comes personally, and then he will reign with his people on
earth a thousand years; and when they are ended, he will reign with them
in heaven to all eternity; for though, at the end of these years, he
shall deliver up the kingdom to the Father, yet he will not cease to
reign; indeed he will not reign in the same manner, but he will reign
with equal power and authority, and over, and with the same persons. The
Vulgate Latin version adds, "Amen".

[Revelation 11:16](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rev 11:16</span></span>

And the four and twenty elders,.... The same with those in [Rev
4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev004.htm#004);

which sat before God on their seats; as they are also there described;
and which may be expressive of their enjoyment of the divine Presence;
and also of their quiet and undisturbed situation, being restored to
their former places, which they now possess without molestation and
interruption; for as these are the representatives of Gospel churches in
all ages, they were with the church in the wilderness during the 1260
days, or years: hence we hear nothing of them from the time of the
sealing of the hundred and forty and four thousand, and during the
sounding of the trumpets; but now they are restored to their former
seats, and upon this wonderful change of things in the world, they

fell upon their faces and worshipped God; in a very humble and
reverential posture, and in a way of praise and thanksgiving.

[Revelation 11:17](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rev 11:17</span></span>

Saying, we give thee thanks, O Lord God Almighty,.... The person
addressed is the Lord Jesus Christ, whose the kingdoms are become, and
who now reigns in great power and authority; he is Lord of all, and
truly and properly God, and the Almighty, as his works of creation,
preservation, redemption, raising himself from the dead, &c. declare;
and each of these titles exceedingly well suit him, when his visible
kingdom on earth will be so greatly enlarged:

which art, and wast, and art to come: the everlasting, "I am", the
unchangeable Jehovah: the phrase is expressive of the eternity and
immutability; see Gill on [Rev 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#008);
and it may be observed, whereas in this description of him it is said,
"and art to come", this therefore does not belong to his personal, but
to his spiritual reign; he will not be as yet come in person, to raise
the dead, and judge the world, when these voices shall be in heaven, and
these congratulations of the elders be made: the reason of their praise
and thanksgiving follows,

because thou hast taken to thee thy great power, and hast reigned; power
always belonged to him, as God; he always was the mighty God, and, as
such, help for his people was laid upon him, he being mighty to save,
and able to bear the government of them, laid on his shoulders; and, as
Mediator, all power in heaven, and in earth, was given to him at his
resurrection; and he had a name given him above every name, when exalted
at the right hand of God, and was made, or declared, Lord and Christ;
and from that time he has, in some measure, exerted his power and
reigned: he endued his apostles with power from on high; and he went
forth in the ministry of the Gospel conquering, and to conquer; and has
ever since reigned in the hearts of his people; but now he will manifest
and display his "great" power; he will show it more openly, and use it
more extensively; his kingdom shall be from sea to sea, and from the
river to the ends of the earth; he shall be King over all the earth; his
power has been seen in ages past, but now the "greatness" of his power
will be made manifest; he has always had a kingdom on earth, but now
the, "greatness" of the kingdom, under the whole heaven, will be his.

[Revelation 11:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rev 11:18</span></span>

And the nations were angry,.... See [Psa
99:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa099.htm#001), which the Septuagint render, the
"Lord reigns, let the nations be angry". This refers not to the times of
the dragon, or the Pagan Roman emperors, who were wroth with the woman,
the church, and made war with her seed; but Rome Papal, and its
Gentiles, are intended; these are the nations that antichrist reigns
over: and it does not so much design their anger against Christ, and his
people, expressed by their anathemas, excommunications, murders; and
massacres, and bloody persecutions, which could not be cause of
thanksgiving to the elders; but their anger and resentment at his power
and reign, at having the outward court taken from them, said to be given
them, [Rev 11:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#002); and at their loss of
power, profit, pleasure, and plenty, through the fall of Babylon, and
the setting up of Christ's kingdom; and though these things will make
the Gentiles, the followers of antichrist, gnash their teeth, it will
occasion joy and thanksgiving among the saints:

and thy wrath is come: the time is come to make Babylon, or the Romish
antichrist, to drink of the wine of the fierceness of divine wrath; as
the time of the Lamb's wrath and vengeance upon Rome Pagan was come at
the opening of the sixth seal, so the time of his wrath and vengeance on
Rome Papal will be come at the sounding of the seventh trumpet:

and the time of the dead, that they should be judged; not the time of
the wicked, who are dead in sins, while they live, and who die in their
sins, not their time to be raised from the dead, in order to be judged,
for they will not rise till after the thousand years are ended; nor the
time of the dead in Christ, who will rise upon Christ's personal coming,
at the beginning of the thousand years; but this trumpet respects not
the personal coming of Christ to raise the dead, and judge the world,
but his spiritual coming to reign in his churches, and judge their
enemies: the time of those that were dead for Christ, whose blood had
been shed in his cause, the time for the vindication of them, and
avenging their blood, is now come; the souls of those under the altar
had been a long time crying to God to avenge their blood on them that
dwell on the earth; and now the time will be come, when God will judge
his people, vindicate their cause; and when he, to whom vengeance
belongs, will repay it, by pouring out the vials of his wrath on the
antichristian party, by giving them blood to drink, because they are
worthy; this judgment will issue in the fall and ruin both of the
western and eastern antichrist.

And that thou shouldest give reward unto thy servants; not a reward of
debt, but of grace; not the recompence of reward, or the reward of the
inheritance in heaven; but some marks of honour and respect; some
measure of happiness, peace, and joy, which Christ of his rich grace
will give to his ministers and churches, and all that love him in this
glorious period of time; and who are distinguished in the following
manner,

the prophets, and to the saints, and them that fear thy name, small and
great: by the "prophets" are meant, not the prophets of the Old
Testament, but the prophets of the New; and not those extraordinary
persons, who are distinguished on the one hand from apostles and
evangelists, and on the other from pastors and teachers, who had an
extraordinary gift of interpreting the Scriptures, and of foretelling
things to come; but the ministers of the word, the two prophets or
witnesses, who had prophesied in sackcloth, but shall now be clothed
with salvation: and by "the saints" are designed such as were set apart
by God the Father from eternity, and whose sins are expiated by the
blood of Christ, and who are internally sanctified by the, Spirit of
God, and externally separated from the rest of mankind, and incorporated
into a Gospel church state, and are in holy fellowship one with another:
and they that "fear the name" of God are such as truly love and
reverence him, and worship him in Spirit and in truth, but are not
members of any particular church; who yet will be taken notice of by the
Lord, and a book of remembrance be written for them; so the proselytes
from among the Gentiles are distinguished from the Israelites by the
same character; See Gill on [Act
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#016); or rather this is a general
character of both ministers and churches, since to fear the name of the
Lord is a phrase that includes all religious worship, internal and
external. And now all these, "small and great", whether greater or
lesser believers, whether men of larger or meaner gifts and abilities,
will all have the same reward, enjoy the same church privileges, partake
of the same ordinances, in the purity of them, have the same communion
with God, and fellowship with Christ, and one another, and share in, the
same common peace, and liberty, and security from enemies: the last
thing taken notice of by these elders, as matter of thanksgiving, is the
destruction of antichrist.

And shouldest destroy them which destroy the earth; or "corrupt it";
meaning antichrist and his followers; who destroy the bodies, souls, and
estates of men, and not only the inhabitants of the earth, but even the
earth itself; for through that laziness and idleness which they spread
wherever they come, a fruitful country is turned into barrenness; who
corrupt the minds of men with false doctrine, idolatry, and
superstition, and the bodies of women and men with all uncleanness and
filthiness, with fornication, sodomy, &c. [Rev
19:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#002); and are the cause of their own
destruction, and the destruction of others; which, upon the blowing of
the seventh trumpet, will come swiftly and irrecoverably. Now will
Babylon sink as a millstone into the sea, never to be seen more; both
the western and eastern antichrists are intended; the former is called
the son of perdition, because of his destroying others, and going into
perdition himself; and the latter is called "Abaddon" and "Apollyon",
which both signify a destroyer, [Th2
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#004).

[Revelation 11:19](../../../bib/kjv/rev011.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rev 11:19</span></span>

And the temple of God was opened in heaven,.... The temple at Jerusalem,
to which the allusion is, was the place of public worship; this, in
times of idolatry, was shut up, and fell to decay; and when there was a
reformation its doors were opened, and that repaired; and to this the
reference seems to be; and the sense is, that at this time the pure
worship of God will be restored, and there will be a free and
uninterrupted exercise of it; the temple will be open to all; here
everyone may come, and sit, and worship without fear; churches will now
be formed according to the original plan, and primitive order and
institution of them; and the laws of Christ concerning the admission,
regulation, and exclusion of members, will be carefully and punctually
observed; the ordinances of Christ will be kept, as they were first
delivered, and be purged from all the corruptions introduced by Papists
or retained by Protestants; the ordinance of the Lord's supper will be
freed from the senseless notions of transubstantiation and
consubstantiation, and from all vain and impertinent rites and
ceremonies that attend it; and the ordinance of baptism will be
administered, both as to mode and subject, according to the word of God,
as well as be cleared from the superstitious rites of the sign of the
cross, chrism, spittle, &c. in short, all external worship will be pure,
plain, and evangelical: hence it appears, that by this temple is not
meant the church triumphant, and the happiness of the saints in heaven,
as becoming visible, not even the new Jerusalem church state, or the
personal reign of Christ on earth for a thousand years; for in that
state there will be no temple at all, nor will the saints then need the
sun, or moon of Gospel ordinances, [Rev
21:22](../../../bib/kjv/rev021.htm#022);

and there was seen in his temple the ark of his testament: the ark was a
chest, in which the covenant or tables of the law were put; upon it was
the mercy seat, and over that the cherubim of glory, shadowing it;
between which were the seat of the divine Majesty; this ark stood in the
holy of holies, and was seen only by the high priest once a year, and
was covered with a covering vail, [Num
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/num004.htm#005); it was wanting in the second
temple (w); to this the allusion is here; See Gill on [Heb
9:4](../../../bib/kjv/heb009.htm#004). Now in this spiritual Gospel
church state, through the pure ministry of the word, and the faithful
administration of ordinances, the mysteries of the Gospel, into which
angels desire to look, signified by the cherubim over the mercy seat,
will be clearly revealed to all Christians, Jews and Gentiles;
particularly to the former, from whom they have been hid; the vail that
is over their hearts will then be done away, when they shall be turned
to the Lord; and indeed the vail which is overall people will then be
removed; and those truths which have been so much obscured by antichrist
will be clearly seen; and especially the Lord Jesus Christ, the antitype
of the ark, in whom are hid the treasures of wisdom; by whom the law,
and the two tables of it, are fulfilled; and in whom they are pure and
perfect; and by whom the covenant of grace is ratified and confirmed;
and in whom it is sure; and through whom God is propitious to his
people, and grants them communion with him; he will be visibly held
forth in the ministry of the word; and be seen in the glory of his
person, and offices, and grace; who has been so long and greatly hid,
and kept out of sight by Popish and Mahometan darkness;

and there were lightnings, and voices, and thunderings, and an
earthquake, and great hail; which may be understood of the vials of
God's wrath, that will be poured out upon the pope and Turk; which
though mentioned last, will be first, and make way for this spiritual
state; particularly the things here spoken of may be compared with what
will be at the pouring out of the seventh vial, [Rev
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/rev016.htm#018); or this may design the powerful
"voices", and clear ministrations of the Gospel, and the efficacy of
them at this time; which, like "thunders", will awaken the consciences
of men, and, like "earthquakes", will make them shake and tremble, and
cry out, what shall we do to be saved? and as "lightnings" illuminate
their understandings, and give them a clear discerning of divine things;
and as "hail" beat down all self-righteousness and self-confidence, and
all errors, heresies, superstition, and will worship. Though I suspect,
that these several things are expressive of the change and revolution
that will be made after a time, in this happy and comfortable state; and
that the cold, which generally attends an hail storm, represents that
coldness and lukewarmness, into which the churches of Christ will again
sink, expressed in the Laodicean church state, in which condition Christ
will find them when he personally appears; so that the seven seals, with
the seven trumpets, bring us exactly to the same period of time as the
seven churches do.

\(w\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 21. 2. See following in Apocrypha:

"And they took all the holy vessels of the Lord, both great and small,
with the vessels of the ark of God, and the king's treasures, and
carried them away into Babylon.'' (1 Esdras 1:54)

"4 And open your hearts in his law and commandments, and send you peace,
5 And hear your prayers, and be at one with you, and never forsake you
in time of trouble.'' (2 Maccabees 1).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 12](rev012)

</div>
