<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Revelation Index](rev)  
  [Previous](jde001)  [Next](rev001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Revelation Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

[Revelation](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rev 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO REVELATION

That this book was written by the Apostle and Evangelist John, is clear
not only from the express mention of his name, and from his office, a
servant of Jesus Christ, [Rev 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#001); but
also from the character this writer gives of himself, [Rev
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002); as being an eyewitness of the
essential Logos, or Word of God, and who bore a faithful record of him
as such, as John did in his Gospel, in a very peculiar and remarkable
manner, and from this writer's being in the isle of Patmos when he
wrote, [Rev 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#009); for of what other
John can this be said? to which may be added the testimonies of the
ancient writers, as Justin Martyr (a), who lived within fifty years of
the apostle, and Irenaeus (b), who was the disciple of Polycarp, an
hearer of this apostle, and Clemens Alexandrinus (c), Tertullian (d),
Origen (e), and others, who ascribe it to him. It was a most monstrously
stupid notion of Caius, Dionysius of Alexandria mentions (f), that it
was written by Cerinthus the heretic, when his heresies concerning the
divinity and humanity of Christ are most strongly refuted in it. What
seems to have led to such a thought is, that the account of the thousand
years' reign, and the descent of the new Jerusalem from heaven, seemed
to favour the judaism of this man, and his carnal notions of an earthly
paradise, whereas they have no such tendency. And as for its being
written by another John, who is said to be presbyter at Ephesus, after
the apostle, it is not certain there ever was such a man; and if there
was, he must be too late to be the writer of this book; nor to him can
the above characters agree. What is observed in favour of him, that the
penman of this book is called, in the title, John the divine, and not
the evangelist, or apostle, will do him no service; for to whom does
this character so well agree, as to the Evangelist John, who wrote of
divine things in so divine a manner, and particularly concerning the
divinity of Christ? hence this book was sometimes called yeologia,
"Divinity" (g): besides, the title of the book is not original, but is
what has been affixed to it by others, and varies; for in the
Complutensian edition it runs thus,

"the Revelation of the holy Apostle and Evangelist John the Divine.''

In the Vulgate Latin version it is called the Apocalypse of the blessed
John the Apostle; and in the Syriac version, the Revelation which was
made to John the Evangelist; and in the Arabic version, the Vision of
John, the Apostle and Evangelist, to wit, the Apocalypse. All which
acknowledge the Apostle John to be the writer of it, and show the sense
of the ancients concerning it. Nor is it of any moment what is alleged,
that this writer makes mention of his name several times, whereas it was
usual with John, both in his Gospel and epistles, to conceal his name;
since there is a wide difference between writing an history and epistles
to friends, and prophecy which requires the author's name, on whom the
authority and truth of the prophecy greatly depend: and so likewise the
disagreement of style observed in this book, with the other writings of
John, has no force in it; since the prophetic style is always different
from an historical and epistolary one; and yet, after all, in many
things, there is an agreement; John in this, as in his other writings,
speaks of Christ as the Word and Son of God and under the character of
the Lamb; and likewise the following: passages may be compared together,
as [Rev 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#002) with [Joh
19:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh019.htm#035) and [Jo1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#001), [Rev
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#005) with [Jo1
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/jo1001.htm#007). All which being observed there no
room to doubt, neither of the writer nor of the authority of this book;
especially when the agreement of the doctrine contained in it with other
parts of the Scripture, the majesty of its style, and above all the many
prophecies of things to come to pass in it, several of which have been
already fulfilled, are considered; and though it was called in question
and rejected by some heretical men, because some things in it did not
suit with their tenets, yet we have not the least reason to doubt of its
being authentic who have lived to see so much of it already accomplished
and which could come from no other but God. As for the time of its
writing this is not agreed upon on all hands; the place where, seems to
be the isle of Patmos, which yet some question. Some think it was
written in the times of Claudius Caesar (h), before the destruction of
Jerusalem. In the title of the Syriac version, this revelation is said
to be made to John in the isle of Patmos, into which he was cast by Nero
Caesar. But the more commonly received opinion is, that he had this
vision there, at the latter end of Domitian's reign (i) by whom he was
there banished, about the year 95, or 96. But be this as it will, the
book is certainly of divine authority, and exceeding useful and
instructive; and contains in it the most momentous and important
doctrines of the Gospel, concerning a trinity of persons in the Godhead,
the deity and sonship of Christ, the divinity and personality of the
Spirit, the offices of Christ, the state and condition of man by nature,
justification, pardon, and reconciliation by the blood of Christ; and it
recommends the several duties of religion, and encourages to the
exercise of every grace and gives a very particular account of the rise,
power, and fall of antichrist, and of the state of the church of Christ
in all the periods of time to the end of the world. And though it is
written in an uncommon style, yet may be understood, by the use of
proper means, as by prayer and meditation, by comparing it with other
prophetic writings, and the history of past times, by which many things
in it will appear to have had their accomplishment; and it ought to be
observed, that it is a revelation, and not a hidden thing; that it is
now not a sealed book, but an open one; and that such are pronounced
blessed that read and hear it, and observe the things in it, [Rev
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#003); and which is no small
encouragement to attempt an explanation of it.

\(a\) Dialog. cum Tryph. p. 308. (b) Adv. Haeres. l. 4. c. 37, 50. & l.
5. c. 30. (c) Paedagog. l. 2. c. 12. (d) Adv. Marcion. l. 4. c. 5. (e)
Comment. in Matt. p. 417. Ed. Huet. (f) Apud. Euseb. Hist. Eccl. l. 3.
c. 28. & l. 7. c. 23. (g) Suidas in voce iwannhv. (h) Vid. Epiphan
Haeres. 51. (i) Irenaeus adv. Haeres. l. 5. c. 36. Euseb. Eccles. Hist.
l. 3. c. 18.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Revelation Chapter 1](rev001)

</div>
