<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom001)  [Next](rom003.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 2:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ROMANS 2

This chapter contains, in general, a vindication of the justice and
equity of the divine procedure against men, such as are described in the
preceding chapter; and a refutation of the several pleas that might be
made by the Gentiles, who had not the law, and by the Jews who had it;
and concludes with exposing the wickedness of the latter, and with
showing who they are that are properly Jews, and circumcised persons, in
the account of God. It begins, in [Rom
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001.md), with an inference deduced from
what had been said in the latter part of the foregoing chapter;
concluding that such, be they who they will, Jews or Gentiles, are
inexcusable, who do the things they condemn others for: but though the
judgment of such persons is wrong, the apostle observes, [Rom
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#002.md), that the judgment of God, in the
condemnation of them, is right, of which he, and others, were fully
assured; and which judgment is commended, by the rule of it, being
according to truth; by the objects of it, criminals, who are left
without excuse, and by the inevitableness of it, [Rom
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#003.md), being such as cannot possibly be
escaped: and though some men might hope to escape it, because not
immediately punished, but loaded with the blessings of Providence, and
peculiar benefits of divine goodness; yet this was to be ascribed to the
forbearance of God for the present; and that if these favours were
despised, and they had not a good effect upon them to bring to
repentance, but instead thereof were more and more hardened under them,
as their guilt would be increased, so wrath would be secretly laying up
for them, which will be revealed in the day of judgment, [Rom
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004.md), at which time justice will be
done to every man as his works will be found to be, [Rom
2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006.md), then follows a description of the
several sorts of persons that will be judged, and of the different
things that will be their portion: as that eternal life will be given to
good men, [Rom 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007.md), and the wrath of
God poured down on bad men, whether they be Jews or Gentiles, [Rom
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008.md). The happiness of good men is
repeated again, and explained, and promised to the Jew first, and then
to the Gentile, [Rom 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#010.md), and a
reason given of this just and equal distribution, taken from the nature
of God, who is no respecter of persons, [Rom
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011.md), an instance of which is produced
in both Jews and Gentiles, that sin; the one perishing with, the other
without the law, [Rom 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012.md), since it
is not barely having and hearing the law, but acting up to it, which
only can justify before God, [Rom
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013.md), upon which the apostle proceeds
to refute the plea that might be made by the Gentiles, in favour of
themselves, why they should not be condemned, taken from their not
having the written law; for though they had not the law written on
tables of stone, as the Jews had, yet they had, as he observes, the law
of nature written on their hearts, against which they sinned: this he
proves by the effects of it, discernible in many of them by their
outward lives and conversations, in conformity to the law; and by the
inward testimony of their consciences, approving of good deeds, and
reproaching for bad ones, [Rom 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014.md),
which two verses being put into a parenthesis, [Rom
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016.md), is connected with [Rom
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013.md), and points at the time when the
doers of the law shall be justified, even at the day of judgment: which
judgment is described by the author of it, God; by the subject of it,
the secrets of men's hearts; by the person employed in the divine
procedure, Jesus Christ; and by the evidence and certainty of it, the
Gospel preached by the apostle, and then follow a description of the
Jews, an account of their profession of religion, and an ironical
concession of the several characters they assumed to themselves: they
are described by their name, a Jew; by their religion, which lay in
trusting in the law of Moses, and in boasting of their interest in God,
as the God of Israel, [Rom 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017.md), by
their knowledge of the will of God, and approbation of the excellent
things of his law, [Rom 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#018.md), and by
the characters they took to themselves, [Rom
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#019.md), from which the apostle takes an
occasion to expose the wickedness of some of their principal men, even
their teachers, [Rom 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021.md), by whose
wicked lives and conversations God was dishonoured, and his name
blasphemed among the Gentiles, [Rom
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023.md), hence it appears, that their
name, profession, and character, would not justify them before God;
wherefore the apostle goes on, to remove their plea taken from
circumcision, showing that could be of no use to them, but became void
through their breach of the law, [Rom
2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025.md), and that, on the other hand, an
uncircumcised Gentile, by keeping the law from right principles, and to
a right end, appeared to be the true circumcision, [Rom
2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#026.md), wherefore the circumcised Jew
that broke the law, stood condemned by the uncircumcised Gentile that
fulfilled it; so far was circumcision from being any part of his
justification, or a plea in favour of it, [Rom
2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#027.md). Then the apostle concludes the
chapter, by giving a definition of a real Jew, and of true circumcision;
which he does first negatively, that it is not anything external that
makes him a Jew, or anything in the flesh that is right circumcision;
but secondly, positively, that it is an inward work of grace that
denominates a man a Jew, in a spiritual sense, or an Israelite indeed;
and that it is the circumcision of the heart, which is wrought by the
Spirit of God, that is true and genuine: and such a Jew, and such a
circumcision, are approved of by God, and commended by him, when the
other have only praise of men, [Rom
2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028.md), and therefore, however such
persons may be justified before men, they cannot be justified in the
sight of God; which is the drift and design of the apostle in the whole.

[Romans 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 2:1</span></span>

Therefore thou art inexcusable, O man,.... Some think, from the
connection of these words with the preceding chapter, that the Gentiles
are here meant; and particularly those among them who seemed to be
virtuous, and took upon them to be the reprovers of others, and yet did
the same things themselves, as Socrates, Cato, Seneca, and others; and
therefore must be inexcusable, because they knew better, and would be
thought to have been so; wherefore such could never be justified before
God by their works, but might be justly condemned by him, nor shall they
escape his righteous judgment. Others think the Jews are meant, who
despised and condemned the Gentiles, and thought themselves to be
righteous persons, and justified in the sight of God; and who, though
they were secretly guilty of many abominable iniquities, yet were very
severe upon the sins of others, and therefore inexcusable: others think
that magistrates are designed, whether among Jews or Gentiles, who
reprove and punish sin in others, and therefore must be supposed to know
the law, and the nature of sin, and so are inexcusable and
self-condemned when they do the same things; wherefore though they may
pass with impunity among men, they shall not escape the judgment of God.
Rather the words respect every man, of whatsoever nation, office, or
place; and may be particularly applied to hypocrites, and seem designed
to correct censoriousness, and hasty judging, and to throw confusion on
such who value themselves on being the censurers and reprovers of
others:

whosoever thou art that judgest; whether a Jew or a Gentile, a public
magistrate or a private person:

for wherein thou judgest another; that is, in what case or instance; the
Complutensian edition and the Arabic version read, "in" "or with what
judgment thou judgest another"; See Gill on [Mat
7:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#002.md);

thou condemnest thyself; by judging them:

for thou that judgest dost the same things; art guilty of the same thing
condemned in others, and therefore must be self-condemned.

[Romans 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 2:2</span></span>

But we are sure that the judgment of God,.... By "the judgment of God",
is not meant what is exercised on and towards men in this life, but what
will follow after death; which is called judgment to come, is
represented as certain, will be universal as to persons and things, and
is here called "the judgment of God", in opposition to the judgment of
men; and because it will be carried on by God only, who is omniscient
and omnipotent, and will be definitive: this is and will be,

according to truth, against them which commit such things; in opposition
to all hypocrisy and unrighteousness: and it may design the law and
light of nature by which the Gentiles, the law of Moses by which the
Jews, and the Gospel of Christ by which all have enjoyed the Gospel
revelation, will be judged; or the truth of their own consciences in
them all: now we may be sure of this judgment; and of its being
according to truth, from reason, from Scripture, and from the being and
perfections of God.

[Romans 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 2:3</span></span>

And thinkest thou this, O man, that judgest them which do such things,
and doest the same,.... Some men may be so vain as to imagine, that
though they do the same things which they condemn in others, they

shall escape the judgment of God: but such will find themselves most
sadly mistaken; there is no avoiding the general judgment; all men must
come to it; there will be no eluding it through craftiness and deceit,
through bribery and corruption; there will be no escaping condign
punishment, through might in the criminal, or through the judge's
ignorance of his crimes, or want of ability and power to punish.

[Romans 2:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 2:4</span></span>

Or despisest thou the riches of his goodness,.... The apostle
anticipates an objection against what he had said, taken from the
prosperity of these persons; who might conclude from thence, that they
were not so wicked as he had represented them; and that they should
escape the judgment of God, otherwise they would have been punished by
God in this life, and not have prospered as they did; which objection is
removed by observing, that it was not their innocence, but "the riches
of" divine "goodness, and longsuffering and forbearance", which were the
causes of their prosperity: by "the riches of God's goodness", are not
meant the riches of his special, spiritual, and eternal goodness, which
his own people are only partakers of: but the general riches of his
temporal and providential goodness, which the men of the world have
commonly the greatest share of; they have it in great plenty, which is
signified by "riches": and by his "longsuffering and forbearance" are
designed, not his forbearance of his chosen ones and his longsuffering
to them, which issue in their salvation; but his forbearance of sinners,
and longsuffering towards them, in not as yet pouring down his wrath and
displeasure on them; all which are "despised" by them; the riches of his
goodness, when he is not glorified for his providential mercies, and in
them, and when these are abused to the lusts of men. The

forbearance of God is despised, when men on account of it harden
themselves in sin; and his

longsuffering, when they deny his concern in Providence, or a future
judgment, and promise themselves impunity. Moreover, the apostle
obviates the above objection by asserting that God's end in his
goodness, forbearance, and longsuffering, was not to testify to their
innocence, as they imagined, but to lead them to repentance, of which
they were ignorant;

not knowing that the goodness of God leadeth thee to repentance. This is
to be understood not of a spiritual and evangelical repentance, which is
a free grace gift, and which none but the Spirit of God can lead, or
bring persons to; but of a natural and legal repentance, which lies in
an external sorrow for sin, and in an outward cessation from it, and
reformation of life and manners, which the goodness of God to the Jews
should have led them to; who had a large share of the good things of
life, a land flowing with milk and honey, and many outward privileges
which other nations had not, as the giving of the law, the covenant and
promises, the word and ordinances; and repentance here chiefly designs,
as it may respect the Gentiles, a change of mind and practice in them
relating to idolatry and superstition Now the providential goodness of
God has a tendency to lead persons to repentance on this account; but of
this end of divine goodness the Gentiles were ignorant; nor was this end
answered thereby; which shows the wretched depravity of human nature;
see [Act 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/act014.htm#015.md).

[Romans 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 2:5</span></span>

But after thy hardness and impenitent heart,.... The apostle goes on to
show, that such persons who promise themselves impunity on the score of
prosperity, shall not always go unobserved and unpunished; for there is
a day of wrath and righteous judgment hastening on, and will take place
after they have filled up the measure of their iniquity. There is a
natural "hardness" of the heart in every son and daughter of Adam; and
there is an acquired habitual hardness, which is increased by sinning;
and a judicial one, which God, for sin, sometimes gives persons up unto.
An "impenitent heart" is not only an heart which does not repent, but
such an one as cannot repent, being harder than the nether millstone.
Now men, by such hardness and impenitence,

treasure up unto themselves wrath: they are the authors of their own
destruction; by which is meant the wrath of God, in opposition to the
riches of his goodness, despised by them; and is in reserve for wicked
men: and is laid up

against, and will be brought forth in

the day of wrath; which the Scriptures call "the evil day", [Amo
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/amo006.htm#003.md) [Eph
6:13](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#013.md); the day fixed by God, when he
will call men to an account for their sins, and stir up all his wrath
against them:

and revelation; that is, the day of revelation, when Christ shall be
revealed from heaven in flames of fire, the sins of men shall be
revealed, and the wrath of God against them:

of the righteous judgment of God; so some copies read; that is, the day
of the righteous judgment; so the Arabic version reads, "and of the
appearance of God, and of his righteous judgment"; for the judgment will
be at the appearance of Christ, who is God, and at his kingdom, [Ti2
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#001.md). The Alexandrian copy reads, "and
of the retribution of the righteous judgment of God"; and so the
Ethiopic version seems to have read, rendering the words, "if so", or
"seeing thy retribution may come upon thee", and "if the judgment of God
may befall thee"; for when the judgment of God shall come, as there will
be a revelation of men's sins, and of the wrath of God against them,
there will be a just retribution according to their works. Or "the
revelation of the righteous judgment of God"; that is, when the judgment
of God, which is now hid, shall appear; and which is said to be
"righteous", because it will be carried on in a righteous manner, and
proceed upon, and be executed according to the strictest rules of
justice and equity.

[Romans 2:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 2:6</span></span>

Who will render to every man according to his deeds. God will be the
Judge, who is righteous, holy, just, and true; every man in particular
will be judged; as the judgment will be general to all, it will be
special to everyone, and will proceed according to their works; for God
will render to wicked men according to the demerit of their sins, the
just recompense of reward, eternal damnation; and to good men eternal
life, not according to the merit of their good works, which have none in
them, but according to the nature of them; such who believe in Christ,
and perform good works from a principle of grace, shall receive the
reward of the inheritance, which is a reward of grace, and not of debt.
In other words, God will render to evil men according to the true desert
of their evil deeds; and of his own free grace will render to good men,
whom he has made so by his grace, what is suitable and agreeable to
those good works, which, by the assistance of his grace, they have been
enabled to perform.

[Romans 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 2:7</span></span>

To them who by patient continuance in well doing,.... These words are
descriptive of one sort of persons, to whom God will render according to
their works; and must be understood not of the Gentiles, the best and
most moralized among them; for they sought after worldly things, after
human wisdom, and popular applause, and not after God, his honour and
glory, nor after immortality, which is only brought to light by the
Gospel; nor of the pharisaical Jews, who sought for righteousness by the
works of the law, and honour and glory from men, and not from God; nor
of any unregenerate persons, but only of such who have the true
principles of grace implanted in them, whether Jews or Gentiles: now the
things which these men seek after are

glory; not the glory of this world, nor any from the men of it; but the
glory of God and Christ; to be glorious within and without, by the grace
and righteousness of Christ here, and to enjoy eternal glory with him
hereafter.

Honour; not that which Adam had in innocence, and did not abide in; but
that which is, and abides with Christ, and which all the saints have,
and shall have.

Immortality; not the immortality of the soul, which is common to all;
but the incorruption of the body, or the glorious resurrection of it to
everlasting life at the great day, or the incorruptible crown, and never
fading inheritance of the saints in light. The manner in which these
things are sought is, "by patient continuance in well doing"; by doing
good works, and by doing these good works well, from a principle of
faith and love, and with a view to the glory of God; and by patiently
enduring reproaches and sufferings for well doing, and by persevering
therein: not that these things are to be had, or are expected by the
saints to be had for the sake of patience and well doing; yet they may
be sought for, and looked unto, as an encouragement to well doing, and
continuance therein; and though not "for", yet "in" well doing there is
a reward. These words do not express that for the sake of which glory is
had; but only describe the persons who seek, and the manner in which
they seek for it, to whom God will render

eternal life, which he of his rich grace promised them before the world
was, and of his free favour has put into the hands of Christ for them,
and which, as a pure gift of grace, he bestows on them through him.

[Romans 2:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 2:8</span></span>

But unto them that are contentious,.... This is a description of the
other sort of persons to whom God will render according to their deeds,
"who are of the contention"; who contend for victory, and not truth;
strive about words to no profit; are quarrelsome, and sow discord among
men, and in churches;

and do not obey the truth; neither attend to the light of nature, and to
that which may be known of God by it; nor regard and submit to the
Gospel revelation and so design both the Gentiles, which knew not God,
and Jews, and others, who obey not the Gospel:

but obey unrighteousness; are servants of sin: to these God renders

indignation and wrath; wrathful or fiery indignation, the hottest of his
fury.

[Romans 2:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 2:9</span></span>

Tribulation and anguish,.... These, with the foregoing words, are
expressive of the second death, the torments of hell, the worm that
never dies, and the fire that is not quenched: which will fall

upon every soul of man that doth evil; whose course of life and
conversation is evil; for "the soul that sins shall die", [Eze
18:4](../../../bib/kjv/eze018.htm#004.md), unless satisfaction is made for
his sins by the blood of Christ:

of the Jew first, and also of the Gentile; regard being had to what
nation they belong.

[Romans 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 2:10</span></span>

But glory, honour, and peace,.... Which are so many words for the
everlasting happiness of the saints; which is a "crown of glory that
fadeth not away" [Pe1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#004).md); an honour
exceeding that of the greatest potentates upon earth, since such that
enjoy it will be kings and priests, and sit with Christ on his throne to
all eternity; and is a peace that passes all understanding: all which
will be rendered

to every man that doth good, to the Jew first, and also to the Gentile;
which none without Christ, and his grace, and by the strength of nature,
does, or can do; not that good works are causes of salvation, but are
testimonies of faith, and fruits of grace, with which salvation is
connected, whether they be found in Jews or Gentiles; for neither grace
nor salvation are peculiar to any nation, or set of people.

[Romans 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 2:11</span></span>

For there is no respect of persons with God. It will not come into
consideration, at the day of judgment, of what nation men are; or from
what parents they are descended; nor of what age and sex persons be; nor
in what state and condition they have lived in this world; nor will it
be asked to what sect they have belonged, and by what denomination they
have been called; or whether they have conformed to such and such
externals and rituals in religion; but only whether they are righteous
men or sinners; and accordingly as they appear under these characters,
judgment will proceed. Some object from hence, though without any
reason, to the doctrine of particular election of certain persons to
everlasting salvation. This passage respects matters of strict justice,
and is a forensic expression relating to courts of judicature, where
persons presiding are to have no regard to the faces of men, but do that
which is strictly just between man and man; and does not respect matters
of grace and free favour, such as giving alms, forgiving debts, &c. A
judge, as such, is to regard no man's person, but to proceed in matters
before him, according to the rules of law and justice; should he do
otherwise, he would be chargeable with being a respecter of persons; but
then he may bestow alms on what objects he pleases; and forgive one man
who is personally indebted to him, and not another, without any such
imputation. This, applied to the case in hand, abundantly clears it; for
though God, as a Judge, respects no man's person; yet in matters of
grace he distinguishes one person from another, as it is plain he does
by the bounties of his Providence. Besides, God is not bound to any
person by any laws, but acts as a Sovereign; he is not moved by anything
in the creature; as his choice is not confined to persons of any
particular nation, family, sex, or condition, so neither does it proceed
upon anything, or a foresight of anything in them, or done by them; and
as there is no worthiness in them that are chosen, and saved above
others, so no injury is done to the rest: add to all this, that those
that are saved by virtue of electing grace, are saved in a way of
righteousness agreeably to the holy law, and strict justice of God; so
that no complaint can be made against the distinguishing methods of
grace, upon the foot of strict justice.

[Romans 2:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 2:12</span></span>

For as many as have sinned without law,.... This is an instance of the
strict justice of God, and proves him to be no respecter of persons; for
the Gentiles, who were "without law", the written law of Moses, not
without the law of nature in their breasts, nor without some civil laws
and statutes of their own; inasmuch as they "sinned" against the God of
nature, and the law and light of nature, they

shall also perish without law: not that their condemnation and perdition
will be illegal, or not in due course of law; but it will not proceed
upon, or according to the law of Moses, they never had; and much less
for not believing in Christ, of whom they never heard; but their
perdition will be for their sins committed without the law of Moses,
against the law of nature: their not having the written law of Moses
will be no plea in their favour, or be a reason why they should not be
condemned; their persons will not be regarded as with or without the
law, but their sins committed by them, to which facts their consciences
will bear witness:

and, so on the other hand,

as many as have sinned in the law; who have been in and under the law of
Moses, and have sinned against it, meaning the Jews:

shall be judged by the law; and condemned by it, as they were in this
world, and will be hereafter: their having this law will be no bar
against their condemnation, but rather an aggravation of it; their
hearing of it will be no plea in their favour; nor their doing of it
neither, unless they could have done it to perfection; for perfect
obedience it requires, as a justifying righteousness, otherwise it
curses, condemns, and adjudges to death.

[Romans 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 2:13</span></span>

For not the hearers of the law are just before God,.... The apostle here
shows, that the Jews were justly condemned, notwithstanding their having
and hearing of the law; since hearing without doing it, will never
denominate persons righteous in the sight of God, however it might
recommend them in the sight of men: regard seems to be had either to the
first delivery of the law by Moses to the people of Israel, when he read
it to them, and they hearkened to it, and promised obedience; or rather
to the reading and hearing it every sabbath day; and may include a
speculative knowledge of it, without a practical obedience to it; and
which therefore must fall greatly short of entitling them to a
justifying righteousness; since not these,

but the doers of the law, shall be justified; by whom are meant, not
such who merely literally and externally fulfil the law, as they
imagine; for the law is spiritual, and regards the inward as well as the
outward man, and requires internal holiness, as well as external
obedience; and the apostle is speaking of justification before God, who
sees the heart, and not before men, who judge according to outward
appearance: nor are such designed who are imperfect doers of the law;
for the law requires a perfect obedience, and what is not perfect is not
properly righteousness; nor does it, nor can it consider an imperfect
righteousness as a perfect one; for it accuses of, pronounces guilty,
curses, and condemns for every transgression of it. But such only can be
intended, who are doers of it spiritually, internally, as well as
externally, and that perfectly. Adam, in his state of innocence, was a
perfect doer of the law; he sinning, and all his posterity in him, none
of them are righteous, but all pass under a sentence of condemnation.
The best of men, even believers in Christ, are not without sin in
themselves; and when any of the saints are said to be perfect, it must
be understood in a comparative sense, or as they are considered in
Christ. There never was but one since Adam, and that is Christ, who has
fulfilled, or could perfectly fulfil the law; the thing is impossible
and impracticable for fallen man: hence these words must be understood
either hypothetically, thus, not the hearers of the law, but if there
were any perfect doers of it, they would be justified before God; or
else of such persons who are considered in Christ, by whom the whole
perfect righteousness of the law is fulfilled in them, and who may be
reckoned as perfect doers of it in him, their substitute, surety, and
representative.

[Romans 2:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 2:14</span></span>

For when the Gentiles which have not the law,.... The objection of the
Gentiles against their condemnation, taken from their being without the
law, is here obviated. The apostle owns that they had not the law, that
is, the written law of Moses, and yet intimates that they had, and must
have a law, against which they sinned, and so deserved punishment, and
which they in part obeyed; for these men

do by nature the things contained in the law. The matter and substance
of the moral law of Moses agrees with the law and light of nature; and
the Gentiles in some measure, and in some sort, did these things by
nature; not that men by the mere strength of nature without the grace of
God, can fulfil the law, or do anything that is acceptable to God; and
indeed, what these men did was merely natural and carnal, and so
unacceptable to God. Some understand this of nature assisted by grace,
in converted Gentiles, whether before or after the coming of Christ;
others expound the phrase, by nature, freely, willingly, in opposition
to the servile spirit of the Jews, in their obedience to the law; though
it rather seems to design the dictates of natural reason, by which they
acted: and so

these having not the law, the written law,

are a law to themselves; which they have by nature and use, and which
natural reason dictates to them. So Plato distinguishes the law

"into written and un written (q): the written law is that which was used
in commonwealths; and that "which was according to custom or nature",
was called unwritten, such as not to go to market naked, nor to be
clothed with women's clothes; which things were not forbidden by any
law, but these were not done because forbidden by the unwritten law;''

which he calls "unwritten", because not written on tables, or with ink;
otherwise it was written in their minds, and which by nature and use
they were accustomed to.

\(q\) Laertii Vit. Philosoph. l. 3. in Vita Platon.

[Romans 2:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 2:15</span></span>

Which show the work of the law written in their hearts,.... Though the
Gentiles had not the law in form, written on tables, or in a book, yet
they had "the work", the matter, the sum and substance of it in their
minds; as appears by the practices of many of them, in their external
conversation. The moral law, in its purity and perfection, was written
on the heart of Adam in his first creation; was sadly obliterated by his
sin and fall; upon several accounts, and to answer various purposes, a
system of laws was written on tables of stone for the use of the
Israelites; and in regeneration the law is reinscribed on the hearts of
God's people; and even among the Gentiles, and in their hearts, there
are some remains of the old law and light of nature, which as by their
outward conduct appears, so by the inward motions of their minds,

their conscience also bearing witness; for, as the Jews say (r) , "the
soul of a man witnesses in him"; for, or against him:

and their thoughts the meanwhile accusing or else excusing one another;
and this the Heathens themselves acknowledge, when they (s) speak of

"tameion dikasthrion kai krithrion thv suneidhsewv, "the conclave,
tribunal and judgment of conscience"; and which they call , "the most
righteous judge": whose judgment reason receives, and gives its suffrage
to, whether worthy of approbation or reproof; when it reads in the
memory as if written on a table the things that are done, and then
beholding the law as an exemplar, pronounces itself either worthy of
honour or dishonour.''

\(r\) T. Bab. Chagigah, fol. 16. 1. & Taanith, fol. 11. 1. (s) Hierocles
in Carmina Pythagor. p. 81, 206, 209, 213, 214.

[Romans 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 2:16</span></span>

In the day when God shall judge,.... These words are to be read in
connection with [Rom 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#013.md), and express
the time when both Jews and Gentiles will be judged, called a "day",
both because of the clearness and evidence of the judgment that will be
made, and because a certain time is fixed, though not known, which will
surely come; also the matter of the judgment, which will be,

the secrets of men: whether good or bad, which are only known to God and
themselves, and which may have been done ignorantly by them; "for God
shall bring every work into judgment with every secret thing, whether it
be good, or whether it be evil", [Ecc
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#014.md), which is so interpreted by the
Jews (t),

"when R. Jochanan came to that Scripture, he wept; "for God shall bring
every work into judgment with every secret thing";''

upon which the gloss says, yea, for those things which are hidden from
him, which he has committed through ignorance, will he bring him into
judgment; everything, even the least thing in a literal sense, but not
for such silly trifling things they mention in the same place; doubtless
the Holy Ghost means the secrets of men's hearts and actions, and the
hidden things of darkness which are contrary to the holy law of God. The
person by whom this awful judgment will be carried on is,

Jesus Christ; to whom all judgment is committed, who is ordained Judge
of quick and dead, and is every way fit for that office, being God as
well as man, and so both omniscient and omnipotent: and this the apostle
says will be,

according to my Gospel; his meaning is not that the Gospel will be the,
rule of judgment, because he speaking of the judgment of the Gentiles,
as well as of the Jews, who never heard of the Gospel; but that what he
had said concerning a day of judgment, of Christ's being the Judge, and
of God's judging by him the secrets of men, were as true and as certain
as the Gospel which he preached was; and was "conformable", or agreeable
to it, as the Arabic version reads it, and might be learned and proved
from it. This he calls, "my Gospel"; not because the author or subject
of it; but because it was committed to his trust and was preached by
him; and in opposition to, and to distinguish it from the Gospel of the
false apostles. Eusebius says (u), that the Apostle Paul had used to
call the Gospel according to Luke his Gospel, and that it is said, that
whenever he makes mention of his Gospel, he designs that.

\(t\) T. Bab. Chagigah, fol. 5. 1. (u) Eccles. Hist. l. 3. c. 4. p. 73.

[Romans 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 2:17</span></span>

Behold, thou art called a Jew,.... From hence to the end of the chapter
the Jews are particularly addressed; their several privileges and
characters are commemorated, which by an ironical concession are allowed
them; several charges are brought against them, even against their
principal men; and the plea in favour of them, from their circumcision,
is considered; and the apostle's view in the whole, is to show that they
could not be justified before God by their obedience to the law of
Moses: "behold"; take notice, observe it, this will be granted: "thou
art called a Jew"; thou art one by name, by nation, and by religion; but
no name, nor outward religion, nor a mere profession, will justify
before God:

and restest in the law; which may be understood of their having the law
and the knowledge of it, what is to be done and avoided easily, without
any fatigue and labour; of their pleasing and applauding themselves with
the bare having and hearing of it; of their trust and confidence in it;
and of their inactivity and security in it, as persons asleep; and so of
their coming short of the knowledge of the Gospel, and of Christ the end
of the law for righteousness, their whole confidence being placed in
that: so the Targumist in [Jer 8:8](../../../bib/kjv/jer008.htm#008.md)
paraphrases the words,

"we are wise, "and in the law of the Lord", , do we trust;''

and makest thy boast of God. There is a right boasting of God in
opposition to boasting in the creature, when men ascribe all the
blessings of nature and grace to the Lord alone, and praise him for all
their enjoyments, temporal and spiritual; and when they trust in, and
glory, and make their boast of Christ as the Lord their righteousness,
in whom alone they are, and can be justified. But the boasting here
spoken of, was such that was not right; these men boasted of their bare
external knowledge of the one God, when the Gentiles around them were
ignorant of him; of their being the covenant people of God, when others
were aliens and strangers; and of their having the word and worship of
the true God, which other nations were unacquainted with; and, on these
external things they depended, which was their fault.

[Romans 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 2:18</span></span>

And knowest his will,.... Not the secret will or purpose of God; nor his
revealed will in the Gospel, for of this they were ignorant; but his
declared will in the law, showing what is to be done, and what is not to
be done: to know which in express terms was a privilege, that other
people had not; but then the bare knowledge of this will be of no avail:
for persons may know their Lord's will, as the Jews did, and not do it,
and so be worthy to be beaten with many stripes:

and approvest the things that are more excellent: or "triest the things
that differ"; from one another, and from the will and law of God; or as
the Syriac, "discernest" "things that are convenient"; agreeable, which
are fit and ought to be done: and having tried and discerned them, they
approved of them in their judgment as the things more excellent; but
then they did not put these excellent things in practice which they
approved of; and the knowledge and approbation they had of these things,
arose from their

being instructed out of the law, and not the Gospel; for the excellent
things of the Gospel, they had no discerning, knowledge and approbation
of; see [Phi 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/phi001.htm#010.md).

[Romans 2:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 2:19</span></span>

And art confident that thou thyself,.... Being vainly puffed up in,
their fleshly minds, they were strongly persuaded that they were very
fit persons to be

a guide to the blind: all men are by nature blind, as to the knowledge
of divine and spiritual things; the meaner sort of the people among the
Jews seem to be intended here; or else the ignorant Gentiles, whom the
Jews were very fond of making proselytes to their religion and laws; but
miserable guides were they, whether to their own people, or others;
blind guides of the blind. Gospel ministers best deserve this title:

a light of them that are in darkness; so Christ, John the Baptist, the
disciples of Christ, and all Gospel ministers are; but these men, who
arrogated such characters to themselves, were dim lights, and dark
lanterns. The apostle seems to have respect to those very high and
exalted characters the Jews give of their doctors, as when they call
one, , "the lamp of light" (w); another, "the holy lamps" (x); and a
third, , "the lamp of Israel" (y); with many others of the same kind;
See Gill on [Mat 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#014.md) and See Gill on
[Joh 5:35](../../../bib/kjv/joh005.htm#035.md).

\(w\) T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 17. 1. (x) Zohar passim. (y) T. Bab.
Beracot, fol. 28. 2.

[Romans 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 2:20</span></span>

An instructor of the foolish,.... All men in a state of unregeneracy are
foolish, and need instruction; here the common people among the Jews,
who knew not the law, are meant; it was very usual to call anyone of
their doctors and masters "an instructor": it follows,

a teacher of babes; either in age or in understanding; such who taught
either of them were called by the Jews , "teachers of babes". Thus they
paraphrase the text in [Dan 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/dan012.htm#003.md),

"they that be wise, shall shine as the brightness of the firmament. This
is the Judge who judges, the judgment of truth truly, and the collectors
of alms: and they that turn, many to righteousness, as the stars for
ever and ever; these are, , "the teachers of babes" (z).''

Though these are said (a) to be inferior to the wise men, or doctors:

which hast the form of knowledge, and of the truth in the law: they had
not a true knowledge of the law; only a draught and scheme, the outward
form of the law, and a mere shadow and appearance of the knowledge of
the truth of it. From hence the apostle would have it concluded, that
though the Jews had the law, and in some sense knew it, yet inasmuch as
they did not perform it, they could not be justified by it; and that
even their teachers, their greatest masters and doctors, were very
deficient, as appears from what follows; and since they could not be
instilled by it, who taught others the knowledge of it, the hearers of
it could not expect justification from it.

\(z\) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 8. 2. & 21. 1, 2. Maimon. Hilchot Talmud
Tora, c. 2. sect. 1. (a) Gloss in Sota, fol. 49. 1.

[Romans 2:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 2:21</span></span>

Thou therefore which teachest another, teachest thou not thyself?....
Several charges are here brought against the Jews, even against their
teachers; for though they are put by way of question, they are to be
considered as so many assertions and matters of fact; thus, though they
taught others, they did not teach themselves; they were blind leaders of
the blind; they were ignorant of the law, of the spirituality of it;
they were desirous to be teachers of the law, understanding neither what
they said, nor whereof they affirmed: they were ignorant of the
righteousness of God, of whom they boasted; and of the more excellent
things of Moses, and the prophets, they pretended to explain; and of the
Messiah, of whom their prophecies so much spoke: and besides, what they
did understand and teach, they did not practise themselves; than which
nothing is more shameful, or more betrays stupidity and ignorance; for
as they themselves (b) say,

"he that teaches men, , "that which he himself does not do", is like a
blind man who has a lamp in his hand, and enlightens others, but he,
himself walks in darkness.''

And such teachers they own were among them.

"Beautiful (say they (c)) are the words which come out of the mouths of
them that do, them: Ben Assai was a beautiful preacher, but did not well
observe;''

i.e., to do what he said.

Thou that preach at a man should not steal, dost thou steal? some
understand this figuratively, of stealing, or taking away the true sense
of the law, and putting a false one upon it; of which these men were
notoriously guilty: but rather, it is to be understood literally, not
only of the inward desires and motions of their minds after this sin,
and of their consenting to, and conniving at theft and robbery, but of
their doing it themselves; who, under pretence of long prayers,
"devoured widows' houses", [Mat 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#014.md),
plundered and robbed them of their substance: no wonder that these men
preferred Barabbas, a thief and a robber, to Jesus Christ.

\(b\) Sepher Hamaalot, p. 87. Apud Buxtorf. Heb. Florileg. p. 75. (c)
Bereshit Rabba, fol. 30. 3.

[Romans 2:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 2:22</span></span>

Thou that sayest a man should not commit adultery,.... Adultery here is
to be taken not figuratively for adulterating the word of God, and
mixing it with their own inventions; but literally for the sin of
adultery, and that not in heart only, but in act:

dost thou commit adultery? an iniquity which greatly prevailed among the
Jews at this time of day; hence Christ calls them "an adulterous
generation", [Mat 12:39](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#039.md); and that to
such a degree, that by the advice of their great Rabbi, R. Jochanan ben
Zaccai, they left off the trial of the suspected woman, cases of this
nature being so very numerous: and this sin prevailed not only among the
common people, but among their principal doctors; as may be learnt from
their own writings, and from that conviction of this iniquity which the
Scribes and Pharisees were brought under by Christ, when the woman,
taken in adultery, was had before him by them, [Joh
8:9](../../../bib/kjv/joh008.htm#009.md).

Thou that abhorrest idols, dost thou commit sacrilege? for though at
this time they abhorred idolatry, to which their forefathers were so
much inclined, and so often fell into, yet they were guilty of
sacrilege; by violating the worship of God, and polluting it with their
own inventions; by pillaging or withholding, or not offering the
sacrifices they ought; and by plundering the temple, and converting the
sacred things of it to their own use.

[Romans 2:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 2:23</span></span>

Thou that makest thy boast of the law,.... Of their having it, which
other nations had not; of their knowledge of it, which many of their own
people were without, or had but a small share of; and of their keeping
of it even to perfection:

through breaking of the law dishonourest thou God? sin sometimes is
expressed by a word which signifies a "fall"; sometimes by another,
which signifies missing of the mark, or straying from it; sometimes by
another, which signifies a "contrariety to the law" of God; and here, by
one which signifies a "passing over it", and the bounds which it has
set, as the rule of man's obedience; and hereby God, the lawgiver, is
dishonoured: for as God is glorified by good works, when rightly
performed, he is dishonoured by evil ones; for his authority, as a
lawgiver, is trampled upon and despised. Now persons guilty of such
iniquities as here mentioned, could not be justified before God, or
accepted by him on account of any works of righteousness done by them.

[Romans 2:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 2:24</span></span>

For the name of God is blasphemed,.... The being and perfections of God,
such as his holiness, omniscience, and omnipotence, are denied, or evil
spoken of; and also the law of God, and the forms of worship instituted
by him:

among the Gentiles through you: through their iniquities, who when they
observe them, conclude that the God of Israel is not omniscient, or he
would know, and take notice of these things; and that he is not holy, or
he could not bear them; nor omnipotent, or he would revenge them:

as it is written; the passage or passages referred to are not mentioned,
but are perhaps [Isa 52:5](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#005.md). In the
former of these texts the words are, "they that rule over them make them
to howl; saith the Lord, and my name continually every day is
blasphemed"; which are spoken of the rulers of the people, either of
their ecclesiastical or political rulers, or both; and so Aben Ezra
interprets them of , "the great men of Israel"; and here by the apostle
are applied to their doctors and wise men: and in the latter are these
words, "thus saith the Lord God, I do not this for your sakes, O house
of Israel, but for my holy name's sake, which ye have profaned among the
Heathen"; that is, by their unbecoming walk and conversation, and
especially by the disagreeable conduct of their principal men: and the
Jews own the same things, and complain of them in much the "same
language the apostle here does, saying, "they disgrace the law before
the people of the earth, (the common people, or else the Gentiles,) how?
a wise man sits and expounds in the congregation, saying, thou shalt not
lend upon usury, and he lends upon usury; he says, thou shalt not commit
a robbery, and he commits a robbery; he says, , "thou shalt not steal,
and he steals": says R. Berechiah, it happened to one man that his cloak
was stolen from him, and he went before the judge about it, and he found
it spread upon his bed or couch: and, says the same Rabbi, it happened
to a certain man that his pot was stolen from him, and he went before
the judge about it, and he found it upon his hearth: hence it is said,
"as they were increased they sinned against me, therefore will I change
their glory into shame", [Hos 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#007) (d.md).

\(d\) Debarim Rabba, sect. 2. fol. 236. 2.

[Romans 2:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 2:25</span></span>

For circumcision verily profiteth,.... The plea from circumcision in
favour of the Jews, and their acceptance with God, and justification
before him, is here, and in the following verses, considered. The
apostle allows that circumcision was profitable; which must be
understood whilst it was in force, before the abrogation of it, for
since, it is not profitable but pernicious; and then it was only
profitable, in case the law was kept:

if thou keepest the law; that is, perfectly; for circumcision obliged
persons to keep the whole law. Now the circumcised Jews did not keep it
in such sense; wherefore circumcision was of no use to them, but, on the
contrary, was an handwriting against them.

But if thou be a breaker of the law, thy circumcision is made
uncircumcision; that is, it is not accounted circumcision; it is of no
avail; such a man was all one as an uncircumcised Gentile, and appeared
to be uncircumcised in a spiritual sense: the apostle perhaps alludes to
a practice among some of the Jews, to bring on and draw over the
foreskin, after they had been circumcised; See Gill on [Co1
7:18](../../../bib/kjv/co1007.htm#018.md).

[Romans 2:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 2:26</span></span>

Therefore if the uncircumcision keep,.... These words are spoken
hypothetically; if any such persons could be found among the Gentiles
who keep the whole law of God; and can only be absolutely understood of
such, who from a principle of grace act in obedience to the law; as in
the hands of Christ, and who look to Christ as the fulfilling end of it,
for righteousness; in whom they keep

the righteousness of the law perfectly:

shall not his uncircumcision be counted for circumcision? by this
question it is suggested, that an uncircumcised Gentile, who keeps the
law as in the hands of Christ, and under the influences of his Spirit
and grace, and keeps it in Christ, is reckoned a circumcised person in a
spiritual sense, and must be preferable to a circumcised Jew that breaks
it.

[Romans 2:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 2:27</span></span>

And shall not uncircumcision which is by nature,.... That is, the
Gentiles, who are by nature uncircumcised; for as circumcision was by
the command of God, and performed by the art of men, uncircumcision is
by nature, and what men naturally have. Now

if it, such persons,

fulfil the law in Christ, they will

judge thee, the circumcision: and condemn, as Noah condemned the old
world, [Heb 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/heb011.htm#007.md), and the men of
Nineveh and the queen of the south will condemn the men of that
generation, in which Christ lived, [Mat
12:41](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#041.md).

Who by the letter and circumcision transgress the law; that is, either
by the law, which is "the letter", and "by circumcision", or "by
circumcision which is in the letter", [Rom
2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029.md), sin being increased by the
prohibitions of the moral law, and the rituals of the ceremonial law,
and the more so by a dependence upon an obedience to either of them, or
both, for justification.

[Romans 2:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 2:28</span></span>

For he is not a Jew which is one outwardly,.... The apostle removes the
plea in favour of the Jews, taken from their name and privilege, by
distinguishing between a Jew and a Jew, and between circumcision and
circumcision: "he is not a Jew which is one outwardly"; by mere name,
nature, nation, religion, and profession:

neither is that circumcision which is outward in the flesh; which takes
away the flesh of the foreskin, but not the carnality of the heart;
leaves a mark upon the flesh, but no impression on the mind. This is
nothing, is not the true, solid, substantial, spiritual circumcision,
which only avails in the sight of God.

[Romans 2:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom002.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 2:29</span></span>

But he is a Jew which is one inwardly,.... Who has an internal work of
grace upon his soul: who has not only an outward name, but an inward
nature; not the law of God in the hand, but in the heart; not an
external righteousness only, but internal holiness; and who is not a
mere outward court worshipper, but a worshipper of God in Spirit and in
truth. The Jews have a (e) saying themselves,

"that whosoever denies idolatry, , "is called a Jew":''

so that, according to them, this is a name that is not confined to
themselves, but belongs to all such who truly fear and worship God; and
they say, in the same place, that Pharaoh's daughter was called "a
Jewess", because she denied idolatry, and went down to wash herself from
the idols of her father's house. And elsewhere (f),

"that faith does not depend upon circumcision, but upon the heart: he
that believes not as he should, circumcision does not make him a Jew;
and he that believes as he ought, he indeed is a Jew, though he is not
circumcised.''

And circumcision is that of the heart; which God requires, and he
himself promises to give, [Deu 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/deu010.htm#016.md),
upon which last passage, a very noted Jew (g) has this observation, ,
"this is the circumcision of the heart"; the very phrase the apostle
here uses: circumcision of the flesh was typical of this, which lies in
a godly sorrow for sin, in a putting off the body of the sins of the
flesh, and in renouncing a man's own righteousness in the business of
justification. The ancient Jews had some notion of this typical use of
circumcision. So Philo the Jew says (h), that circumcision taught , "the
cutting off of all pleasures and affections": and elsewhere he says (i):
it is a symbol of two things particularly; the one is the cutting off of
pleasures, as before; and the other is the removal of arrogancy, that
grievous disease of the soul: and in another place (k) he calls purity,
or chastity, , "the circumcision of circumcision". Now this our apostle
says is

in the spirit; meaning either the spirit or soul of man, which is the
seat and subject of it; or the Spirit of God, who is the author of it:
the Ethiopic version reads it, "by the Holy Ghost":

and not in the letter; or "by the letter" of the law; but the Holy Ghost
produces this spiritual work instrumentally, by the preaching of the
Gospel. To which the apostle adds,

whose praise is not of men, but of God; referring not to circumcision
immediately spoken of before, but to the Jew who is one inwardly: and
alludes to the name Judah, from whence the Jews are called, which comes
from the word which signifies to "praise"; and intimates here, that such
persons must not expect praise from men, who are only taken, with
outward things, but from God, who searches and knows the heart.

\(e\) T. Bab. Megilia, fol. 13. 1. (f) Nizzachon ad Gen. xvii. Apud Maji
Theolog. Jud. p. 252. (g) R. David Kimchi in Jer. iv. 4. (h) De Migrat.
Abraham, p. 402. (i) De Circumcisione, p. 811. (k) De Somniis, p. 1111.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 3](rom003.md)

</div>
