<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Romans Index](rom)  
  [Previous](rom002)  [Next](rom004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ROMANS 3

In this chapter are an answer to several objections which follow one
upon another, relating to what the apostle had said concerning the
equality of the Gentiles with the Jews; and various proofs out of the
Psalms and Prophets, showing the general depravity and corruption of
mankind, of the Jews as well as of the Gentiles; and the conclusion from
all this, that there is no justification by the works of the law, but by
the righteousness of God received by faith, of which a large and clear
account is given. The first objection is in [Rom
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001), and is taken from the
unprofitableness of being a Jew and a circumcised person, if that is
true which is asserted in the preceding chapter; to which an answer is
given, [Rom 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002), showing that though
many things might be instanced in, in which the Jew had the advantage of
the Gentile in external things; this might be mentioned as one for all,
and taken sufficient answer, that the Jews had the oracles or word of
God committed to their trust, by which they became acquainted with the
will of God. The apostle foreseeing that another objection would arise
upon this; what signifies their having the oracles of God, when these
are not believed by them? prevents it by observing, [Rom
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003), that though some did not believe,
some did, and as for the unbelief of others, the truth and faithfulness
of God in his word were not made void by it; however false and deceitful
men are, God is always true to his word, [Rom
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004), and which is confirmed by a
passage of Scripture, cited out of [Psa
51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004), hence arises another objection,
that if the righteousness of God is commended and illustrated by the
unrighteousness of man, then it would be unjust in God to take vengeance
on men for their sins, [Rom 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005), which
is removed with abhorrence, and answered by observing, that if there was
any truth in it, the world could not be judged by God, as it certainly
will, [Rom 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006), but still the
objection is continued and strengthened, [Rom
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#007), that if God is glorified through
the sins of men, not only men ought not to be punished for them, but
they should not be reckoned sinners, or as doers of evil things, but of
good things, and be indulged in them; to which is replied, that this was
the common calumny cast upon the doctrine of the apostle, and persons of
such principles and practices are deserving of damnation, [Rom
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008). Having removed these objections,
the apostle reassumes his former assertion, and supports it, that a
carnal circumcised Jew is no better than a carnal uncircumcised Gentile;
it being already sufficiently made to appear, that they are both under
the power and guilt of sin; and as a further evidence of it, he produces
several passages out of the book of Psalms, and out of the prophecies of
Isaiah, which fully express the sad corruption of human nature, and
especially of the Jews; and this account begins in [Rom
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010), and ends in [Rom
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#018), and which account he suggests,
[Rom 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019), carries in it such a full
conviction of the truth of what he had said, that all men are under sin,
that no one would be able to open his mouth in his own defence, but all
must acknowledge themselves guilty before God: and then he proceeds to
the conclusion he meant to draw from all this, that there is no
justification of any before God by the deeds of the law; giving this as
a reason for it, because the law discovered sin, but not a justifying
righteousness, [Rom 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020), that is
revealed in another way, by the Gospel, and not the law, though both law
and prophets bear a testimony to it, [Rom
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021), which righteousness is described
by the author of it, God; by the means through which it comes to the use
and comfort of men, the faith of Christ; and by the subjects of it, them
that believe; in the justification of which there is no difference, [Rom
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022), of which a reason is given, [Rom
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023), taken from the general state of
men, as sinners, and bereaved of the image of God: the several causes,
ways, means, and end of the justification of such persons are suggested;
the moving cause is the free grace of God, the meritorious or procuring
cause the redemption that is in Christ, [Rom
3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024), and his propitiatory sacrifice,
[Rom 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025), which is owing to the
eternal purpose of God, whose end in it was to declare his purity,
holiness, and justice; which end is repeated and enlarged on, in [Rom
3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026), upon which the apostle asks,
[Rom 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027), what is become of boasting
in the creature? and answers himself by saying, it was excluded, not by
the doctrine of works, but by the doctrine of faith, and particularly
the doctrine of justification by faith in the righteousness of Christ;
wherefore the conclusion stands firm and just, from the premises, that
justification is by faith without the works of the law, [Rom
3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028), and it is further confirmed,
that Jews and Gentiles, with respect to their state and condition
God-ward, are on a level; he is the God of the one, as well as of the
other, [Rom 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029), and this appears by
his justifying both in one and the same way, through faith in the
righteousness of this Son, [Rom 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030),
and the chapter is concluded by obviating an objection that might be
made, that through this doctrine of justification by faith the law is
made void, and is of no use, [Rom
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#031), to which the apostle answers,
that this is so far from being fact, that the law is established by it.

[Romans 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 3:1</span></span>

What advantage then hath the Jew?.... If he is not properly a Jew, who
is born of Jewish parents, and brought up in the customs, rites, and
religion of the Jewish nation, but anyone of whatsoever nation, that is
born again of water, and of the Spirit; where is the superior excellency
of the Jew to the Gentile? A man may as well be born and brought up a
Heathen as a Jew; the one has no more advantages than the other by his
birth and education: it may be rendered, "what hath the Jew more?" or
"what has he superfluous" or "abundant?" the phrase answers to the
Hebrew in [Ecc 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#003), which is rendered,
"what profit hath a man?" and in [Ecc
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/ecc006.htm#008), , "what hath a wise man more",
&c. and in [Rom 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#011), , "what is a man
better?" the first of these passages the Septuagint render by , "what
abundance?" and the last by "what more", or "superfluous", or
"abundant?" the phrase used by the apostle here:

or what profit is there of circumcision? since that which is outward in
the flesh profits not unless the law is kept, otherwise circumcision is
no circumcision; and if an uncircumcised Gentile keeps the law, he is a
better man than a circumcised Jew; yea, he judges and condemns him; for
the only true circumcision is internal, spiritual, and in the heart. To
this the apostle answers in the [Rom
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002).

[Romans 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 3:2</span></span>

Much every way,.... The circumcised Jew has greatly the advantage of the
uncircumcised Gentile, , "in all respects", , "on every side", as the
Rabbins speak; phrases to which this in the text answers:

chiefly; more especially, particularly, and in the first place;

because that unto them were committed the oracles of God; by which are
meant the law of Moses, and the writings of the prophets, the
institutions of the ceremonial law, and the prophecies of the Messiah
and the Gospel church state; and in a word, all the books of the Old
Testament, and whatsoever is contained in them; which are called so,
because they are of divine inspiration, contain the mind and will of
God, and are infallible and authoritative: and it was the privilege and
profit of the Jews that they were intrusted with them, when other
nations were not, and so had the advantage of them; they had them for
their own use; for hereby they had a more clear and distinct knowledge
of God than the Gentiles could have by the light of nature; and besides,
became acquainted with the doctrines of a trinity of persons in the
Godhead, of the sonship and deity of the Messiah, of the sacrifice,
satisfaction, and righteousness of the Redeemer, and of salvation by
him; and also with the manner of worshipping of God according to his
will; all which the Gentiles were ignorant of. Moreover, they had the
honour of being the keepers of these sacred books, these divine oracles,
and of transmitting them to posterity, for the use of others.

[Romans 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 3:3</span></span>

For what if some did not believe?.... It is suggested, that though the
Jews enjoyed such a privilege, some of them did not believe; which is an
aggravation of their sin, that they should have such means of light,
knowledge, and faith, such clear and full evidences of things, and yet
be incredulous: though it should be observed that this was the case only
of some, not of all; and must be understood, not of their disbelief of
the Scriptures being the word of God, for these were always received as
such by them all, and were constantly read, heard, and attended to; but
either of their disobedience to the commands of God required in the law,
or of their disregard to the promises of God, and prophecies of the
Messiah, and of their disbelief in the Messiah himself when he came; but
now this was no objection to the advantage they had of the Gentiles,
since this was not owing to want of evidence in the word of God, but to
the darkness and unbelief of their minds: and,

shall their unbelief make the faith of God without effect? no, their
unbelief could not, and did not make void the veracity and faithfulness
of God in his promises concerning the Messiah, recorded in the oracles
of God, which they had committed to them; for notwithstanding this, God
raised up the Messiah from among them, which is another advantage the
Jews had of, the Gentiles; inasmuch as "of" them, "as concerning the
flesh, Christ came, who is God over all, blessed for evermore", [Rom
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#005), and he sent him to them, to the
lost sheep of the house of Israel, as a prophet and minister; he sent
his Gospel to them first, and called out by it from among them his
elect, nor did he take it from them until he had done this: and he took
it away only; until "the fulness of the Gentiles", [Rom
11:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#025), is brought in; and then the
Gospel shall come to them again with power, and "all Israel shall be
saved" [Rom 11:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom011.htm#026).

[Romans 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 3:4</span></span>

God forbid, yea, let God be true, but every man a liar,.... Let no such
thing ever enter into the minds of any, that the truth of God can be, or
will be made of none effect by the want of faith in man; let it be
always asserted and abode by; that God is true, faithful to his word,
constant in his promises, and will always fulfil his purposes; though
"every man is a liar", vain, fallacious, and inconstant: referring to
[Psa 116:11](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#011);

as it is written, [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004);

that thou mightest be justified in thy sayings, and mightest overcome
when thou art judged. This is a proof that God is true, and stands to
his word, though men are fallacious, inconstant, and wicked. God made a
promise to David, that of the fruit of his body he would set upon his
throne; that the Messiah should spring from him; that he would of his
seed raise up unto Israel a Saviour. Now David sinned greatly in the
case of Bathsheba, [Sa2 11:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#003) (title),
but his sin did not make of no effect the truth and faithfulness of God:
though David showed himself to be a weak sinful man, yet God appeared
true and faithful to every word of promise which he had sworn in truth
to him; and therefore when he was brought to a sense of his evil, and at
the same time to observe the invariable truth and faithfulness of God,
said, "I acknowledge my transgression, &c. against thee, thee only have
I sinned and done this evil in thy sight", [Psa
51:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#003), which confession of sin I make,
"that thou mightest be justified in thy sayings"; or "when thou
speakest", [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004), which is all
one; that is, that thou mightest appear to be just, and faithful, and
true in all thy promises, in every word that is gone out of thy mouth,
which shall not be recalled and made void, on account of my sins; for
though I have sinned, thou abidest faithful; and this also I declare
with shame to myself, and with adoring views of thine unchangeable truth
and goodness: "that thou mightest overcome"; that is, put to silence all
such cavils and charges, as if the faith of God could be made void by
the unfaithfulness of men: "when thou art judged"; when men will be so
bold and daring to arraign thy truth and faithfulness, and contend with
thee about them. This now is brought as a full proof, and is a full
proof of this truth, that God is always true to his word, though men
fail in theirs, and fall into sin. God kept his word with David
concerning the stability of his kingdom, his successor, and the Messiah
that should spring from him, though he acted a bad part against God.
There is some little difference between these words as they stand in the
Hebrew text of [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004); and as they
are cited and rendered by the apostle, in the last clause of them; in
the former it is, "that thou mightest be clear"; in the latter, "that
thou mightest overcome". Now to vindicate the apostle's version, let it
be observed, that the Hebrew word signifies to "overcome", as well as to
"be clear"; of which instances may be given out of the Jewish writings.
Says (l) Rabba; concerning an argument used by R. Chanina, in a
controversy with other Rabbins, by this R. Chanina ben Antigonus, "hath
overcome" them: and in another place (m), whosoever "overcomes" a king,
they cast him into an empty ditch; where the gloss upon it is, he that
overcomes a king by words, that is, by disputing with him, which is a
disgrace to a king. So the word is used in the Syriac language in [Joh
16:33](../../../bib/kjv/joh016.htm#033). Moreover, the sense is the
same, be it rendered either way; for as a man, when he overcomes his
adversary, and carries his point against him, is clear of his charges
and cavils, so God, when he overcomes in judgment, is clear of the
imputations of wicked men. Another difference in the citation is, that
what in the psalm is rendered "when thou judgest", is by the apostle,
"when thou art judged", [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004), the
word, which is used by the Psalmist, may be rendered either way; either
"when thou judgest", as a word of the same form is rendered, when "thou
speakest", in [Psa 51:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#004); or "when
anyone judges of thee", or "when thou art judged": a like instance is in
[Psa 46:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa046.htm#002); and so it is rendered by
the Septuagint, and followed by the apostle, though the word he uses may
be considered in the middle voice, and may have an active signification
in it; and the phrase, , may be rendered, "when thou judgest", and then
both agree.

\(l\) T. Bab. Niddah, fol. 52. 2. (m) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 10. 2.
Sanhedrim, fol. 39. 1. & Becorot, fol. 8. 2.

[Romans 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 3:5</span></span>

But if our unrighteousness commend the righteousness of God,.... Hence
it appears, that the unrighteousness of men commends the righteousness,
or faithfulness of God; and yet all unrighteousness is sin; the wrath of
God is revealed against it; and would exclude from heaven, were it not
for pardon through the blood of Christ; and besides, the one is contrary
to the other, and of itself, of its own nature, cannot influence and
affect the other: wherefore this can only be understood of the
manifestation and illustration of, the righteousness of God by it; which
is covered and commended, in punishing the unrighteousness of men; in
setting forth Christ to be a propitiation for sin; and in fulfilling his
promises, notwithstanding the failings of his people, of which the case
of David is a pregnant proof; just as the love of God is illustrated and
commended, by the consideration of the sins of men, for whom Christ
died, and his grace and mercy in the conversion of them: but if this be
true,

what shall we say? shall we allow the following question to be put? this
answers to , "what is there to say", or "to be said?" a way of speaking,
often used by the Talmudists (n):

is God unrighteous, who taketh vengeance? if the premises are true, this
is a just consequence of them; whereas God does take vengeance on men
for their unrighteousness, both here and hereafter, it must be a piece
of unrighteousness in him so to do; since that for which he takes
vengeance on them commends his own righteousness; but that you may know
as well by what follows, that this is not an inference of his own, but
another's, he adds,

I speak as a man; , "according to the language of the children of men",
a phrase often used by the Jewish doctors (o). The apostle did not speak
the sentiments of his own mind, he represented another man, and spoke in
the language of an adversary.

\(n\) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 4. 1. & passim. (o) T. Bab. Ceritot,
fol. 11. 1. & passim.

[Romans 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 3:6</span></span>

God forbid, for then how shall God judge the world? "far be it"; such a
notion is detestable and abominable, nor can it be fairly deduced from
what is asserted; for it is the unrighteousness of his own people, on
whom he takes no vengeance personally, and not the unrighteousness of
others, on whom he does take vengeance, which commends his
righteousness; and supposing it was that of others, God cannot be
unrighteous in performing his threatenings, in a way of righteousness:
moreover, unrighteousness is sin, and does not of itself but by
accident, illustrate the righteousness of God; wherefore God is not
unjust in punishing it; for how should God "judge the world?" whereas
nothing is more certain than that he will do it, and that this will be
done in righteousness; which could not be, was he unrighteous in taking
vengeance; which will be one considerable part of that righteous
judgment.

[Romans 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rom 3:7</span></span>

For if the truth of God,.... The "truth of God" is the same with "the
righteousness of God", [Rom 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005), and
means his faithfulness; of which it is hypothetically said, it

hath more abounded; or has been more illustrated,

through my lie to his glory: nothing is more opposite to truth than a
lie; a lie of itself can never be of any advantage to truth, or to the
God of truth; nothing is more contrary to the nature of God, and more
abominable to him; a lie is of the devil, and punishable with eternal
death; wherefore it may seem strange, that the truth of God should
abound through it to his glory: now let it be observed, that the apostle
is not speaking of himself, nor of his lie of unbelief, in his state of
unregeneracy; but in the person of a sinful man, "for every man is a
liar", [Rom 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004), as he says, "I speak
as a man", [Rom 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#005); representing a
wicked man, who from what was before said, might collect this as the
sense of it, that the truth of God is illustrated by the lies of men:
and so much may be owned as the apostle's sense, that the truth of God
is commended, illustrated, and made to abound, when it is asserted, that
he is true and faithful, and every man is a liar, fallacious, and
deceitful; "let God be true, and every man a liar", [Rom
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#004), moreover, the truth of God may be
allowed to abound through the lies of men, in a comparative sense, the
one being set against the other; and so as contraries do, illustrate
each other: this may be assented to, as that sometimes a lie has been
overruled by God, for the accomplishing of his purposes and promises, in
which his truth and faithfulness have been displayed, as in the cases of
Jacob and the Egyptian midwives; but then this does not arise from its
nature and tendency, but from the overruling wisdom and providence of
God, and therefore not to be excused hereby from sin; and consequently
the inference from it is not just, that therefore "no man can, or ought
to be, judged as a sinner"; since his sin turns to such account, as to
make for the glory of God, which is intimated in the question:

why yet am I also judged as a sinner? if this be the case, I ought not
to be reckoned a sinner, or to be treated as such here, or judged and
condemned as one hereafter, which is a most wicked, as well as weak
consequence; for though God is true and faithful to his promises,
notwithstanding the sins of his people, which are as a foil, to set off
the lustre of his truth the more, yet their sins are nevertheless sins,
and are taken notice of by him as such, and they are corrected for them;
and however God may overrule, in a providential way, the sins of others
for his glory, this is no excuse for their sins, nor will it be an
exemption of them from punishment. This is the sense of the passage;
unless by "the truth of God" should be meant, the Gospel, the word of
truth, which is of God; and which through the apostle's "lie", as the
Jews might call his ministration of it, "abounded to" the "glory" of
God; being spread far and near, and made useful for the conversion of
sinners, for turning men from darkness to light, and from the power of
Satan unto God; and for the planting of churches in the Gentile world,
as well as in Judea; which much conduced to the honour of God, and the
interest of true religion: and then the meaning of the last clause is,
"why yet am I also judged as a sinner?" why am I accounted and condemned
as an heretic? as an apostate from the faith? as he was by the Jews, and
who are used to call heretics sinners: so "the sinner" in [Ecc
7:26](../../../bib/kjv/ecc007.htm#026) is thus interpreted (p), "these
are the heretics": and elsewhere it (q) is observed, that concerning the
heretics it is said, [Pro 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/pro010.htm#007), "the
name of the wicked shall rot": and I very much suspect this to be the
sense of the word in [Joh 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#024), "we
know that this man is a sinner"; an heretic, a man of bad principles;
and in [Joh 9:31](../../../bib/kjv/joh009.htm#031); "now we know that
God heareth not sinners"; men of corrupt minds; since this character
stands opposed to a worshipper of the God of Israel.

\(p\) Midrash Kohelet, fol. 77. 1. (q) Juchasin, fol. 130. 2.

[Romans 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 3:8</span></span>

And not rather, as we be slanderously reported,.... These are the
apostle's own words, in answer to the objector he represented; and it is
as if he should say, why do not you go on? why do you stop here? "and
not rather" say, as we are evil spoken of, and our doctrine is
blasphemed:

and as some affirm; ignorantly and audaciously enough:

that we say; and teach:

let us do evil that good may come; a slander cast upon the apostle's
doctrine of unconditional election, free justification, and of God's
overruling the sins of men for good; and is the same which is cast on
ours now, and is no small proof of the likeness and sameness of
doctrines:

whose damnation is just; whose judgment would have been right, and their
censure of our doctrines just, had it been true that we held such a
principle, taught such a doctrine, or encouraged such a practice: or
their condemnation is just, for aspersing our principles and practices
in so vile a manner; and all such persons are deserving of damnation,
who teach such things, or practise after this sort.

[Romans 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 3:9</span></span>

What then? are we better than they?.... The apostle returns to what he
was treating of in the beginning of the chapter, and suggests, that
though the Jew has the advantage of the Gentile, with respect to some
external privileges, yet not with regard to their state and condition
God-ward, and as in his sight; "are we Jews better than they Gentiles?"

no, in no wise; upon no consideration whatever, neither as men, nor as
Jews; which is directly opposite to a notion that people have of
themselves:

"in mankind (they say (r)) there are high degrees, one higher than
another, and the Israelites , "are above all mankind"; they are the
head, and the nations of the world are the tail, and are like to a
serpent, for they come from the filth of the old serpent.''

Again, they say (s),

"worthy are the Israelites, for the holy blessed God hath given to them
holy souls, from an holy place, "above all the rest of the people", that
they may do the commandments, and delight in the law.''

And elsewhere (t) it is observed on those words, [Gen
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/gen001.htm#024), "the living creature", or "the
soul of the living creature", by R. Aba:

"these are the Israelites, for they are the children of the holy blessed
God, and their holy souls come from him; the souls of the rest of the
people, from what place are they? says R. Eleazar, from the side of the
left hand, which is defiled; for they have polluted souls, and therefore
they are all defiled, and defile whoever comes nigh them:''

but they are no better, especially with regard to their estate by
nature:

for we have before proved; in the preceding chapters, by full instances
to a demonstration; and if that cannot be thought sufficient, he goes on
to give more proof in the following "verses":

that both Jews and Gentiles are under sin; under the power and guilt of
sin, and a sentence of condemnation for it; which is equally true of the
Jews, who were no better than the Gentiles, for being Abraham's seed,
for being circumcised, for having the ceremonial law, and other outward
privileges; for they were equally born in sin, and by practice sinners,
as the Gentiles: and this is true of God's elect in all nations, who are
no better by nature, by birth, than others; as deserving of the wrath of
God as the rest; no better in their tempers and, dispositions, or in the
endowments of their minds, or outward circumstances of life; nor better
qualified to receive and improve the grace of God bestowed on them, than
others.

\(r\) Tzeror Hammor, fol. 103. 2. Vid. Nishmat Chayim, orat. 2. c. 7.
fol. 61. 1. (s) Zohar in Lev. fol 28. 2. (t) Zohar in Gen. fol. 31. 1.

[Romans 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 3:10</span></span>

As it is written, there is none righteous, no, not one. The several
passages cited here, and in some following verses, are taken out of the
Psalms and Isaiah; and are brought to prove, not only that the Jews are
no better than the Gentiles, being equally corrupt and depraved as they;
but also to show the corrupt state and condition of mankind in general:
and the words are not always literally expressed, but the sense is
attended to, as in this passage; for in the original text of [Psa
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#001), it is, "there is none that doth
good"; from whence the apostle rightly infers, "there is none
righteous"; for he that does not do good, is not righteous; and
therefore if there is none on earth that does good and does not sin,
there is none righteous upon earth, "no, not one" single person. The
Jews allegorizing that passage in [Gen
19:31](../../../bib/kjv/gen019.htm#031), "there is not a man in the
earth to come into us", remark (u) on it thus,

"Urab qydu vya Nya, "there is not a righteous man in the earth"; and
there is not a man that rules over his imagination.''

There is none righteous as Adam was, in a state of innocence; for all
have sinned, and are filled with unrighteousness, and are enemies to
righteousness; none are righteous by their obedience to the law of
works; nor are there any righteous in the sight of God, upon the foot of
their own righteousness, however they may appear in their own eyes, and
in the sight of others; nor are any inherently righteous, for there is
none without sin, sanctification is imperfect; nor is it, either in
whole or in part, a saint's justifying righteousness; indeed there is
none righteous, no, not one, but those who are justified by the
righteousness of Christ imputed to them.

\(u\) Midrash Haneelam in Zohar in Gen. fol. 68. 1.

[Romans 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 3:11</span></span>

There is none that understandeth,.... This is rightly concluded, from
what the Psalmist says, [Psa 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#002),
"The Lord looked down from heaven upon the children of men", on all the
children of men, Jews and Gentiles, "to see if there were any that did
understand"; and it appears, upon this survey of them, there was not one
understanding person among them: man thinks himself a very wise and
understanding creature, though he is born a very ignorant one: true
indeed, he has not lost by sin the natural faculty of the understanding,
so as to become like the horse and mule, which are without any; and it
must be allowed, that natural men have some understanding of things
natural, civil, and moral; though there is none that understands even
these, as Adam did: but then they have no understanding of things
spiritual; no spiritual knowledge of God; no true sense of themselves,
their sin and misery; nor do they truly know the way of salvation by
Christ; nor have they any experience of the work of the Spirit of God
upon their souls; nor any experimental knowledge of the doctrines of the
Gospel: no man can understand these of himself, by the mere strength of
reason, and light of nature; nor can even a spiritual man fully
understand them in this life; in consequence of this account and
character of men it follows, that

there is none that seeketh after God; that worships him in Spirit and in
truth, or prays to him with the Spirit, and with the understanding; who
seek him chiefly, and in the first place, with their whole hearts,
earnestly, diligently, and constantly; who seek him in Christ, and under
the assistance of the Spirit; who seek after the knowledge of God in
Christ, communion with him through the Mediator, or his honour and
glory.

[Romans 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 3:12</span></span>

They are all gone out of the way,.... In [Psa
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003); it is said, "they are all gone
aside"; as persons in debt: man had a considerable stock of
righteousness, holiness, knowledge, &c. but he has run through all, has
contracted large and numerous debts, has been obliged to hide himself,
has been used as a bankrupt, and turned out of house and home: Christ
indeed has undertook to pay, and he has paid all the debts of his
people; and has put them into a better state than ever Adam was in: in
[Psa 53:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#003), it is rendered, "everyone
of them is gone back"; that is, from God; from his commands, and from
their former state and condition: here the phrase is rendered by the
apostle, "they are all gone out of the way": that is, out of the way of
God and his precepts, out of the way of holiness and righteousness, of
light and life; into their own ways, the ways of sin, Satan, and the
world of darkness, and of death: so Aben Ezra explains it, "out of the
right way"; Kimchi and Ben Melech paraphrase it, "out of the good way:
and so"

they are together become unprofitable; the word in [Psa
14:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa014.htm#003) and [Psa
53:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa053.htm#003); is translated, "they are become
filthy"; which R. Aben Ezra interprets by "they are corrupt"; and R.
Solomon Jarchi by , "they are turned to corruption"; the metaphor is
taken from stinking flesh, which is tainted and corrupted, and so good
for nothing, hence here rendered "unprofitable"; for so men being
corrupted by sin, are of no use, service, and advantage to God, to men,
or to themselves; but, on the contrary, nauseous to God, and to all that
are good, and hurtful to themselves and others: for

there is none that does good, no, not one; and therefore must be
unprofitable. There is none that can do good in a spiritual manner,
without the grace of God, strength from Christ, and the assistance of
the Spirit; and there is not even a spiritual man, that can do good
perfectly, and without sin.

[Romans 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 3:13</span></span>

Their throat is an open sepulchre,.... The several vices of the
instruments of speech are here, and in the following verse, exposed:
"the throat" is said to "be an open sepulchre", as in [Psa
5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009), so called, for its voracity and
insatiableness; both as an instrument of speech, for the words of the
wicked are devouring ones; and as an instrument of swallowing, and so
may denote the sinner's eager desire after sin, the delight and pleasure
he takes in it, the abundance of it he takes in, and his insatiable
greediness for it; likewise for its filthy stench, the communication of
evil men being corrupt; and because, as by an open grave, persons may
fall unawares to their hurt, so the evil communications of wicked men,
as they corrupt good manners, are dangerous and hurtful: R. Aben Ezra
explains it by , "immediate destruction", or sudden death:

with their tongues they have used deceit; which may design the sin of
flattery, for the words in [Psa 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/psa005.htm#009);
the place referred to, are, "they flatter with their tongue"; either God
or men, themselves or others, their princes or their neighbour; for
there are flatterers in things sacred and civil, there are
self-flatterers, court flatterers, and flattering preachers, and all
abominable and mischievous; or the phrase may design the sin of lying,
either politically, officiously, perniciously, and religiously; and in
this latter way, either with respect to doctrine or practice:

the poison of asps is under their lips; or as in [Psa
140:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa140.htm#003), "adders' poison is under their
lips". The asp is but a small creature, and so is the tongue, [Jam
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/jam003.htm#005), but there is a world of mischief
in it, signified by poison; which, as that, is latent and secret, is
under it; and as that stupefies and kills insensibly, so an evil tongue
does, and that in a deadly and incurable manner: oftentimes the Jews
speak of the evil imagination, or corruption of nature entering into
persons, and operating in them, "as poison in an angry serpent" (w).

\(w\) T. Bab. Sabbat, fol. 62. 2. Yoma, fol. 9. 2.

[Romans 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 3:14</span></span>

Whose mouth is full of cursing and bitterness. These words are taken
from [Psa 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa010.htm#007), by cursing is meant,
cursing of God, which is sometimes internal with the heart, and
sometimes external with the mouth, as here; and of all good men, though
without cause, and to no purpose with respect to the persons they curse,
since God has blessed them, and they are blessed, and greatly to their
own detriment, for, in the issue, their curses will be turned against
themselves. There is also a cursing of superiors, as parents, masters,
magistrates, kings, and governors; which is a sore evil, and attended
with bad consequences; likewise of themselves, and their fellow
creatures: and "the mouth being full of it", denotes the frequency of
the sin; scarce anything else comes out of it but cursing; which
discovers the sad corruption of the heart; "for out of the abundance of
the heart the mouth speaketh", [Mat
12:34](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#034). By "bitterness" is meant,
either sin in general, which is "an evil and bitter thing", [Jer
2:19](../../../bib/kjv/jer002.htm#019), in its nature and effects; or
sinful words, such as oaths, curses, imprecations, all wrathful and
deceitful words.

[Romans 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 3:15</span></span>

Their feet are swift to shed blood. The sins of the heart and mouth are
before described, and now the sins of action are taken notice of; for
"the feet" are the instruments of motion and action: and when these are
said to be "swift to shed blood", it denotes the readiness and eagerness
of men, to murder innocent creatures; which shows the dreadful malice
and hatred that is in them. The words are cited from [Isa
59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007), and seem to point at the times
of Manasseh, who shed so much innocent blood, as to fill Jerusalem with
it from one end to the other.

[Romans 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 3:16</span></span>

Destruction and misery are in their ways. This passage also is to be
found in [Isa 59:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#007), and may be
understood either actively thus: all the ways they take, and methods
they pursue, are to make their fellow creatures miserable, to ruin and
destroy them; or passively, that by their sinful ways and vicious course
of life, they themselves are brought to destruction and misery: the way
they are walking in is, "the broad way, that leadeth to destruction",
[Mat 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/mat007.htm#013); the end of it, what it
issues in, is eternal death, the destruction of the body and soul in
hell, which will be attended with endless and inexpressible misery.

[Romans 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 3:17</span></span>

And the way of peace have they not known. This is a citation front [Isa
59:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa059.htm#008), and expresses the ignorance of
mankind, with regard to true peace, and the way unto it: men are
naturally ignorant of the way of peace with God; of the first step which
God took towards it; of the council and covenant of peace, in which the
scheme of it was drawn, and the method fixed; of Christ the peacemaker,
and of the way in which he has made it; and of the Gospel, which reveals
and publishes it. They are ignorant of the true way of enjoying peace of
conscience; they have no true peace of mind, their consciences are often
tortured; and though they may have a stupid and secure peace, yet
nothing that is true, real, and solid; for they are without the Spirit,
whose fruit is peace; and without faith in Christ, by which true peace
only is enjoyed; nor are they spiritually minded, which is life and
peace; nor have they any knowledge of the way to have it; they are ready
to think it must be had by doing something of their own, and not that it
is to be had only in Christ, in his blood and righteousness. They are
ignorant of the paths of wisdom, which are peace; peace is enjoyed in
them, they lead unto it, and issue in it: they know not the way to
eternal peace; they imagine something done by the creature is the way;
and are ignorant that Christ is the only way of salvation, the true way
to eternal life, everlasting peace and happiness: yea, they know not the
way of peace among men, and one another; nor will they do that which is
just and right, in order to support and maintain it, but are unjust,
deceitful, and quarrelsome; they do not study peace, but rather
contention, which they like and approve of. The Jews talk (x) much of
their good nature, affability, and condescension, and of their doing
this and that, and the other thing, , "because of the ways of peace".

\(x\) Misn. Gittin, c. 5. sect. 8, 9. T. Hieros. Demai, fol. 24. 1.
Maimon. Obede Cochabim, c. 10. sect. 5.

[Romans 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 3:18</span></span>

There is no fear of God before their eyes. The place referred to is [Psa
36:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa036.htm#001), by the "fear of God", is not
meant a fear of God's wrath, of hell and damnation; nor a fearful
distrust of his presence, power, providence, and grace; much less an
hypocritical fear; but a reverential affection for God, and which is
peculiar to the children of God, which springs from a sense of divine
goodness, is attended with holiness of heart and life, is consistent
with faith, even full assurance of it, and with spiritual joy in its
highest degree; it stands opposed to pride and haughtiness, and is a
blessing of the covenant of grace: now this is not to be found in
unregenerate men, for this springs from grace, and not nature, and is
only implanted in the heart in conversion; it appears from the whole
life and conversation of unconverted men, that the fear of God is not in
their hearts, nor before their eyes.

[Romans 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 3:19</span></span>

Now we know that what things soever the law saith,.... By "the law" is
meant, not the law of nature, nor the civil law of nations, nor the
ceremonial law of the Jews, nor barely the five books of Moses, nor the
book of Psalms, of the Prophets, or the writings of the whole Old
Testament; but the moral law, as it appears in the whole word of God,
which every man is bound to observe, of which all are transgressors, by
which is the knowledge of sin, which no man can be justified by, and
which Christ was made under, and came to fulfil. This law is represented
as a person speaking, and saying many things, some of which are here
mentioned; so, , "the law says" so and so, is an usual phrase with
Jewish writers (y). The persons it speaks to, are

them that are under the law; the Jews were in a peculiar sense under it,
as it was given to them by Moses; all mankind are under it, as to the
matter of it; they are under obligation to obedience to it, and, through
disobedience, come under its sentence of condemnation. The elect of God
themselves were, and are in some sense under it; not indeed as a
covenant of works, or as in the hands of Moses, nor as a yoke of
bondage; nor are they obliged to seek for justification by it, and are
entirely delivered from the curse and condemnation of it by Christ. They
were under it, and that as a covenant of works, as in Adam, the federal
head and representative of all mankind; and came under its sentence of
condemnation and death, for his sin, and their own actual
transgressions; which is consistent with the everlasting love of God to
them in Christ, the covenant of grace made with them in him, as their
head and surety, and their justification by him: and they are now under
it, as in the hands of Christ; and look upon themselves as obliged, by
the love of Christ, to yield a cheerful obedience to it: here it means
such as are transgressors of the law, and so under obligation to
punishment, without any regard to Jew or Gentile, or any distinction God
has made in his own breast: and the things it says to such are, it
charges them with sin, and convicts them of it, both of its pollution
and guilt: so

that every mouth may be stopped; and have nothing to say of the purity
of their nature, which appears to be so sadly stained; nor of their
works of righteousness, which are so few, and so very imperfect. The law
makes such a representation of things to them, that their mouths are
stopped from glorying in themselves, and in their works, which are far
from being adequate to the demands of the law; and from complaining
against the righteous judgment of God, should he proceed against them in
the most rigorous manner:

and all the world may become guilty before God; Jews and Gentiles; all
the individuals of mankind are guilty before God, and will be found to
be so, sooner or later: some read it, "subject to God", and understand
it of a subjection to his grace, being brought to see their need of it,
and of salvation by it; but this is not the case of all the world,
rather signifies a subjection to that justice, vengeance, and wrath of
God, to which all men are liable in their own persons; since they are
all found guilty by the law, and will appear to be so, and therefore can
never be justified by their obedience to it; which is what the apostle
is aiming at in all he here says, as appears from what follows; all
which "we know" to be true, and are fully assured of, who know the
nature and spirituality of the law, and to whom it has come with light
and power.

\(y\) T. Bab. Roshhashanah, fol. 16. 1. Taanith, fol. 21. 2.

[Romans 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 3:20</span></span>

Therefore by the deeds of the law,.... Hence it most clearly appears,
that there can be no justification before God by the law, since it stops
the mouths of men, and pronounces them guilty: by "the deeds of the law"
are meant, works done in obedience to it, as performed by sinful men,
which are very imperfect; not as performed by Adam in innocence or by
Christ in our nature whose works were perfect; but as performed by
sinful men and of themselves, and not as performed in and by Christ for
them who is the fulfilling end of the law for righteousness to all
believers: now by such works as these whether wrought before or after
conversion, with or without the strength and grace of Christ,

there shall no flesh be justified in his sight: that is, no one person:
"flesh" designs men, and men as corrupt and carnal, in opposition to
God, who is a Spirit pure and holy; and may have respect to the vain
opinion of Jews and Gentiles, who were vainly puffed up in their fleshly
mind; the one on account of their wisdom and learning, the other on
account of their righteousness; and includes all the individuals of
human nature:, the word "justified", does not signify being made
righteous by the infusion of righteousness, for the infusion of a
righteousness, or holiness, is sanctification, which is a work of the
Spirit of God, is internal, and imperfect, and so not justifying; but it
is a forensic word, or legal term, and stands opposed to a being
condemned; and signifies to be acquitted, discharged, and made righteous
in a legal sense, which can never be done by an imperfect obedience to
the law: men may be justified hereby in their own sight, and in the
sight of others, but not in "his sight"; in the sight of God, who is
omniscient, and sees not as man seeth; who is pure, holy, and righteous,
and whose judgment is according to truth: this is said in direct
contradiction to the Jews (z), who say,

"a man is not justified for ever, but by the words of the law:''

but in his sight none can be justified, but by the perfect obedience and
righteousness of Christ. The reason for it is,

for by the law is the knowledge of sin; it discovers to a man, by the
light of the Spirit of God, and as under his influence, and attended
with his power, the sins both of his heart and life; and so he is
convinced by it as a transgressor and finds himself guilty, and liable
to condemnation and death; wherefore he can never hope for and expect
justification by it. The Jews ascribe such an use as this to the law,
which they suppose it performs in a very gentle manner;

"he that rises in the night (say they (a)), and studies in the law, ,
"the law makes known to him his sin", but not in a way of judgment, but
as a mother makes known to her son in tender language:''

but this is generally done in a rougher way, for the law works wrath.

\(z\) Zohar in Lev. fol. 33. 3. (a) Zohar in Lev. fol. 10. 2.

[Romans 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 3:21</span></span>

But now the righteousness of God,.... The apostle having proved that all
men are unrighteous, and that no man can be justified in the sight of
God by his obedience, either to the law of nature or of Moses, proceeds
to give an account of that righteousness, which does justify before God;
and so returns to his former subject, [Rom
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017), concerning "the righteousness of
God", the revelation of which he makes to be peculiar to the Gospel, as
he does here; since he says, that it

without the law is manifested: meaning, either that this righteousness
is without the law, and the deeds of it, as performed by sinful men; or
that the manifestation of it is without the law, either of nature or of
Moses; for the law discovers sin, but not a righteousness which
justifies from sin; it shows what righteousness is, but does not direct
the sinner where there is one to be had, that will make him righteous in
the sight of God: this is made known without the law, and only in the
Gospel:

being witnessed by the law and the prophets; a testimony is borne to the
justifying righteousness of Christ both "by the law", particularly in
the five books of Moses; which testify of Christ, of his obedience,
sufferings, and death, by which he brought in life and righteousness;
see [Gen 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen003.htm#015), compared with [Dan
9:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#024); and [Gen
15:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen015.htm#006) with [Rom
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom004.htm#009); and [Gen
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen022.htm#018) with [Gal
3:8](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#008); and [Deu
30:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#011) with [Rom
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005). And the prophets; Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Daniel, and others; see [Isa
42:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa042.htm#021).

[Romans 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rom 3:22</span></span>

Even the righteousness of God, which is by faith of Jesus Christ,.... A
further account is given of this righteousness: why it is called "the
righteousness of God", and in what sense revealed and manifested; see
Gill on [Rom 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#017); Here it is said to
be "by faith of Jesus Christ"; not by that faith which Christ himself
had as man, but by that faith, of which he the author and object: the
Alexandrian copy reads, "by faith in Jesus Christ"; and not by that as
the cause of justification; for faith is neither the efficient, nor the
moving, nor meritorious cause of it; no, nor the instrumental cause of
it on the part of God or Christ: nor is faith the matter of a justifying
righteousness; for faith is a part of sanctification, is itself
imperfect, is a man's own, as it is implanted in him, and exercised by
him; is here and elsewhere distinguished from righteousness; something
else, and not that, as the obedience and blood of Christ, are said to be
what men are made righteous and justified by: but faith is a means of
apprehending and receiving righteousness; it views the excellency of
Christ's righteousness; it owns the sufficiency of it; the soul by it
renounces its own righteousness, submits to Christ's, rejoices in it,
and gives him the glory of it: now this is by, or through faith,

unto all, and upon all: not all men, for all have not faith, nor are all
justified and saved: but

all that believe; which must be understood, not of believing any thing,
nor of any sort of believing; but of such, who truly and with the heart
believe in Christ for salvation; and who are here opposed to the wise
philosophers among the Gentiles, had to all self-righteous persons among
the Jews. Though this character does not design any cause or condition
of justification, but is only descriptive of the persons, who are
declaratively interested in a justifying righteousness, which is said to
be "unto", and "upon them"; that is, it is appointed, provided, and
wrought out for them, and directed and applied unto them, and put upon
them as a garment, and that upon all of them:

for there is no difference; of nation, age, or sex, or of state and
condition; no respect is had to persons or works; nor is there any
difference with respect to weak or strong believers; the righteousness
is equally applied to one as to another, and one is as much justified by
it in the sight of God as another.

[Romans 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">rom 3:23</span></span>

For all have sinned,.... This is the general character of all mankind;
all have sinned in Adam, are guilty by his sin, polluted with it, and
condemned for it; all are sinners in themselves, and by their own actual
transgressions; this is the case of the whole world, and of all the men
in it; not only of the Gentiles, but of the Jews, and the more righteous
among them: hence there is no difference in the state and condition of
men by nature; nor is there any reason from and in themselves, why God
saves one and not another; nor any room to despair of the grace and
righteousness of Christ, on account of persons being, in their own view,
the worst of sinners:

and hence it is, that they are all

come short of the glory of God; either of glorifying of God; man was
made for this purpose, and was capable of it, though now through sin
incapable; and it is only by the grace of God that he is enabled to do
it: or of glorying: before him; sin has made him infamous, and is his
shame; by it he has forfeited all external favours, and has nothing of
his own to glory in; his moral righteousness is no foundation for
boasting, especially before God: or of having glory from God; the most
pure and perfect creature does not of itself deserve any glory and
praise from God; good men, in a way of grace, will have praise of God;
but sinners can never expect any on their own account: or of the
glorious grace of God, as sanctifying and pardoning grace, and
particularly the grace of a justifying righteousness; man has no
righteousness, nor can he work out one; nor will his own avail, he wants
a better than that: or of eternal glory; which may be called the glory
of God, because it is of his preparing, what he calls persons to by his
grace, and which of his own free grace he bestows upon them, and will
chiefly lie in the enjoyment of him; now this is represented sometimes
as a prize, which is run for, and pressed after; but men, through
sinning, come short of it, and must of themselves do so for ever: or
rather of the image of God in man, who is called "the image and glory of
God", [Co1 11:7](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#007), which consisted
externally in government over the creatures; internally, in
righteousness and holiness, in wisdom and knowledge, in the bias of his
mind to that which is good, and in power to perform it; of all which he
is come short, or deprived by sinning.

[Romans 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">rom 3:24</span></span>

Being justified freely by his grace,.... The matter of justification is
before expressed, and the persons that share in this blessing are
described; here the several causes of it are mentioned. The moving cause
of it is the free grace of God; for by "the grace of God" here, is not
meant the Gospel, or what some men call the terms of the Gospel, and the
constitution of it; nor the grace of God infused into the heart; but the
free love and favour of God, as it is in his heart; which is wonderfully
displayed in the business of a sinner's justification before him: it
appears in his resolving upon the justification of his chosen ones in
Christ; in fixing on the method of doing it; in setting forth and
pre-ordaining Christ to be the ransom; in calling Christ to engage
herein; in Christ's engaging as a surety for his people, and in the
Father's sending him to bring in everlasting righteousness; in Christ's
coming to do it, and in the gracious manner in which he wrought it out;
in the Father's gracious acceptation, imputation, and donation of it; in
the free gift of the grace of faith, to apprehend and receive it; and in
the persons that partake of it, who are of themselves sinners and
ungodly. The meritorious cause of justification is,

the redemption that is in Jesus Christ: redemption supposes a former
state of captivity to sin, Satan, and the law, in which God's elect were
by nature, and is a deliverance from it; it is of a spiritual nature,
chiefly respects the soul, and is plenteous, complete, and eternal: this
is in and by Christ; he was called unto it, was sent to effect it, had a
right unto it, as being the near kinsman; and was every way fit for it,
being both God and man; and has by his sufferings and death obtained it:
now, as all the blessings of grace come through redemption by Christ, so
does this of justification, and after this manner; Christ, as a
Redeemer, had the sins of his people laid on him, and they were bore by
him, and took away; the sentence of the law's condemnation was executed
on him, as standing in their legal place and stead; and satisfaction was
made by him for all offences committed by them, which was necessary,
that God might appear to be just, in justifying all them that believe:
nor is this any objection or contradiction to the free grace of God, in
a sinner's justification; since it was grace in God to provide, send,
and part with his Son as a Redeemer, and to work out righteousness; it
was grace in Christ, to come and give himself a sacrifice, and obtain
salvation and righteousness, not for angels, but for men, and for some
of them, and not all; and whatever this righteousness, salvation, and
redemption cost Christ, they are all free to men.

[Romans 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">rom 3:25</span></span>

Whom God had set forth to be a propitiation,.... Redemption by Christ is
here further explained, by his being "a propitiation": which word may
design either Christ the propitiator, the author of peace and
reconciliation; or the propitiatory sacrifice, by which he is so; and
both in allusion to the mercy seat, which was a type of him as such. The
apostle here uses the same word, which the Septuagint often render "the
mercy seat", by; and Philo the Jew calls it by the same name, and says
it was a symbol, "of the propitious power of God" (b). Christ is the
propitiation to God for sin; which must be understood of his making
satisfaction to divine justice, for the sins of his people; these were
imputed to him, and being found on him, the law and justice of God made
demands on him for them; which he answered to satisfaction, by his
obedience and sacrifice; and which, as it could not be done by any
other, nor in any other way, is expressed by "reconciliation", and
"atonement": whence God may be said to be pacified, or made propitious;
not but that he always loved his people, and never hated them; nor is
there, nor can there be any change in God, from hatred to love, any more
than from love to hatred: Christ has not, by his sacrifice and death,
procured the love and favour of God, but has removed the obstructions
which lay in the way of love's appearing and breaking forth; there was,
a law broken, and justice provoked, which were to be attended to, and
Christ by his sacrifice has satisfied both; so that neither the wrath of
God, nor any of the effects of it, can fall upon the persons Christ is
the propitiation for, even according to justice itself; so that it is
not love, but justice that is made propitious: for this is all owing to
the grace and goodness of God, who "hath set him forth", for this
intent, in his eternal purposes and decrees; in the promises of the Old
Testament, in the types, shadows, and sacrifices of the old law; by the
exhibition of him in our nature, and in the ministration of the Gospel;
and this is said to be

through faith in his blood. The "blood" of Christ is that, by which
Christ is the propitiation; for without the shedding of that blood,
there is no redemption, no peace, no reconciliation, or remission of
sin; and "faith" in his blood is the means by which persons become
partakers of the benefits of his propitiation; such as peace, pardon,
atonement, justification, and adoption: and the end of Christ's being
set forth as a propitiation, on the part of God's people, is,

for the remission of sins that are past, through the forbearance of God:
by "sins that are past", are meant, not sins before baptism, nor the
sins of a man's life only, but the sins of Old Testament saints, who
lived before the incarnation of Christ, and the oblation of his
sacrifice; and though this is not to be restrained to them only, for
Christ's blood was shed for the remission of all his people's sins,
past, present, and to come; yet the sins of the saints before the coming
of Christ, seem to be particularly designed; which shows the
insufficiency of legal sacrifices, sets forth the efficacy of Christ's
blood and sacrifice, demonstrates him to be a perfect Saviour, and gives
us reason under the present dispensation to hope for pardon, since
reconciliation is completely made: "remission" of sin does not design
that weakness which sin has brought upon, and left in human nature,
whereby it is so enfeebled, that it cannot help itself, and therefore
Christ was set forth, and sent forth, to be a propitiation; but rather
God's passing by, or overlooking sin, and not punishing for it, under
the former dispensation; or else the forgiveness of it now, and
redemption from it by the blood of Christ, "through the forbearance of
God"; in deferring the execution of justice, till he sent his Son, and
in expecting satisfaction of his Son; which shows the grace and goodness
of God to his people, and the trust and confidence he put in his Son:
the other end on the part of God, in setting forth Christ to be a
propitiation, was

to declare his righteousness [Psa
22:31](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#031); meaning either the
righteousness of Christ, which was before hid, but now manifested; or
rather the righteousness of God the Father, his faithfulness in his
promises relating to Christ, his grace and goodness in the mission of
his Son, the holiness and purity of his nature, and his vindictive
justice, in avenging sin in his own Son, as the surety of his people:
the execution of this was threatened from the beginning; the types and
sacrifices of the old law prefigured it; the prophecies of the Old
Testament express it; and the sufferings and death of Christ openly
declare it, since God spared not his own Son, but sheathed the sword of
justice in him.

\(b\) Philo de Vita Mosis, l. 3. p. 668.

[Romans 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">rom 3:26</span></span>

To declare, I say, at this time, his righteousness,.... This end is
further explained, it being to declare the righteousness of God "at this
time", under the Gospel dispensation; in which there was such a display
of the grace, mercy, and goodness of God:

that he might be just; that is, appear to be so: God is naturally and
essentially just in himself; and he is evidentially so in all his works,
particularly in redemption by Christ; and when and while he is

the justifier of him that believeth in Jesus: Jesus, the Saviour, is the
object of faith, as he is the Lord our righteousness; the believer in
Jesus is a real, and not a nominal one; God is the justifier of such in
a declarative way, and God only, though not to the exclusion of the Son
and Spirit; and which sentence of justification is pronounced by him on
the foot of a perfect righteousness, which neither law nor justice can
find fault with, but entirely approve of; and so he appears just and
righteous, even though he justifies the sinner and the ungodly.

[Romans 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">rom 3:27</span></span>

Where is boasting then?.... There is no room nor reason for it, either
in Jews or Gentiles: not in the Jews, who were very apt to boast of
their being Abraham's seed; of their circumcision; of their being
Israelites; of their having and keeping the law; of God being their God;
and of their knowledge of him: nor in the Gentiles, who were ready to
boast of their philosophy, wisdom, and learning; of their
self-sufficiency, freewill, and of the things they had in their own
power.

It is excluded; it is shut out of doors; the key is turned upon it; it
is not allowed of; it is entirely exploded:

by what law? of works? nay; for, that establishes boasting when men seek
life, righteousness, and salvation by the works of it, and fancy they
shall be able to attain them this way:

but by the law of faith: not by a law requiring faith; nor as if the
Gospel was a law, a new law, a remedial law, a law of milder terms; but
the word "law" here answers to the Hebrew word which signifies any
"doctrine" or "instruction", and oftentimes the doctrine of the Gospel,
as in [Isa 2:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#003), and here particularly,
the doctrine of a sinner's justification by faith in the righteousness
of Christ; according to which doctrine the most unlikely persons are
justified, even ungodly persons, the worst and vilest of sinners; and
that without any consideration of works, by faith only, which is freely
given them; and by faith in Christ's righteousness only: so that there
is not the least room for boasting in the creature, but all their
boasting is in Christ, who is made unto them righteousness, and by whom
they are justified.

[Romans 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">rom 3:28</span></span>

Therefore we conclude,.... This is the conclusion from the premises, the
sum total of the whole account:

that a man is justified by faith without the deeds of the law. The
subject of justification is, "man", not in opposition to angels; nor
does it design the Jew against the Gentile, though some have so thought;
but the apostle names neither Jew nor Gentile, but "man", to show that
Christ's righteousness is unto all, and every man, that believes, be he
who he will; and is to be understood indefinitely, that every man that
is justified is justified by faith. The means is "by faith", not
habitually or actually considered; that is, either as an habit and
principle infused into us, or as an act performed by us; but either
organically, as it is a means of receiving Christ's righteousness; or
objectively, as it denotes Christ the object of it: and all this is done
"without works", of any sort; not by a faith which is without works, for
such a faith is dead, and of no avail; but by faith without works joined
to it, in the affair of justification; or by the righteousness of Christ
imputed by God the Father, without any consideration of them, and
received by faith, and relied upon by the believer, without any regard
unto them.

[Romans 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">rom 3:29</span></span>

Is he the God of the Jews only?.... The Jews made their boast of him as
such, and would not allow the Gentiles any interest in him: but

is he not also of the Gentiles? yes, of the Gentiles also: God is the
God both of Jews and Gentiles; not only as the Creator, preserver, and
Governor of them, or as he has a right to demand worship and service of
them, but as he is their covenant God; not by virtue of the covenant of
circumcision, or by the Sinai Covenant, but by the covenant of grace; as
appears by his loving them in Christ, choosing them in him, putting them
into his hands, providing blessings of grace for them in him, and
sending his Son to redeem them; by calling them by his grace; by their
sanctification, adoption, pardon, and justification; by taking out of
them a people for his name with whom he dwells, and of whom he takes
care; and will never leave nor forsake: all which may lead us to observe
the distinguishing grace of God, the happiness of our state and
condition, and what encouragement we have for faith and hope in God.

[Romans 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">rom 3:30</span></span>

Seeing it is one God,.... God is one in nature and essence, though there
are three persons in the Godhead, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; whence it
appears, that he that is the God of the Jews, is also the God of the
Gentiles, or there would be more gods than one; and that these are
justified in one and the same manner, or God must be divided; for God,
as he is one in nature, so he is one in will, in his promises, and in
the methods of his grace:

which shall justify the circumcision by faith, and uncircumcision
through faith. The objects of justification are "the circumcision", the
circumcised Jews, and "the uncircumcision", the uncircumcised Gentiles;
the circumcision of the one does not forward, and the uncircumcision of
the other does not hinder, nor neither of them effect the grace of
justification: the justifier of them is one and the same, who is God;
and the matter of their justification is the same, which is the
righteousness of Christ; and the manner of it, or the means of their
comfortable apprehension of it, is the same; for those phrases, "by
faith", and "through faith", mean one and the same thing; see [Phi
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/phi003.htm#009).

[Romans 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">rom 3:31</span></span>

Do we then make void the law through faith?.... Which question is
answered by way of detestatation,

God forbid! and by asserting the contrary,

yea, we establish the law. The law is not made void, neither by the
grace nor doctrine of faith: not by the grace of faith; for that faith
is not right which is not attended with works of righteousness; and
those works are not right which do not flow from filth. Such a
connection there is between faith and works; and so much do the one
depend upon the other. Moreover, none but believers are capable of
performing good works aright, and they do them, and they ought to do
them: besides, faith, as a grace, looks to Christ, as the end of the law
for righteousness, and therefore do not make it void. Nor is it made
void by the doctrine of faith, and by the particular doctrine of a
sinner's justification by faith in Christ's righteousness, which is here
more especially intended; for though it is made void by it, as to any
use of it for justification by the deeds thereof; yet its use in other
respects is not set aside, such as to inform us of the mind and will of
God, to discover and convince of sin, to show believers their deformity
and imperfection, to render Christ and his righteousness more valuable,
and to be a rule of walk and conversation to them; and it still remains
a cursing and condemning law to Christless sinners, though justified
ones are delivered from it as such: yea, the law is so far from being
made void, that it is established by this doctrine; for by it the
perpetuity of it is asserted, the spirituality of it is acknowledged,
the perfect righteousness of it is secured: according to this doctrine
all its demands are answered; whatever it requires it has, such as
holiness of nature, perfect obedience to its precepts, and its full
penalty borne: it is placed in the best hands, where it will ever
remain; and a regard to it is enforced under the best influence, by the
best of motives, and from the best of principles. It is indeed abolished
as a covenant of works, and in this sense is made void to believers; and
it is done away as to the form of administration of it by Moses; and it
is destroyed as a yoke of bondage; and the people of God are free from
the malediction of it, and condemnation by it, and so from its terror;
yet it remains unalterable and unchangeable in the hands of Christ; the
matter of it is always the same, and ever obligatory on believers, who,
though they are freed from the curse of it, are not exempted from
obedience to it: wherefore the law is not made void, so as to be
destroyed and abolished in every sense, or to be rendered idle,
inactive, useless, and insignificant; but, on the contrary, is made to
stand, is placed on a sure basis and firm foundation, as the words used
signify.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 4](rom004)

</div>
