<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](rom009)  [Next](rom011.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ROMANS 10

In this chapter are contained an account of the two righteousnesses of
faith and works, a summary of the Gospel of Christ, a description of the
grace of faith, in the nature, use, and means of it, and several
testimonies concerning the calling of the Gentiles; and whereas the
apostle knew that this, as well as what he had said in the latter part
of the preceding chapter, that the Jews had not attained to the law of
righteousness, but stumbled at the stumbling stone, would be offensive
to his countrymen the Jews; wherefore that it might appear that he said
this not out of disaffection and ill will to them, he declares his
sincere regard unto them, and the great respect he had for them, by
calling them "brethren", by expressing his good will to them, by praying
for the salvation of them, [Rom 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001.md),
by bearing testimony of their zeal for God, [Rom
10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002.md), though he faithfully observes to
them, that it was an ignorant zeal, of which ignorance he gives an
instance, [Rom 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003.md), particularly in
the attribute of God's righteousness; from which ignorance arose all
their misconduct in religious things, especially in the article of
justification; hence they sought to be justified by their own
righteousness, and rejected the righteousness of Christ, and then points
out to them the true end of the law, for righteousness which is Christ,
[Rom 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004.md), which if they had known
would have set them right, and which is another instance of their
ignorant and misguided zeal: this leads him on to what he had in view,
which was to give an account of the two righteousnesses he had suggested
in the latter part of the former chapter, the righteousness of the law,
which the Jews sought for and found not, and the righteousness of faith,
which the Gentiles without seeking for enjoyed; and this account he
gives in the words of Moses, for whom they had the greatest regard: the
description of the former is given in his words, in [Rom
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005.md), which suggest the impossibility
of keeping the law, and obtaining life by it, and therefore it is a vain
thing to seek for righteousness by the works of it; the latter is
described, [Rom 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006.md), by the certainty
of it, being wrought out by Christ, who came down from heaven, fulfilled
the law, and died, and rose again from the dead; and by the plainness
and evidence of it, as revealed in the Gospel, [Rom
10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008.md), the sum of which Gospel is, that
whoever believes in Christ and confesses him shall be saved, [Rom
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009.md), which faith and confession, when
genuine, are with the heart and mouth agreeing together; the
consequences of which are righteousness and salvation, comfortably
apprehended and enjoyed, [Rom 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010.md),
and that the above is the sum of the Gospel, and that there is such a
connection between faith and righteousness, and between confession and
salvation, is confirmed, [Rom 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011.md),
by a testimony from the prophet, [Isa
28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016.md), which being expressed in such a
general manner, as to extend to every believer, whether Jew or Gentile,
reasons are given, [Rom 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012.md), in
support of such an explanation of that passage, taken from the equal
condition of all, there being no difference between them naturally, from
the universal dominion of God over them, and from his liberal
communication of grace and goodness to all that call upon him; which
last reason is confirmed, [Rom 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013.md),
by a passage of Scripture in [Joe
2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032.md), on occasion of which, the
apostle proceeds to treat of the calling of the Gentiles, and of the
means of it, the preaching of the Gospel, which was necessary to it,
which is made out by a train of reasoning after this manner; that seeing
salvation is only of such that call upon the name of the Lord, and there
could be no calling upon him without believing in him, and no believing
without hearing, and no hearing without preaching, and no preaching
without mission, which is proved by a citation out of [Isa
52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007.md), and no success in preaching,
when sent, without the exertions of efficacious grace, as appears from
the case of the Jews, who had the ministration of the Gospel to them by
Isaiah, and yet all did not believe it; as is evident from [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md), and seeing the conclusion of
which is, that faith comes by preaching, and preaching by the order and
command of God, [Rom 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014.md), it
follows, that it was proper that ministers should be sent, and the
Gospel preached to the Gentiles, and that attended with power, in order
that they should believe in the Lord, and call upon his name and be
saved; and which method God had taken, and which he had foretold he
would take, in the prophecies of the Old Testament, and which were now
fulfilling: that the Gospel was preached to them, and they heard it,
were matters of fact, and were no other than what should be, or might be
concluded, from [Psa 19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004.md), cited, [Rom
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018.md), and that the Jews could not be
ignorant of the calling of the Gentiles is clear, first from the words
of Moses, [Deu 32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021.md), which the
apostle produces, [Rom 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019.md), and from
a passage in the prophecy of [Isa
65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001.md). So that this was no other than
what Moses and the prophets said should be, [Rom
10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020.md), and the chapter is closed, [Rom
10:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#021.md), with another passage out of the
same prophet in the next verse, showing the rejection of Christ and his
Gospel by the Jews, and which justifies their being cast off by him, of
which the apostle treats largely in the next chapter.

[Romans 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rom 10:1</span></span>

Brethren, my heart's desire,.... The apostle having suggested, that a
few of the Jews only should be called and saved; that the far greater
part should be rejected; that the Israelites who sought for
righteousness did not attain it when the Gentiles did, but stumbled and
fell at Christ, and would be ashamed and confounded; and knowing the
prejudices of that people against him, therefore lest what he had said,
or should say upon this subject, should be thought to arise from hatred
and ill will to them, he judged it proper, as before, to express his
trouble and sorrow on their account; so now his great love and affection
to them, and which he signifies by calling them "brethren": for not the
Roman believers are here addressed, as if he was telling them how much
he loved his own nation; but either the Jews in general, whom he looked
upon and loved as his brethren, according to the flesh; and whatever
they thought of him, he considered them in such a relation to him, which
obliged him to a concern for their good and welfare; or rather the
believing Jews, that were members of the church at Rome, whom, besides
using the common style of the Jewish nation, who were wont to call all
of their country brethren, he could speak to, as being such in a
spiritual relation, being children of the same father, partakers of the
same grace and privileges, and heirs of the same glory. Now he declares
to these persons, that the "desire of his heart" was towards Israel, he
bore a good will to them, his mind was well disposed and affected
towards them, he had a cordial, sincere, and hearty respect for them;
and so far was he from being their enemy, that he continually bore them
upon his mind at the throne of grace: and his

prayer to God for Israel was, that they might be saved; not only that
they might be saved in a temporal sense, from these grievous calamities
and sore judgments he saw were coming upon them, which he had reason to
believe would issue in the destruction of them, as a nation and church;
but that they might be spiritually converted, turned from their evil
ways, and brought to believe in Christ, whom they had despised and
rejected, and so be saved in the Lord with an everlasting salvation:
this he might desire not only from a natural affection for them, but as
a minister of the Gospel, who cannot but wish that all that hear him
might be converted and saved; and as a believer in Christ he might pray
for this in submission to the will of God; and especially as he knew
there was a seed, a remnant according to the election of grace, at that
present time among them, that should be saved, though the larger number
of them were cast off. The Alexandrian copy, and some others, read "for
them", instead of "for Israel"; not naming them, being easily
understood; and so the Vulgate Latin and Syriac versions.

[Romans 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rom 10:2</span></span>

For I bear them record, that they have a zeal of God,.... A zeal for
God; for the being and unity of God, against the polytheism and idolatry
of the Gentiles; for the word of God, the writings of the Old Testament,
of which they were zealous defenders and preservers, and which they
diligently read and heard explained, and whereby they thought to obtain
eternal life; for the law of God, moral and ceremonial, especially for
the rituals of the Mosaic economy; for the service and worship of God,
they spared no pains, but compassed sea and land to bring in proselytes
to their religion; all which the apostle could testify from his own
knowledge, and by his own experience, who had been as great a zealot as
any of them all. But now whilst the apostle is expressing his strong
affection for this people, he is careful to act the faithful part to
them, and points out their mistakes, and shows them their faults; which
he does in this and the following verse, by observing, that they had a
zeal of God indeed,

but not according to knowledge: it was not well regulated, it proceeded
on mistaken principles, and moved in a wrong way, in persecuting the
church of God, in doing things contrary to the name of Christ, in
putting to death his ministers and members, thinking that hereby they
did God good service; which arose from their ignorance of their Father,
and of the Son: though they had a zeal of God, they knew neither God nor
Christ aright; they did not know God in Christ, nor Jesus to be the true
Messiah; they understood neither law nor Gospel truly, and fancied the
Gospel was contrary to the law, and an enemy to it; and therefore in
their great zeal opposed it, and the professors of it; they were zealous
of the law, and of doing the commands of it, but knew not the true
nature, use, and end of the law; as appears by what follows.

[Romans 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rom 10:3</span></span>

For they being ignorant of God's righteousness,.... Either of the
righteousness of God revealed in the Gospel, which is no other than the
righteousness of Christ, and which they knew nothing of, the whole
Gospel being a sealed book, and wholly hidden from them; or of the
righteousness of God required in the law, they imagining that only an
external conformity to the commands of the law, was all that was
necessary to attain to a justifying righteousness by it, not knowing the
spirituality of it, and that it required conformity of heart and nature,
as well as life and conversation; or rather of the attribute of God's
righteousness, the strictness of his justice, the purity and holiness of
his nature: for though they knew that he was holy, just, and righteous,
yet did not think he was so strict as to insist upon every punctilio,
and to take notice of every little default and defect in obedience; and
especially that he had any regard to the heart and the thoughts of it,
and required perfect purity there or that he would accept of nothing
less than an absolutely perfect and complete righteousness; nor justify
any without full satisfaction to his justice: hence they were

going about to establish their own righteousness; which they would never
have done, had they known the righteousness of God, in either of the
above senses; the Alexandrian copy, and some others, omit the word
"righteousness", and only read, "their own", leaving it to be
understood, and which is easily done; and so reads the Vulgate Latin
version: by "their own righteousness", as opposed to God's, is meant the
righteousness of works, their obedience to the law, an outward
conformity to it, an observance of the rituals of it, and a little
negative holiness. This they endeavoured to "establish" or "make to
stand" in the sight of God, as their justifying righteousness, which is
all one as setting chaff and stubble, briers and thorns, to a consuming
fire; as the attempt expresses madness in them, the phrase suggests
weakness in their righteousness, which they would fain make to stand,
but could not, it being like a spider's web before the besom, or like a
dead carcass, which men would set upon its feet to stand alone, but it
cannot; than which nothing can be a greater instance of egregious folly:
their "going about" or "seeking" to do this, shows their ignorant zeal,
and the toil, the pains, the labour they used to effect it, but all in
vain, and to no purpose; as appears by their hearing, reading, fasting,
praying, giving alms to the poor, and tithes of all they possessed; all
which they were very careful and studious of, and especially to have
them done in the sight of men: and so it was that they

have not submitted themselves to the righteousness of God; that is, the
righteousness of Christ, so called, because approved and accepted of by
God, imputed by him to his people, and given them by him as a free gift,
and which only justifies in his sight; and because it is wrought by
Christ, who is truly and properly God, and revealed and applied by the
Spirit of God. This the Jews submitted not to, because they had no true
humble sense of themselves as sinners, nor did they care to acknowledge
themselves as such; which submission to Christ's righteousness requires
and necessarily involves in it; no man will ever be subject to it, till
he is made sensible of the exceeding sinfulness of sin, and brought to
an humble acknowledgment of it; the Spirit of God first convinces of sin
and then of righteousness; and because they had an overweening opinion
of their own righteousness, which they trusted to, and depended upon,
imagining it to be blameless, and to contain all that the law required,
and therefore they stood in no need of any other; and as for the
righteousness of Christ they had it in contempt, their carnal minds
being enmity to him, were not subject to his righteousness, nor could
they, nor can any be, without the powerful efficacious grace of God,
making them willing in the day of his power. This phrase denotes the
rebellion of their wills, against Christ and his righteousness, they
acting as rebellious subjects against their sovereign prince.

[Romans 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rom 10:4</span></span>

For Christ is the end of the law,.... The apostle here observes that to
them which had they known, would have regulated their zeal, removed
their ignorance and set them right, in that which they stumbled at, and
fell. By the "law" here, is not meant the ceremonial law, of which,
indeed, they were all very zealous, and of which Christ also was the end
in many respects; he was the final cause of it, or that for the sake of
which it was; it had not been given had it not been for him; all its
institutions, ordinances, and sacrifices, were on his account: they were
all shadows of him, and he the body and substance of them; he was the
end or mark and scope at which they all aimed; every type looked to him,
and every offering directed the worshipper to him; he was the terminus
of it, to whom it was to reach, and beyond whom it was not to go; it was
a schoolmaster for instruction and direction until Christ came, and no
longer. He was the fulfilling end of it, every thing in it had its
accomplishment in him; and then lastly, he put an end to it, he
disannulled it because of its after weakness and unprofitableness; he
blotted out this hand writing of ordinances, and entirely abolished this
law of commandments; but then Christ was not the end of this law for
righteousness; Christ's obedience to it is no part of justifying
righteousness, especially not to everyone that believes, not to the
Gentiles who never were under any obligation to observe it: the moral
law is here designed, and when Christ is said to be the end of it, the
meaning is not that he was the end of its being given; for that was to
be a rule of righteousness and life to men, and a ministration of death
in case of disobedience: or that he was the scope of this law, though
the Syriac version renders it "the scope" of the law is the Messiah, the
mark at which it aimed, or which it directs persons to; for the law does
not direct to Christ at all, in any way; it requires and insists upon a
perfect righteousness, but gives not the least hint of the righteousness
of Christ, nor does it in any form direct unto it; by it is the
knowledge of sin, but no knowledge of a Saviour from sin; not the law,
but the Gospel directs and encourages sensible sinners to believe in
Christ and be saved; on the contrary, the law is a killing letter, and
the ministration of condemnation and death; but Christ is either the
consuming or consummating, the destroying or fulfilling end of the law.
He is the destroying end of the law, not as to the nature, being, matter
and substance of it, which is invariable and eternal, and is not, and
cannot be made void by the doctrine of faith; nor as to the true use of
it; but as a covenant of works, as to the ministry of it by Moses, and
as to its curse and condemnation. Though I rather think the latter is
here meant, namely, that Christ is the fulfilling end of the law, since
it is added,

for righteousness: for the bringing in an everlasting righteousness; a
righteousness justifying in the sight of God; a righteousness sinners
wanted, and could not obtain of themselves, and could never be obtained
but by a perfect fulfilling of the law: this Christ has done partly by
the conformity of his nature, being exactly like that, and what it
requires holy, just, and good; and partly by perfect obedience of his
life to all its precepts; and also by suffering the penalty of it,
death, in the room and stead of all his people; and so the whole
righteousness of the law is fulfilled by him, and he becomes the end of
it, for a justifying righteousness before God,

to everyone that believes: not to him that works for life, and in order
to obtain a righteousness of his own; nor to the Jew only, but also to
the Gentile, even to everyone, be who he will, that has faith in Christ;
not that faith is either the matter, cause, or condition of
righteousness, but this righteousness is only revealed unto, and
received by the believer, and can only be pleaded by him, as his
justifying righteousness. Moreover, this phrase is descriptive of the
persons to whom Christ is the end of the law for righteousness, and
suggests that for whomsoever he has fulfilled the law, in order to bring
in for them a justifying righteousness, faith in consequence is given to
them, to receive and embrace it, and enjoy all the comfort and
privileges of it.

[Romans 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rom 10:5</span></span>

For. Moses describeth the righteousness which is of the law,.... In
this, and some following verses, an account is given of the two
righteousnesses before mentioned, called their own and the righteousness
of God; and that chiefly in the words of Moses, which is wisely done by
the apostle, he and his writings being in great esteem among the Jews.
The description he gives of the righteousness of the law, that is,
righteousness which the law requires, and is done in obedience to its
commands, is,

that the man which doth those things, shall live by them, or "in them";
and which is to be seen in [Lev 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#005.md),
"ye shall therefore keep my statutes and my judgments, which if a man
do, he shall live in them"; from whence it appears, that by "those
things" a man is to do, are meant the statutes and judgments of God, not
the ordinances of the ceremonial, but the precepts of the moral law; and
that the righteousness of the law lies in "doing" and keeping those
statutes, not merely externally, but internally, with all the heart, and
soul, and strength; the law requires love to God, fear of him, and faith
in him, and an inward disposition of the mind towards him, and a
conformity of heart and nature to his law, as well as outward obedience;
and all this is to be done perfectly and completely in every punctilio
the law requires, otherwise no life is to be expected, nor any
righteousness to be had by it. The Jewish writers understand the life
promised by the law, to be eternal life. The two Targums of Onkelos and
Jonathan ben Uzziel paraphrase the words thus, "he shall live in them",
, "in eternal life"; in like manner Jarchi explains them, "he shall
live", , "in the world to come"; to which agrees the note of R. Aben
Ezra, who interprets it of lie in both worlds; he says the statutes of
the law are life to them that do them in both worlds, for if a man
understands the secret of them, he shall live for ever, and shall never
die. The life which the law promised to Adam in his state of perfection,
who was the only mere man that ever was capable of perfectly fulfilling
it, was the continuance of the happy life he enjoyed; the life it
promised to the Israelites, at the renewing of it on Mount Sinai, was a
long and prosperous life in the land of Canaan; as for the promise of
eternal life, that was made before the world began, in the covenant of
grace, and is a peculiar promise and blessing of that covenant, is an
entire gift of God's grace, and never was designed to be enjoyed through
men's obedience to the law of works, but through the righteousness and
death of Christ, who is the fulfilling end of the law: hence it appears,
that as the righteousness of the law is a righteousness of works done by
men, it cannot be the righteousness God imputes, for that is without
works, and by which a man can be justified before God; and since the law
requires internal and perfect obedience to it, it is certain that it
cannot be yielded by fallen creatures; hence it follows, that there can
be no life, and so no righteousness by it, the consequence of which,
when observed by sinful men, horror, terror, and gloomy despair; the
very reverse of which is the language of the righteousness of faith.

[Romans 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rom 10:6</span></span>

But the righteousness which is of faith,.... Or "with respect to the
righteousness of faith"; the other righteousness before called the
righteousness of God, because God is the author of it, here the
righteousness of faith, because that receives it,

speaketh on this wise; the selfsame writer who describes the
righteousness of the law in such a manner, that it gives no room to a
fallen creature ever to expect life and salvation by it, gives such an
account of the righteousness of faith, as forbids all doubting and
despair:

say not in thine heart; let not such a thought enter into thy mind, much
less express it with thy lips;

who shall ascend into heaven (that is, to bring Christ down from above,
or who shall descend into the deep? that is, to bring up Christ again
from the dead). These words are not properly a citation of [Deu
30:12](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#012.md); but the apostle makes use of
some phrases which are there, with his own explications of them; though
the difference between them, stripped, of these explications is not very
material: in the first clause, "who shall ascend into heaven?" the
apostle leaves out the phrase, "for us"; which as to the sense was not
absolutely necessary to retain; the difficulty, indeed, seems greater in
the latter clause, "who shall descend into the deep?" which in the text
of Moses is, "who shall go over the sea for us?" but when it is
considered that the sea is often called the deep, and that sailing on it
and over it, is expressed by "going down to the sea in ships", [Psa
107:23](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#023.md); and moreover, when it is
observed that the Jerusalem Targum paraphrases it thus,

"the law is not in heaven that it should be said, oh that we had one of
us, as Moses the prophet, who could go up to heaven and bring it to us!
nor is it beyond the great sea, that it should be said, oh that we had
one of us, as Jonah the prophet , "who could descend into the depths of
the great sea", and bring it to us;''

the apostle is to be justified in his expressions. His sense, indeed,
may seem to be different from that of Moses, and of the common
interpretations of the Jewish writers, as in the above paraphrase and in
the following account of them from the Talmud, understanding them of the
law (w);

"says Abdimo bar Chama bar Dousa, what is the meaning of that Scripture,
"neither is it in heaven, nor is it beyond the sea?" it is not in
heaven, for if it was in heaven you must needs go up after it, and if it
was beyond the sea, you must needs go over after it; Rabba says, not in
heaven is it, you will not find it in him that exalts his knowledge in
himself as the heavens, nor will you find it in him that enlarges his
knowledge in himself, as the sea; R. Jochanan says, not in heaven is it,
you will not find it in those that are of a haughty spirit, nor beyond
the sea is it, you will not find it among traders abroad, or
merchants.''

Though the apostle's sense may be brought pretty near to this, after
this manner; who shall go up to heaven, or down to the deep, either to
bring us the knowledge of the law, and yield an obedience to it which
that requires of us, or to give us a full account of the Gospel of the
grace of God? there is no room, nor reason, for men to say this in their
hearts, or to make a doubt of them, as if they were not done already; to
do so, is to deny that Christ is come in the flesh, and risen from the
dead, who has given the true sense and knowledge of the law, and has
perfectly fulfilled it, in the room and stead of his people, and by whom
the doctrine of grace and truth is come, particularly the doctrine of a
sinner's justification before God; this is brought nigh in the
ministration of the word, so that there is no need of such inquiries as
these. Moreover, for the illustration of these words, let it be
observed, that these phrases are proverbial, and often used to express
things impossible, of which take the following instances;

"it is a tradition of the Rabbins (x) if a man says to his wife, lo,
this is thy divorce, on condition that "thou ascendest to the
firmament", on condition that "thou descendest into the deep"; on
condition that thou passest over the great sea on foot, this is no
divorce;''

the reason is, , "because it is impossible". Again (y),

"if a man says to a woman, if thou wilt "ascend into the firmament", or
if thou wilt "descend into the deep", lo, thou art espoused to me by
this penny; but if thou wilt not go up into the firmament, nor go down
into the deep, thou shalt not be espoused; and after that he puts the
penny into her hand, lo, the condition becomes void, and behold she is
espoused immediately, for the thing is known , "that it is impossible"
for her to fulfil the condition.''

So here are forbidden all such thoughts, words, or expressions which
carry such a sense as this; who will go down to the deep to fetch such a
wretch as I am out of the lowest hell, to deliver me from the curses of
the law, and the wrath of God, and bring me out of this wretched
miserable condition in which I am? or go up to heaven and carry me
there, and put me in the possession of the undefiled inheritance? all
this is as impossible to be done, as for a man to ascend to heaven, or
go down into the deep: now though the righteousness of the law
encourages such despondency and black despair, the righteousness of
faith, or the doctrine of justification by faith in Christ's
righteousness, forbids every thing of this kind; assuring the sinner,
that Christ is come down from heaven in human nature, that he has
fulfilled all the righteousness of the law by his obedience in life, and
has bore the penalty of it in his sufferings and death, and is risen
again for justification; so that such questions should not be put, nor
such despairing thoughts encouraged: besides, to think and speak in this
manner, is to set aside the whole scheme of the Gospel, and supposes the
person to doubt whether Christ is come down from heaven; and therefore
asks, who shall go up to bring him down? and that he is not risen from
the dead; and therefore puts the question, who will go down to the deep
to fetch him up? whereas he is already come, has obeyed, suffered, and
died, and rose again, and is become the end of the law for righteousness
to everyone that believes.

\(w\) T. Bab. Erubin, fol. 55. 1. Maimon. Talmud Tora, c. 3. sect. 8.
(x) T. Bab. Gittin, fol. 84. 1. & Bava Metzia, fol. 94. 1. (y) Maimon.
Hilchot Ishot. c. 6. sect. 7. Vid. Zohar in Exod. fol. 40. 4. & 43. 1.

[Romans 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rom 10:8</span></span>

But what saith it,.... The Scripture; so some copies, and the Vulgate
Latin and Ethiopic version read, "what saith the Scripture?" the Arabic
version, "what dost thou say?" or "what saith he", Moses? for what
follow are manifestly his words, in [Deu
30:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu030.htm#014.md),

the word is nigh thee, even in thy mouth, and in thy heart; which is to
be understood not of the law, for Moses himself is not speaking of the
law only, but either of the whole word of God, both law and Gospel; or
particularly of the Gospel, which holds forth those special blessings
and promises of grace, pardon of sin, and circumcision of the heart,
which are mentioned in the context, as what should be bestowed upon the
people of the Jews in the latter days; and so is rightly applied by the
apostle to the then dispensation, and is to be understood of the Gospel;
which was nigh both in the ministration of it, by the apostles, to Jews
and Gentiles, and in the application and experience of it; it was not
only "in the mouth" of the preachers, but also of the hearers of it, by
a hearty and sincere confession; and "in their hearts", being attended
with the power of God, and received in the love of it, was truly
believed in, and cordially embraced;

that is, the word of faith. This phrase, , "the word of faith", may be
seen in the Jewish writings (z); and this shows what word is here meant,
even the Gospel so called, because it contains doctrines which are to be
believed upon the testimony of God, and particularly the doctrine of
justification by the righteousness of Christ received by faith; and
because it proposes Christ as the object of faith, and encourages souls
to believe in him for life and salvation; and is also the means of
begetting and implanting faith in the heart, and without it the
preaching of it is of no avail: and it is further described by the
ministration of it,

which we preach; being sent, commissioned, qualified, and assisted by
Christ thereunto; which shows the agreement between Moses and the
apostles of Christ; for the word which he spoke of, they preached, and
indeed said no other things than what the prophets and Moses said should
come, that Christ should suffer in the stead of his people, and rise
again for their justification; the sum of which is delivered in [Rom
10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009.md).

\(z\) Zohar. in Gen. fol. 45. 4.

[Romans 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rom 10:9</span></span>

That if thou shalt confess with thy mouth the Lord Jesus,.... That is,
if a man shall make a good, sincere, and hearty confession to God,
before the church and people of God, and before the world, that Christ
is his Lord and Saviour, whom he desires to serve, and to be saved by;
and this as arising from a comfortable experience of the grace of God in
his soul, and from a true faith in Christ in his heart, wherefore it
follows,

and shall believe in thine heart, that God hath raised him from the
dead, thou shalt be saved; for this article of Christ's resurrection
includes the several other articles of faith: it supposes his death, and
that supposes his life, and the obedience of it; and his life implies
his being here on earth, and that his coming down from heaven to do the
will of his Father; and this is the rather mentioned, which is here
ascribed to God the Father, though not to the exclusion of the Son and
Spirit, because that Christ is risen again for our justification, with
which true faith is principally concerned; for such a faith is intended,
not which lies in a mere assent to the truth of this, or any other
article of the Christian religion; but which is concerned with Christ
for righteousness, life, and glory; and with such a faith salvation is
certainly and inseparably connected.

[Romans 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rom 10:10</span></span>

For with the heart man believeth unto righteousness,.... The apostle
here explains the nature and use both of faith and confession; as true
faith does not lie in the bare assent of the mind to the Gospel, or any
truth contained in it, respecting the person and office of Christ, so
neither does it lie, as not in the brain, so not in the tongue, but in
the heart; it is not a notional knowledge of things to be believed; nor
is it saying that a man believes; but it is heart work, a believing with
all the heart; such a faith in which all the powers of the soul, the
understanding, will, and affections, are concerned, it is a seeing of
the Son, a beholding of the glory, fulness, suitableness, ability, and
willingness of Christ as a Saviour, with the eye of the understanding
spiritually enlightened; it is a going out of the soul to Christ, in
various acts, such as venturing into his presence, prostrating itself at
his feet, resolving if it perishes it will perish there; a giving up
itself unto him, determining it will have no other Saviour, leaning and
relying on him, and living upon him; which faith works by love to
Christ, moves the affections, stirs up the desires of the soul to his
name, and endears him and all that belong to him to it. The use of this
grace is, "unto righteousness"; it is not instead of one, for faith is
not our righteousness; nor is it in order to work out one, for this
grace puts a soul on renouncing its own righteousness; but its use is to
receive one, even the righteousness of Christ, which when it spies, it
admires, receives, lays hold on, and rejoices in looking on itself as
righteous through this righteousness, and so has peace with God through
Christ:

and with the mouth confession is made unto salvation. This is to be
understood not of confession of sin, though that is proper and requisite
to be made, both with respect to the participation, and enjoyment of
salvation, particularly pardoning grace and mercy, and to an admission
to Gospel ordinances; but of confession of Christ, as appears from the
preceding verse, which lies in a frank and open acknowledgment of what
Christ is in himself, as that he is truly and properly God, the Son of
God, the true Messiah, the Mediator between God and man, and the only
Saviour of lost sinners, and of our faith in him, with respect to
ourselves, to our pardon, justification, acceptance and salvation in him
and through him; in ascribing the whole of our salvation to him, and
giving him the glory of it; in declaring to the churches of Christ what
he has done for our souls, and in subjecting ourselves to his
ordinances. This confession must be made both by words and facts, must
be open, visible, and before men; and also real, hearty, and sincere,
the words of the mouth agreeing with the experience of the heart; and
such a good profession made before God, angels, and men, highly becomes
all that believe with the heart. This was the practice of the primitive
saints; yea, all nations own, acknowledge, and profess the God they
worship; and should not we confess our God, Saviour and Redeemer? Christ
himself confessed a good confession before Pontius Pilate, and is the
Apostle and High Priest of our profession. So to do, makes both for the
glory of God, and for our own real good and advantage. Yea, it is "unto
salvation"; not as a cause of it, for Christ alone is the author of
eternal salvation; but a sincere and well made confession of Christ
points out to all that know us where and from whom we expect to have
salvation; it is what lies in the way, and is to be taken up by all that
believe in Christ, and to be held fast without wavering until we receive
the end of our faith, even the salvation of our souls.

[Romans 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rom 10:11</span></span>

For the Scripture saith,.... Of this form of expression, or mode of
speaking; see Gill on [Rom 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#017.md). The
passage referred to is [Isa 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#016.md),
cited before in [Rom 9:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#033.md); the view
with which it is produced is to prove the certain connection between
faith and righteousness, and confession and salvation; or in other
words, to observe that such who cordially believe in Christ, and make a
sincere profession of their faith in him, shall be saved. There are some
things somewhat different from, though agreeing in sense with, the words
as they stand in the prophet; there it is indefinitely said, "he that
believeth", here an universal is made use of,

whosoever, or "everyone"

that believeth: which phrases are equipollent, and a certain truth it
is, that whosoever believes in Christ, whether Jew or Gentile, be he who
he will, shall surely be saved: here the object believed in, is
expressed

in him, which is there implied, and may easily be understood of the
stone laid in Zion for a foundation, which is Christ; for other
foundation can no man lay, and whoever by faith builds on this
foundation is safe:

and shall not be ashamed; neither in this world, nor in that to come; in
the Hebrew text it is, "shall not make haste"; how this may be
reconciled; see Gill on [Rom 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#002.md), [Rom
9:3](../../../bib/kjv/rom009.htm#003.md).

[Romans 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rom 10:12</span></span>

For there is no difference between the Jew and the Greek,.... Some
reasons are here assigned, confirming the apostle's sense of the
prophet's words, that everyone that believes in Christ shall be saved;
for there is no distinction of nations, no superiority on account of
carnal descent, or fleshly privileges, no preeminence on the score of
the laws and ordinances of the former dispensation, all which are now
abolished; nor is there any difference in their state God-ward, all
being under sin, and without a righteousness, and all standing in need
of the righteousness of Christ, and salvation by him; to which is added
another reason,

for the same Lord over all, or "is over all": by whom is meant, either
God the Father, who is the God of the Gentiles as well as of the Jews,
[Rom 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/rom003.htm#029.md); or rather the Lord Jesus
Christ, who is Lord of all; and is to be understood, not of his being so
merely by creation, but redemption, he having bought with his blood all
the elect of God, both among the Jews and among the Gentiles; so that he
has the same equal propriety in one as another, and they the same claim
to him, and the same encouragement to believe in him, for righteousness
and life: and moreover, he

is rich unto all that call upon him; he is not only rich as God, being
possessed of all divine perfections and glory, but as Mediator, having
the riches of grace and glory in him; and is rich, beneficent, liberal
and free in dispensing, pardoning, justifying, and sanctifying grace to
all that come unto him, throw themselves at his feet, implore his grace
and righteousness, and call upon him with faith and fervency. Such as
these are here designed, and not all that make mention of his name, or
are called by it; but who are the true worshippers of him in faith and
fear; for the invocation of his name includes all worship of him, and
exercise of grace upon him; hence this passage is no inconsiderable
proof of his proper deity.

[Romans 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rom 10:13</span></span>

For whosoever shall call upon the name the Lord,.... This testimony is
taken out of [Joe 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032.md) and is brought
to prove the truth of what the apostle had just suggested, that all that
call upon the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, will find him rich and
plenteous in mercy, and ready to dispense his grace and salvation to
them: such

shall be saved; be they who they will, whether Jews or Gentiles; not
with a temporal salvation only, but with a spiritual and eternal one;
for the words of the prophet refer to Gospel times, as the context
shows, and is cited and applied thereunto by the Apostle Peter, [Act
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/act002.htm#016.md); besides, the deliverance and
salvation Joel speaks of, is of a "remnant whom the Lord shall call",
[Joe 2:32](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#032.md); and designs the remnant
according to the election of grace, whether among Jews or Gentiles, whom
God calls by his efficacious grace; between which call and eternal
glory, there is a certain and inseparable connection.

[Romans 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rom 10:14</span></span>

How then shall they call on him in whom they, have not believed?.... The
apostle having observed, that whoever, Jew or Gentile, believe in the
Lord and call upon his name, shall be saved; and that the same Lord was
ready and willing to dispense his grace, without any difference to them;
suggests, that it was therefore absolutely necessary, that the Gospel
should be preached to the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews; that it was
the will of God it should be; that what he and others did, was by a
divine commission; that they were sent by the Lord to preach the Gospel
to them; that hearing they might believe, and so call upon the name of
the Lord, and be saved; and therefore the Jews ought not to blame them
for so doing, for there was a real necessity for it, since there can be
no true calling upon God without faith, no faith without hearing, no
hearing without preaching, and no preaching without a divine mission.
The first of these is signified by this interrogation. Every man calls
upon the God he believes in, and him only; this has been the practice of
all men, in all nations; such as have not believed in God and Christ, do
not call upon them; it is true indeed, there may be an external
invocation of them, where there is no true faith; but then this is not
calling upon them in truth and sincerity; as is their faith, so is their
calling upon them; as the one is historical, the other is only external;
there is no true invocation without faith, or any that is acceptable to
God, or of any avail to men; for calling on the name of the Lord, as it
ought to be practised in all religious worship, so it includes and every
part of worship as done in faith:

and how shall they believe in him of whom they have not heard? the
meaning is, that there is no faith in Christ without hearing of him; as
it is in human, so in divine faith, there may be believing without
seeing, but not without hearing; so we believe that there were such men
as Alexander and Julius Caesar, and other persons now in being, though
we never saw them, having heard of them, or had a report made of them,
which we have reason to give credit to; so there may be, and is faith in
Christ without seeing him with our bodily eyes, though not without
hearing of him; for of an unheard of person, there can be no faith in
him, because no exercise of thought about him. This is to be understood
of outward hearing of the word, and of adult persons only; for that,
infants may have the grace of regeneration, and so faith wrought in them
by the Spirit of God, without hearing the word, is not to be denied;
since as they are capable of the principles of corruption, why not of
grace? and also of such persons as have the right and free exercise of
the faculties of hearing and speaking, and not of such who never could
hear, and speak; for as the Spirit works where, and how he pleases, so
he can work faith in the hearts of such persons who never heard the
word, and enable them to exercise it on the proper object, and cause
them secretly to call upon the name of the Lord, with groans which
cannot be uttered. Moreover, this is to be, understood of the ordinary
way and means of believing; for though God can, and sometimes does work
by other means, and even without any, yet his usual way and method is,
to bring men to faith and repentance by the hearing of the word:

and how shall they hear without a preacher? or there is no hearing
without, preaching; there may be reading without it, and this ought to
be where there is preaching, to see that what is preached is agreeably
to the Scriptures; but there is no hearing the word explained without
preaching; explaining the word is preaching. There is no hearing of
Christ, and salvation by him, without the preaching of the Gospel; the
usual and ordinary way of hearing from God, and of Christ, is by the
ministry of the word: this shows not only the necessity and usefulness
of the Gospel ministry, but also points out the subject matter of it,
which is Christ, and him crucified. They that preach ought to preach
concerning the person of Christ, his offices, grace, righteousness,
blood, sacrifice and satisfaction, otherwise men may hear the preacher,
and not hear Christ.

[Romans 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rom 10:15</span></span>

And how shall they preach, except they be sent,.... There is no proper,
rightful, regular, and lawful preaching of the word without a mission,
which is either extraordinary, or ordinary; extraordinary mission was
such as the apostles themselves had; who, as they were called to
extraordinary service, had extraordinary qualifications, and were sent
forth in an extraordinary manner, with a power of doing miracles, and
immediately by Christ himself. Ordinary mission is of men to be pastors
and teachers, which includes qualifications for the ministerial work;
for whom Christ sends forth into such service, he bestows gifts on them,
fitting them for it, some more, some less, but all have some; and it
also includes a call unto it, which is either internal, and by the
Spirit of God, and lies partly in the furniture he gives, and the
inclination of the heart to this good work which he forms; and which
arises not from a vanity of mind, and a desire of popular applause, and
worldly views, and sinister ends; but from a real concern for the good
of souls, and the glory of Christ, being willing to deny themselves, and
forsake all for Christ, to suitor reproach for his name's sake, and to
forego all worldly interest, and secular views: or is external, which is
given by the churches of Christ, after due trial and examination of
gifts, and a serious consideration of the matter, and that in the most
solemn manner; and this is what may be properly called a preacher's
mission, and none but such who are in this way sent out ought to preach
the Gospel: and to such well agrees, and may be applied, that passage in
[Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007.md), where

it is written, how beautiful are the feet of them that preach the Gospel
of peace, and bring glad tidings of good things; which words are not to
be understood of the messengers that brought the tidings of deliverance
from the Babylonish captivity, but of the ministers of the Gospel. In
[Isa 52:7](../../../bib/kjv/isa052.htm#007.md) it is expressed in the
singular number, "how beautiful are the feet of him", &c. and is by some
understood of Christ, as it is also by many Jewish writers: thus
interpreting the "turtle's voice" in [Sol
2:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#012.md);

"this (say they (a)) is the voice of the King Messiah, proclaiming and
saying, "how beautiful on the mountains", &c.''

And elsewhere (b) it is observed, that the

"Rabbins say, great is peace, for when the King Messiah comes, he does
not open but with peace, as it is said, "how beautiful upon the
mountains", &c.''

And says (c) another,

"one verse says, "how beautiful upon the mountains are the feet of him
that bringeth good tidings", , "the explanation", or meaning is, the
King Messiah:''

and some of the more, modern ones (d) of them, own these words are, ,
"concerning the redemption, and the coming of the Messiah": and so the
worlds, however they may principally regard the Messiah and his
ministry, are property applied to the apostles of Christ; and may be
rightly understood of any minister of the Gospel, whose business it is
to "preach the Gospel of peace": which is so called from the subject
matter of it, peace made by the blood of Christ, which it proclaims;
from the effect of it, producing, peace and tranquillity in distressed
minds, and making men of peaceable dispositions; and from the use of it,
which is to direct men to the way of peace, to guide their feet in it,
lead them to eternal peace: their work is also to "bring glad tidings of
good things"; such as reconciliation, righteousness, pardon, life, and
eternal salvation, by a crucified Christ; and the preaching of such a
Gospel, and bringing such news, make their "feet beautiful": one should
have thought rather their lips than their feet would be took notice of;
the reason of this is, partly because of the agreeableness of their walk
and conversation to the doctrine they preach; and partly because of
their readiness to preach it everywhere, though they run the utmost risk
in so doing; and also because of their swiftness, particularly of the
apostles, in going through the cities of Israel, and running over the
Gentile world with the Gospel of peace, in so short a time as they did;
and more especially because of the acceptableness of their message, with
which they were sent and ran; see [Sa2
18:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#027.md). And so this passage is
pertinently alleged to prove, that mission is necessary to preaching;
since these words declare the character of Gospel ministers, as
publishers of peace, and messengers of good tidings; and express the
message itself, and the nature of it; both which suppose them to be sent
by another, even the Lord, under whose authority, and by whose warrant
they act; just as ambassadors, heralds, and messengers do, by virtue of
a commission they receive from their prince.

\(a\) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 11. 4. (b) Vajikra Rabba Parash, c. 9.
fol. 153. 2. Perek Shalom, fol. 20. 1. (c) Raziel, fol. 23. 2. (d)
Menasseh ben Israel Nishmath Chayim, fol. 41. 2.

[Romans 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rom 10:16</span></span>

But they have not all obeyed the Gospel,.... Who hear it, and to whom it
is preached; for though ministers may be regularly sent forth, and
rightly preach the Gospel in the purity of it, yet there is no success
without the power of God attending it: ministers may preach, and men may
hear, and yet not obey the Gospel; that is, cordially embrace the
doctrines, and sincerely submit to the ordinances of it:

for Esaias saith, Lord, who hath believed our report; or "our hearing",
agreeably to the Hebrew word in [Isa
53:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa053.htm#001.md), and which designs not the
"hearing" with which the apostles heard Christ, though what they heard
from him, they made known to men; but the hearing, or the word heard,
which others had from them, namely, the report they made in their
ministry, of the person and grace of Christ, which was disregarded, when
the arm and power of the Lord were not, revealed and exerted: this was
the case of the Jews in Isaiah's time, and the same in the times of
Christ and his apostles, and is always the case, when divine power does
not attend the preaching of the Gospel.

[Romans 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rom 10:17</span></span>

So then faith comes by hearing,.... That is, by preaching; for the word
hearing is used in the same sense as in the preceding verse; and designs
the report of the Gospel, or the preaching of the word, which is the
means God makes use of, to convey faith into the hearts of his people;
for preachers are ministers, or instruments, by whom others believe:

and hearing by the word of God; or "of Christ", as some copies read, and
so do the Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic versions; and intends either the
holy Scriptures, which have God for their author, and Christ for the
subject of them; and which furnish the men of God, or ministers of the
Gospel, with proper materials to preach; and so hearing or preaching is
by them, or else the command of God or Christ, which more properly
signifies; and the sense is, that men preach the Gospel in obedience to
the commandment of the everlasting God, and according to the orders,
mission, and commission, warrant and authority, of the Lord Jesus
Christ: and so these words are the conclusion, and sum of the whole;
that as invocation is owing to faith, so faith to hearing, hearing to
preaching, preaching to a mission; whence it follows, that it is the
original will of God, to send forth his apostles and ministers, to
preach the Gospel to the Gentiles, as well as to the Jews; that they
hearing might believe, and believing call upon the Lord, and so be saved
by him: it is a saying of the Jews, , "hearing depends upon the word"
(e).

\(e\) Zohar in Deut. fol. 110. 3.

[Romans 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rom 10:18</span></span>

But I say, have they not heard?.... , "but I say", is a phrase
frequently used by the Jewish doctors in disputation, either in forming
or answering objections. The Ethiopic version confines these words to
Israel, and reads, "have not Israel heard?" whereas they are to be
understood both of Jews and Gentiles; the question refers to each, and
the answer is,

yes, verily: which the Arabic renders just the reverse, "no", or "not at
all, notwithstanding their sound went into all the earth"; and so makes
this an aggravation of their stupidity, and obstinate rejection of the
Gospel, that they would not hear it, though its sound reached every
place; but the answer is in the affirmative, they did hear. The Jews
heard the Gospel in the times of Isaiah, and other prophets, though they
disbelieved the report of it; they heard it from John the Baptist, and
were pleased with his ministry for a while; yea, they heard Christ
himself preach it, who spake as never man did, with power and authority,
as the Scribes did not, and wondered at his gracious words; they heard
the apostles of Christ, who for some time were limited in their ministry
to them only, and after their commission was enlarged, were ordered to
preach first to them; so that they could not say they had not heard it,
and they were left entirely inexcusable. The Gentiles also had heard it;
the apostles were bid to go into all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creature; and at a proper opportunity, they did as the Lord
commanded them, and the Gentiles heard the Gospel with joy and pleasure;
multitudes were converted everywhere, and churches raised through their
ministry, according to the will of God; thus

their sound went into all the earth, and their words unto the ends of
the world; the passage referred to is [Psa
19:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#004.md), which some here, as there,
understand literally of the works of nature, the heavens, the firmament,
the sun, moon and stars, proclaiming every where the being of God, his
perfections, especially his wisdom, power, and goodness; so that the
Gentiles were not without hearing of God, even whilst they were
destitute of a divine revelation; which was a sort of a prelude of the
after extensive spread of the Gospel among them: a voice, or sound, is
ascribed to the inanimate creatures; and which is so loud, that it
reaches to the end of the earth. There are three voices, the Jews say
(f) which go "from one end of the world to the other"; and one of them
is , "the voice of the orb of the sun": others understand these words of
the law, of which many "encomiums" are given in the psalm from whence
this passage is taken; and though it was delivered peculiarly to the
people of the Jews, yet the fame of it reached the nations of the world,
as Moses suggests it would, [Deu 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu004.htm#006.md);
and the Jews say (g).

"that when the law was given to Israel, , "its voice went from one end
of the world to the other".''

Or as it is better expressed by Philo (h), and almost in the words of
this text,

"the fame of the laws which Moses left, is gone throughout all the
world, unto the ends of the earth.''

But certain it is, that the apostle is speaking neither of the light of
nature, nor the law of Moses, but of the preaching of the Gospel; and
what the Psalmist, literally understood, says of the heavens, that the
apostle in an allegorical and mystical sense, or by an argument from the
lesser to the greater, or by way of allusion, applies to the apostles
and ministers of the Gospel, the luminaries of the world, and stars of
heaven; whose ministry, by this time, had reached the then known parts
of the habitable world; as it was to do, before the destruction of
Jerusalem, according to Christ's prediction, [Mat
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#014.md), and as the Apostle Paul
testifies it had, [Col 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/col001.htm#006.md), and in
which he himself had a very considerable share, having preached the
Gospel from Jerusalem, round about unto Illyricum. There is some little
difference between the passage in the Psalms, and as cited or referred
to by the apostle, who instead of "their line", reads "their sound";
which have made some suspect a corruption of the present Hebrew text, or
a various reading; and that the Septuagint, followed by the apostle,
used a copy which had not, "their line", but "their voice", and which
was the true reading; but then how came the Chaldee paraphrase to render
it by, "extension", and Aquila by "a canon", or "rule?" and besides, the
Masora observes, that this word is no where else read, which is not true
of for that often occurs; to which may be added, had this been the
reading, the Septuagint would have rendered it most probably, as they do
elsewhere, by "voice", and not "sound": but for the reconciliation of
this let it be observed, that the Hebrew word signifies a rule, or
plummet, or such a line as builders use in their work, as a direction to
them, hence Kimchi (i) explains it by "their building"; and so it may
signify any rule, or direction, whether given by writing, and so Aben
Ezra (k) interprets it by "writing", or by word of mouth; besides, the
carpenter's line, when stretched out, and remitted upon the timber,
makes a sound, and hence the word might be used for one: all this agrees
with the ministry of the apostles, who were builders; and as they worked
by a line and rule themselves, so they gave out rules and directions to
others, both by writing and preaching, both which reached far and near;
this the apostle seems to allude to, in [Co2
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2010.htm#013.md), where he speaks of the measure,
line, and rule of their ministry, which reached to Corinth and further,
without going into another man's line: moreover, that great Oriental
critic, and our countryman, Mr. Pocock (l), has shown from the use of
the word in the Arabic language, that the word in the Psalms may signify
a loud cry, or noise, as well as a line, or rule; so that the psalmist
and the apostle may be easily reconciled.

\(f\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 20. 2. (g) T. Bab. Zebachim, fol. 116. 1. (h)
De Vita Mosis, l. 1. p. 657. (i) In Psal. xix. 4. (k) In ib. (l) Not. in
Portam Mosis, c. 4. p. 48, &c.

[Romans 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rom 10:19</span></span>

But I say, did not Israel know? Some supply the word "God", did not
Israel know God? verily, they did; they knew the being and perfections
of God, the unity of God, and the trinity of persons in the divine
essence; they knew the will of God, and the right way of worshipping
him; for they were favoured with a divine revelation; to them were
committed the oracles of God, and to them belonged the giving of the
"Gospel", did not Israel know the Gospel? yes, they did; they not only
heard it, but knew it; not spiritually and experimentally, but
nationally and speculatively, and, against the light and conviction of
their own minds, obstinately rejected it with contempt: but I rather
think this question refers to the calling of the Gentiles, and their own
rejection; and the sense is, did not Israel know, that the Gentiles were
to be called by the grace of God, and that they themselves were to be
cast off? they did know this, at least something of it, though not so
clearly as it is now revealed to the holy apostles and prophets by the
Spirit; but in some measure they could not but know it, since there were
such strong hints of it in the writings of the Old Testament, some of
which are hereafter produced:

first Moses saith; not "Moses the first", as if there was another, or a
second Moses, but either Moses, who is the first of the inspired
writers, and chief of the prophets; or rather this regards order of
time, Moses in the first place says so and so, for other testimonies are
after cited; the passage in Moses referred to, is [Deu
32:21](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#021.md).

I will provoke you to jealousy by them that are no people, and by a
foolish nation I will anger you. The Gentiles are here designed by "them
that are no people": who before God, and in his sight, as all nations
are, were as a drop of the bucket, as the small dust of the balance:
nay, even as nothing, yea, less than nothing and vanity: likewise they
were no people of any account, of any name; they were mean and
contemptible, neglected and overlooked by God himself, and treated with
contempt by the Jews, his professing people: and besides, they were not
as yet openly and visibly the people of God; they neither called upon
his name, nor were they called by his name; he had not as yet taken from
among them a people for his name: these are also meant by "the foolish
nation"; Jarchi (m) says, the Cuthites, or Samaritans, are intended; who
were neighbours to the Jews, and greatly hated by them: but it may more
rightly be applied to all the Gentiles in general, who notwithstanding
their large pretensions to natural, civil, and moral wisdom, yet being
without a true knowledge of God, Christ, and the Gospel, were a foolish
people; and in nothing more did their folly appear, than in their
idolatry and superstition. Now the Lord threatened by these people to
provoke the Jews to jealousy, and to anger them; and this was but just,
and by way of retaliation; for since they provoked him to jealousy and
anger, by worshipping strange gods, which plainly declared their want of
faith in him, affection for him, and their departure from him; it was a
righteous thing in him to provoke them to jealousy of him, as if he had
no affection for them, who had been so long, in some sense, an husband
to them all; and as about to cast them off; and to anger them, by
sending his Gospel among the Gentiles, and calling them by his grace,
and making them partakers of his special favours; whereby this prophecy
had its full accomplishment: for though the Jews rejected and despised
the Gospel themselves, yet nothing more provoked them than that it
should be carried among the Gentiles; see [Act
22:21](../../../bib/kjv/act022.htm#021.md). Now from these words of Moses,
the Israelites must needs know, they could not but know that it was the
will of God to call the Gentiles, and reject them.

\(m\) In Deut. xxxii. 21.

[Romans 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rom 10:20</span></span>

But Esaias is very bold, and saith,.... The apostle here produces
another testimony in proof of this, that the Israelites must needs have
some knowledge of this truth, the calling of the Gentiles; since a
famous prophet of theirs, Isaiah, also spake out with great freedom; he
did not mince the matter, or cover it with dark sayings, but with all
plainness and perspicuity, and with great courage and intrepidity
declared it; though he knew he run the risk, not only of his fame and
credit among the Jews, but of his life also, for so doing: the citation
is made from [Isa 65:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#001.md).

I was found of them that sought me not, I was made manifest unto them
that asked not after me; here also the Gentiles are meant by "them that
sought me not, and asked not after me"; the Messiah; and so R. Moses the
priest says (n), that these words are to be understood, , "concerning
the nations of the world". The common people among them sought after the
things of the world; their philosophers sought after the wisdom of it;
and the more devout and religious among them sought the observance of
superstitious rites and ceremonies, and, at best and most, a little
morality and external righteousness; but none sought after Christ, for
they knew nothing of him, and therefore did not so much as ask after
him; they did not ask counsel of him, nor ask concerning him, nor ask
for him; not for his coming into the world, as the Jews did, nor for the
preaching of the Gospel among them, for it came among them unasked for,
unexpected, and undesired, as well as undeserved by them, nor for any
blessing of his; and yet such was his grace and goodness, that he was
"found" of these persons, in the preaching of the Gospel; which by his
kind providence was brought among them, and they were brought under the
hearing of it; and by the Spirit of God directed to him in it, in whom
they found life, peace, pardon, righteousness, food, and rest, and every
valuable blessing; a pearl of great price they found, a finding which
can never be lost: he is also said to be "made manifest" unto them, not
in the flesh, but in the ministry of the word; in which his person,
blood, righteousness, and sacrifice, are evidently set forth, and
clearly manifested; and besides the outward manifestation of Christ to
them by the Gospel, they had no internal revelation of him in their
hearts by his Spirit, setting forth to them his grace and fulness, and
showing them their interest therein: from this prophecy, also, the Jews
could not but have some knowledge of this mystery of grace.

\(n\) In Aben Ezra in Isa. lxv. 1.

[Romans 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/rom010.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rom 10:21</span></span>

But to Israel he saith,.... Or against Israel, or concerning Israel he
saith in the same prophecy in [Isa
65:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa065.htm#002.md).

All day long I have stretched forth my hands, unto a disobedient and
gainsaying people: very rightly does the apostle apply these words to
Israel, as he does the former to the Gentiles; and just in like manner
does the above mentioned Jewish writer, R. Moses the priest, interpret
them. The Lord's "stretching out his hands all the day long" to them,
designs the ministry of the prophets one after another to them, the
preaching of John the Baptist, of Christ and his apostles among them:
but they were a stiffnecked and rebellious people, uncircumcised in
heart and ears; would have none of his counsel, and despised his
reproof; contradicted and blasphemed the word; rejected the Messiah and
his Gospel; killed the Prince of life, and persecuted his apostles; so
that it was just with God to write a "Lo-ammi", Hos\_1:9, upon them, and
cast them off; and, to pave the way for the account of the rejection of
these people in the next chapter, is all this said, and these
testimonies produced.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 11](rom011.md)

</div>
