<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Romans Index](rom.md)  
  [Previous](act028)  [Next](rom001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Romans Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

[Romans](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rom 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ROMANS

Though this epistle is in order placed the first of the epistles, yet it
was not first written: there were several epistles written before it, as
the two epistles to the Thessalonians, the two to the Corinthians, the
first epistle to Timothy, and that to Titus: the reason why this epistle
stands first, is either the excellency of it, of which Chrysostom had so
great an esteem that he caused it to be read over to him twice a week;
or else the dignity of the place, where the persons lived to whom it is
written, being Rome, the imperial city: so the books of the prophets are
not placed in the same order in which they were written: Hosea
prophesied as early as Isaiah, if not earlier; and before Jeremiah and
Ezekiel, and yet stands after them. This epistle was written from
Corinth, as the subscription of it testifies; and which may be confirmed
from the apostle's commendation of Phoebe, by whom he sent it, who was
of Cenchrea, a place near Corinth; by his calling Erastus, the
chamberlain of the city, who abode at Corinth, [Ti2
4:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#020.md), and Gaius his host, who was a
Corinthian, [Rom 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#023.md), [Co1
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/co1001.htm#014.md), though at what time it was
written from hence, is not so evident: some think it was written in the
time of his three months' travel through Greece, [Act
20:2](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#002.md), a little before the death of the
Emperor Claudius, in the year of Christ 55; others, that it was written
by him in the short stay he made at Corinth, when he came thither, as is
supposed, from Philippi, in his way to Troas, where some of his company
went before, and had been there five days before him: and this is placed
in the second year of Nero, and in the year of Christ 56; however, it
was not written by him during his long stay at Corinth, when he was
first there, but afterwards, even after he had preached from Jerusalem,
and round about unto Illyricum: and when he was about to go to
Jerusalem, with the contributions of the churches of Macedonia and
Achaia, to the poor saints there, [Rom
15:19](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#019.md). The persons to whom this
epistle was sent were Roman saints, both Jews and Gentiles, inhabiting
the city of Rome; of which city and church; See Gill on [Act
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#014.md); [Act
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#015.md); by whom the Gospel was first
preached at Rome, and who were the means of forming the church there, is
not very evident Irenaeus, an ancient writer, says (a), that Peter and
Paul preached the Gospel at Rome, and founded the church; and Gaius, an
ecclesiastical man, who lived in the time of Zephyrinus, bishop of Rome,
asserts the same; and Dionysius; bishop of the Corinthians, calls the
Romans the plantation of Peter and Paul (b): whether Peter was ever at
Rome is not a clear point with many; and certain it is, that the Apostle
Paul had not been at Rome when he wrote this epistle, at least it seems
very probable he had not, by several expressions in [Rom
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#010.md); and yet here was a church to
which he writes, and had been a considerable time; for their faith was
spoken of throughout the world, [Rom
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#008.md); and when the apostle was on the
road to this city, the brethren in it met him, [Act
28:15](../../../bib/kjv/act028.htm#015.md). The chief design of this
epistle is to set in a clear light the doctrine of justification:
showing against the Gentiles, that it is not by the light of nature, and
works done in obedience to that, and against the Jews, that it was not
by the law of Moses, and the deeds of that; which he clearly evinces, by
observing the sinful and wretched estate both of Jews and Gentiles: but
that it is by the righteousness of Christ imputed through the grace of
God, and received by faith; the effects of which are peace and joy in
the soul, and holiness in the life and conversation: he gives an account
of the justified ones, as that they are not without sin, which he
illustrates by his own experience and case; and yet are possessed of
various privileges, as freedom from condemnation, the blessing of
adoption, and a right to the heavenly inheritance; he treats in it
concerning predestination, the calling of the Gentiles, and the
rejection of the Jews; and exhorts to the various duties incumbent on
the saints, with respect to one another, and to the world, to duties of
a moral and civil nature, and the use of things indifferent; and closes
it with the salutations of divers persons.

\(a\) Adv. Haeres. l. 3. c. 1. Vid. Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 5. c. 8. (b)
Apud Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l. 2. c. 25.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Romans Chapter 1](rom001.md)

</div>
