<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ruth Index](rut.md)  
  [Previous](jdg021)  [Next](rut001.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO RUTH

This book is called Ruth, not because she was the author of it, but
because she is the principal subject of it. In the Syriac and Arabic
versions, it is called the Book of Ruth the Moabitess, which describes
her by the country of which she was. Her name, according to Hillerus
(l), signifies beautiful, of a good aspect, the same with Calliope in
Greek. As to the author of this book, some attribute it to Eli the
priest, who seems to have been too soon to give an account of the birth
of David; others to Gad or Nathan; some to Hezekiah, and others to Ezra;
but what the Talmudists assert, which is most generally received, and
most probable, is, that it was written by Samuel; so they say Samuel (m)
wrote his own book, Judges, and Ruth; and it is commonly said that this
book is an appendix to that of the Judges, and the introduction to
Samuel, and is fitly placed between them both. According to Eusebius
(n), with the Hebrews, Judges and Ruth make one book they call
Shophetim, or Judges; the principal design of it is to give the
genealogy of David, whom Samuel had anointed to be king of Israel, and
from whom the Messiah was to come, and who therefore may be said to be
the aim and scope of it, as he is of all Scripture; and whereby it
appears that he sprung both from Jews and Gentiles, and is the Saviour
of both, and there is a good foundation for both to hope in him; and the
call and conversion of Ruth the Moabitess may be considered as a shadow,
emblem, and pledge of the conversion of the Gentiles. Manythings besides
may be learnt from this little book, as the different circumstances of
good people in this life, and the particular providence of God
respecting them. It furnishes out examples of bearing afflictions
patiently, of industry, courteousness, kindness to strangers, and young
converts; and none can doubt of the divine authority of this book, that
considers the use made of it in the genealogies of Christ by the
Evangelists Matthew and Luke.

\(l\) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 211. (m) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 13. 2. (n)
Eccl. Hist. 1. 6. c. 25.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 1](rut001.md)

</div>
