<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Ruth Index](rut.md)  
  [Previous](rut000)  [Next](rut002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md)

INTRODUCTION TO RUTH 1

This chapter treats of a family that removed from the land of Canaan to
the land of Moab on account of a famine, where the father of it and his
two sons died, and each of them left a widow, [Rut
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md) the mother-in-law proposed to
return to her own country, and set forward with her two
daughters-in-law, whom, when they had gone a little way with her, she
entreated to go back, and expostulated with them about it, [Rut
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#006.md), upon which one of them did, but
the other, Ruth, the subject of this book, resolved to go the journey
with her, [Rut 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#014.md) and they both came
to Bethlehem, the former residence of her mother-in-law Naomi, who was
greatly taken notice of by her old friends and acquaintance, to whom she
related her present circumstances, [Rut
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#019.md).

[Ruth 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rut 1:1</span></span>

Now it came to pass, in the days when the judges ruled,.... So that it
appears that this history is of time and things after the affair of
Micah, and of the concubine of the Levite, and of the war between Israel
and Benjamin; for in those times there was no king nor judge in Israel;
but to what time of the judges, and which government of theirs it
belongs to, is not agreed on. Josephus (o) places it in the government
of Eli, but that is too late for Boaz, the grandfather of Jesse, the
father of David, to live. Some Jewish writers, as Jarchi, say it was in
the times of Ibzan, who they say (p) is the same with Boaz, but without
proof, and which times are too late also for this history. The Jewish
chronology (q) comes nearer the truth, which carries it up as high as
the times of Eglon, king of Moab, when Ehud was judge; and with which
Dr. Lightfoot (r) pretty much agrees, who puts this history between the
third and fourth chapters of Judges, and so must belong to the times of
Ehud or Shamgar. Junius refers it to the times of Deborah and Barak; and
others (s), on account of the famine, think it began in the times the
Midianites oppressed Israel, and carried off the fruits of the earth,
which caused it, when Gideon was raised up to be their judge; Alting (t)
places it in the time of Jephthah; such is the uncertainty about the
time referred to:

that there was a famine in the land; the land of Canaan, that very
fruitful country. The Targum says this was the sixth famine that had
been in the world, and it was in the days of Boaz, who is called Ibzan
the just, and who was of Bethlehemjudah; but it is more probable that it
was in the days of Gideon, as before observed, than in the days of Ibzan

and a certain man of Bethlehemjudah; so called to distinguish it from
another Bethlehem in the tribe of Zebulun, [Jos
19:15](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#015.md) which had its name from the
fruitfulness of the place, and the plenty of bread in it, and yet the
famine was here; hence this man with his family removed from it:

and went to sojourn in the country of Moab; where there was plenty; not
to dwell there, but to sojourn for a time, until the famine was over:

he and his wife, and his two sons; the names of each of them are next
given.

par (o) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect. 1. (p) T. Bab. Bava Bathra, fol. 91.
1. Tzemach David, par. 1. fol. 8. 2. Jarchi & Abendana in loc. (q) Seder
Olam Rabba, c. 12. p. 33. (r) Works, vol. 1. p. 48. (s) Rambachius in
loc. & Majus in ib. so Biship Patrick. Lampe Hist. Eccl. l. 1. c. 5. p.
22. (t) Theolog. Hist. loc. 2. p. 84.

[Ruth 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rut 1:2</span></span>

And the name of the man was Elimelech,.... Which signifies "my God is
King", as he was King over Israel. In the times of the judges, the
government was a theocracy; the judges were raised up immediately by the
Lord, and ruled under him; the Targum calls him a great man, and so
Jarchi; and it is very likely he was, especially if it be true what is
said the Jewish chronology (u), that he was the brother of Salmon,
prince of the tribe of Judah; and it is certain that Boaz the son of
Salmon was a kinsman of his, [Rut 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#001.md),

and the name of his wife Naomi; which signifies "sweet, pleasant", very
likely a comely person, and of a sweet disposition; a name of the same
signification with Naamah, the sister of Tubalcain, [Gen
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#022.md) and according to the Talmudists
she was Elimelech's brother's daughter; for they say (w), that
Elimelech, Salmon, and the kinsman (spoken of in this book), and the
father of Naomi, were all of them the sons of Nahshon, prince of the
tribe of Judah; the same Jarchi observes on [Rut
1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#022.md).

and the name of his two sons Mahlon and Chilion; which seem to have
their names from weakness and consumption, being perhaps weakly and
consumptive persons; and it appears they both died young. It is a
tradition of the Jews, mentioned by Aben Ezra, that these are the same
with Joash and Saraph, who are said to have dominion in Moab, [Ch1
4:22](../../../bib/kjv/ch1004.htm#022.md) which is not likely:

Ephrathites of Bethlehemjudah: Jarchi interprets Ephrathites by men of
worth and esteem; and the Targum is,"Ephrathites, great men of
Bethlehemjudah''but no doubt they were called so, because Ephratah was
one of the names of Bethlehem, [Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019.md) so called from its fruitfulness;
though Aben Ezra thinks it had its name from Ephratah the wife of Caleb;
but it was so called in the time of Moses, as in the passage referred
to:

and they came into the country of Moab, and continued there; unto their
death; all excepting Naomi, who returned when she heard the famine was
over.

\(u\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 12. p. 34. Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 8. 1.
(w) T. Bab Bava Bathra, fol. 91. 1.

[Ruth 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rut 1:3</span></span>

And Elimelech, Naomi's husband, died,.... According to Josephus (x),
after he had dwelt in the land ten years, and had married his two sons
to Moabitish women; but, as Alshech observes, the text shows that while
he was living they were not married to them, but after his death; and it
is said of them only that they dwelt there about ten years; so that it
is most probable that their father died quickly after he came into the
land of Moab: and she was left, and her two sons; in a strange land, she
without a husband, and they without a father.

\(x\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect. 1.)

[Ruth 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rut 1:4</span></span>

And they took them wives of the women of Moab,.... Not before they were
proselyted to the Jewish religion, as Aben Ezra thinks, and which seems
plainly to be the case of Ruth; at least she was so afterwards, if not
before; and also of Orpah, as the same writer concludes from [Rut
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#015.md) though others are of a different
opinion, and some excuse their marriage, and others condemn it as
unlawful, among whom is the Targumist, who paraphrases the words,"and
they transgressed the decree of the Word of the Lord, and took to them
strange wives of the daughters of Moab;''however it was so permitted by
the Lord, and ordered in Providence, that from one of them the Messiah
might spring:

and the name of the one was Orpah; she was married to Chilion; and
Alshech gathers from hence that the youngest was married first before
his brother:

and the name of the other Ruth the Targum adds,"the daughter of Eglon,
king of Moab;''and that she was his daughter, or the daughter of his
son, is a notion commonly received with the Jews (y) though without any
just foundation; she was married to Mahlon, [Rut
4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#010), one Philo (z.md) asserts these two
women to be own sisters, for what reason does not appear; and a Jewish
writer (a) says they were both daughters of Eglon, king of Moab: and
they dwelt there about ten years; that is, Mahlon and Chilion, who
married these women; which is to be reckoned either from the time they
came into the land, or from the time of their marriage; the latter seems
to be the case from the connection of the words.

\(y\) T. Bab. Nazir, fol. 23. 2. Sotah, fol. 47. 1. Sanhedrin, fol. 105.
2. Horayot, fol. 10. 2. Zohar in Deut. fol. 109. 2. (z) Apud Drusium in
loc. (a) Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 8. 1.

[Ruth 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rut 1:5</span></span>

And Mahlon and Chilion died also both of them,.... As well as their
father, in the land of Moab, after they had lived with their wives in it
about ten years; the Targum is,"because they transgressed the decree of
the Word of the Lord, and joined in affinity with strange people, their
days were cut off;''or shortened:

and the woman was left of her two sons and her husband; deprived both of
her husband and her sons, which was a great affliction, aggravated by
her being in a strange country; many are the afflictions of the
righteous.

[Ruth 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rut 1:6</span></span>

Then she arose with her daughters in law, that she might return from the
country of Moab,.... After the death of her two sons, and having heard
of the ceasing of the famine in Israel, she had a desire to go into her
own country, where she would have better opportunities of serving the
Lord; and having no heart to stay in Moab, an idolatrous country, where
she had lost her husband, and her two sons; and therefore prepared for
her journey, and set forward, and her two daughters-in-law with her, to
accompany her some part of the way; for it does not appear to be their
intention, at least at first setting out, to go with her into the land
of Canaan; and therefore it is only said, that they arose

that she might return, &c.

for she had heard in the country of Moab: which was near the land of
Israel, the borders of it reaching to the salt sea; the Targum says she
heard it by the mouth of an angel, but it is highly probable it was by
common fame:

that the Lord had visited his people in giving them bread; that he had
been kind and gracious to the people of Israel, by granting them plenty
of provisions; which might be their happy case after Gideon had
vanquished the Midianites, who came yearly, and destroyed and carried
off the fruits of the earth, which had caused a famine; see [Jdg
6:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#003.md). It seems as if the famine had
continued ten years, see [Rut 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#004.md) nor
need this be thought incredible, since there was a famine in Lydia,
which lasted eighteen years (b).

\(b\) Herodot Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 94.

[Ruth 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rut 1:7</span></span>

Wherefore she went forth out of the place where she was,.... What part
of Moab she had dwelt in, and now removed from, is not said; it is
called the country or field of Moab, she returned from; hence some have
thought, that she and her husband, and her sons, did not live in any of
the cities of Moab, but in a field; either because the Moabites would
not suffer them to dwell in their cities, only allowed them to pitch
their tents in their fields; or they chose to dwell there, that they
might as much as possible avoid conversation with them, and be preserved
from their idolatry, and other corruptions:

and her two daughters in law with her; who, out of respect to her,
accompanied her some part of the way, as relations and friends usually
did:

and they went on the way to return unto the land of Judah; they went
along with her to the border of the land of Judah, in her return
thither; for returning can only be said of her with any propriety,
because her two daughters had never been there; that was not the country
from whence they came, and therefore could not be said to return
thither.

[Ruth 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rut 1:8</span></span>

And Naomi said to her two daughters in law,.... When they were come, as
it is very probable, to the utmost limits of the land of Moab, and to
the borders of the land of Israel:

go, return each unto her mother's house: the mother's house is
mentioned, and not the father's, not because they had no father living;
for it is certain Ruth had a father as well as a mother, [Rut
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut002.htm#011.md) but because mothers are most
affectionate to their daughters, and they most conversant together; and
because women in those times had apartments to themselves, and who used
to take their daughters to them when become widows; though such was the
strong love of those young widows to their mother-in-law, that they
chose rather to dwell with her, while she lived in Moab, than with their
own mothers:

the Lord deal kindly with you, as ye have dealt with the dead, and with
me; that is, with their husbands, who were dead; as the Targum is, that
they refused to marry men after their death; or rather it respects their
affectionate care of their husbands, and behaviour towards them when
living, as well as the respect they showed to their memory, at and since
their death; and also their filial duty to her, both before and since;
and particularly, as the Targum expresses it, in that they had fed and
supported her.

[Ruth 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rut 1:9</span></span>

The Lord grant you,.... Some make a supplement here, the Targum a
perfect reward, Aben Ezra an husband; and so Josephus says (c), she
wished them happier marriages than they had with her sons, who were so
soon taken from them; but a supplement seems needless, for what follows
is connected with the wish, and contains the sum of it:

that you may find rest; each of you:

in the house of her husband; that is, that they might each of them be
blessed with a good husband, with whom they might live free from brawls
and contentions, as well as from the distressing cares of life, having
husbands to provide all things necessary for them, and so from all the
sorrows and distresses of a widowhood estate:

then she kissed them; in token of her affection for them, and in order
to part with them; it being usual then as now for relations and friends
to kiss at parting:

and they lifted up their voice and wept; to think they must part, and
never see one another more; their passions worked vehemently, and broke
out in sobs, and sighs, and tears, and loud crying.

\(c\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect. 1.

[Ruth 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rut 1:10</span></span>

And they said unto her,.... When they had eased themselves in cries and
tears, and had recovered their speech:

surely we will return with thee unto thy people; to be proselyted, as
the Targum; not only to dwell with them, but to worship with them.

[Ruth 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rut 1:11</span></span>

And Naomi said, turn again, my daughters,.... Supposing this resolution
of theirs only arose from a natural affection, and not from any love to
the God or people of Israel; at least doubting whether it was so or not,
and willing to try whether anyone, or both of them, were really from a
principle of religion inclined to go with her; and desirous that they
would thoroughly consider what they did, lest they should repent and
apostatize, and bring a reproach upon the true religion:

why will ye go with me? what reason can you give? this she said in order
to get out of them if there was any real inclination in them to the true
worship and service of God; though she keeps out that from her own
questions put to them as follows, that it might come purely from
themselves:

are there yet any more sons in my womb, that they may be your husbands?
is there any likelihood that I should ever have any sons to be instead
of husbands, or really husbands to you? can it be thought that at my
age, supposing I had an husband, or an husband's brother to marry me,
that there is in me a natural power of conceiving and bearing children?
this therefore can surely be no inducement to you to go along with me;
for some, as Jarchi, think she refers to the law of a husband's brother
marrying his widow, and raising up seed to him, which was known among
the Gentiles before it was given to Israel; see [Gen
38:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#008.md), to which Aben Ezra rightly
objects, that that law respects a brother by the father's side, and not
by the mother's only; to which may be added, that this law was not
binding on a brother unborn, but on one that was living before the death
of his brother; besides if this law had been in her mind, it would
rather have furnished out an encouraging reason them to go with her,
since there were kinsmen of her sons, to whom they might be married, as
one of them afterwards was.

[Ruth 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rut 1:12</span></span>

Turn again, my daughters, go your way,.... This she repeated still to
try their affections to her, and especially whether there was any real
love to the God of Israel, his people, and worship, but still proceeds
upon the same topic:

for I am too old to have an husband; and can never think of marrying
again on account of age, nor can you surely ever think I should, at
these years I am now arrived to:

if I should say I have hope; of marrying, and bearing children; suppose
that:

if I should have a husband also tonight; be married to a man directly,
suppose that:

and should also bear sons; conceive and bear, not female but male
children, allow that; all which are mere suppositions, and, could they
be admitted, would not furnish out any reason why you should be desirous
of going with me.

[Ruth 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rut 1:13</span></span>

Would you tarry for them till they were grown?.... It is not to be
thought that they would tarry till she was married and had children, and
then till these infants were grown up to men's estate, and be
marriageable; for though Tamar tarried for Shelah, yet he was born, and
of some years of age, though not a grown man, [Gen
38:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen038.htm#011.md).

would ye stay for them from having husbands? they were young widows, and
it was fit they should marry again; and it could not be imagined that
they would deny themselves having husbands, in expectation of any sons
of her's:

nay, my daughters; I am well satisfied you will never tarry for them,
nor deprive yourselves of such a benefit; it is unreasonable to suppose
it:

for it grieveth me much for your sakes; that she could be of no manner
of service to them, either to give them husbands, or to support and
maintain them, should they go with her; or "I have exceedingly more
bitterness than you" (d); her condition and circumstances were much
worse than theirs; for though they had lost their husbands, she had lost
both husband and children: or it was more bitter and grievous to her to
be separated from them, than it was for them to be separated from her;
her affection to them was as strong, or stronger than theirs to her; or
they had friends in their own country that would be kind to them, but as
for her, she was in deep poverty and distress, and when she came into
her own country, knew not that she had any friends left to take any
notice of her:

that the hand of the Lord is gone out against me; in taking away her
husband and children, and reducing her to a low estate, penniless and
friendless; so poor, as it appears, that her daughter-in-law, when come
to the land of Canaan, was obliged to glean for the livelihood of them
both, as in the next chapter.

\(d\) "amaritudo mihi (est) valde prae nobis", Montanus, Rambachius; so
Pagninus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Drusius.

[Ruth 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rut 1:14</span></span>

And they lifted up their voice, and wept again,.... Not being able to
bear the thought of parting, or that they must be obliged to it:

and Orpah kissed her mother in law; gave her the parting kiss, as the
Jews (e) call it; and which was used by other people (f); but not
without affection to her, and took her leave of her, as her kiss
testified, since it must be so; and being moved by her reasons, and
having a greater inclination to her own country than Ruth had; of the
kiss at parting, see [Gen 31:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen031.htm#028.md).

but Ruth clave unto her; hung about her, would not part from her, but
cleaved unto her in body and mind; forsaking her own people, and her
father's house; neither the thought of them, nor of her native country,
nor of not having an husband, or any likelihood of it, nor of poverty
and distress, had any manner of influence upon her, but determined she
was to go and abide with her.

\(e\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 70. fol. 62. 4. Shemot, sect. 5. fol. 94. 4.
(f) "----discedens oscula nulla dedi". Ovid. ep. 3. ver. 14.

[Ruth 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rut 1:15</span></span>

And she said,.... That is, Naomi to Ruth, after Orpah was gone:

behold, thy sister in law is gone back unto her people, and unto her
gods; meaning Orpah, who was the wife of her husband's brother, as the
word used signifies; she was not only on the road turning back to her
own country and people, but to the gods thereof, Baalpeor or Priapus,
and Chemosh, [Num 21:29](../../../bib/kjv/num021.htm#029.md) from whence
Aben Ezra concludes, that she had been a proselyte to the true religion,
and had renounced the gods of her nation, and retained the same
profession while her husband lived, and unto this time, and now
apostatized, since she is said to go back to her gods; and in this he is
followed by some Christian interpreters (g), and not without reason:

return thou after thy sister in law: this she said, not that in good
earnest she desired her to return, at least to her former religion, only
relates, though not as approving of, the conduct of her sister, rather
as upbraiding it; but to try her sincerity and steadfastness, when such
an instance and example was before her.

\(g\) Clericus & Rambachius.

[Ruth 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rut 1:16</span></span>

And Ruth said, entreat me not to leave thee, or to return from following
after thee,.... Do not make use of any arguments to persuade me to go
back: or "do not meet me", or "be against me" (h); do not meet me with
objections, or be in my way, or an hinderance to me, in going along with
thee; do not be against it, for to be against that was to be against her
inclination, desires, and resolutions, and against her interest:

for whither thou goest I will go: let the country she was going to be
what it would, though unknown to her, and though she should never see
her own country any more:

and where thou lodgest I will lodge; though in ever so mean a cottage,
or under the open air:

thy people shall be my people; whom I shall choose to dwell among, and
converse with; whose religion, laws, and customs she should readily
comply with, having heard much of them, their wisdom, goodness, and
piety, of which she had a specimen and an example in Naomi, and by whom
she judged of the rest:

and thy God my God; not Chemosh, nor Baalpeor, nor other gods of the
Moabites, be they what they will, but Jehovah, the God of Naomi, and of
the people of Israel. So a soul that is truly brought to Christ
affectionately loves him, and heartily cleaves unto him, resolves in the
strength of divine grace to follow him, the Lamb, whithersoever he goes
or directs; and is desirous to have communion with none but him, and
that he also would not be as a wayfaring man, that tarries but a night;
his people are the excellent of the earth, whom to converse with is all
his delight and pleasure; and Christ's God is his God, and his Father is
his Father: and, in a word, he determines to have no other Saviour but
him, and to walk in all his commands and ordinances.

\(h\) "ne occurras mihi", Vatablus, Rambachius; "ne obstes me", Tigurine
version; "ne adverseris mihi", V. L. Drusius; so Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator.

[Ruth 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rut 1:17</span></span>

Where thou diest will I die, and there will I be buried,.... She was
determined to abide with her unto death, and not only was desirous to
die as she did, but where she should die; in the same country, cottage,
and bed, and be laid in the same grave, in hope of rising together at
the resurrection of the just; having no regard at all to the sepulchres
of her fathers, which people in all ages and countries have been fond of
being laid in, as an honour and happiness. So with the Greeks and
Romans, not only relations, but intimate friends, and such as had a
strong affection for each other, were sometimes buried in the same
grave, as Crates and Polemon (i), Paris and Oenome (k), and others (l);
see [Gal 2:20](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#020.md),

the Lord do so to me, and more also, if ought but death part thee and
me; this is the form of oath she used for confirmation of what she had
said, and to put an end to the debate on this subject; what she
imprecates upon herself is not expressed, should she otherwise do than
what she swears to; leaving Naomi to supply it in her own mind, and as
being what was not fit to be named, and the greatest evil that could be
thought to befall a perjured person.

\(i\) Lart. in Vita Cratet. (k) Strabo. Geograph. l. 13. p. 410. (l)
Vid. Kirchman. de Funer. Roman. l. 3. c. 14. p. 433.

[Ruth 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rut 1:18</span></span>

When she saw that she was steadfastly minded to go with her,.... That
she was strong in her resolutions, and steadfast in her determinations
not to go back to her own country, but to go forward with her; and
nothing could move her from the firm purpose of her mind, which was what
Naomi wanted to make trial of:

then she left speaking unto her: that is, upon that head of returning
home; otherwise, no doubt, upon this a close, comfortable, religious
conversation ensued, which made their journey the more pleasant and
agreeable.

[Ruth 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rut 1:19</span></span>

So they two went until they came to Bethlehem,.... Went on their way
directly till they came to it, without lingering or staying by the way,
at least not unnecessarily, and not for any time; and they kept
together, though Ruth was a younger woman, and could have gone faster,
yet she kept company with her ancient mother, and was no doubt very much
edified and instructed by her pious conversation; and it seems that they
were alone, only they two; for as they had no camels nor asses to ride
on, but were obliged to travel on foot, so they had no servants to wait
upon them, and assist them in their journey, such were their mean
circumstances:

and it came to pass, when they were come to Bethlehem; had entered the
city, and were seen by some that formerly had known Naomi, or at least
to whom she made herself known:

that all the city was moved about them; the news of their arrival was
soon spread throughout the place, and the whole city rang of it; so the
Septuagint version, "all the city sounded"; it was all the talk every
where, it was in everybody's mouth, that Naomi, who had been so long out
of the land, and thought to be dead, and it was not expected she would
never return again, was now come; and this drew a great concourse of
people in a tumultuous manner, as the word signifies, to see her; and as
it may denote a corporeal motion of them, so the inward moving and
working of their passions about her; some having pity and compassion on
her to see such a change in her person and circumstances; others
treating her with scorn and contempt, and upbraiding her for leaving her
native place, and not content to share the common affliction of her
people, intimating that she was rightly treated for going out of the
land at such a time into a strange country; and others were glad to see
their old neighbour again, who had always behaved well among them; so
the Syriac and Arabic versions, "all the city rejoiced"; many no doubt
knew her not, and would be asking questions about her, and others
answering them, which is commonly the case of a crowd of people on such
an occasion:

and they said, is this Naomi? that is, the women of the place said so,
for the word is feminine; and perhaps they were chiefly women that
gathered about her, and put this question in a way of admiration; is
this Naomi that was so beautiful, and used to look so pleasant and
comely, and now so wrinkled and sorrowful, who used to dress so well,
and now in so mean an habit! that used to be attended with maidens to
wait on her, and now alone! for, as Aben Ezra observes, this shows that
Elimelech and Naomi were great personages in Bethlehem formerly, people
of rank and figure, or otherwise there would not have been such a
concourse of people upon her coming, and such inquiries made and
questions put, had she been formerly a poor woman.

[Ruth 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rut 1:20</span></span>

And she said, call me not Naomi, call me Mara,.... The one signifying
"prosperity", according to Josephus (m), and the other "grief"; but he
is not always correct in his interpretation of Hebrew words, or to be
depended on; by this indeed her different states are well enough
expressed, and he rightly observes, that she might more justly be called
the one than the other; but the words signify, the one "sweet" and
pleasant, and the other "bitter", see [Exo
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo015.htm#023.md), and the reason she gives
confirms it:

for the Almighty hath dealt very bitterly with me; had wrote bitter
things against her, brought bitter afflictions on her, which were very
disagreeable to the flesh, as the loss of her husband, her children, and
her substance; see [Lam 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/lam003.htm#015.md).

\(m\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect. 2.

[Ruth 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rut 1:21</span></span>

I went out full,.... Of my husband and children, as the Targum; of
children and riches, as Aben Ezra and Jarchi; wherefore some Jewish
writers blame her and her husband for going abroad at such a time, and
ascribe it to a covetous disposition, and an unwillingness to relieve
the poor that came to them in their distress, and therefore got out of
the way of them, on account of which they were punished, so Jarchi on
[Rut 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001.md), see [Jdg
2:15](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#015.md) but this is said without any just
cause or reason that appears:

and the Lord hath brought me home again empty: deprived of her husband,
children, and substance; she acknowledges the hand of God in it, and
seems not to murmur at it, but to submit to it quietly, and bear it
patiently:

why then call ye me Naomi; when there is nothing pleasant and agreeable
in me, nor in my circumstances:

seeing the Almighty hath testified against me, and the Almighty hath
afflicted me? had bore witness that that was not a name suitable for
her; or that she had sinned, and had not done what was well pleasing in
his sight, as appeared by his afflicting her; she seemed therefore to be
humbled under a sense of sin, and to consider afflictions as coming from
the Lord on account of it, and submitted to his sovereign will; the
affliction she means was the loss of her husband, children, and
substance; see [Job 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/job010.htm#017.md).

[Ruth 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rut 1:22</span></span>

So Naomi returned,.... Aben, Ezra thinks this is to be understood of her
returning at another time; but it is only an observation of the writer
of this history, to excite the attention of the reader to this
remarkable event, and particularly to what follows:

and Ruth the Moabitess her daughter in law with her, which returned out
of the country of Moab; to Bethlehem, the birth place of the Messiah,
and who was to spring from her a Gentile; and which, that it might be
the more carefully remarked, she is called a Moabitess, and said to
return out of the country of Moab:

and they came to Bethlehem in the beginning of barley harvest; which
began on the second day of the feast of unleavened bread, on the
"sixteenth" of Nisan, which answers to our March, and part of April,
when they offered the sheaf of the firstfruits to the Lord, and then,
and not till then, might they begin their harvest; see Gill on [Lev
23:10](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#010.md); see Gill on [Lev
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/lev023.htm#014.md), hence the Targum here is,"they
came to Bethlehem at the beginning of the day of the passover, and on
that day the children of Israel began to reap the wave sheaf, which was
of barley.''So the Egyptians and Phoenicians, near neighbours of the
Jews, went about cutting down their barley as soon as the cuckoo was
heard, which was the same time of the year; hence the comedian (n) calls
that bird the king of Egypt and Phoenicia. This circumstance is observed
for the sake of the following account in the next chapter.

\(n\) Aristoph. in Avibus, p. 565.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Ruth Chapter 2](rut002.md)

</div>
