<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Ruth Index](rut)  
  [Previous](rut003)  [Next](sa1000) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Ruth Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001)

[Ruth](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">rut 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO RUTH 4

This chapter relates how an offer was made to the nearest kinsman of
Ruth to redeem her, and the field her husband left, which he refused to
do, [Rut 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001), upon which Boaz redeemed
both, and married Ruth before the elders of the city as witnesses, and
who congratulated him and her on that occasion, [Rut
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#009), to whom a son was born, called
Obed by the neighbours, [Rut 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#013) and
the chapter is concluded with the genealogy of David, who sprung from
him, [Rut 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#018).

[Ruth 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">rut 4:1</span></span>

Then went Boaz up to the gate,.... In the middle of the day, as Josephus
(d) says, to the gate of the city, where people were continually passing
and repassing to and from the country, and where he was most likely to
meet with the person he wanted to see and converse with, and where
courts of judicature were usually held, and where it was proper to call
one to determine the affair he had in hand; so the Targum,"and Boaz went
up to the gate of the house of judgment of the sanhedrim:''

and set him down there; waiting for the person or persons passing by,
with whom be chose to speak:

and, behold, the kinsman of whom Boaz spake came by; the kinsman that
was nearer than he, of whom he had spoke to Ruth, that if he would not
redeem her, he would; a "behold" is prefixed to this, to observe the
providence of God that ordered it so, that he should come that way just
at the time Boaz was sitting there, and waiting for him; who perhaps was
going into his field to look after his threshers and winnowers, as Boaz
had been:

unto whom he said, ho, such an one; calling him by his name, though it
is not expressed; which the writer of this history might not know, or,
if he did, thought it not material to give it, some have been of opinion
that it is purposely concealed, as a just retaliation to him, that as he
chose not to raise up seed to his kinsman, to perpetuate his name, so
his own is buried in oblivion; though it might be done in his favour,
that his name might not be known, and lie under disgrace, for refusing
to act the part he ought according to the law to have done; hence the
plucking off the shoe, and spitting in his face, were done to such an
one by way of contempt and reproach. The words are "peloni almoni",
words used by the Hebrews of persons and places, whose names they either
could not, or did not choose to mention, which two words are contracted
into "palmoni" in [Dan 8:13](../../../bib/kjv/dan008.htm#013). The name
of this man was "Tob" or "Tobias", according to some Jewish writers; see
Gill on [Rut 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#013), to him Boaz said,

turn aside, and sit down here; and he turned aside, and sat down;
instead of going right forward, as he intended, about his business, he
turned on one side as he was desired, and sat down by Boaz.

\(d\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect. 4.

[Ruth 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">rut 4:2</span></span>

And he took ten men of the elders of the city,.... Who were such, not
merely in age but in office, who were the heads of thousands, fifties,
and tens; ten of whom were a quorum to do business in judiciary affairs,
to determine such matters as Boaz had propose, as to whom the right of
redemption of a brother and kinsman's widow, and her estate, belonged,
and who were the proper witnesses of the refusal of the one to do it,
and of the other's doing it and from hence the Jews (e) gather, that the
blessing of the bride and bridegroom at their marriage is not to be done
by less than ten persons:

and said, sit down here, and they sat down; and so made a full court.

\(e\) Misnah Megillah, c. 4. sect. 3. T. Bab. Cetubot, fol. 7. 1.
Midrash Ruth, fol. 35. 1.

[Ruth 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">rut 4:3</span></span>

And he said unto the kinsman,.... That is, Boaz said to the kinsman he
called to, and who sat down by him before the ten elders that were
present:

Naomi, that is come again out of the land of Moab, selleth a parcel of
land; meaning, that she was determined upon it, and was about to do it,
and would do it quickly, and he had it in commission to propose it to a
purchaser:

which was our brother Elimelech's; not in a strict sense, but being akin
to the kinsman and himself, and having been a neighbour of them all, and
an inhabitant of the place, he is called their brother; though some
Jewish writers (f) say, that he was in a strict sense a brother of Boaz
and this kinsman, and that Tob, Elimelech, and Boaz, were brethren, and
so Tob was reckoned the nearest kinsman, and had the first right to
redeem, because he was the elder brother but this does not seem likely;
See Gill on [Rut 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#013).

\(f\) Midrash Ruth, fol. 34. 2.

[Ruth 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">rut 4:4</span></span>

And I thought to advertise thee,.... To give him notice of it; or "I
said" (g); he said in his heart and mind, purposing to do it; or he said
it to Ruth, promising her that he would do it:

saying, buy it before the inhabitants, and before the elders of my
people; or before those that sat there, even the elders, as witnesses of
the purchase:

if thou wilt redeem it, redeem it: for it was redeemable by a near
kinsman according to the law, even when said to another, in [Lev
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025),

but if thou wilt not redeem it, then tell me, that I may know; what to
do in this affair, whether to redeem it or not:

for there is none to redeem it besides thee, and I am after thee; he was
the first, and Boaz was the next near kinsman, to whom the right of
redemption belonged:

and he said, I will redeem it: he chose to make the purchase, he liked
the land, which he probably full well knew, and it might lie near his
own, and make a good addition to it; and as the widow was determined,
and under a necessity to sell, he might expect to have it at a cheap
rate; all which might induce him at once to agree to be the purchaser.

\(g\) "et ego dixi", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Ruth 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">rut 4:5</span></span>

Then said Boaz,.... In order to try the kinsman, whether he would abide
by his resolution, he acquaints him with what he had as yet concealed:

what day thou buyest the field of Naomi, thou must buy it also of Ruth
the Moabitess, the wife of the dead; the wife of Mahlon, who was dead,
the eldest son of Naomi, and so his widow, Ruth the Moabitess, had the
reversion of the estate; wherefore the purchase must be made of her as
well as of Naomi, and the purchase could not be made of her without
marrying her; which, though no law obliged to, yet it seems to be a
condition of the purchase annexed to it by Naomi, that she would sell it
to no man, unless he would consent to marry Ruth, for whose settlement
she had a great concern, having been very dutiful and affectionate to
her; which is clearly intimated in the next clause:

to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance; and so Naomi had
another end to answer thereby, not only to provide a good husband for
her daughter-in-law, but to perpetuate the name of her son, agreeably to
the design of the law in [Deu 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005).

[Ruth 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">rut 4:6</span></span>

And the kinsman said, I cannot redeem it for myself,.... On such a
condition, because he had a wife, as the Targum suggests; and to take
another would, as that intimates, tend to introduce contention into his
family, and make him uncomfortable; so Josephus says (h), he had a wife
and children, for that reason it was not convenient for him to take the
purchase on such a condition:

lest I mar my own inheritance; he considered, that as he had a wife and
children already and as he might have more by marrying Ruth, his family
expenses would be increased, and his estate diminished; and what would
remain must be divided among many, and this estate in particular go to
Ruth's firstborn, whereby his own inheritance would be scattered and
crumbled, and come to little or nothing; add to all which, he might
suppose that her ancient mother Naomi would be upon his hands to
maintain also:

redeem thou my right for thyself which I am ready to give up to thee,
for thou hast no wife, as the Targum expresses it:

for I can not redeem it; in the circumstances I am, and upon the
condition annexed to the purchase.

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect. 4.

[Ruth 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">rut 4:7</span></span>

Now this was the manner in former time in Israel concerning
redeeming,.... It is a custom, and not a law, that seems here referred
to, when an estate was bought and sold; not the law in [Lev
25:25](../../../bib/kjv/lev025.htm#025), though that respects the
redemption of an estate by a near kinsman, yet no such manner was
enjoined as here practised afterwards, made mention of; nor the law in
[Deu 25:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#005) which does not concern the
redemption of estates, nor a kinsman's marrying the widow of a deceased
kinsman, but a brother's marrying the widow of a deceased brother, and
the rites and ceremonies there enjoined upon refusal are different from
those here used; though Josephus (i) is express for it, that the law is
here referred to; but this is not only concerning purchase of estates,
but "concerning changing" also one field for another as Aben Ezra
interprets it: "for to confirm all things"; the following custom was
observed for the confirmation of any bargain whatever, whether by sale
or barter, and where there was no marriage in the case:

a man plucked off his shoe and gave it to his neighbour; signifying
thereby, that he yielded his right to him in the thing sold or bartered;
the Targum says, he plucked off the glove of his right hand, which
perhaps was then in use, when the Targumist wrote, and answered the same
purpose; and, according to Jarchi, it was a linen cloth, vail, or
handkerchief, that was used, and delivered by the one to the other; and
of this way of buying writes Elias (k); at this day, says he, we
purchase by a linen cloth or handkerchief called "sudar", which is a
garment; and this two witnesses take, and explain before them the words
of their agreement, and each of the witnesses stretches out the skirt of
the garment, and those that take upon them to confirm every matter,
touch the skirt of their garments; and this is called purchasing by
"sudar", or the linen cloth:

and this was a testimony in Israel; a witness to, or a confirmation of
the bargain made; but who gave the shoe, whether the kinsman or Boaz, is
not certain from the text; and about which the Jewish writers are
divided, as Jarchi observes.

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect. 4. (k) Tishbi, p. 207. See Leo Modena's
History of the Rites, &c. of the present Jews, part 2. c. 6.

[Ruth 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">rut 4:8</span></span>

And therefore the kinsman said unto Boaz, buy it for me,.... Which is
repeated to show he gave his full consent to it, that he should make the
purchase of it if he pleased, and which he confirmed by the following
rite:

so he drew off his shoe; thereby signifying that he relinquished his
right to the purchase of the estate, and ceded it to him; the Targum has
it,"and Boaz drew off the glove off his right hand, and bought it of
him;''and so Aben Ezra,"and Boaz drew off his shoe, and gave it to his
kinsman,''as if this was some acknowledgment for yielding his right unto
him; and about this there is a great dissension among the Jewish writers
(l); one says it was the shoe of Boaz that was plucked off; another says
it was the shoe of the kinsman; which latter seems most correct: and it
may be observed, that this custom is different from what is enjoined
[Deu 25:6](../../../bib/kjv/deu025.htm#006) there the woman was to pluck
off the shoe of him that refused to marry her, but here the man plucked
off his own shoe, who chose not to redeem; nor is there mention of
spitting in his face; nor does it appear that Ruth did the one or the
other; though Josephus (m) affirms it, and says, that she both plucked
off his shoe, and spit in his face; neither of which are mentioned.

\(l\) Midrash Ruth, fol. 35. 2. (m) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect.
4.)

[Ruth 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">rut 4:9</span></span>

And Boaz said unto the elders, and unto all the people,.... Who were
present at the gate of the city, or in court:

ye are witnesses this day that I have bought all that was Elimelech's;
all the land which belonged to him, who was the husband of Naomi, and
the father of Ruth's husband, whose estate Boaz now bought, paying the
value for it to Naomi:

and all that was Chilion's and Mahlon's; the two sons of Elimelech, who,
had they been living, would have enjoyed their father's estate; but they
being dead, it devolved on the mother, and after her on the widows, who
must therefore agree to the sale of the estate, as Ruth did, see [Rut
4:5](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#005). Of Orpah no notice is taken,
because she returned to her own land; and besides Mahlon, the husband of
Ruth, was the elder brother, and therefore had the first right to the
inheritance; but as it was in the hands of Naomi now, the purchase was
made of her principally, and therefore Boaz is said to purchase it

of the hand of Naomi; to whom the money was paid, and who delivered the
estate to him.

[Ruth 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">rut 4:10</span></span>

Moreover, Ruth the Moabitess, the wife of Mahlon, have I purchased to be
my wife,.... Which was the condition on which the purchase of the land
was, that whoever bought that should take her for his wife; nor did Boaz
do evil in marrying her, though a Moabitess. Moab was not one of the
nations with whom marriage was forbidden; and though it was a Heathenish
and idolatrous nation, and so on that account it was not fit and proper
to marry with such, yet Ruth was become a proselytess; nor was this
contrary to the law in [Deu 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/deu023.htm#003),
since, according to the sense the Jews give of it, it respects men, and
not women, and such men who otherwise were capable of bearing offices in
the congregation;"an Ammonite, and a Moabite (they say (n)) are
forbidden, and their prohibition is a perpetual one, but their women are
free immediately:"

to raise up the name of the dead upon his inheritance; the name of
Mahlon, Ruth's former husband, to whom the inheritance would have come
had he lived; the raising up of his name is not upon a son of hers by
Boaz, for her firstborn was called Obed, and not Mahlon, and is always
spoken of as the son of Boaz, and not of Mahlon, but upon his
inheritance, having bought his wife along with it, which the register of
the purchase would show, and so cause his name to be remembered; and, as
Jarchi says, when Ruth went in and out upon the estate or inheritance,
they would say, this was the wife of Mahlon, and so through her his name
would be made mention of:

that the name of the dead be not cut off from among his brethren, and
from the gate of this place; might not be quite forgotten both in the
city and in the court, and be remembered no more:

ye are witnesses this day; this is repeated, that they might answer to
it, as they do in the next verse.

\(n\) Misn. Yebamot, c. 8. sect. 3.

[Ruth 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">rut 4:11</span></span>

And all the people that were in the gate, and the elders, said, we are
witnesses,.... Both of the purchase of the estate by Boaz being legally
made, and of the marriage of Ruth to him, the condition of the bargain:

the Lord make the woman that is come into thine house; not into his
house, strictly and literally taken, the place of his habitation; for
both he and she were now at the gate of the city, and as yet she was not
introduced into his house; but by his marriage of her she was brought
into his family, and was become a principal part of it, being his wife.
This is a wish, prayer, or benediction of the elders, of one in the name
of the rest, congratulating the married couple, and wishing them well;
and particularly that the woman Boaz had married before them, as
witnesses, might be

like Rachel and like Leah, which two did build the house of Israel: the
two wives of Jacob; the Targum adds, with twelve tribes; for though some
of the tribes sprung from their maids, which they gave to Jacob, yet the
children born of them were reckoned theirs by a moral estimation, as
some express it. Rachel is set before Leah, though the youngest, and had
the fewest children, because she was his first wife in his intention,
and according to the covenant made with her father, though imposed upon
and deceived; and she was his more lawful wife, and his most beloved
one. By the children of these two, and their maidens, the house or
family of Israel was built up, and became a great nation, consisting of
twelve tribes, very numerous:

and do thou worthily in Ephratah, and be famous in Bethlehem; two names
of one and the same place, [Gen 35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019).
These words seem to be directed to Boaz, particularly praying that he
might continue to do worthy and virtuous actions, as well as increase in
wealth and riches, power and authority, and retain his name and fame,
and grow in credit and reputation among his fellow citizens.

[Ruth 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">rut 4:12</span></span>

And let thy house be like the house of Pharez, whom Tamar bare unto
Judah,.... Of whose tribe the Bethlehemites were, and were also of the
house or family of Pharez, as appears from [Rut
4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#018), &c. who was born to Judah of
Tamar, one of another nation, as Ruth was, and from whom sprung a very
numerous family, one of the five families of Judah; and they wish that
the family of Boaz, by Ruth, might be as numerous; and if Boaz was the
same with Ibzan, as the Jews say, though that wants proof, he had a very
numerous offspring, thirty sons and thirty daughters, [Jdg
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#008).

of the seed which the Lord shall give thee of this young woman; by which
it is plain Ruth was present, for they do, as it were, point to her, and
that she was a young woman, though a widow: the Jews say she was forty
years of age, as observed in [Rut 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/rut003.htm#010)
and the elders wish and pray he might have a numerous family of the
children the Lord would give him by her; and this might be the rather
expected of her, as being a young woman, yet only as the gift of God, as
children are, [Psa 127:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa127.htm#003).

[Ruth 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">rut 4:13</span></span>

So Boaz took Ruth, and she was his wife,.... Without any other rites or
ceremonies than what are here expressed; for as yet the rites and
ceremonies now in use with the Jews (o), in marriages had not obtained:
and when he went in unto her; which is a modest expression of the
conjugal duty performed him:

the Lord gave her conception; for this is of God, let the circumstance
of the person, as to age, be as it may:

and she bare a son; at the year's end, as Josephus (p) relates,

\(o\) Vid. Buxtorf. Synagog. Jud. c. 39. Leo Modena's History of the
Rites of the present Jews, part 4. c. 3. (p) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c.
9. sect. 4.)

[Ruth 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">rut 4:14</span></span>

And the women said unto Naomi,.... The inhabitants of Bethlehem, as they
fell into her company; or perhaps these were the women that were called
to the labour of Ruth, and attended the birth of the child:

blessed be the Lord, which hath not left thee this day without a
kinsman; a grandchild born to her that day. In Moab she was bereaved of
her husband and of two sons; but now she is not left without a relation,
a kinsman, and a redeemer, for which the women blessed God, and stirred
her up to do the same. Alshech observes, that the women said, blessed be
the Lord, because from him would spring the Messiah of the Lord, as did.
Some refer this to Boaz, to whom the name of kinsman, or redeemer, more
properly belonged; and who appeared to have done the office and duty of
such an one, by redeeming the estate of his kinsman, and marrying his
widow, the effect of which was, that a son was born, who would be heir
of the estate; but the text speaks of what was done that day, and what
is after said in the next verse all relates to the child born:

that his name may be famous in Israel; some refer this to the name of
God, by whose providence this was brought about; others to Boaz, who was
well spoken of for his charity, integrity, and humility, shown in
redeeming the estate, and taking Ruth to wife; or rather it refers to
the newborn child, of whom they express their hope and confidence, that
when he came to man's estate would be very famous and honourable in
Israel, being a worthy and virtuous man himself, and the progenitor of
such illustrious persons as Jesse, David, &c. and even of the Messiah.

[Ruth 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">rut 4:15</span></span>

And he shall be unto thee a restorer of thy life,.... Of the joys,
pleasures, and comforts of it, which she had been deprived of through
the death of her husband and her two sons, ever since which she had
lived a sorrowful life; all the comfort she had was from her
daughter-in-law, and now a grandchild being born to her of her would be
a means of restoring comfort to her mourning sorrowful spirit, and give
her pleasure in those years in which she did not expect any:

and a nourisher of thine old age; that would when grown up feed her,
support her, and supply her with all necessaries of life, being heir to
a large and rich estate:

for thy daughter in law which loveth thee; Ruth the wife of Boaz, who
had shown her love, in leaving her own country and kindred, to come
along with her into a strange land, and who had laboured for her support
in it, and still retained the same affection for her:

which is better to thee than seven sons, hath borne him: either which
had been so in the time of her widowhood, as the Targum; or rather which
was so now, being the wife of so rich a person, and having now brought
forth a son, heir to the estate, who would be more capable of doing for
her than if she had seven sons living, having no other than their
paternal estate.

[Ruth 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">rut 4:16</span></span>

And Naomi took the child, and laid it in her bosom,.... As a token of
her most tender love and affection for it; this it is probable she did
quickly after the birth of it:

and became a nurse unto it; that is, after the mother had suckled and
weaned it, then she took it from her, and brought it up.

[Ruth 4:17](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">rut 4:17</span></span>

And the women her neighbours gave it a name,.... Josephus says (q) Naomi
gave it, by the advice of her neighbours; very probably on the eighth
day when he was circumcised, and the neighbours were invited on that
occasion, at which time it seems it was usual to give names to children,
see [Luk 1:59](../../../bib/kjv/luk001.htm#059). The Romans gave names
to females on the eighth day, to the males on the ninth; hence the
goddess Nundina had her name (r); the Greeks generally on the tenth,
sometimes on the seventh (s): it was commonly the province of the father
to give the name, and sometimes his neighbours and nearest friends were
called, and in their presence the name was given, and by any of them he
should choose in his stead (t):

saying, there is a son born to Naomi; to her family, and even to
herself, being born of her who had been wife to her eldest son; and this
was to her as instead of him, and was as he to her; so Aben Ezra
compares this with [Exo 2:10](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#010) and
moreover, this child was born, as the neighbours presaged, for the great
comfort and advantage of Naomi, to be her supporter and nourisher in her
old age, [Rut 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#015).

and they called his name Obed; which signifies "serving", as Josephus
(u) rightly observes, though he does not always give the true sense of
Hebrew words: this name was given, not in remembrance of the service his
mother was obliged to, before marriage with Boaz; but rather on the
account of the service that he would be of to Naomi, as they hoped and
believed; though the reason of it, as given by the Targum, is not to be
overlooked, which interprets it,"who served the Lord of the world with a
perfect heart;''and so they might have some respect to his being
hereafter a servant of the Lord:

he is the father of Jesse, and the father of David: so Jesse is called
the Bethlehemite, [Sa1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001), being of
the city of Bethlehem, of which city Boaz was when his son Obed was
born, who was the father of Jesse; of whom was David king of Israel, and
from whom sprung the Messiah, for whose sake this book was written, that
his genealogy might clearly appear; and of which use it is made by the
Evangelists Matthew; and Luke.

\(q\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 5. c. 9. sect. 4.) (r) Alex. ab Alex.
Genial. Dier. l. 2. c. 25. (s) Harpocration & Suidas in voce Scholiast.
in Aristoph. Aves, p. 565. & Euripid. & Aristot. in ib. (t) Vid.
Sperling. de Baptism. Ethnic. c. 14. & 15. (u) Ibid.

[Ruth 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">rut 4:18</span></span>

Now these are the generations of Pharez,.... The son of Judah, by Tamar
before mentioned, [Rut 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#012), for the
intention of this genealogy is to confirm the truth of Jacob's prophecy,
of Shiloh the Messiah coming from the tribe of Judah, [Gen
49:10](../../../bib/kjv/gen049.htm#010) and therefore it begins with
Pharez, well known to be the son of Judah, and ends with David, whose
son the Messiah was to be, as is owned by all Jews and Gentiles that
believe the divine revelation:

Pharez begat Hezron; who was one of those that went down with Jacob into
Egypt, being born in the land of Canaan, [Gen
47:12](../../../bib/kjv/gen047.htm#012) called Esrom in [Mat
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003).

[Ruth 4:19](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">rut 4:19</span></span>

And Hezron begat Ram,.... Called Aram by the Septuagint, and so in [Mat
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#003),

and Ram begat Amminadab; in whose name there is no variation, neither in
the book of Chronicles nor in the Evangelists; both these, as well as
the next, were born in Egypt.

[Ruth 4:20](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">rut 4:20</span></span>

And Amminadab begat Nahshon,.... The prince of the tribe of Judah, as
the Targum adds; and so he was when the Israelites were come out of
Egypt, and were in the wilderness at the time of the dedication of the
altar, [Num 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#012) called Nahsson, [Mat
1:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#004), and Nahshon begat Salmon; or, as
in the Hebrew text, Salmah, and in [Ch1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#011), Salma; and yet in the verse
following Salmon, as we read it.

[Ruth 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">rut 4:21</span></span>

And Salmon begat Boaz,.... Of Rahab the harlot, whom he married, [Mat
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#005) the very same person that makes a
principal part of this book, and whom the Targum here takes to be the
judge Ibzan; see Gill on [Rut 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#001).

and Boaz begat Obed; of Ruth; of whom see the preceding verses.

[Ruth 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">rut 4:22</span></span>

And Obed begat Jesse,.... The Bethlehemite, the father of David:

and Jesse begat David; the Targum adds, the king of Israel; and so the
Syriac and Arabic versions add, the king; from whence it is by some
concluded that this book was written by Samuel, not only after the birth
of David, but after he had been anointed king by him: here being but
four generations mentioned, from the coming of the Israelites into
Canaan, to the birth of David, which was three hundred and sixty years,
each of the four persons, Salmon, Boaz, Obed, and Jesse, must beget a
son when one hundred years old and upwards; and which is not at all
incredible, as appears by instances in later times, and therefore not at
all improbable, that in those ancient times men of sobriety and good
constitutions should have children at such an age.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Introduction](sa1000)

</div>
