<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1027)  [Next](sa1029.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 28:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 28

The Philistines gathering together, to fight with Israel, Saul trembled
at it, not being able to get any answer from the Lord about it in any
way whatever, [Sa1 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001.md); upon which he
applies to a woman that had a familiar spirit to bring him up Samuel,
which she did, [Sa1 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007.md); and what
passed between Saul and Samuel, or at least the apparition in his form,
is recorded, [Sa1 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015.md); which so
struck him, as to make him strengthless, and so melancholy, that he
refused to eat until persuaded, or rather compelled, by the woman and
his servants, [Sa1 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 28:1</span></span>

And it came to pass in those days,.... That David was in the country of
the Philistines:

that the Philistines gathered their armies together: out of their five
principalities or lordships:

for warfare to fight with Israel; with whom they were continually at
war, and though sometimes there was a cessation of arms, yet never any
settled peace; and the Philistines took every opportunity and advantage
against them, as they now did; when David was among them, and so had
nothing to fear from him, but rather expected his assistance; and Samuel
was dead, and Saul in a frenzy:

and Achish said unto David: who seems to have been at the head of the
combined armies of the Philistines:

know thou assuredly that thou shall go with me to battle, thou and thy
men; against Israel; which was a trying thing to David, and whereby he
was like to be drawn into a dilemma; either to fight against his
country, which he could not do conscientiously; or be guilty of
ingratitude to Achish, and incur his displeasure, and be liable to be
turned out of his country, or treated in a worse manner, even he and his
men, to be seized on and cut to pieces by the forces of the Philistines,
should he refuse.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 28:2</span></span>

And David said to Achish, surely thou shalt know what thy servant can
do,.... By which he would have Achish understand, and so he did, that he
would exert himself in favour of the Philistines, and against Israel,
and do great and brave things, of which Achish would be, made sensible,
through his heroic courage and valour; though he meant rather what he
could and should do for Israel against the Philistines, if he had an
opportunity: but it seems best of all to consider David as quite
undetermined, and at a loss what to do, hoping that God in his
providence would extricate him out of this difficulty, and direct him
what he should do, which then Achish would know; and accordingly he was
delivered out of it:

and Achish said to David: putting confidence in him on account of his
answer, and believing he was hearty in engaging in the war with the
Philistines against Israel:

therefore will I make thee keeper of mine head for ever; the captain of
his bodyguard, which post he should hold for life; or he proposed to put
him into this post, that he might be with him, near his person, and
under his eye, that he might observe how he behaved himself; which may
show some suspicion of him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 28:3</span></span>

Now Samuel was dead,.... Had been so for some time; which is mentioned
before, [Sa1 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001.md); and here repeated,
partly to observe the reason of the Philistines renewing the war, and
partly to account for the conduct of Saul, in seeking to a witch to
raise Samuel, and for the sake of that story:

and all Israel lamented him; as they had great reason to do; See Gill on
[Sa1 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#001.md); and buried him in Ramah,
even his own city; there being two Ramahs, as Kimchi observes, it is
added, "in his own city", to show that he was buried in that Ramah which
was his native place, and where his constant residence was; though, as
he says, it may mean that he was buried within the city, and not without
it; but the Targum gives a different sense,"and they buried him in
Ramah, and mourned for him every man in his city:"

and Saul had put away those that had familiar spirits, and the wizards,

out of the land: out of the land of Israel; had by an edict banished
them, or had given orders that neither witches nor wizards should abide
in the land; but should be taken up, and prosecuted according to the law
of God; which he had done either at the instigation of Samuel; or, as
some think, from a conceit that the evil spirit he had been troubled
with was owing to them; or to make some appearance of a zeal for
religion, and the honour and glory of God: this is observed to show the
inconstancy of Saul, and his folly in applying after this to a person of
such a character, and to account for the fears of the woman when applied
to, and afterwards when she was engaged, when she found it was by Saul;
see [Sa1 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 28:4</span></span>

And the Philistines gathered themselves together,.... From different
parts, and formed a considerable army:

and came and pitched in Shunem; a city, in the borders of the tribe of
Issachar, of which See Gill on [Jos
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#018.md),

and Saul gathered all Israel together, and they pitched in Gilboa; a
range of mountains, near Jezreel, and which Jerom (b) calls the
mountains of the Philistines, six miles from Scythopolis, where there is
a large village called Gelbus.

\(b\) De loc. Heb fol. 92. D.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 28:5</span></span>

And when Saul saw the host of the Philistines,.... From the mountains of
Gilboa, where he had pitched his camp:

he was afraid, and his heart greatly trembled; on sight of the numbers
of them, and thinking perhaps of the death of Samuel, and of the loss of
David; who was now among the Philistines, and might possibly fight
against him, and for the Philistines, of which he might be informed;
however, he was not with him, and his conscience might accuse him of
various sins he had been guilty of, for which he might fear the Lord
would now reckon with him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 28:6</span></span>

And when Saul inquired of the Lord,.... And this being not done truly
and heartily, nor continued in, it was as if he had not inquired, and
especially after he had inquired of one that had a familiar spirit, as
Kimchi observes; for so it is said, [Ch1
10:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#014.md),

the Lord answered him not, neither by dreams; which he dreamed himself,
from whence he could not conclude anything relating to the will of God;
so the Targum,"the Lord did not receive his prayer even by dreams;''or
by dreamers, diviners, who pretended to give answers by dreams:

nor by Urim; there being no priest to consult in this way, Abiathar
having fled with the ephod, in which were the Urim and Thummim, to
David, [Sa1 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#009.md); though some think
that he sent to Abiathar, who was with David, to inquire for him; and
others that he made another ephod with Urim, and appointed another
priest to consult by them; neither of which are probable:

nor by prophets; of which there was a school not far from him, even at
Naioth in Ramah, of which Samuel in his lifetime was president; but
neither by the one nor the other could Saul get an answer from God, who
for his sins had departed from him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 28:7</span></span>

Then said Saul unto his servants,.... That waited upon him, to some of
them, to such as he could place most confidence in to keep a secret;
perhaps only the two after mentioned:

seek me a woman that hath a familiar spirit, that I may go to her, and
inquire of her; that was mistress of the bottle, a ventriloquist, that
spoke out of her belly, or seemed to do; who had the spirit of Python or
divination, conversed with the devil, and by his assistance pretended to
bring up a dead person, and thereby foretell things to come; See Gill on
[Deu 18:11](../../../bib/kjv/deu018.htm#011.md); a woman is pitched upon,
because such were most addicted to those wicked arts, and being of the
weaker sex, were more easily imposed upon by Satan; and Saul showed
himself to be as weak, to seek after such persons; but being left of
God, he acted the part of a mad man, as well as of a bad man:

and his servants said to him, behold, there is a woman that hath a
familiar spirit at Endor; a city in the tribe of Manasseh, of which see
[Jos 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/jos017.htm#011.md); it was not far from
Gilboa. Mr. Maundrell speaks (c) of it as near Nain, at the foot of
Mount Hermon; and turning, a little southward, he says, you have in view
the high mountains of Gilboa. It is a tradition of the Jews (d) that
this woman was the mother of Abner, the wife of Zephaniah; some say her
name was Zephaniah; but, as Abarbinel observes, if so she would have
known Saul, and also Saul would have known her, and what she was, if, as
they say, she was spared because of her relation to him; nor needed he
to have inquired of his servants for such a woman.

\(c\) Journey from Aleppo, p. 115. (d) Pirke Eliezer, c. 33. foi. 35. 2.
Shalshalet Hakabala, fol. 8. 1. Hieron. Trad. Heb. in lib. Reg. fol. 77.
B.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 28:8</span></span>

And Saul disguised himself, and put on other raiment,.... Stripped
himself of his royal robes, or military apparel, as supreme commander,
and clothed himself in the habit of a peasant or a common soldier; and
this not only that he might not be known by the woman, but that he might
pass from his army incognito, and it might not be known that he was
gone, and especially whither he was gone:

and he went, and two men with him: these, according to the tradition of
the Jews (e), were Abner and Amasa; but it is not probable that Saul
should leave his army destitute of their general at such a time as this:

and they came to the woman by night; not only that they might not be
seen, but because it was a work of darkness they were going about, and
it was only in the night season that such persons exercised their black
art; though the Jews (f) say it was day, only because of their distress
it was like tonight with them; but the literal sense is best:

and he said, I pray thee divine unto me by the familiar spirit; exercise
her art of divination, by the assistance of the familiar spirit she
conversed with:

and bring me up whom I shall name unto thee: that is, from the dead; for
necromancy was the kind of divination she professed; and such persons
pretended to have a power to bring up a deceased person, and consult
with him about secret and future things.

\(e\) Vajikra Rabba, sect. 26. fol. 167. 1. Shalshalet ib. (f) Tanchuma
apud Jarchiura in loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 28:9</span></span>

And the woman said unto him,.... Not knowing who he was:

behold, thou knowest what Saul hath done; for by his speech and habit
she perceived he was an Israelite, and so must be acquainted with what
had passed in the nation, especially of a public nature, and which made
a great noise, as doubtless this, lid:

how he both cut off those that have familiar spirits, and the wizards,

out of the land; as many of them as he had knowledge of, or information
about; and by this it appears that he did not merely expel them his
dominions, but he put them to death, according to the law of God, [Exo
22:18](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#018.md); so the putting them out of the
land, [Sa1 28:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#003.md), was putting them to
death, and the woman's after reasoning confirms this: one should think
for Saul to be told this to his face must fill him with shame and
confusion, and his conscience must accuse him of sin and folly to make
this attempt; and he must stand self-convicted and self-condemned; and
it was enough to have deterred him from pursuing his scheme, had not his
heart been strangely hardened:

wherefore then layest thou a snare for my life, to cause me to die? she
suspected that Saul and his men were persons that came to entrap her;
that when they had prevailed upon her to exercise her art, would turn
informers against her, to the taking away of her life, it being death to
practise it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 28:10</span></span>

And Saul sware to her by the Lord,.... By the Word of the Lord, as the
Targum: it is much that Saul, being about such a work of darkness and
wickedness, could take the name of the Lord into his mouth, and swear by
him in such a solemn manner; which must surely put him in mind of his
omniscience, from whom this wicked action could not be hid:

saying, as the Lord liveth, there shall no punishment happen to thee for
this thing; the tenor of the oath was, and so the woman understood it,
that he would never make any discovery of what she did, and so she would
be sat from punishment; though as he was the supreme governor, and a
very arbitrary prince, had it been discovered, he could have screened
her from justice, though contrary to the law of God; however, he could
not secure her from eternal punishment.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 28:11</span></span>

Then said the woman, whom shall I bring up unto thee?.... For such
persons, according to their profession, pretended they were able to
bring up any of the dead, that he who inquired of them should name:

and he said, bring me up Samuel; the prophet Samuel he meant, and no
doubt the woman so understood him, whose name was well known; he had
been an old acquaintance and friend of Saul's, his counsellor and
adviser in many things and though he greatly neglected him in the latter
part of his life, was very desirous of an interview with him now dead,
that he might be advised by him how to get out of the straits and
difficulties in which he was involved; but it argued extreme folly and
madness in him to imagine, that the spirit of this great and good man
was at the beck of a witch, and he to be called out of the state of the
dead by her enchantments; or that God would permit him to appear to him,
and by him give an answer, when he would not answer him by living
prophets, nor any other way.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 28:12</span></span>

And when the woman saw Samuel,.... The appearance of him whom she took
for Samuel; no mention is made of the methods she used to raise him, to
check the curiosity of such as might be desirous to know them, and to
prevent the imitation of them; though some think that Samuel, or the
apparition, was seen before she made use of any, which surprised her;
but this seems not so probable, and is only observed for the sake of an
hypothesis; though it must be owned the word "when" is not in the text:

she cried with a loud voice; not so much frightened at what she saw, and
the manner of his appearing, and as thinking the resurrection of the
dead was come, as say the Jews (b), as what she feared would be the
consequence to her, even death by the hand of Saul; for though he had
sworn no punishment should come upon her, she might begin to fear she
was not safe, perceiving who he was:

and the woman spake to Saul, saying, why hast thou deceived me? for thou
art Saul: how she knew this is a question; it could not be by the
appearance of Samuel, for it was Samuel she was to bring up; unless with
Ben Gersom it can be thought that she understood him of another man,
whose name was Samuel, and not Samuel the prophet; and so when she saw
him, concluded he was Saul, because of the intimacy between them in his
lifetime; but this is not probable, nor does it appear that she as yet
knew who it was, but rather she was told by her familiar spirit, or by
the apparition, so Josephus (c), that it was Saul that inquired of her;
or she guessed at it by some gesture of the apparition to Saul, by way
of homage and honour; and so Abarbinel thinks that the clause in [Sa1
28:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#014.md) respects not Saul's bowing to
Samuel, but Samuel bowing to Saul; and so by this means the woman knew
who he was.

\(b\) Pirke Eliezer, c. 33. (c) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 14. sect. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 28:13</span></span>

And the king said unto her, be not afraid,.... Meaning not of the
apparition, but of him; since he had sworn no punishment should come
upon her, and he should inviolably observe his oath: for what sawest
thou? for as yet Saul himself saw not anything, the woman being between
him and the apparition; or she might be in another room with her
familiar spirit performing the operations when Samuel appeared:

and the woman said unto Saul, I saw gods ascending out of the earth; a
great personage, one of a majestic form, like the gods, or judges and
civil magistrates, sometimes so called, as Kimchi and R. Isaiah rightly
interpret it; and so the Targum,"I saw an angel of the Lord;''a person
that looked like one; for not many came up with him, and particularly
Moses, as say some Jewish writers (d).

\(d\) T. Bab. Chagigah, fol. 4. 8. Pirke Eliezer, c. 33.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 28:14</span></span>

And he said unto her, what form is he of?.... Of what stature is he? or
rather of what age does he seem to be? and what clothes has he on? as
appears from the answer:

and she said, an old man cometh up, and he is covered with a mantle;
such as either priests or judges wore, and Samuel did in his lifetime:

and Saul perceived that it was Samuel; by the description she gave of
him, by his age and apparel; for as yet it is not certain that he
himself saw him, though it should seem as if he did by what follows: it
is in the original, "that it was Samuel himself"; which seems to make
for those who think the real Samuel appeared, and no doubt Saul thought
it was really he himself:

and he stooped with his face to the ground, and bowed himself: either in
reverence to Samuel, and from whom he hoped relief, and therefore was
all obeisance; or he put himself in this posture, that he might listen
and hear what should be said; it being a general notion that such
spirits gave their responses whispering and muttering, [Isa
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/isa008.htm#019.md); though Abarbinel, as before
observed, is of opinion, that this is to be understood of Samuel, that
he bowed to Saul in reverence of him as a king; which does not so well
agree with the connection of the words. Some have thought that it was
the true Samuel, or the soul of Samuel, that appeared; so Josephus (e),
and many other writers; but to this may be objected, that that would not
have ascended out of the earth, but come down from heaven; and that it
cannot reasonably be supposed that it was in the power of the witch, by
the assistance of the devil, to fetch it from heaven; nor be thought
that God would send it from thence on such an errand, to give Saul an
answer, when he would not answer him by any prophet on earth, nor in any
other way; and especially it seems quite incredible that he should send
it at the motion of a witch, and through her enchantments, who,
according to a law of his, ought not to live; whereas nothing could have
given greater countenance to such a wicked profession than this: nor
would the true Samuel have admitted such worship and homage to be paid
him, as is expressed in this last clause, which angelic spirits have
refused, [Rev 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/rev019.htm#010.md); though perhaps no
more than civil respect is intended: but rather this was a diabolical
spectre, or apparition, or the devil, that appeared in the form and
shape of Samuel, and mimicked him; and was one of those deceiving
spirits Porphyry speaks (f) of, that appear in various shapes and forms,
and pretend to be gods or demons, or the souls of the deceased. Some (g)
think all this was the cunning and imposture of the woman alone, or that
she was assisted with a confederate, who acted the part of Samuel; but
this is not probable.

\(e\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 14. sect. 2.) (f) De Abstinentia, l.
2. apud Grotium in loc. (g) See Webster's Displaying of supposed
Witchcraft, &c. ch. 8. p. 166, &c.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 28:15</span></span>

And Samuel said to Saul, why hast thou disquieted me to bring me up?....
This makes it a clear case that this was not the true Samuel; his soul
was at rest in Abraham's bosom, in the state of bliss and happiness in
heaven, and it was not in the power of men and devils to disquiet it;
nor would he have talked of his being brought up, but rather of his
coming down, had it been really he; much less would he have acknowledged
that he was brought up by Saul, by means of a witch, and through the
help of the devil:

and Saul answered, I am sore distressed; in mind, being in great straits
and difficulties, pressed hard upon by men, and forsaken of God, as
follows:

for the Philistines make war against me; so they had many times, and he
had been victorious, and had no reason to be so much distressed, if that
was all: but he adds:

and God is departed from me: and therefore he feared he should be left
to fall into their hands; and that he had forsaken him he concluded from
hence,

and answereth me no more, neither by prophets, nor by dreams: See Gill
on [Sa1 28:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#006.md); he makes no mention of
Urim, either because they were not with him to inquire by, being carried
away by Abiathar when he fled to David, [Sa1
23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#009); or, as the Jews say (h.md), through
shame, he said nothing of the Urim before Samuel, as he took this
appearance to be, because he had slain the priests at Nob, and because
of this shame, they say, his sin was forgiven him:

therefore have I called thee, that thou mayest make known unto me what I
shall do; which was downright madness and folly to imagine, that since
God had forsaken him, and would give him no answer, that a prophet of
his should take his part; or when he could get no answer from a prophet
of God on earth, that he could expect an agreeable one from one fetched
down from heaven: one would be tempted to think that he himself believed
it was the devil he was talking to, and whom he had called for under the
name of Samuel, and expected to see; for from whom else could he expect
advice, when he was forsaken of God, and his prophets?

\(h\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 12. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 28:16</span></span>

Then said Samuel, wherefore then dost thou, ask of me,.... Whom thou
knowest to have been a prophet of the Lord, and therefore can say
nothing more or less than what comes from him, and is according to his
will, if anything at all; the "devil" representing Samuel, whom Saul had
called for, and reasons in such language as might be thought to be his
own, though sometimes he betrays himself:

seeing the Lord is departed from thee; as Saul himself owned: to which
he adds:

and is become thine enemy; to make his case appear still more desperate;
for his whole view is to lead him to despair, which shows what sort of
spirit he was: though some understand this as spoken of David, and read
the words, and "he is with thine enemy" (i); is on his side, and favours
his cause; so the Targum,"and he is for the help of a man, whose enmity
thou sharest in;''or who is at enmity with thee, meaning David; but now
the true Samuel would never have said this, or suggested it, that David
was an enemy to Saul, for he was not.

\(i\) "et est cum inimico tuo", Pagninus, Vatablus; so V. L.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 28:17</span></span>

And the Lord hath done to him,.... To David, Saul's enemy, as he
insinuated he was:

as he spake by me; pretending to be the true Samuel, and wearing the
guise of him, he speaks his very words, which he was well acquainted
with, and could deliver exactly as he did:

for the Lord hath rent the kingdom out of thine hand, and given it to
thy neighbour; which words are expressed by Samuel, [Sa1
15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#028.md),

even unto David; which is added by the apparition, by way of
explanation, interpreting the words of David; which he might safely
venture to do, seeing such a train of circumstances had occurred since
the delivery of these words, which plainly made it appear he was
intended.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 28:18</span></span>

Because thou obeyedst not the voice of the Lord,.... At Gilgal, as
Abarbinel thinks; which is the first thing for which the kingdom was
threatened to be taken from him, [Sa1
13:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#013.md),

nor executedst his fierce wrath upon Amalek: in sparing Agag, and the
best of the cattle, [Sa1 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#009.md),

therefore hath the Lord done this thing unto thee this day; forsaken
him, rent his kingdom from him, and would deliver him into the hands of
the Philistines, as follows: had he been the true Samuel, he would have
told him of some other sins of his, provoking to the Lord; as his
slaughter of the priests at Nob, his cruel persecution of David, and
especially of his asking counsel of one that had a familiar spirit at
this time, of which not a word is said, and yet was the very
transgression for which Saul died, [Ch1
10:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1010.htm#013.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 28:19</span></span>

Moreover, the Lord will also deliver Israel with thee into the hands of
the Philistines,.... Not a word of comfort does he speak unto him, it
being the business of this foul spirit to drive him to despair by the
permission of God; had he been the true Samuel, he would have directed
him to have altered his course of life, and especially his behaviour
toward David, and advised him in those difficulties to send for him, who
might have been of singular use unto him; he would have exhorted him to
repentance for his sins, and humiliation before God on account of them,
and given him hope on this that God would appear for him, and work
deliverance, as he had done; but instead of this tells him, that he and
his army would be delivered into the hands of the Philistines, which he
might make a shrewd guess at, and venture to say from the circumstances
of things, and the situation Saul and his people were in; the armies of
the Philistines were very numerous, and those of Israel comparatively
weak; Saul was quite dispirited, and God had forsaken him:

and tomorrow shalt thou and thy sons be with me; which if understood in
what sense it may, seems to be a lie of the devil, and at best an
ambiguous expression, such as he has been wont to give in the Heathen
oracles; if he meant this of himself as an evil spirit, it could not be
true of Saul and all his sons, that they should be with him in hell,
especially of Jonathan who appears throughout the whole of his life to
have been a good man; if he would have it understood of him as
representing Samuel, and of their being with him in heaven, it must be a
great stretch of charity to believe it true of Saul, so wicked a man,
and who died in the act of suicide; though the Jews (k), some of them,
understand it in this sense, that his sins were pardoned, and he was
saved; and if it is taken in the sense of being in the state of the
dead, and in the earth, from whence he is said to ascend, and where the
body of Samuel was, which seems to be the best sense that is put upon
the phrase, "with me"; yet this was not true, if he meant it of all the
sons of Saul, as the expression seems to suggest; for there were
Ishbosheth, and his two sons by Rizpah, which survived him; nor was it
true of Saul and his sons that they were cut off, and that they died the
next day; for the battle was not fought till several days after this,
see [Sa1 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#023.md); if it should be said,
that "tomorrow" signifies some future time, and not strictly the next
day, this shows the ambiguity of the expression used, and the
insignificance of it to the present purpose; for who knew not that Saul
and his sons would die some time or another?

the Lord also shall deliver the host of Israel into the hand of the
Philistines; which is only a repetition of what is said in the first
clause.

\(k\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 12. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 28:20</span></span>

Then Saul fell straightway all along on the earth,.... Fell at his full
length at once, as if he had been thunderstruck, or pierced through with
a dart or sword:

and was sore afraid, because of the words of Samuel; as he supposed they
were, whose words never failed:

and there was no strength in him: to rise up again, he was quite
dispirited and strengthless:

for he had eaten no bread all the day, nor all the night; which
contributed the more to his weakness; not only his fears, but not eating
any food, occasioned his weakness, and that through want of an appetite,
by reason of the great concern of his mind in his present troubles.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 28:21</span></span>

And the woman came unto Saul,.... Having left him and the apparition in
a room by themselves to converse together, and perhaps on hearing him
fall to the ground came in:

and saw that he was sore troubled: by his lying on the ground, and the
agonies he seemed to be in, and the uneasiness that sat upon his
countenance:

and said unto him, behold, thine handmaid hath obeyed thy voice; in
divining by her familiar spirit for him, and in bringing up Samuel to
him, as he desired:

and I have put my life in my hand; exposed it to the utmost danger,
since a person of her profession, and token in the exercise of it, was
punishable with death; and especially she was in the greater danger, as
it was Saul himself, who had by an edict expelled all such persons from
his dominions, who now employed her, as she perceived:

and have hearkened unto thy words which thou spakest unto me: to the
oath he had taken, that no hurt should come to her, which she confided
in, and relied upon, and to what he bid her do, according to her art of
divination.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 28:22</span></span>

Now therefore, I pray thee, hearken thou also unto the voice of thine
handmaid,.... She argues, that as she had hearkened unto him to the
endangering of her life, it was but reasonable, and might be expected,
that he would hearken to her in a case that would be to the preservation
of his life:

and let me set a morsel of bread before thee, and eat, that thou mayest
have strength, when thou goest on thy way; which she might urge, not
merely out of respect to the king, but for her own sake, lest should he
die in her house, she might be taken up, not only for a witch, but as
being accessory to the death of the king; and therefore she moves, that
he would take some food for refreshment of nature, that he might be able
to depart her house, and go on his way to his army.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 28:23</span></span>

But he refused, and said, I will not eat,.... Choosing rather to die
with famine than by the sword of the Philistines; though perhaps his
meaning is, he could not eat, his stomach loathed it, being overwhelmed
with grief and trouble:

but his servants, together with the woman, compelled him; not by force,
but by arguments; they reasoned with him, and prevailed upon him to try
to eat:

and he hearkened unto their voice; and agreed to eat, if he could:

so he arose from the earth; on which he lay at his full length:

and sat upon the bed; or couch, it being now the custom to recline on
couches at caring; though some deny that this custom obtained so early.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 28:24</span></span>

And the woman had a fat calf in the house,.... This was reckoned a very
dainty dish in those countries, and fit for any guests, see [Gen
18:7](../../../bib/kjv/gen018.htm#007); Josephus says (l.md), she
vouchsafed to feed and take care of it in her house, and it was very
familiar with her; and he highly commends the liberality of the woman,
and as worthy of imitation:

and she hasted and killed it; and dressed it in some way or another, and
which in those times was done speedily:

and took flour and kneaded it, and did bake unleavened bread therewith;
which was soonest made, she not having time to leaven it.

\(l\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 14. sect. 3. 4.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 28:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1028.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 28:25</span></span>

And she brought it before Saul, and before his servants, and they did
eat,.... Of the fatted calf, and unleavened bread, which she set upon a
table before them, in the best manner she could:

then they rose up, and went away that night; that it might not be seen
in what house they had been, and that they might get to the camp without
being discovered by the Philistines, or known by the Israelites that
they had been out.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 29](sa1029.md)

</div>
