<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1008)  [Next](sa1010.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 9:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 9

This chapter gives an account of Saul, the person the Lord had appointed
to be king of Israel; it relates his descent, and describes his person,
[Sa1 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001.md) and how seeking his father's
asses, which were lost, he providentially came to the place where Samuel
dwelt, [Sa1 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#003.md) and being advised by
his servant, and approving of his advice, he concluded to go to him, and
inquire the way he should go, [Sa1 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#006.md)
and being directed by some young maidens, they found him presently in
the street going to a feast, [Sa1 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#011.md)
and Samuel having some previous notice from the Lord of such a person's
coming to him that day, when he met him invited him to dine with him,
and obliged him to stay with him that day, [Sa1
9:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#015.md) satisfied him about his asses,
and gave him a hint of the grandeur he was to be raised to, to which
Saul made a modest reply, [Sa1 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#020.md)
and Samuel treated him at the feast in a very respectable manner, [Sa1
9:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#022.md) and privately communed with him
of things preparatory to what he was about to make known unto him, [Sa1
9:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#025.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 9:1</span></span>

Now there was a man of Benjamin,.... Of the tribe of Benjamin, which had
its name from the youngest son of Jacob, and one of this tribe was the
first king of Israel:

whose name was Kish: whom the apostle calls Cis, [Act
13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021), and Josephus (i.md) Cises; his
name, according to Hillerus (k), signifies "ensnared"; for what reason
it was given him is not certain:

the son of Abiel; in [Ch1 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#033.md), he is
called Ner that begat Kish; and in this book, [Sa1
14:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#050.md) Ner and Kish are represented as
brethren, the sons of Abiel: to reconcile this, it may be observed, that
Ner being the elder brother, on the death of his father Abiel, had the
care and bringing up of his younger brother Kish; and therefore when he
is said to beget him, the meaning is, not that he was the parent of him,
but the bringer up of him; or rather, as Kimchi thinks, Abiel had two
sons, one of which was Ner; and that he had two sons, one that was
called after his own name Ner, who was the father of Abner; and the
other Kish, the father of Saul:

the son of Zeror, the son of Bechorath, the son of Aphiah, a Benjamite;
of these persons we nowhere else read:

a mighty man of power; not a man of riches, or of authority, neither a
wealthy man, nor a magistrate, for his family was mean and contemptible,
[Sa1 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#021.md) but a man of great strength,
an able bodied man, and of great natural fortitude, and courage of mind.

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 4. sect. 1. (k) Onomastic. Sacr. p. 405.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 9:2</span></span>

And he had a son whose name was Saul,.... Of this name was the great
apostle of the Gentiles before his conversion, and was of the same tribe
also; but very different in stature; he was a little man, this a large
tall man, like his father perhaps:

a choice young man, and a goodly; [Sa1
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#001.md) of a goodly aspect, a comely man,
tall and well shaped, in the prime of his age, a very agreeable person,
one among a thousand:

and there was not among the children of Israel a goodlier person than
he; meaning not for the endowments of his mind, or his moral character
and behaviour. There might be as good, or better men than he, on such
accounts, but for his outward appearance, his bodily shape, and the
dignity of his person:

from his shoulders and upwards he was higher than any of the people;
this description of him is enlarged upon and explained, to show that he
was just such a person the people were desirous of having king over
them, such an one as the nations about them had; and it was usual with
the eastern people, and so with the Greeks and Romans, to choose persons
to the highest offices of magistracy that made a personable appearance
superior to others, and is what they often take notice of, as a
recommendation of them as princes. Herodotus (l) reports of the
Ethiopians, that they judged the largest of the people, and him who had
strength according to his size, most worthy to be king. And the same
writer observes (m), that among the many thousands of men of the army of
Xerxes, there was not one who for comeliness and largeness was so worthy
of the empire as Xerxes himself; so Ulysses, because of his height, was
the more acceptable to the people of Corfu (n); so Alexander's captains,
it is said (o), might be thought to be kings for their beautiful form,
height of body, and greatness of strength and wisdom. Julius Caesar is
said to be of high stature; and so Domitian (p); Virgil (q) represents
Turnus as in body more excellent than others, and by the entire head
above them; and Anchises as walking statelier and higher than the rest
(r); among the many encomiums Pliny (s) gives of Trajan, as to his
outward form and appearance, this is one, "proceritas corporis", height
of body, being higher than others; the Gentiles had a notion that such
men came nearer to the deities, and looked more like them; so Diana is
described as taller than any of the nymphs and goddesses (t). Solomon,
according to Josephus (u), chose such young men to ride horses, and
attend his person, when he himself rode, who were conspicuous for their
height, and greatly above others.

\(l\) Thalia, sive, l. 3. c. 20. (m) Polymnia, sive, l. 7. c. 187. (n)
Homer. Odyss. 8. ver. 20, 21. (o) Justin. e Trogo, l. 13. c. 1. (p)
Sueton. Vit. Caesar. c. 45. Domitian. c. 18. (q) Aeneid. l. 7. ver. 783,
784. & 9. ver. 29. (r) Ib. l. 8. ver. 162. (s) Panegyr. c. 4, 22. (t)
"Tamen altior illis ipsa dea est". Ovid. Metam. l. 3. fab. 2. ver. 180,
181. (u) Antiqu. l. 8. c. 7. sect. 3.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 9:3</span></span>

And the asses of Kish, Saul's father, were lost,.... Had got out of the
stables or fields, in which they were kept, and strayed from thence:

and Kish said to Saul his son, take now one of the servants with thee,
and arise, go seek the asses; he chose not to send his servants only,
who might not be so careful and diligent in searching for them, but his
son, and not him alone, but a servant with him to wait upon him, and
assist him. And it was quite agreeable to the simplicity of those times
for persons of equal or greater substance to be employed in such an
affair; asses made a considerable part of the wealth and riches of men,
were rode upon by persons of quality, and were fed and taken care of by
the sons of dukes and princes; see [Job
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/job001.htm#003). The Jews (w.md) have a tradition,
that this servant was Doeg the Edomite.

\(w\) Hieron. Trad. Heb. in Paralip, fol. 83. A.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 9:4</span></span>

And they passed through Mount Ephraim,.... The mountainous part of that
tribe, which lay contiguous to the tribe of Benjamin, where it might be
supposed the asses had strayed to:

and passed through the land of Shalisha; a tract in the tribe of
Benjamin, so called from some illustrious person, prince, and duke of
it; in it very probably was the place called Baalshalisha; [Kg2
4:42](../../../bib/kjv/kg2004.htm#042.md) and which perhaps is the same
Jerom calls (x) Bethshalisha; and says there was a village of this name
in the borders of Diospolis, almost fifteen miles distance from it to
the north, in the Tamnitic country; though Bunting (y) says it was
situated in Mount Ephraim, eight miles from Jerusalem to the northwest:

but they found them not; the asses, neither in Mount Ephraim, nor in the
land of Shalisha:

then they passed through the land of Shalim which some take to be the
same with Salim, where John was baptizing, [Joh
3:23](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#023) but Jerom says (z.md) it was a
village on the borders of Eleutheropolis, to the west, seven miles
distant from it:

and there they were not; the asses could not be found there:

and he passed through the land of the Benjamites; or rather of Jemini,
which was in Benjamin, so called from a famous man of that name; for it
cannot be thought they should pass through the whole tribe of Benjamin
in one day. And, according to Bunting (a), from Gibeah, the native place
of Saul, through the mountain of Ephraim, and the land of Shalisha, to
the borders of Shalim, were sixteen miles; and from thence to Jemini, in
the tribe of Benjamin, sixteen more:

but they found them not; the asses.

\(x\) De loc. Heb. fol. 89. K. (y) Travels of the Patriarchs, &c. p.
129. (z) De loc. Heb. fol. 94. L. (a) Travels of the Patriarchs, &c. p.
126.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 9:5</span></span>

And when they were come to the land of Zuph,.... In which was
Ramathaimzophim, the native place of Samuel, [Sa1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md) and so the Targum here,"the land
in which was the prophet"

Saul said to the servant that was with him, come, and let us return;
home, despairing of finding the asses after so long a search in divers
places:

lest my father leave caring for the asses, and take thought for us;
fearing some evil should have befallen his son and his servant, in
comparison of whom, and especially his son, the asses would be of no
account, and so give himself no concern for them, but be in great care
and uneasiness for his son and servant; wherefore Saul thought it most
advisable to return home as soon as possible, lest his father should be
overwhelmed with grief and trouble.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 9:6</span></span>

And he said unto him,.... That is, the servant of Saul:

behold, now, there is in this city a man of God; a prophet of the Lord,
as the Targum; such were called men of God, because not only partakers
of the grace of God, but of extraordinary gifts, which qualified them
for the office of prophets. The city near to which they now were was
Ramah, the place where Samuel lived, and he is the man of God here
meant:

and he is an honourable man; of great esteem among men for his wisdom
and knowledge, integrity and faithfulness, and particularly for his gift
of prophecy, being a true prophet of the Lord; so the Targum,"and he is
a man that prophesies truth,''and that made him honourable, and gave him
great credit:

all that he saith cometh surely to pass; as his prophecies concerning
Eli's family, and other things, which were well known to have had their
accomplishment, and this had gained him universal esteem, see [Sa1
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1003.htm#019.md),

now let us go thither; being very near it, within sight of it, insomuch
that the servant could point at it, and say "this city", as in the
preceding part of the verse:

peradventure he can show us our way that we should go; to find the
asses; he was not certain he could or would, but thought it possible and
probable he might.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 9:7</span></span>

Then Saul said to his servant, but behold, if we go,.... The Targum
is,"if he receives money,''which it seems Saul was not clear in; some
sort of persons that set up for prophets, and a sort of diviners and
fortune tellers, did; but he could not tell whether so eminent and
honourable a person as Samuel was, did; in as much he was not better
known by him, who had been so many years a judge in Israel:

what shall we bring the man? it being usual, when persons addressed
great men for a favour, to carry a present with them; or a man of God, a
prophet of the Lord, to inquire of the Lord by him concerning any thing,
see [Kg1 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#002.md),

for the bread is spent in our vessels; the food they brought with them
in their bags or scrips for their journey, this was all exhausted; not
that he meant by it, that if they had had any quantity, they might
present it to the man of God, though yet sometimes such things were
done, as the instances before referred to show; but that since their
stock of bread was gone, what money they had, if they had any, must be
spent in recruiting themselves, and therefore could have none to spare
to give to the man:

and there is not a present to bring to the man of God; neither bread nor
money, without which he seems to intimate it would be to no purpose to
go to him:

what have we? Saul knew he had none, he had spent what he brought out,
with him for the journey, and he put this question to try what his
servant had; unless it can be supposed it was the custom now, as
afterwards among the Romans (b), for servants to carry the purse, and as
it was with the Jews in Christ's time, [Joh
12:6](../../../bib/kjv/joh012.htm#006.md) though this may have respect not
to a price of divination, but to the common custom in eastern countries,
and which continues to this day with the Turks, who reckon it uncivil to
visit any person, whether in authority, or an inferior person, without a
present; and even the latter are seldom visited without presenting a
flower, or an orange, and some token of respect to the person visited
(c).

\(b\) A. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 20. c. 1. (c) Maundrell's Journey from
Aleppo, &c. p. 26, 27.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 9:8</span></span>

And the servant answered Saul again, and said,.... As he had answered
him before, when Saul proposed to return home, by telling him there was
an honourable man of God in the city near at hand, that might possibly
be able to direct them which way they should go to find the asses: so he
answers him again with respect to the present it was proper to carry
with them, and what he had in his hands to make:

behold, I have here at hand the fourth part of a shekel of silver: a
"zuze" of silver, as the Targum, four of which made a shekel, about
seven pence halfpenny of our money, and scarce so much:

that will I give to the man of God to tell us our way; that they should
go to find the asses: which he would give him very freely for that
purpose: both Saul and his servant must entertain a mean opinion of
prophets, and men of God, and especially of so great a man as Samuel,
that he should be employed at any time in directing persons in such
cases, and take money for so doing, and so small a gratuity as this
before mentioned; though it seems as if, at some times, something of
this kind was done by prophets, and men of God, which might be permitted
to keep the people from going to diviners and soothsayers.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 9:9</span></span>

Before time in Israel, when a man went to inquire of God,.... To ask
doctrine of him, as the Targum, to be taught by him, to have his mind
and will in any affair of moment and importance; which was usually done
by applying to some man of God, eminent for grace and piety, and a
spirit of prophecy:

thus he spake, come, and let us go to the seer; a man used to say to his
friend, when he wanted some instruction or direction, let us go together
to such an one, the seer, and ask counsel of him what is proper to be
done in such an affair:

for he that is now called a prophet was before called a seer; for though
these names are used freely of the same persons, both before and after
this time; yet now the more common appellation which obtained was that
of a prophet; custom, and the use of language, varied at different
times, though the same was meant by the one and the other; such men were
called seers, because of the vision of prophecy, because they saw or
foresaw things to come; and they were called prophets, because they
foretold what they saw, or delivered out their predictions by word of
mouth. This verse is put in a parenthesis, and is commonly supposed to
be the words of the writer of this book: hence some draw an argument
against Samuel being the writer of it, as Abarbinel does, who concludes
from hence that it was written by Jeremiah, or some other person long
after Samuel, or that this verse was added by Ezra; but as this book
might be written by Samuel in the latter part of his life, he might with
propriety observe this, that in his younger time, and quite down to the
anointing of Saul king, both when there was no open vision, and
afterwards when there was scarce any that had it but himself, he was
used to be called the seer; but in his latter days, when there were many
that had the vision of prophecy, and there were schools set up, it was
more common to call them prophets; though perhaps these are the words of
Saul's servant, spoken to encourage Saul to go to the man of God, and
inquire of him, since in former times, as he could remember, being
perhaps an old servant, or he had heard his parents so say, that such
men used to be called seers, because they saw what others did not, and
declared and made others to see what they did; and therefore there was a
probability that this man of God, who was a seer, might show them the
way they should go to find the asses.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 9:10</span></span>

Then said Saul to his servant, well said,.... Or "good is thy word" (d),
thou hast well spoken; it is a good proposal thou hast made, and thou
art very generous to give all thou hast to the man; and very promising
it is, that since he is a seer he may inform us where the asses are, or
which way we must take to find them. Things look feasible enough:

come, let us go: to the city, and to the man of God there, and hear what
he will say to us, and what information he will give us:

so they went unto the city where the man of God was; to Ramah, where
Samuel dwelt.

\(d\) "bonum verbum tuum", Pagninus, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 9:11</span></span>

And as they went up the hill to the city,.... For the city was built
upon an hill, from whence it had the name of Ramah, which signifies high
and lifted up:

they found young maidens going out to draw water: going out of the city,
to a fountain which was at the bottom of the hill; and this was the
usual business of maidens in those countries to fetch water for the
service of the family; see Gill on [Gen
24:11](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#011.md); see Gill on [Gen
24:15](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#015.md); see Gill on [Gen
24:16](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#016). R. Akiba (e.md) makes this
observation, that whenever a man meets maidens coming out of a city
before he goes into it, it is a token of prosperity to him; and
instances in the cases of Abraham's servant, of Jacob, and of Moses, and
here of Saul, who was informed of a kingdom, and anointed for it, see
[Gen 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/gen024.htm#014.md) [Exo
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo002.htm#016.md),

and said unto them, is the seer here? meaning, is he in the city? or is
he at home? or is he in the country?

\(e\) In Pirke Eliezer, c. 36. fol. 39. 1. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 9:12</span></span>

And they answered them, and said, he is,.... That is, he is in the city,
at home, and to be spoken with:

behold, he is before you; his house is straight before you as you go
along, you cannot miss of it. Some Jewish writers say (f) they gave a
token to know it by, that there was a cloud at the door, and when they
saw that, they might know it was the seer's house:

haste now, for he came today to the city; from the suburbs to it, or
from his country house, or from the other Ramah, for there were two of
them, one over against the other, see [Sa1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md), for that he was just now come off
a circuit, is not so probable, since he was now old, and past riding his
circuits; and indeed the meaning may be no more than as it may be
rendered, "today he comes into the city" (g); that is, he comes out of
his own house into the city, and was then just coming out; so that, if
they made haste, they might meet him in the street before he got to the
place of sacrifice and feasting:

for there is a sacrifice of the people today in the high place; whether
it was the new moon, or some festival they observed, though the
tabernacle was not there, is not certain; at which, besides the
offerings required, freewill offerings and peace offerings were brought
by the people, on part of which they feasted with their friends; and
very probably, as Samuel was acquainted by the Lord that he who was to
be king of Israel would be with him that day, he might add to the
sacrifices of the people, to make the entertainment the more grand and
liberal; since he had a principal concern in ordering the guests, and
dividing the portions, as well as blessing the food, which indeed he
might take upon him, as being judge, priest, and prophet: this was an
high place where this sacrifice or feast was; for Shiloh being
destroyed, and the tabernacle removed elsewhere, and that being in one
place, and the ark in another, and they not together, no distinction of
places was made, none being yet chosen, all were fit; and particularly
high places, which were always reckoned the most proper for divine
service and sacrifice.

\(f\) Midrash Schemuel & Pesikta apud Abarbinel in loc. (g) "venit",
Pagninus, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 9:13</span></span>

As soon as ye come into the city, ye shall straightway find him,.... By
which it seems that the house of Samuel was at that end of it at which
they entered; and with which agrees what is observed in the preceding
verse, that "he was before them", his house was in sight of them:

before he go up to the high place to eat; intimating they would, if they
made haste, come up to him before he got thither to sit down and eat
with the people; for if they did not, they would not be able to see him
and speak with him for some time, if on that day:

for the people will not eat until he come; partly out of affection and
veneration for him, being their chief magistrate, as well as seer or
prophet, and partly for the reason following:

because he doth bless the sacrifice; ask a blessing upon it, upon the
meat of the peace offerings before it was eaten; for as this was usually
done at every common meal, then much more at such a solemn festival as
this. Jarchi gives us the form of blessing used on such an
occasion,"blessed art thou, O Lord our God, the King of the world, who
hath sanctified us by his commandments, and hath commanded us to eat the
sacrifice:''and "afterwards they eat that be bidden"; for when a man
offered his peace offerings, he not only had his family with him, but
invited his friends, and the poor, and the fatherless, the strangers,
and the Levites, to partake with him, see [Deu
12:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#018.md), the number of the guests at
this time, see in [Sa1 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#022.md).

Now therefore get ye up; ascend the hill as fast as ye can:

for about this time ye shall find him; that is, by the time they could
get up the hill into the city they would find him coming out of his
house to go to the sacrifice: or "as this day" (h); so sure as the day
is, so sure shall ye find him.

\(h\) "invenietis cum tam certo quam certum est hunc diem esse",
Drusius; so Jarchi.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 9:14</span></span>

And they went up into the city,.... Saul and his servant went up the
hill to the city of Ramah: and

when they were come into the city; were within it, within the walls of
it:

behold, Samuel came out against them; came out of a door of his house
upon them, just as they came up: or "to meet them" (i); his way to the
high place lay where they were coming; unless it can be thought he went
out purposely to meet them, having, as in the following verse, an
intimation, that about that time one from the tribe of Benjamin, who
should be king, would come to him, and so made this his way, knowing
that one coming from that tribe must come that way; but it seems most
likely that this was his readiest way:

for to go up to the high place; or place of sitting down, or feasting,
as the Targum; see Gill on [Sa1 9:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#012.md).

\(i\) "in occursum eorum", Pagninus, Montanus; "eis obviam", V. L.
Tigurine version.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 9:15</span></span>

Now the Lord had told Samuel in his ear,.... In a private manner,
whispering in his ear, telling him in a free, familiar, friendly way, as
a secret:

a day before Saul came; that he might prepare for the entertainment of
him, and not be surprised at his coming, as well as hereby be assured he
was the person designed to be king of Israel, when he should come:

saying; as follows.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 9:16</span></span>

Tomorrow about this time I will send thee a man out of the land of
Benjamin,.... Who without any thought or design of his own, but merely
directed by the providence of God, should come to him, not expecting a
kingdom; at most only to hear of his father's asses, and which way he
should take to find them; missing the finding of which would and did
bring him thither:

and thou shalt anoint him to be captain over my people Israel; the
leader, ruler, and governor of them; to which high office he was to be
appointed by pouring oil upon him, and was the first king on whom this
ceremony was performed, and from whence he was called the Lord's
anointed:

that he may save my people out of the hands of the Philistines; who,
since Samuel was grown old, made encroachments upon them, built
garrisons on their borders, and made, it is very probable, incursions
upon them, and ravages and oppressions of them:

for I have looked upon my people; with an eye of pity and compassion:

because their cry is come unto me; by reason of the oppressions of the
Philistines, and the war they were threatened with by the Ammonites;
though Abarbinel thinks this refers to their importunate cry,
supplication, and request to have a king set over them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 9:17</span></span>

And when Samuel saw Saul,.... Who could not but take notice of him for
his height, and which might give him a suspicion he was the man the Lord
had spoken of to him; and the rather, because this was the exact time in
which he was to be sent to him, and therefore he fixed his eyes upon
him: and that he might be assured it was he, and be left at no
uncertainty about it:

the Lord said unto him; by a still small voice, or by an impulse upon
his mind:

behold the man whom I spake to thee of; yesterday, this is he:

this same shall reign over my people; be their king, as they have
desired: or "shall restrain" (k) them, keep them in due bounds, in the
discharge of their duty to God and man; and keep them from doing that
which is evil, or walking in evil ways, which is the business of a good
king; or who shall restrain them from having their own will, but shall
rule over them in an absolute manner, according to his own arbitrary
will and pleasure.

\(k\) "cohibebit", Montanus; "continebit", Tigurine version;
"retinebit", Drusius; i.e. "coercebit", Piscator.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 9:18</span></span>

Then Saul drew near to Samuel in the gate,.... Either at the door of his
own house, just as he was coming out of it, or within the gate of the
city as Saul entered that, Samuel came to it, in order to go through it
to the high place, which it is probable was without the city; wherefore
it is very properly said that Samuel came out to meet them, [Sa1
9:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#014.md).

and said, tell me, I pray thee, where the seer's house is; one knows not
which to wonder at most, the simplicity and humility of Samuel to be in
so plain an habit, unattended by servants, and yet going to a public
festival, so that he seemed to be no other than a common man, to be
inquired of whereabout his house was; or the ignorance of Saul, who had
lived so long in the world, and so near Samuel, and yet had never seen
and knew not the chief magistrate in the nation, so famous both for his
civil and religious character.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 9:19</span></span>

And Samuel answered Saul, and said, I am the seer,.... For he supposed,
by inquiring for his house, that his business was with him; wherefore
this he said, not as boasting of his character and office, or in the
pride and vanity of his mind, but merely for information sake:

go up before me unto the high place; instead of returning home with him,
he invited him to go to the place of feasting, as the Targum, whither he
was going to partake of the entertainment there; and he bids him go
before him, either because he was an old man, and could not go his pace,
or he had business to do by the way, or this was in honour to Saul, whom
he knew was to be king of Israel:

for ye shall eat with me today; he and his servant, at the public feast:
he insisted upon his dining, or it may be rather supping with him:

and tomorrow I will let thee go; for it being in the evening when this
feast was, he could not depart that night, but must stay till morning,
and then he promised to dismiss him:

and will tell thee all that is in thine heart; answer all questions he
had in his mind to ask him, for which he came into the city, and
inquired for his house. The Jews (l) have a tradition that it was in the
heart of Saul that he should be a king, having in a vision seen himself
placed on the top of a palm tree, which was a sign of royalty, and this
Samuel told him.

\(l\) Hieron. Trad. Heb. in lib. Reg. fol. 75. G.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 9:20</span></span>

And as for thine asses that were lost three days ago,.... Which,
according to Kimchi, is to be understood not of the time from whence
they were lost, but to be reckoned from the time that Saul had been
seeking of them; so the Targum,"as to the business of the asses, which
are lost to thee, and thou art come to seek them today, these three
days:''though it is probable enough that the same day they were lost
Saul set out to seek them, Now Samuel telling him of the asses that were
lost, and of the time of their being lost, or of his seeking them, so
exactly, before ever he said a word to him about them, must at once
convince him that he was a true prophet, and which must prepare him to
give credit to all that he should hereafter say to him:

set not thy mind on them, for they are found; of the truth of which he
could not doubt, after he had said the above words; and which he said to
make his mind easy, that he might the more cheerfully attend the feast,
and be the more willing to stay all night:

and on whom is all the desire of Israel? which was to have a king; in
this they were unanimous, and who so fit and proper as Saul, it is
intimated, whom Samuel knew God had chosen and appointed to be king over
them?

is it not on thee, and on all thy father's house? not that the
Israelites had their eye on Saul, and their desire after him to be their
king, though he was such an one as they wished for; but that as this
desire of theirs was granted, it would issue and terminate in him and
his family; he should be advanced to the throne, which would be attended
with the promotion of his father's house, as Abner particularly, who was
his uncle's son, and was made the general of the army.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 9:21</span></span>

And Saul answered and said, am not I a Benjamite,.... Or the son of
Jemini, the name of one of his ancestors, see [Sa1
9:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#001.md) or rather, as the Targum, a son of
the tribe of Benjamin:

of the smallest of the tribes of Israel? having been greatly reduced,
even to the number of six hundred men, by the fatal war between that
tribe and the rest, on account of the Levite's concubine, and is called
little Benjamin, [Psa 68:27](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#027.md).

and my family the least of all the families of the tribe of Benjamin?
the smallest in number, had the least share of authority in the tribe,
and of land and cattle, wealth and substance:

wherefore then speakest thou so to me? Saul presently understood
Samuel's meaning, that he should be chosen king of Israel, the affair of
a king being at this time in everyone's mind and mouth; but could not
believe that one of so small a tribe, and which sprung from the youngest
son of Jacob, and of so mean a family, would be raised to such dignity,
but that a person of great figure and character would be settled upon;
and, therefore he took Samuel to be in joke, as Josephus (m) says, and
not in earnest.

\(m\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 4. sect. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 9:22</span></span>

And Samuel took Saul and his servant, and brought them into the
parlour,.... The dining room of the house, which belonged to the high
place:

and made them sit in the chiefest place among them that were bidden; and
who very probably were the principal persons in the city; and yet Saul
was placed at the head of them by Samuel, to convince him that what he
had said to him was in earnest, and to do him honour before all the
people; and for the sake of him, and to show his respect to him, he
placed his servant; his minister, also in the chief place with him; what
was reckoned the highest and most honourable places at table; see Gill
on [Mat 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#006.md). The guests were placed
by the master of the feast according to their rank; and the dignity of
the person, as Jarchi observes, was known by his manners and place of
sitting:

which were about thirty persons; more or less; Josephus (n) says
seventy, disagreeing with the text, the Targum, Syriac and Arabic
versions, but agreeing with the Septuagint.

\(n\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 4. sect. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 9:23</span></span>

And Samuel said unto the cook,.... That dressed and prepared the food
for the entertainment of the guests:

bring the portion which I gave thee; to dress; for part of the
provisions of the feast was Samuel's, and the other part the people's
that brought the peace offerings:

of which I said unto thee, set it by thee; do not bring it in with the
rest, but keep it in the kitchen till called for.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 9:24</span></span>

And the cook took up the shoulder, and that which was upon it,....
Meaning either, as some think, some sauce that was poured on it, or
garnish about it; or the thigh, as the Targum, and so Jarchi, Kimchi,
and others; or rather the breast, as a more ancient Jew (o); since this
joined to the shoulder before separated, and in sacrifices went along
with it; though most think this was the left shoulder and breast,
because the right shoulder and breast of the peace offerings were given
to the priest, to be eaten by him and his sons, [Lev
7:34](../../../bib/kjv/lev007.htm#034.md) but in those unsettled times,
with respect to sacrifices, many things were dispensed with; and Samuel,
though a Levite, might officiate as a priest, and so the right shoulder
and breast belonged to him as such; and this best accounts for his
having the disposal of it; and upon this extraordinary occasion, Saul,
though not the son of a priest, might be admitted to eat of it, it being
the choicest part, and fit to be set before one designed to be king; and
to show that he was to live in friendship with the priests of the Lord,
and to take care of and protect the ministerial function:

and set it before Saul; by the direction of Samuel no doubt, as a token
of honour and respect unto him; it being usual in other countries to
commend the best dishes, or best pieces of flesh, to the more excellent
and worthy persons at table (p); and this was, as Josephus (q) calls it,
a royal portion: the arm or shoulder, especially the right arm, being a
symbol of strength, may denote that strength which was necessary for him
to bear the burden of government, to protect his people, and fight in
defence of them; and the breast being the seat of wisdom and prudence,
of affection and love, may signify how necessary such qualities were for
kingly government, to know how to go in and out before the people, and
be heartily concerned for their good: and Samuel said:

behold that which is left; not by the guests, and what they could not
eat; for till Samuel came they did not begin to eat; and as for this
part, it was but just brought in, and was never set before the guests,
but it was left by Samuel in the hands of the cook, and reserved for the
use of Saul:

set it before thee, and eat; it was already set before him, but he would
have him keep it by him, and eat of it, and make his meal of it, it
being the best dish at the table:

for unto this time hath it been kept for thee; by which he gave him to
understand that he knew of his coming before hand, and therefore had
made this provision for him; and which might serve to persuade him of
the truth and certainty of what he had hinted to him:

since I said I have invited the people; not the thirty persons before
mentioned, for it does not appear that they were invited by Samuel, but
rather by those who brought the peace offerings, who had a right to
invite any of their friends they thought fit; but by "the people" are
meant Saul and his servant; for in the eastern languages two or three
persons, and even one, are called a people; and this Samuel had said to
his cook, when he bid him set by the shoulder, and what was on it,
because he had invited some, for whom he had designed it:

so Saul did eat with Samuel that day: they dined together.

\(o\) R. Eliezer in T. Bab. Avodah Zara, fol. 25. 1. (p) Vid. Diodor.
Sicul. l. 5. p. 306. (q) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 4. sect. 1.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 9:25</span></span>

And when they came down from the high place into the city,.... After the
feast was ended; and though Ramah itself was situated on an eminence,
yet it seems this high place was higher than that, being without the
city upon an hill, and therefore they are said to come down from the one
to the other; or they came down from the high place, and then ascended
the hill to the city:

Samuel communed with Saul upon the top of the house: of Samuel's house;
when they were come thither, Samuel took Saul up to the roof of his
house, which was flat, as the roofs of houses in this country were; see
[Deu 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008.md) on which they could walk to
and fro, and converse together; hence you read of preaching and praying
on housetops, [Mat 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/mat010.htm#027.md) what they
communed about is not said, but may be guessed at, that it was about
Saul's being made king; of the certainty of it, by divine designation;
of the manner of executing that office wisely and justly; about the
objections Saul had made of the smallness of his tribe and family; and
of Samuel's willingness to resign the government to him, with other
things of the like kind.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 9:26</span></span>

And they arose early,.... Neither of them being able to sleep, as
Abarbinel supposes; not Samuel for thinking what he was to do the next
morning, anoint Saul king over Israel; nor Saul for what Samuel had
hinted to him about the desire of all Israel being upon him, and for the
honour done him at the feast, and because of the conversation they had
together afterwards:

and it came to pass about the spring of the day; or the "ascents of the
morning" (x), when day was about to break, before the sun was up:

that Samuel called Saul to the top of the house; where they had
conversed together the evening before:

saying, up, that I may send thee away; meaning not rise from his bed,
for he was risen; but that he would prepare to set out on his journey,
that Samuel might take his leave of him for the present, when he had
accompanied him some part of his way, as he intended; and he was the
more urgent upon him, because there was something to be done before
people were stirring:

and Saul arose, and they went out both of them, he and Samuel, abroad;
out of Samuel's house, without doors, into the street.

\(x\) "circa ascendere auroram", Montanus; "quum ascenderet aurora",
Junius & Tremellius.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 9:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 9:27</span></span>

And as they were going down to the end of the city,.... That end of it
that led the way to the place where Saul was going. As this city was
built on an hill, going to the end of it was a declivity, a descent:

Samuel said to Saul, bid the servant pass on before us; being another
man's servant, he did not choose of himself to bid him go on, but
desired his master to order him to go before them, that he might not
hear what Samuel had to say to Saul, or see what he did unto him; for as
the choice of Saul to be king was to be declared by lot, as coming from
the Lord, all those precautions were taken of rising early, and going
abroad, and sending the servant before them, that it might not be
thought that Samuel did this of himself:

and he passed on; his master bidding him:

but stand thou still a while; that he might hear the better, and more
attentively than in walking; such a posture was most fitting also for
what was to be done, anointing him with oil:

that I may show thee the word of God: tell him more of the mind of God
concerning his being king, and declare more fully the word, will, and
decree of God about that matter, by an action which would put it out of
all doubt that he was the man God designed to be king, as in the
following chapter.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](sa1010.md)

</div>
