<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1000)  [Next](sa1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 1

This chapter gives an account of the parents of Samuel, of the trouble
his mother met with from her rival, and comfort from her husband, [Sa1
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001), of her prayer to God for a son,
and of her vow to him, should one be given her, [Sa1
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009) of the notice Eli took of her, and
of his censure on her, which he afterwards retracted, and comforted her,
[Sa1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#012) of her conception and the
birth of her son, the nursing and weaning of him, [Sa1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019) and of the presentation of him to
the Lord, with a sacrifice, [Sa1 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 1:1</span></span>

Now there was a man of Ramathaimzophim, of Mount Ephraim,.... Ramathaim
is a word of the dual number, and signifies two Ramahs; the city
consisted of two parts, being built perhaps on two hills, and were
called Zophim; because, as the Rabbins say, they looked one to another;
or rather, because situated on eminences, there were watchtowers in
them, where watchmen were placed; or because they were inhabited by
prophets, who were sometimes called watchmen, [Eze
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#017) and here is thought to be a
school of the prophets, see [Sa1 19:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#019)
and which seems to be countenanced by the Targum, in which the words are
paraphrased thus, "and there was one" man of Ramatha, of the disciples
of the prophets; or, as others think, the sense is this, this man was
one of the Ramathites, the inhabitants of Ramah, and of the family of
Zuph, or the Zuphites, which gave the name to the land of Zuph, and the
grand ancestor of Elkanah is in this verse called Zuph, see [Sa1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#005). According to Jerom (e), this is
the same with Arimathaea, of which Joseph was, [Mat
27:57](../../../bib/kjv/mat027.htm#057) for thus he writes,"Armatha
Sophim, the city of Helcanah and Samuel, in the Thamnitic region near
Diospolis (or Lydda), from whence was Joseph, who in the Gospels is said
to be of Arimathaea;''but Reland (f) thinks it cannot be the same that
was about Lydda, which was all a champaign country; whereas this was in
the mountains of Ephraim, which must be sought to the north of
Jerusalem, and not the west, and so it follows:

of Mount Ephraim: which is added to distinguish it from other Ramahs in
several tribes, as in Benjamin, Naphtali, &c. though this may refer not
to the situation of Ramathaim, but to the country of this man, who was
originally of Mount Ephraim, as was the Levite in [Jdg
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001) who was the cause of much evil to
Israel, as this was of great good, as Kimchi observes:

and his name was Elkanah; which signifies "God hath possessed"; that is,
possessed him, or he was in possession of God; he had an ancestor of the
same name, [Ch1 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#023). This man was a
Levite, one of the Kohathites, and a descendant of Korah; so that the
famous prophet Samuel was of the sons of Korah:

the son of Jeroham, the son of Elihu, the son of Tohu, the son of Zuph;
the three last of these names are somewhat differently read in [Ch1
6:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#026), where they are Eliab, Nahath,
Zophai; and in [Ch1 6:34](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#034). Eliel, Toah,
Zuph:

an Ephrathite; which appellation is to be connected, according to
Kimchi, not with Elkanah, but with Zuph; though neither of them were so
called from Bethlehemjudah, the inhabitants of which were indeed called
Ephrathites from Ephratah, another name of it; so Elimelech, and his
sons Mahlon and Chilion, being of that city, were so called, [Rut
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/rut001.htm#002) not from their being of the tribe
of Ephraim, as Jeroboam of that tribe is called an Ephrathite, [Kg1
11:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#026), see [Jdg
12:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg012.htm#005) for these were Levites, the
descendants of Kohath, in the line of Korah; but because they sojourned
in Mount Ephraim, or dwelt there, as Elkanah did; and it is well known
that the Kohathites had cities given them in the tribe of Ephraim, [Jos
21:5](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#005).

\(e\) De loc. Heb. fol. 88. K. (f) Palestin. Illustrat. tom. 2. p. 581.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 1:2</span></span>

And he had two wives,.... Which, though connived at in those times, was
contrary to the original law of marriage; and for which, though a good
man, he was chastised, and had a great deal of vexation and trouble, the
two wives not agreeing with each other; perhaps not having children by
the one so soon as he hoped and wished for, he took another:

the name of the one was Hannah, and the name of the other Peninnah; the
first name signifies "grace" or "gracious", and she was a woman who had
the grace of God, and very probably was also very comely, beautiful, and
acceptable, as she was in the sight of her husband; the other signifies
a cornered gem, a precious stone or jewel, as the pearl, ruby, amethyst,
&c. Very likely Hannah was his first wife, and having no children by
her, he took Peninnah, who proved to be a rough diamond: and Peninnah
had children, but Hannah had no children; how many Peninnah had is not
said, perhaps ten; see [Sa1 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#008) and
that Hannah had none was not because she was naturally barren, but
because the Lord had shut up her womb, or restrained her from bearing
children, to put her upon praying for one, and that the birth of Samuel
might be the more remarkable: see [Sa1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#005).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 1:3</span></span>

This man went up out of his city yearly,.... From year to year; or, as
the Targum, from the time of the solemn appointed feast to the solemn
appointed feast, from one to another; there were three of them in the
year, at which all the males in Israel were to appear at the tabernacle;
and being a Levite, this man was the more careful to observe this rule.
He is said to "go up" out of his city, which was Ramathaim or Ramah; for
though it was built on an eminence, from whence it had its name, yet
Shiloh, whither he went, was higher; that being, as Adrichomius says
(a), on the highest mountain of all round about Jerusalem, and the
highest of all the mountains of the holy land. So that as he first went
down the hill from Ramah, he went up an high ascent to Shiloh, which is
the place he went up to as follows:

to worship and to sacrifice unto the Lord of hosts in Shiloh; where the
tabernacle was, the place of worship, and the altar of burnt offerings,
on which sacrifices were offered. This place, according to Bunting (b),
was twelve miles from Ramah, though others say it was not more than
seven miles from it; hither he went to worship, or bow before the Lord;
to pray unto him, as it is commonly interpreted; and being put before
sacrifice, is said to be preferable to that, and more acceptable to God,
and more eligible to be done in the tabernacle or temple than at home;
see [Luk 18:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#010) and though he is said
to go up to sacrifice, it is not to be understood of his performing it
himself, but by others, by the priest; for he himself was a Levite and
could not offer sacrifices. This is the first time that mention is made
of this title of Jehovah, Lord of hosts, of all the hosts and armies in
heaven and in earth, the Lord of Sabaoth, as in [Jam
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jam005.htm#004) from an "host", or army; and from
hence the Heathens called some of their deities by the name of Sabazius,
as Jupiter Sabazius (c); and the Phrygians and Thracians used to call
Bacchus Sabazius, and other Grecians following them did the same (d):

and the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas the priests of the Lord,
were there; Eli was the next judge of Israel after Samson, and who also
was the high priest, as is generally supposed; but when and how the high
priesthood came into his family is nowhere said, who was a descendant of
Ithamar, the younger son of Aaron, in whose line it continued to the
time of Solomon; and Josephus (e) places three between Phinehas and Eli,
who were all of the line of Eleazar, whom he calls Abiezer, Bouci, and
Ozis; but their Scripture names are Abishua, Bukki, and Uzzi, [Ch1
6:50](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#050). And according to him, after Uzzi
came Eli to be high priest, and therefore must be the first of the line
of Ithamar that was in that office. His two sons are mentioned as
officiating as priests in Shiloh, at the time Elkanah used to go yearly
thither to worship and sacrifice; who were very wicked men, as appears
by an after account of them; and it is generally thought that this is
observed here, to show that the wickedness of these priests did not
hinder this good man from doing his duty; nor did he make use of it as
an excuse for not attending the worship of the sanctuary.

\(a\) Theatrum Terrae Sanct. p. 30. So Sandys's Travels, l. 3. p. 157.
(b) Travels of the Patriarchs, &c. p. 122. (c) Valer. Maxim. l. 1. c. 3.
Vid. D. Herbert de Cherbury de Relig. Gent. c. 3. p. 22. (d) Diodor.
Sicul. Bibliothec. l. 3. p. 212. Harpocration in voce Lucian. Concil.
deor. sect. 4. Cicero de legibus. l. 2. Aristophan vespae, v. 9, 10.
Aves, 582. & Scholia in ib. Lysistrate, p. 860. & Scholia in ib. (e)
Antiqu. l. 5. c. 11. sect. 5.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 1:4</span></span>

And when the time was that Elkanah offered,.... That is, brought his
offering to the priest, to offer it for him, which was at one of the
three festivals. According to R. Joshua Ben Levi (f), this was at the
time of Pentecost; but Abarbinel thinks it was at the time of the
ingathering of the fruits of the earth, which was a time of rejoicing,
even the feast of tabernacles, and which is most likely:

he gave to Peninnah his wife, and to all her sons and her daughters,
portions; parts of the offering, everyone a part, or portion; by which
it appears, that this was a peace offering he offered, the greater part
of which belonged to the owner, and which he made a feast of for his
family and friends; see [Deu 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu012.htm#005).
Jerom (g) interprets these portions of garments.

\(f\) Apud Kimchium in loc. (g) Trad. Heb. in lib. Reg. fol. 74. H.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 1:5</span></span>

But unto Hannah he gave a worthy portion,.... Or, one choice portion, as
the Targum; the best part or portion in the peace offering, of what the
priest had not; he had the breast and the right shoulder, the next best
piece he gave to Hannah; and the word being of the dual number, some
render it a double portion; others, "one part of two faces" (h); which
Jerom interprets, which might be received with a cheerful countenance,
it was so good and excellent in its kind; others interpret it that he
gave it with a sorrowful (i) and displeased countenance, because of the
reason following, that she had no children; but Ben Gersom understands
it of a part or portion of meat that had two faces or appearances; that
he gave her one of the pieces, one part of which was very fat, and the
other had no fat on it, so that she might choose what she liked best:

for he loved Hannah; loved her best, and therefore did everything to
please her, and make her comfortable under her affliction for want of
children, and to express his tender affection for her:

but the Lord had shut up her womb; restrained her from conception, and
bearing children; see [Gen 20:18](../../../bib/kjv/gen020.htm#018) or
"though the Lord had shut up her womb" (k); this did not abate his love
to her.

\(h\) "unam portionem duarum facicrum", Sanctius Belgae. (i) Sic
Stockins, p. 79. (k) "quanquam Jehovah", Piscator.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 1:6</span></span>

And her adversary also provoked her sore,.... That is, Peninnah, the
other wife of Elkanah; for when a man had more wives, two or more, they
were usually at enmity to one another, as the two wives of Socrates
were, being always jealous lest one should have more love and respect
than the other from the husband; and this woman provoked Hannah one time
after another, and continually, by upbraiding her with her barrenness;
and this was another reason why Elkanah did all he could to comfort her,
not only because the Lord had restrained her from bearing children, but
because also she that envied and emulated her sadly provoked her:

for to make her fret; and be uneasy, and murmur at and complain of her
unhappy circumstances: some render it, "because she thundered" (l)
against her; that is, Peninnah was exceeding loud and clamorous with her
reproaches and scoffs, which were grievously provoking to Hannah. So
said Socrates, when Xantippe first scolded at him, and then poured foul
water on him: did not I say, says he, that Xantippe first thunders, and
then rains (m)?

because the Lord had shut up her womb; it was this Peninnah upbraided
her with, and at which Hannah fretted and grieved.

\(l\) "propterea quod intonabat contra eam", Piscator. (m) Laert. in
Vit. Socrat. p. 112.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 1:7</span></span>

And as he did so year by year,.... Elkanah went up every year to Shiloh,
and offered sacrifices, taking his family with him, and gave to Peninnah
and her children their portion, and to Hannah a double portion, or if
but one yet the best:

when she went up to the house of the Lord; that is, Peninnah, along with
her husband, with whom she went every year to the tabernacle at Shiloh:

so she provoked her; her rival Hannah, upbraiding her with her
barrenness; to which she was stirred up by seeing her husband on these
festivals take so much notice of her, and show so much love and respect
for her, as always to give her the best portion. Abarbinel thinks that
Peninnah and Hannah lived at two separate places, the one at Ramah and
the other at Ramatha, which both together are called Ramathaim; and that
they only met with and saw one another at these festivals, and then it
was that the one was so very insulting and provoking to the other:

therefore she wept and did not eat; that is, Hannah wept at the insults,
reproaches, and scoffs, cast at her by her antagonist; insomuch that she
could not eat of the peace offerings, though her husband always gave her
the best part and portion of them; but her grief took away her stomach
and appetite, that she could not eat; see [Psa
42:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#003).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 1:8</span></span>

Then said Elkanah her husband to her, Hannah, why weepest thou?....
Since it was a time of rejoicing, as every festival was, especially at
the ingathering of the fruits of the earth:

and why eatest thou not? since they were at a feast, and she had the
best part and portion of the provision:

and why is thy heart grieved? to such a degree that she could neither
eat nor drink:

am not I better to thee than ten sons? which, as Jarchi says, Peninnah
had borne to him; his meaning is, that the share she had in his love and
affections ought to have been esteemed by her more than if she had ten
or many children by him; and it suggests that Peninnah would have been
glad to have such a share in his affections as Hannah had; and it would
have been more eligible to her, than to have borne him so many children
as she had.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 1:9</span></span>

So Hannah rose up after they had eaten in Shiloh, and after they had
drank,.... After dinner, after Elkanah and Peninnah, and their children,
had eaten heartily, and drank freely, and made a comfortable meal, and
even a feast of it, at the place where the tabernacle and altar were,
and their peace offerings were offered up, part of which they had been
regaling themselves with. The Targum is,"after she had eaten in Shiloh,
and after she had drank;''for upon the entreaty of her husband, and to
make him easy, she might be prevailed upon to eat somewhat, though it
might be but little; and to drink, though it was but water; for as for
wine and strong drink, she declares afterwards she had not drank, [Sa1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#015).

now Eli the priest sat upon a seat by a post of the temple of the Lord;
for so the tabernacle was called, and sometimes the temple is called a
tabernacle, [Jer 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/jer010.htm#020). Now at the
door posts and side of the threshold of the temple of the Lord, as the
Targum; at the entrance of the great court of the Israelites, Eli had a
seat placed, on which he sat; this must be at the gate of the court of
the tabernacle, by the pillars of it; for in the court itself none
afterwards might sit but kings of the family David (n); here Eli sat as
an high priest and judge, give advice in difficult cases, and to try and
judge all causes that were brought before him; some say (o) that he was
on this day constituted an high priest, and others say (q) he was now
made a judge; but no doubt he was both high priest and judge before this
time.

\(n\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Yoma, c. 7. sect. 1. (o) Shoched Tob
apud Yalkut, par. 2. fol. 12. 4. (q) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 13. p. 37.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 1:10</span></span>

And she was in bitterness of soul,.... Because of her barrenness, and
the taunts and reflections she had met with on that account; her life
was bitter to her, she could take no pleasure in any of the comforts of
it:

and prayed unto the Lord, and wept sore; her prayer was with strong
crying and tears; it was very fervent and affectionate; she prayed most
vehemently, and wept bitterly. This perhaps was about the time of the
evening sacrifice, about three or four o'clock in the afternoon; seeing
it was after dinner that she arose up and went to prayer in the house of
God, at the door of the tabernacle, or near it, as it should seem by the
notice Eli took of her, who sat there.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 1:11</span></span>

And she vowed a vow,.... Which might be confirmed by her husband;
otherwise the vow of a woman, if disapproved of by her husband, was not
valid, [Num 30:8](../../../bib/kjv/num030.htm#008) and Elkanah might
make the same vow his wife did, and so it stood; for as this was a vow
of Nazariteship, it is a tradition of the Jews (r), that a man may vow
his son to be a Nazarite, but a woman may not; but as this instance
contradicts the tradition, they endeavour to explain away this vow, as
it may respect a Nazarite, as will be observed hereafter:

and said, O Lord of hosts; this is properly the first time this title
was used by any that we know of; for though it is expressed in [Sa1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003) there it is used as the words of
the writer of this history, and so long after this prayer was put up;
See Gill on [Sa1 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#003); and it is an
observation in the Talmud (s), that from the day God created the world,
no man called him the Lord of hosts till Hannah came and called him so:

if thou wilt indeed look upon the affliction of thine handmaid the
sorrow of heart she had, the reproach she met with, on account of her
having no children:

and remember me, and not forget thine handmaid; which petitions are the
same in other words, and are repeated to denote her vehemence and
importunity in prayer, and may allude to usages among men, that will
look upon a person in distress, and turn away and forget them, and never
think of them more; which she deprecates may not be her case with God:

but wilt give unto thine handmaid a man child; or, "a seed of men" (t);
a son in the midst of men, as the Targum; such as is desirable by men,
as a male child for the most part is; though some Jewish writers
interpret it of the seed of righteous, wise, and understanding men, such
as be fit to serve the Lord, which seems to be a sense foreign to the
text; a man child she asks, because no other could serve the Lord in the
temple; and that she meant by this phrase such an one is clear, because
she vowed that a razor should not come on its head, which is never said
of females, as Kimchi observes:

then will I give him unto the Lord all the days of his life; to serve
him, and minister unto him in the sanctuary; being born a Levite, it was
incumbent on him to serve the Lord, and he had a right to his service;
but then a common Levite did not enter on it until twenty five or thirty
years of age, and was not always serving, but was dismissed from it at
fifty [Num 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024); but the child she
vows, if the Lord would give her such an one, should be trained up in
his service from his infancy, and continue it all the days of his life;
and was to be also a perpetual Nazarite, as Samson was, as follows:

and there shall no razor come upon his head; as was not to come upon a
Nazarite, during his Nazariteship, [Num
6:5](../../../bib/kjv/num006.htm#005) and as such a vow made by a woman
contradicts the tradition of the Jews before mentioned, they give
another sense of this clause; as the Targum, which paraphrases it,"and
the fear of man shall not be upon him;''but about this there is a
division (u); but that Samuel was Nazarite, and a perpetual one, is the
sense of their best interpreters.

\(r\) Misn. Sotah. c. 3. sect. 8. (s) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 31. 2. (t)
"semen virorum", Montanus. (u) Misn. Nazir, c. 9. sect. 5.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 1:12</span></span>

And it came to pass, as she continued praying before the Lord,.... Being
very earnest and importunate with him to grant her request, and
therefore repeated her petition, and prolonged her prayer, being
unwilling to let the Lord go, until she had a promise, or some
satisfaction, that she should have the thing she liked; some think she
continued an hour in prayer:

that Eli marked her mouth; observed the motion of her lips, and no doubt
her distorted countenance, and uplifted eyes and hands, but chiefly the
former; not knowing what the woman was at, and what could be the meaning
of such motions.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 1:13</span></span>

Now Hannah, she spake in her heart,.... It was mental prayer she used,
some ejaculations of her mind she sent up to God, which she was sensible
were well known to him, and she needed not to express vocally:

only her lips moved; as her heart spoke, and sent up her petitions, as
if she had used words and phrases in form:

but her voice was not heard: that she might not seem to be ostentatious
in her prayer, and that she might not interrupt others in their
devotions; and she knew that her voice was not necessary with respect to
God:

therefore Eli thought she had been drunken; by the motions she made, and
gestures she used, as if she was muttering something to herself, and by
her long continuance therein, and it being after a feast she had been at
with her husband, and the rest of the family; from all which Eli
concluded this must be her case.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 1:14</span></span>

And Eli said unto her, how long wilt thou be drunken?.... What, every
day drunk? what, continually in this wicked practice? when will it be
stopped? for Eli might have observed on other days, and at other times,
odd looks, and a strange behaviour in her, which he took for the effects
of drinking too much wine: or how long will this drunken fit last? she
had been a considerable time as he thought in it, and it was not gone
off yet: the Targum is,"how long wilt thou behave like a fool, or a mad
woman?''as drunken people generally do act, as if they were fools, or
mad:

put away thy wine from thee; not as if she had any with her there to
drink of, but he advises her, since it had such an effect upon her, to
abstain from it, and wholly disuse it, and so break off such an habit
and custom she had got into; or he would have her go home and sleep it
out, and wait till she had digested it, and the strength of it was gone
off, before she came to such a place of devotion and worship; from hence
the Jews say (w) it may be learnt, that a drunken person ought not to
pray.

\(w\) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 31. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 1:15</span></span>

And Hannah answered and said, no, my lord,.... That is not my case, you
have greatly mistaken it; she answered with great mildness and meekness,
without falling into a passion at such a scandalous imputation upon her,
and with great respect and reverence to Eli, suitable to his office; so
in later times the high priest used to be addressed after this manner,
particularly on the day of atonement, "Lord high priest", do so and so
(x); indeed these words of Hannah are interpreted as not so very
respectful, as if the sense was, not a lord art thou in this matter; nor
does the Holy Ghost dwell upon thee (y); which thou hast sufficiently
shown, or thou wouldest never have suspected me of drunkenness:

I am a woman of a sorrowful spirit: depressed with trouble and grief on
account of afflictions; if she was drunk, it was not with wine, but with
sorrow: or "a woman of a hard spirit" (z); which is sometimes taken in
an ill sense, and, according to Abarbinel, is here denied by her, who
connects this clause with the preceding thus; not, my lord, am I a woman
of a hard spirit, or such a hardened wretch, and such an impudent woman,
as I must be, were it so, to come drunk into the house of God, and
pretend to pray unto him:

I have drank neither wine nor strong drink; not any sort of intoxicating
liquors that day, neither wine new or old, as the Targum:

but have poured out my soul before the Lord: the affliction of it, as
the same paraphrase; the grievances and distresses, the complaints of
her soul, which were many, and which she had poured out before the Lord
freely and plentifully, and which had taken up some time to do it; see
[Psa 42:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#008) where phrases similar to
this are used, and which seem to be taken from hence.

\(x\) Misn. Yoma, c. 1. sect. 3, 5, 7. (y) T. Bab. Beracot, fol. 31. 2.
Jarchi in loc. (z) "dura spiritu", Pagninus, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 1:16</span></span>

Count not thine handmaid for a daughter of Belial,.... A yokeless, a
lawless, impudent, and abandoned creature; one of the most wicked,
vilest, and most profligate wretches; as she must be to come drunk into
the sanctuary of God; see [Sa1 25:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#017).
Drunkenness in man is au abominable crime, but much more in a woman. The
Romans (a) forbad wine to women, and drunkenness in them was a capital
crime, as adultery, or any other; and indeed a drunken woman is liable
to all manner of sin:

for out of the abundance of my complaint and grief have I spoken
hitherto; out of the abundance of the heart the mouth will speak,
whether it is matter of trouble or of joy; the heart of Hannah was full
of grief, and her mouth full of complaints, on which she long dwelt, in
order to give vent thereunto, and ease herself.

\(a\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 14. c. 13.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 1:17</span></span>

Then Eli answered and said, go in peace,.... He found he was mistaken in
her, and that her discourse was not only sober and rational, but
religious and spiritual; and therefore dismisses her in peace, and bids
her not distress herself with what he had said to her, nor with anything
she had met with from others, or from the Lord; but expect peace and
prosperity, and particularly success in what she had been engaged, and
had been solicitous for:

and the God of Israel grant thee thy petition that thou hast asked of
him; which may be considered either as a prayer for her, he joining with
her in a request to the Lord, that what she had asked might be granted;
or as a prophecy that so it would be, it being revealed to him by the
Holy Ghost, as the high priest of the Lord; or impressed by an impulse
upon his spirit that the favour asked would be given; and therefore she
might go home in peace, and with satisfaction of mind.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 1:18</span></span>

And she said, let thine handmaid find grace in thy sight,.... She had
found favour in his sight she perceives, and she desires it might be
continued and increased; and that as he had prayed for her, he would
still use his interest at the throne of grace for her:

so the woman went her way; took her leave of Eli, and went from the
tabernacle to her husband: and did eat; what remained of the peace
offerings, which were to be eaten that night, and not left till the
morning; and though she would not eat her dinner, her heart was so full
of grief, yet she could now make a good supper, being eased and relieved
in her mind:

and her countenance was no more sad; sorrowful and dejected, but
cheerful, brisk, and lively; believing that her prayers, and those of
the high priest, would be answered.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 1:19</span></span>

And they rose up in the morning early,.... Partly for devotion, and
partly for the sake of their journey:

and worshipped before the Lord; went up to the tabernacle, and prayed
with their faces towards that part of it, the western part, where stood
the ark of the Lord, the symbol of the divine Presence; and when they no
doubt gave thanks for all the favours they had received there, and
prayed for a safe and prosperous journey home, committing themselves to
the care of divine Providence:

and returned, and came to their house to Ramah; or "Ramatha", the same
with Ramathaim, [Sa1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001). Abarbinel
thinks that Elkanah had two houses, one at Ramah for Peninnah, and
another at Ramatha for Hannah; and that this was Hannah's house, to
which they returned and came:

and Elkanah knew Hannah his wife: cohabited with her as a man with his
wife; it is a modest expression of the conjugal act; see [Gen
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#001) and is observed to show that the
conception and birth of Samuel were not in a supernatural way, but in
the ordinary way and manner of generation:

and the Lord remembered her; the prayer she had made to him, opened her
womb, as he had before shut it, and gave her power to conceive.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 1:20</span></span>

Wherefore it came to pass, when the time was come about, after Hannah
had conceived,.... Or, "at the revolutions of days" (b); at the end of a
year, of a complete year, as Ben Melech, from their return from Shiloh;
for it might be some time after their return that she conceived; or
rather the sense is, that at nine months' end, the usual time of a
woman's going with child from her conception, which is the date here
given:

that she bare a son: was brought to bed of a son:

and called his name Samuel, saying, because I have asked him of the
Lord; one would think rather his name should have been Saul, for the
reason given; but, as Ben Gersom observes, givers of names are not
always grammatically strict and critical in them, or in the etymology of
them, as in the names of Reuben and Noah, in which he instances; and
this may be the rather overlooked in a woman, than in a man of learning.
According to Kimchi, it is as if it was Saulmeel; that is, "asked of
God", and by contraction Samuel; but Hillerus (c) gives a better account
of this name, and takes it to be composed of Saul-mul-el, "asked before
God", "in the sight of God", "before the ark of God". This name Hannah
gave her son (for sometimes the father, and sometimes the mother, gave
the name) in memory of the wonderful favour and goodness of God in
granting her request; and to impress her own mind with a sense of the
obligation she lay under, to perform her vow, and to engage her son the
more readily to give up himself to the service of God, when he reflected
on his name, and the reason of it.

\(b\) "in revolutionibus dierum", Montanus; so Piscator. (c) Onomastic.
Sacr. p. 418, 419, 487.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 1:21</span></span>

And the man Elkanah, and all his house,.... All his family, excepting
Hannah, and her son Samuel; or all the men of his house, as the Targum;
for only the males were obliged to appear at the three festivals:

went up to Shiloh; to the house of God there:

to offer unto the Lord the yearly sacrifice; either the passover, to
which men commonly went up with their families: see [Luk
2:41](../../../bib/kjv/luk002.htm#041), or rather it may be what was
offered at the feast of tabernacles, as Abarbinel thinks, the time of
the ingathering the fruits of the earth, when men went up with their
families to offer sacrifice, and express their joy on that account, [Deu
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#010).

and his vow: which he had made between feast and feast; for whatever
vows men made at home, on any account, they paid them at the yearly
festivals; and this vow might be on the account of the birth of his son,
by way of thanksgiving for that.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 1:22</span></span>

But Hannah went not up,.... For women, though they might go if they
pleased to the yearly feasts, yet they were not obliged to it; whether
she went up at the time for her purification, and for the presenting and
redemption of the firstborn, is not certain; some say the Levites were
not obliged by that law, the perquisites of it falling to them, and so
did not go up; others that she did, though it is not expressed, the
Scriptures not relating all facts that were done; though by what follows
it looks as if she did not:

for she said unto her husband, I will not go up until the child be
weaned: which, according to Jarchi, was at the end of twenty two months;
but others say at the end of twenty four months, or two years, as Kimchi
and Ben Melech; and sometimes a child was three years old before it was
weaned, and sometimes longer, which very probably was the case here; See
Gill on [Gen 21:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen021.htm#008). Comestor (d)
observes, there was a three fold weaning of children in old times; the
first from their mother's milk, when three years old; the second from
their tender age, and care of a dry nurse, when seven years old; the
third from childish manners, when at twelve years of age; and that it is
this last and metaphorical weaning which is here meant, when Samuel was
twelve years of age, and fit to serve in the temple; but the proper
sense is best, since she is said to bring him when weaned: her reason
for it seems to be this, because had she went up with her sucking child,
she must have brought him back again, since he would not be fit to be
left behind, and would be entirely incapable of any kind of service in
the sanctuary; and according to the nature of her vow, she could not
think of bringing him back again, after she had once entered him there:

and then I will bring him, that he may appear before the Lord; and
minister in the service of the sanctuary in what might be suitable to
his age; there and then she would present him, and give him up to the
Lord, as she had promised she would:

and there abide for ever; that is, as long as he lived; for her vow was
that he should be a Nazarite all the days of his life, and be separated
to the service of God as long as he had a being in the world.

\(d\) Apud Weemse's Observ. Nat. c. 18. p. 76.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 1:23</span></span>

And Elkanah her husband said unto her, do what seemeth thee good,.... He
spake like a kind and indulgent husband, knowing that she would not
thereby break any law of God; and it might be more for her own health,
and the health of the child, to stay longer:

tarry till thou have weaned him; when he would be more fit for the
journey, and to be left behind:

only the Lord establish his word; which some understand of the prophecy
of Eli that God would grant her request, which being delivered under the
direction of the Spirit of God, is called his word; but this was already
fulfilled, and established by Hannah's bearing a son: or the word "his"
refers not to the Lord, but to Samuel, and so may respect the word which
his mother spake concerning him; either when she made her vow, as
Abendana, that he should be a perpetual Nazarite, and the Lord's as long
as he lived: and so Elkanah wishes that he might have health and grow
strong, and be fit for the service of the Lord, and live many years to
perform it; or what she had just now said, as Abarbinel, that he should
abide in the house of God for ever, or as long as he lived:

so the woman abode; at home, while Elkanah and his family went up to
Shiloh:

and gave her son suck until she weaned him; did not put him out to a wet
or dry nurse, but suckled him herself with what nature had provided for
his nourishment, as becomes women to do, if their circumstances of
health, and the provisions of nature, will admit of it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 1:24</span></span>

And when she had weaned him,.... At the usual time of weaning children;
See Gill on [Sa1 1:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#023) some refer this
not only to the milk of the breast, from which he was weaned, but to
such food as was common to children, and so supposes him grown up to
nine or ten years of age:

she took him up with her; to the tabernacle at Shiloh, at a yearly
festival: with three bullocks; for three sorts of offerings, burnt
offering, sin offering, and peace offering; or since one only is spoken
of as slain, that is, for sacrifice, the other two might be for food to
entertain her family and friends with while there; or as a present to
the high priest, to whose care she committed her son:

and one ephah of flour; if the bullocks were all sacrificed, three tenth
deals, or three tenth parts of the ephah, went for a meat offering to
each bullock, which made nine parts out of ten, and the tenth part she
had to dispose of at pleasure; see [Num
15:9](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#009), though that seems to be
restrained to a burnt offering only:

and a bottle of wine; part of which might be for the drink offering
which always attended a meat offering, and the rest for her own use, and
that of her friends:

and brought him unto the house of the Lord in Shiloh: the tabernacle
there, and delivered him up to the care of the high priest, to be
trained up in the service of God:

and the child was young; a very child, very young in years, a little
infant; not a sucking child, as the Targum, because weaned, otherwise of
a very tender age; though some think this expresses that he was a well
grown lad, and was sharp and acute, and could well distinguish between
good and evil.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 1:25</span></span>

And they slew a bullock,.... One of the three Hannah brought, unless the
singular is put for the plural, and so all three were slain, some for
sacrifice, and some for food perhaps; or if only one was slain, it might
be offered as a sacrifice previous to the presentation of Samuel; or
else was made a present of to Eli, at the introduction of Samuel to him,
as follows:

and brought the child to Eli: to be under his care, to he instructed and
trained up by him in the service of the tabernacle; from hence it
appears that Elkanah the husband of Hannah came along with her at this
time.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 1:26</span></span>

And she said, O my lord,.... According to the Targum, it is a
supplication or request, I beseech thee, my lord; that is, to look upon
her son, and take him under his care as his disciple or scholar, to
instruct him in the law of God, and enter him into his service; to which
Eli might be very backward and indifferent, and even treat it with some
degree of contempt, that such a young Levite should be brought to him,
when the soonest the Levites were admitted was at twenty five years of
age:

as thy soul liveth, my lord; which Ben Gersom takes for the form of an
oath, as if she swore to the truth of what follows by the life of the
high priest; but as it was forbidden to swear by any but by the living
God, by his life, it cannot be thought so good a woman as Hannah would
be guilty of such a sinful and Heathenish practice; this rather is a
wish or prayer for his life and health, and the continuance thereof, to
bring up her son in the exercise of true religion:

I am the woman that stood by thee here, praying unto the Lord: by which
it appears that Eli was now at the tabernacle, and in the same place he
was, [Sa1 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#009) when she was some years
ago praying near him, at the distance of four cubits, as the Jews say:
she takes no notice of his mistaking her for a drunken woman, nor of his
censure on her, and the reproof he gave her; but puts him in mind only
of her praying to the Lord standing near to him, which made him take the
more notice of her; standing is a prayer posture; the Jews say there is
no standing but what is prayer, or prayer is meant by it; See Gill on
[Mat 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#005).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 1:27</span></span>

For this child I prayed,.... Which she now had in her hand, and was
presenting to Eli:

and the Lord hath given me my petition which I asked of him; and which
he also desired might be granted her, or foretold that it would be, [Sa1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#017) though perhaps he knew not then
particularly what it was she asked; nor did she acquaint him with it at
parting, as she now did, having obtained of the Lord what she was so
solicitous for, and now makes mention of with thankfulness.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 1:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa1 1:28</span></span>

Therefore also I have lent him to the Lord,.... To be employed in his
service, not for a few days, months, or years, but for his whole life.
The Targum is,"I have delivered him, that he may minister before the
Lord;''as she had received him front him as an answer of prayer, she
gave him up to him again according to her vow: as long as he liveth he
shall be lent unto the Lord, or as the Targum,"all the days that he
lives he shall be ministering before the Lord;''

or "all the days he shall be asked" (or "required") by or for the Lord
(e); that is, he shall be lent unto him, and serve him as long as it is
desired:

and he worshipped the Lord there; in the tabernacle at the same time;
either Elkanah, who with Hannah brought the child to Eli, and now gave
thanks to God for giving them the child, and prayed unto him that he
might be received into the service of the sanctuary; or else Eli, to
whom the child was brought for admittance, who when he heard that
Hannah's request was granted, which he had entreated also might be or
had declared it would be, bowed his head, and gave thanks to God for it;
or rather the child Samuel, as he was taught and trained up, bowed
himself before the Lord, and worshipped him in the tabernacle as soon as
he was brought into it, though a child; for he only is spoken of in this
and the preceding verse; and by some interpreters (f) the name Samuel is
supplied; the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions, read in the
plural number, "and they worshipped the Lord there": that is, Elkanah
and his wife; so Mr. Weemse (g) translates and interprets it.

\(e\) "Quamdiu" h. e. "expetitus aut requisitur", Peter Martyr; "quoties
a Jehova postulatur", Piscator. (f) Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (g)
Observat. Nat. c. 18. p. 77.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 2](sa1002)

</div>
