<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1022)  [Next](sa1024.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 23:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 23

This chapter gives an account of David's relieving Keilah, when it had
like to have fallen into the hands of the Philistines, [Sa1
23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001.md); and of Saul's design to surprise
him there, which David having notice of, and inquiring of the Lord,
departed from thence; which when Saul heard of, he forbore to come
forth, [Sa1 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#007.md); and of David's being
in the wilderness of Ziph, where, in a wood there, he had an interview
with Jonathan, [Sa1 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014.md); and of the
Ziphites offering to deliver him up to Saul, for which he commends them,
and gives them instructions how they should behave to him in that
affair, [Sa1 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#019.md); and of his seeking
him in the wilderness of Maon, where David and his men were in great
danger of being taken; which was prevented by the news of the
Philistines invading the land coming to Saul just at the nick of time,
[Sa1 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#024.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 23:1</span></span>

Then they told David,.... Either the men of Keilah sent to him, being
near them, or some well wishers of theirs, and of their country,
acquainted him with their case:

saying, behold, the Philistines fight against Keilah; had laid siege to
it, being a fortified place, [Sa1
23:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#007.md); it was a city in the tribe of
Judah, on the borders of the Philistines; of which See Gill on [Jos
15:44](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#044.md),

and they rob the threshing floors; took away the corn upon them, which
they were threshing and winnowing, which were usually done without the
city for the sake of wind, see [Jdg
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#011.md); it was harvest time when the
three mighty men came to David in the cave of Adullam, and so now it
might be the time of threshing, harvest being over, see [Sa1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001.md); compared with [Sa2
23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2023.htm#013.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 23:2</span></span>

Therefore David inquired of the Lord, saying, shall I go and smite these
Philistines?.... For though David was well disposed to serve his
country, and was desirous of freeing them from their enemies the
Philistines, he might have some doubts in his mind whether it would be
right for him to engage with them now; partly because he could not act
under a commission from his prince, Saul the king; and partly because he
had such a small number of forces with him, that it might be hazardous
for him to attack the armies of the Philistines with them, and attempt
to raise the siege of Keilah; and therefore he thought it advisable, as
doubtless it was, to inquire of the Lord what was his mind and will in
this matter: how and by what means he inquired it is not said, very
probably it was by the prophet Gad, who was with him, [Sa1
22:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#005.md); for as for Abiathar, he was not
yet come with the ephod, the Urim and Thummim, to inquire by them, [Sa1
23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006.md); though some think that is
observed there to show in what way David did inquire, namely, by Urim
and Thummim; and so Kimchi and Abarbinel understand it; and it is
supposed that he came to David when he was about Keilah, and near unto
it, and so before he came thither, and time enough for him to inquire by
him whether he should go thither or not:

and the Lord said unto David, go, and smite the Philistines, and save
Keilah; which was not only giving him leave to go, and signifying it was
his mind and will he should; but that he should be successful, and rout
the Philistines, and raise the siege of Keilah, and save the city from
falling into their hands.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 23:3</span></span>

And David's men said unto him, behold, we be afraid here in Judah,....
Of Saul and his army falling upon them, and crushing them, though they
were in the tribe of Judah, where they had many friends, and in the
heart of that tribe:

how much more then if we come to Keilah; which, though in the same
tribe, yet in the further parts of it, and on the borders of the
Philistines: and there engage

against the armies of the Philistines? too numerous and powerful for
them, and so by this means be driven out of their place of safety, the
forest of Hareth, where they could hide themselves upon occasion; to be
exposed not only to the Philistines, before them, on the edge of their
country, from whence they could have re-enforcements easily, but to Saul
and his army behind them; and so, being between two fires, would be in
danger of being cut off.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 23:4</span></span>

Then David inquired of the Lord yet again,.... Not for his own sake, who
firmly believed it was the will of God he should go and succeed, but for
the sake of his men, and to remove the doubts and fears that hung on
their minds:

and the Lord answered him, and said, arise, go down to Keilah;
immediately, make no stay, nor hesitate about it, but go with all haste
to the relief of the place:

for I will deliver the Philistines into thine hands; which is still more
explicit, and is a promise not only of delivering Keilah out of the
hands of the Philistines, but of delivering them into David's hands, and
so of an entire: victory; and therefore none of David's men had anything
to fear after such a declaration of the will of God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 23:5</span></span>

So David and his men went to Keilah,.... Animated by a commission from
God, and a promise of success by him:

and fought with the Philistines; encamped before Keilah:

and brought away their cattle; which they had brought with them for the
support of their army; or having routed them, they pursued them into
their own country, and brought off their cattle from thence:

and smote them with a great slaughter; killed great numbers of them, and
put the rest to flight:

so David saved the inhabitants of Keilah; from falling into the hands of
the Philistines, by timely raising the siege of the city.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 23:6</span></span>

And it came to pass, when Abiathar the son of Ahimelech fled to David to
Keilah,.... Either when he was there, or near the place:

that he came down with an ephod in his hand; not with a linen ephod on
his back, which the priests in common wore, but the ephod with the Urim
and Thummim in his hand, which was peculiar to the high priest; and his
father the high priest being dead, it belonged to him, and therefore he
took care to bring it with him; though the words may be literally
rendered, "the ephod came down in his hand" (k), as it were by chance,
and not with design; and so some Jewish interpreters (l) understand it,
that in his fright and flight, among his garments and other things he
took hold of to carry with him, and not minding well what he took, this
happened to be, being so ordered by the providence of God; though the
Targum renders it,"the ephod he made to descend in his hand,''or brought
it in his hand; and so Kimchi and Abarbinel observe it may be
interpreted, though they seem to incline to the other sense.

\(k\) "ephod descendit in manu sua", Pagninus, Montanus; "ephod
descendebat in manu sua", Munsterus; so Tigurine version and Piscator.
(l) Kimchi & Ben Melech.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 23:7</span></span>

And it was told Saul that David was come to Keilah,.... No doubt it was
told him what he came thither for, to relieve it, and deliver it out of
the hands of the Philistines, and what success he had; which one would
have thought would have reconciled his mind to him, and made him think
well of them; but instead of that, it only led him to contrive mischief
against him:

and Saul said, God hath delivered him into mine hand; as if the success
he had given to David was against, him, and in favour of Saul:

for he is shut in, by entering into a town that hath gates and bars;
while he betook himself to caves, and fields, and woods, he had no great
hopes of finding him out, and coming up with him, and seizing him; but
now he had got into a fortified place, enclosed with walls, and that had
gates to it, kept bolted and barred; when he brought his army against
it, and surrounded it, he imagined he would not be able to get out, and
escape his hands.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 23:8</span></span>

And Saul called all the people together to war,.... Or "caused them to
hear" (m) summoned them by an herald, whom he sent into all parts of the
kingdom to proclaim war, and require them in his name to attend him;
which was the prerogative of a king to do:

to go down to Keilah, to besiege David and his men; that was what he
privately intended, but the pretence was to make war against the
Philistines.

\(m\) "fecit audire", Montanus, Piscator.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 23:9</span></span>

And. David knew that Saul secretly practised mischief against him,....
That is, plotted and contrived it, formed schemes in order to do him
mischief, giving out one thing, and designing another; so he pretended
war against the Philistines, but his intention was to come against
Keilah, and take David there:

and he said to Abiathar the priest, bring hither the ephod; not for
David to put on, but for the priest himself, that being clothed with it,
and the Urim and Thummim in it, he might inquire for him of the Lord.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 23:10</span></span>

Then said David,.... By the priest, for it was he that put the questions
for and in the name of the inquirer:

O Lord God of Israel; the great Jehovah, the covenant God of his people,
who always has a merciful regard unto them:

thy servant hath certainly heard; had good information of it, on which
he could depend:

that Saul seeketh to come to Keilah; that was his intention and
resolution:

to destroy the city for my sake; to besiege it, and demolish it, if that
was necessary, in order to take him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 23:11</span></span>

Will the men of Keilah deliver me up into his hands? will Saul come
down, as thy servant hath heard?.... That is, if David continued there,
which is the supposition all proceeds upon. The questions are not
orderly put, as may easily be observed, the last should have been first;
which shows some perturbation of mind David was in upon hearing the
design of Saul against him:

O Lord God of Israel, I beseech thee, tell thy servant; give an answer
by Urim and Thummim, as he did:

and the Lord said, he will come down; if David abode there; that was in
his thoughts, in his purpose and design, which the Lord, being
omniscient, full well knew, who knows all future contingencies: hence
the Jews (n) gather, that two things are not to be asked together; and
if they are asked, only answer is made to one, and the answer is only
made to that which it was proper to ask first; and that which is asked
out of order should be asked again, which was the case here, as follows.

\(n\) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 73. 1, 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 23:12</span></span>

Then said David, will the men of Keilah deliver me and my men into the
hand of Saul?.... That is, the lords and great men of the place, the
governor of the city, and the heads of it, the chief magistrates in it:

and the Lord said, they will deliver thee up: that is, provided he
stayed there; for the Lord knew the dispositions and affections of their
minds, that they were inclined to do it, and would do it, if he
continues among them till Saul came down; which showed the great
ingratitude of this people to their deliverer.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 23:13</span></span>

Then David and his men, which were about six hundred,.... Having had an
increase of two hundred since he was at the cave of Adullam, [Sa1
22:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#001.md), and upon his relief of Keilah,
[Sa1 23:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#005.md); so that he sustained no
loss of men by fighting with the Philistines, but had an addition to his
small forces:

arose and departed out of Keilah, and went whithersoever they could go;
not knowing whither they should go, having no particular place in view;
but went where they thought they could be safest, or that appeared the
most proper place for them; so the Targum,"they went to a place which
was fit to go unto;''which was fittest for their purpose, and most for
their safety and security, be it where it would:

and it was told Saul that David was escaped from Keilah; very likely
some of the inhabitants informed him of it, since they were disposed to
deliver David to him, had he stayed among them, and Saul had come down:

and he forbore to go forth: from the place where he was, in order to
come to Keilah,

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 23:14</span></span>

And David abode in the wilderness in strong holds,.... In the wilderness
of Ziph, in high and strong rocks there, as it seems to be explained by
what follows:

and remained in a mountain in the wilderness of Ziph; which had its name
from a city in the tribe of Judah, of which See Gill on [Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055.md),

and Saul sought him every day; for though he did not go forth from the
place where he was to Keilah, yet hearing which way he went, and
whereabout he lurked, he sought after him continually, if haply he might
find him:

but God delivered him not into his hand: which suggests, that it was
only the providence of God that secured him, or, in all probability,
such was the diligence of Saul, that he would have found him out, and he
must have fallen into his hands, as he expected.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 23:15</span></span>

And David saw that Saul was come out to seek his life,.... Either he saw
him with his bodily eyes from the top of the mountain where he was, [Sa1
23:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#014.md); or he perceived, he understood
by information given him by his friends, it may be by Jonathan, or by
spies he sent to observe his motions:

and David was in the wilderness of Ziph in a wood; where he and his men
could hide themselves among the trees in it; sometimes he was in a
mountain in this wilderness, and sometimes in a wood, where he thought
himself the safest; thus was this great man obliged to shift about for
his safety.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 23:16</span></span>

And Jonathan, Saul's son, arose,.... And came from Gibeah, which,
according to Bunting (o), was twenty two miles from the place where
David was:

and went to David into the wood: having had intelligence where he was,
this being a proper place to have an interview with him privately:

and strengthened his hand in God; and his heart too, his hand of faith
to lay hold on God, as his covenant God and lean and rely upon him; he
strengthened him in his power and in his providence, and in his promises
to him; the Targum is,"he strengthened him in the Word of the Lord;''not
only in his word and promise, but in Christ the essential Word of God,
who should spring from him according to the flesh.

\(o\) Travels, &c. p. 334. (text not clear could be 834 or some other
number)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 23:17</span></span>

And he said unto him, fear not,.... Distrust not the power, providence,
and promises of God, nor dread the wrath of Saul, or fear falling into
his hands:

for the hand of Saul my father shall not find thee; to lay hold on him,
seize him, and do him any hurt:

and thou shalt be king over Israel; meaning after the death of his
father; which he knew either by some special revelation made to him; or
rather by being informed he had been anointed by Samuel, and which he
had either from Samuel or from David himself; and this he most firmly
believed, though David was now in so low a condition:

and I shall be next unto thee; not succeed him in the kingdom; but if
living when he came to the throne, he should be the second man in civil
affairs, as he now was, and that he should be content with:

and that also Saul my father knoweth; having knowledge of the anointing
of David by Samuel; or he might, and did conclude this from various
circumstances, that David was his neighbour Samuel had told him of, God
had given his kingdom to, [Sa1 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#028.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 23:18</span></span>

And they two made a covenant before the Lord,.... Renewed the covenant
they had before made in the name and fear of God, and before him as a
witness of it. Kimchi and Abarbinel interpret this phrase:

before the Lord, of the covenant being made before Abiathar, with the
Urim and Thummim in his hand; and so Jerom (p), before Gad the prophet,
and Abiathar who wore the ephod:

and David abode in the wood; being a proper place for him for secrecy
and safety:

and Jonathan went to his house; in Gibeah; and these two dear and
cordial friends never saw one another more, as is highly probable.

\(p\) Trad. Heb. in lib. Reg. fol. 76. K.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 23:19</span></span>

Then came up the Ziphites to Saul to Gibeah,.... Who though he had been
out in quest of David, yet was now returned to Gibeah, the place of his
residence, and where he kept his court; and hither came the Ziphites,
the inhabitants of Ziph, in the wilderness of which David hid himself,
with a proposal to deliver him to Saul; for though they were of the same
tribe with David, yet being terrified with what Saul had done to Nob,
they thought it best for their own security to inform Saul where he was,
and make an offer to deliver him to him. Some interpreters, as Kimchi,
think that this was done before Jonathan was with Saul, and should be
rendered, "the Ziphites had come up to Saul"; and hence it is before
said, and David saw, &c. for he had heard that the Ziphites should say
to Saul, that David had hid himself there; and at this time it was that
David wrote the fifty ninth psalm, [Psa
54:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa054.htm#001.md),

saying, doth not David hide himself with us in the strong holds in the
wood; which is in the wilderness of Ziph, in their neighbourhood; they
were informed he had hid himself there, and they thought it their duty
to let the king know of it: and particularly

in the hill of Hachilah, which is on the south of Jeshimon? Hachilah is
by Jerom (q) called Echela; and he speaks of a village of that name
seven miles from Eleutheropolis, and of Jeshimon as ten miles from
Jericho to the south, near the dead sea; on the top of this hill, which
was an ascent of thirty furlongs or about four miles, Jonathan the high
priest built a castle, and called it Masada, often spoken of by
Josephus; who says (r), that Herod built a wall around it of seven
furlongs or about a mile, twelve cubits high, and eight broad, and
thirty seven towers of fifty cubits stood in it.

\(q\) De loc. Heb. fol. 91. C. (r) De Bello Jud. l. 7. c. 8. sect. 3.
Vid. Adrichom. Theatrum T. S. p. 38. 2. & 39. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 23:20</span></span>

Now therefore, O king, come down,.... From Gibeah to Ziph, and the
wilderness of it, where David was:

according to all the desires of thy soul to come down; to seize such a
prey which he was greatly desirous of, and of nothing more so than of
that according to Abarbinel, the sense is, that the thing was ready in
whatever way he should desire it; if he chose to come down himself, and
lay hold on him, they invite him to come down; but if he did not choose
to come down himself, they would seize him, and bring him to him, and
deliver him up into his hand, and so he would be under no necessity of
going down after him:

and our part shall be to deliver him into the king's hand; this we will
take upon us to do, and save the king the trouble of coming down.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 23:21</span></span>

And Saul said, blessed be ye of the Lord,.... He highly commends them
for the offer they made to him, blesses God for them, and desires the
blessing of God upon them for it:

for ye have compassion on me; pitied him on account of the troubles he
met with from his son-in-law, were sorry for him, and sympathized with
him, which others did not, of which he complained, [Sa1
22:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1022.htm#008.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 23:22</span></span>

Go, I pray you, prepare yet,.... That is, go home, return to their
habitations, and get things in a greater readiness for him; inquire more
diligently after David, get more intelligence of him, and inform
themselves more exactly about him:

and know and see his place where his haunt is; or "foot" (s) is, where
that steps and walks most frequently, not only get knowledge of it by
information, but if they could get sight of it with their own eyes, that
they might describe it more exactly:

and who hath seen him there; not only seen the place, but him in the
place, and that often, that it may be certain it is the place he usually
resorts to:

for it is told me that he dealeth very subtilly; sometimes he is seen in
one place, and sometimes in another; he is here today, and elsewhere
tomorrow; and by such crafty methods it is not easy to know where the
place is, and where to be found; this Saul had information of from some,
who knew the methods David took to keep it unknown where it was; or "it
says to me"; my heart says so to me, as R. Isaiah interprets it; my mind
suggests this to me, knowing the man, that he uses such wiles as these:
or "he said to me", so Kimchi; when he was with me, and we were
intimate, when I used to ask him how he smote the Philistines, so and
so, and preserved himself from them; his answer was, "that he dealt very
subtilly", he used a good deal of craftiness; and so I imagine he does
now.

\(s\) "pes ejus", Pagninus, Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 23:23</span></span>

See therefore, and take knowledge of all the lurking places where he
hideth himself,.... Which he most frequents, that ye may be able to
describe them, and the way to them, and easily find them when necessary:

and come ye again to me with the certainty; of time and place, when and
where he may be certainly found:

and I will go with you; upon such certain intelligence: it is very much
he did not seize this opportunity, and go directly with them; for by
this delay, David being informed of the Ziphites coming to Saul to
betray him, had time to depart elsewhere:

and it shall come to pass, if he be in the land; in the land of Israel,
or rather in the land that is in the tribe of Judah:

that I will search him out throughout all the thousands of Judah;
through all the divisions of that tribe, which, as others, were divided
into thousands, see [Mic 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/mic005.htm#002.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 23:24</span></span>

And they arose, and went to Ziph, before Saul,.... Not before his
person, as if he went with them, and they before him leading the way;
but they went thither before he went, to prepare things more exactly,
and with more certainty, before he came, and in order to return to him
again and go with him:

but David and his men were in the wilderness at Maon; for by the time
the Ziphites returned home, David had intelligence of their design, and
therefore removed from the wilderness of Ziph to the wilderness of Maon;
which, though in the same tribe, was a distinct place; See Gill on [Jos
15:55](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#055.md),

in the plain on the south of Jeshimon; the same as in [Sa1
23:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#019.md); only David was now farther to
the south of it, and in a plain, whereas before he was on an hill.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 23:25</span></span>

And Saul also and his men went to seek him,.... Whether the Ziphites
returned to him with better intelligence, or sent him word where David
was, is not said, however Saul with his army came out in search of him:

and they told David; or it was told him, that Saul was come in quest of
him:

wherefore he came down into a rock; either into a cave in it, or he came
down from the hill Hachilah to a plain or valley, in order to go up to a
rock, the same with the mountain in [Sa1
23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026.md),

and abode in the wilderness of Maon; in which was the rock or mountain
he came to:

and when Saul heard that, he pursued after David in the wilderness of
Maon; for upon the intelligence of the Ziphites, he came out to seek for
him in the wilderness of Ziph, but hearing that he was removed to the
wilderness of Maon, he pursued him there.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 23:26</span></span>

And Saul went on this side of the mountain, and David and his men on
that side of the mountain,.... Saul with his army came to the very
mountain where David and his men were, the one was on one side of it,
and the other on the other side; there was only one mountain between
them:

and David made haste to get away for fear of Saul; he fled on one side
of the mountain, while Saul was pursuing him on the other, and hastening
to get round unto him:

for Saul and his men compassed David and his men round about to take
them; he took methods by dividing his troops, and sending them different
ways, to surround David and his men, and had very near effected it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 23:27</span></span>

But there came a messenger unto Saul,.... From his court, by order of
his council there; though the Jews (t) say it was an angel from heaven;
but be it which it will, it was certainly the providence of God that
directed this affair, that a messenger should come to Saul just at that
very time that David was like to fall into his hands:

saying, haste thee, and come, for the Philistines have invaded the land;
were come into it, and spread themselves in it, as the word signifies,
which expresses their numbers they had poured in, the force they came
with, and the possessions they had already got; perhaps they had taken
the advantage of Saul's departure in quest of David, to penetrate into
the tribe of Benjamin, where his patrimony, residence, and court were,
and which were liable to fall into their hands; and therefore his
presence was immediately required, and haste was necessary.

\(t\) Midrash apud Yalkut in loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa1 23:28</span></span>

Therefore Saul returned from pursuing after David,.... Stopped short at
once, as soon as ever he received the message:

and went against the Philistines; to stop them in their progress, and
drive them out of his country:

therefore they called that place Selahammahlekoth, which signifies the
rock of divisions. David and his men, very probably, gave it this name,
not only because it divided between Saul and his men, and David and his
men, when they were one on one side of it, and the other on the other
side of it; but because Saul was, by the providence of God, divided and
separated from David here, whereby he escaped falling into his hands.
The Targum is,"therefore they called that place the rock of division,
the place where the heart of the king was divided to go here and
there:''he was divided in his own mind, and at a loss what to do; he was
in two minds, as Jarchi says, and did not know which to follow, whether
to return and deliver his country from the hands of the Philistines, or
to pursue and take David; and others represent the soldiers of Saul as
divided, some saying that since the son of Jesse was just falling into
their hands, they should not leave him; others, that the war of Israel
should be regarded before him, who might be found at any time (u).

\(u\) Midrash apud Yalkut in loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 23:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 23:29</span></span>

And David went up from thence,.... From the wilderness of Maon, having
had a narrow escape for his life:

and dwelt in strong holds in Engedi; another place in the tribe of
Judah, and which lay in the wilderness of Judah, and from whence that is
called the wilderness of Engedi; and here Dr. Lightfoot (w) thinks he
penned the sixty third psalm, [Psa
63:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa063.htm#001.md), the wilderness about Engedi
being the most desert of all other places, that being upon the borders
of the dead sea; of this place; see Gill on [Jos
15:62](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#062.md).

\(w\) Works, vol. 1. p. 58.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 24](sa1024.md)

</div>
