<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1009)  [Next](sa1011) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 10:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 10

In this chapter we read of Saul's being anointed king by Samuel, [Sa1
10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001), and of certain signs given as
confirming the same, which should come to pass, and did, before Saul got
to his father's house, [Sa1 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002), of
his arrival at his father's house, and of what passed between him and
his uncle there, [Sa1 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#014), of
Samuel's calling all Israel together at Mizpeh, and of the election of
Saul by lot to be king, and of his being declared such, [Sa1
10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017), and of his return to his city,
being respected by some, and despised by others, [Sa1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 10:1</span></span>

Then Samuel took a vial of oil,.... Out of his pocket very probably,
which he brought along with him on purpose for the use he made of it:
this, as the Jews (y) say, was not the anointing oil that was in the
tabernacle, which was at another and distant place, and with which only
the kings of the house of David were anointed; but common oil, or, as
they say, oil of balsam; and this was not an horn, but a vial, which
held a small quantity, and was brittle; and they observe that Saul and
Jehu, who were anointed with a vial, their reigns were short, whereas
David and Solomon, who were anointed with a horn, their reigns were
long; and as oil is a symbol of the gifts and graces of the Spirit, it
may denote a smaller measure conferred on Saul than on David and
Solomon:

and kissed him; congratulating him on the dignity he was raised to, and
in reverence and respect to him, because of the high office he was
arrived to; and as a token of subjection and homage, and to testify his
well pleased in his being king, and that he readily, willingly, and with
pleasure resigned the government to him:

and said, is it not because the Lord hath anointed thee to be captain
over his inheritance? the people of Israel, so called, [Deu
32:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#009) and which is observed here to
show, that though Saul was anointed king over them, they were the Lord's
possession still, and he was accountable to him for his government and
usage of them, over whom he was to be a captain, leader, and commander,
to go before them, and fight their battles for them, of which his being
anointed with oil was a token; and therefore it is said, "is it not?" or
dost thou not see by this? or knowest thou not, as R. Isaiah supplies
it, that this is of the Lord? for it was the Lord that anointed him, or
Samuel by his orders; and such questions as these, as Kimchi observes,
are for the greater confirmation of what is spoken; and if Saul had any
doubt upon his mind, as perhaps he might because of his meanness, and
the high honour designed hereby, not only this question is put, but
three following signs are given him, whereby he might be assured of the
truth of it.

\(y\) T. Bab. Horayot, fol. 11. 2. & 12. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 10:2</span></span>

When thou art departed from me today,.... Not as soon as he was
departed, for he had some few miles to go from Ramah to Rachel's grave
near Bethlehem:

thou shalt find two men by Rachel's sepulchre, in the border of
Benjamin, at Zelzah; the Jews move a difficulty here, that Rachel's
sepulchre should be said to be in the border of Benjamin, when it was by
Bethlehemephrath, in the tribe of Judah, [Gen
35:19](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#019) and which they solve by
observing, that these men were now, at the time Samuel was speaking, by
the grave of Rachel, but as they were coming on he would meet them at
Zelzah, in the border of Benjamin (z); but there is no need of this,
Rachel's grave was not at Bethlehem, but in, the way to it; and besides,
as these two tribes were contiguous, and this city being on the borders
of both, it might be said at one time to be in the border of Benjamin,
and at another in the border of Judah, or in Judah, without any
contradiction. Of Zelzah we nowhere else read, but it is plain it was
near the sepulchre of Rachel, and perhaps nearer than Bethlehem. The
Arabic geographer (a) speaks of Rachel's grave as in the midway between
Jerusalem and Bethlehem; and says there were twelve stones upon it, and
a stone arched vault over it; and the same is affirmed by Benjamin of
Tudela (b), who makes it to be but half a mile from Bethlehem. Jarchi
would have Zelzah to be the same with Jerusalem, which is not probable:

and they will say unto thee, the asses which thou wentest to seek are
found; as Samuel had before told Saul they were, [Sa1
9:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#020).

and, lo, thy father hath left the care of the asses; or had left all
thoughts about them, and concern for them, not minding whether he heard
of them or not, and this before they were found; or otherwise it would
have been no strange thing to drop all thoughts about them, when they
were found:

and sorroweth for you; for Saul, and his servant; such was the anxiety
and distress of his mind lest any evil should befall them, having been
gone so long in quest of the asses, that he had as it were forgot them,
and lost all care and concern about them, in comparison of his son and
servant; but especially his sorrow rose high for his son, as follows:

saying, what shall I do for my son? though he was concerned for his
servant, yet most for his son; he might have another servant, and not
another son, and Saul seems to be his only one, which made his grief for
him the greater, see [Ch1 8:33](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#033). Now as
these were contingent events here foretold, as meeting with two men at a
certain place described, the words related expressly they should say to
him when he met them, and these exactly coming to pass, would most
clearly prove Samuel to be a true prophet, and confirm Saul in the
belief of what he had said and done to him concerning the kingdom.
Another sign follows.

\(z\) Bereshit Rabba, sect. 82. fol. 71. 4. R. Isaiah, Jarchi, Kimchi,
Abarbinel, & Abendana in loc. (a) Chinat. 3. par. 5. (b) ltinerar. p.
47.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 10:3</span></span>

Then shall thou go on forward from thence,.... From Zelzah and Rachel's
sepulchre there:

and thou shall come to the plain of Tabor; not that which lay at the
bottom of the famous and well known mountain Tabor; for that was in the
tribe of Zebulun, at a great distance from hence: but a plain, so called
perhaps from the name of the owner of it:

and there shall meet thee three men going up to God to Bethel: the same
with Luz, where Jacob built an altar, and called upon God; and so
Elohimbethel here is the same with Elbethel, [Gen
35:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen035.htm#006). Here was an high place as at
Ramah, whither in those times, when there was no fixed place for
worship, the tabernacle at one place, and the ark at another, the people
went up to worship; and they might the rather choose this, because it
was a place devoted to the worship and service of God by their father
Jacob; so the Targum paraphrases it,"going up to worship God in
Bethel;''so Josephus (c), they were going thither to pray, and, as it
seems by what follows, to sacrifice: one carrying three kids; which were
used in sacrifice, and were a pretty heavy load if carried far; though,
according to Josephus (d), it was but one kid:

and another carrying three loaves of bread; for the minchah, the meat
offering, or rather bread offering, [Lev
2:4](../../../bib/kjv/lev002.htm#004).

and another carrying a bottle of wine; for the drink offering, the
fourth part of an hin of wine being required for each kid, [Num
15:5](../../../bib/kjv/num015.htm#005). This bottle, Ben Melech says,
was a bottle made of skin, a leathern bottle or bag, or a potter's
vessel or pitcher; the Targum renders it, a flagon of wine.

\(c\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 4. sect. 2. (d) lbid.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 10:4</span></span>

And they will salute thee,.... Not as king, of which they knew nothing,
but in a common way; and though a stranger and unknown to them, yet
finding their hearts disposed and affected towards him, would inquire of
his welfare, and wish him all happiness, peace, and prosperity:

and give thee two loaves of bread; which was pretty much that they
should give him two out of three, and leave but one for themselves, and
especially if they were going to sacrifice; but perhaps they knew they
could buy more bread at Bethel, and so were disposed to give two of
their loaves to Saul, one for himself and another for his servant;
though Kimchi thinks that these are not the same before called loaves;
and indeed the word "loaves" is not in the text, but cakes of bread,
which were lesser than loaves, and which they carried for their own use,
besides three loaves of bread:

which thou shall receive of their hands; being sent out by Samuel early
that morning without eating any food, and having travelled some miles,
might become weary and faint, and which the three men might discern, and
so had compassion on them, and relieved them; and Saul was not to refuse
the offer of them, but take them at their hands, though he was anointed
to be king; and this was to teach him humility, and to be kind to the
poor and needy, and relieve them when he was in more elevated
circumstances. All these actions also were contingent, and when they
came to pass, as they did, must be still more confirming than the former
sign.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 10:5</span></span>

After that thou shall come to the hill of God,.... The Targum is, the
hill in which was the ark of the Lord, and that was in the house of
Abinadab, on a hill in the city of Kirjathjearim, [Sa1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001) and so the Jewish commentators
generally interpret this hill of God of Kirjathjearim; but rather it was
Geba, a city of Benjamin, partly because by this time he must have got
out of the tribe of Judah into the tribe of Benjamin, and even almost to
the end of his journey, and among those that were his relations, [Sa1
10:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#011) and partly because it is certain
there was a garrison of the Philistines at Geba, [Sa1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003) as there was at this place, as
follows:

where is the garrison of the Philistines; which they were allowed by the
terms of peace made between Israel and them; or which through their
growing power over them in the latter days of Samuel they placed there,
and which yet they kept, without giving the people any molestation in
their worship and service:

and it shall come to pass, when thou art come thither to the city; to
the city Geba, or near it:

that thou shall meet a company of prophets; of Scribes, as the Targum;
which were, as Kimchi observes, disciples; for the disciples of the wise
men were called Scribes, and these were the disciples of prophets, the
same with the sons of the prophets; and the prophets that were at this
time, as he says, from Eli to David, were Elkanah, Samuel, Gad, Nathan,
Asaph, Heman, and Jeduthun; here was a school or college of young
prophets, where they were trained up, under the care and tuition of one
or other of the above prophets, in the knowledge of the word of God, in
psalmody, and other religious exercises; for though the word of the Lord
was scarce and precious in the beginning of Samuel's time, yet through
his industry, influence, and encouragement, divine knowledge was greatly
promoted, and many were trained up and qualified to instruct the people;
who, though they had not the gift of foretelling future events, or of
the vision of prophecy, yet had gifts qualifying for the edification of
the people; and out of these schools and colleges God sometimes raised
up prophets in the highest sense, who foretold things to come, and to
whom the Lord appeared in dreams and visions. And this company Saul
would meet

coming down from the high place; where they had been to worship, to
sacrifice, or to pray, for here was an high place for such service, as
well as at Ramah:

with a psaltery, and a tabret, and a pipe, and a harp, before them;
which were several instruments of "music" used in singing praises to God
in those times:

and they shall prophesy; or praise, as the Targum, sing praises at the
same time they played on their instruments of music; and singing praises
is one sort of prophesying, see [Ch1
25:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1025.htm#001), and in which sense it seems to
be used in [Co1 11:4](../../../bib/kjv/co1011.htm#004).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 10:6</span></span>

And the Spirit of the Lord will come upon thee,.... As a spirit of
prophecy, so the Targum; whereby he would be enabled at once to compose
psalms and hymns of praise, and sing them in a proper manner, though he
had not been trained up in this exercise in the school of the prophets;
which made it more wonderful to those that knew him:

and thou shalt prophesy with them: or "praise" with them, as the same
Targum; join with them in singing praises, and perform this service in
an orderly manner, as if he had been instructed in it, and used to it:

and shall be turned into another man; for the Spirit of God would not
only operate on him in that way, as to fit him for composing and singing
psalms and hymns, but inspire him with wisdom, and prudence, and
greatness of mind, and with every qualification necessary for a king; so
that he would appear quite another man than he was before, in his
outward behaviour, as well as in the endowments of his mind; and from a
rustic, an husbandman, a farmer's son, would appear with the air of a
prince, and in the majesty of a king; and, as Procopius Gazaeus, have a
royal mind or heart given him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 10:7</span></span>

And let it be, when these signs are come unto thee,.... And are all
fulfilled, especially the last:

that thou do as occasion shall serve thee: as his circumstances would
require, and as he in his great wisdom and prudence, with which he
should now be furnished, would see necessary to prepare for his taking
upon him the kingdom he was anointed to, and would be in a little time
openly chosen to, and invested with. Some understand this of royal
ornaments befitting a king, or of preparing arms for the defence of the
kingdom:

for God is with thee; or the Word of the Lord is thy help, as the
Targum, and therefore he need not fear engaging in any enterprise that
might be for the glory of God, and good of the kingdom.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 10:8</span></span>

And thou shall go down before me to Gilgal,.... Not immediately; for the
first summons of the people, and of Saul, and the first meeting of them
by Samuel, were at Mizpeh, where Saul was chosen by lot; nor the first
time of Saul's being at Gilgal, when the kingdom was renewed; for Saul
had no need to wait seven days there, since he and Samuel went together,
[Sa1 11:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#014) rather at the second time
of his being there, where not staying the time quite up, was reproved
for it, which was two years after this, [Sa1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001), though it may be this was a
general rule to be observed by Saul, that whenever anything turned up of
importance to the children of Israel, and was a difficulty with him, he
should go to Gilgal, and there wait seven days for Samuel, from the time
he gave him notice of it, who would come at the appointed time, and
would give him what advice and instructions were necessary; and this
place was the rather appointed, because it was the place where the
Israelites first pitched their camp when they came over Jordan, and
where the tabernacle first was; and where prayer and sacrifices were
wont to be made; and where the kingdom of Saul was renewed; and which
lay convenient for all the tribes, both on the one and the other side of
Jordan:

and, behold, I will come down to thee to offer burnt offerings, and to
sacrifice sacrifices of peace offerings; so he did when the kingdom was
renewed, and Saul was confirmed in it, [Sa1
11:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#015) but two years after, Saul not
staying the full time, he offered them himself by another, for which he
was reproved, [Sa1 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#009).

seven days shalt thou tarry till I come to thee; either from the time of
the notice he should give to Samuel of his going thither, or from the
time of his arrival there; for it can by no means be understood as from
the time of his present departure from him, for the reasons before
given:

and show thee what thou shalt do; in the then present emergency or
difficulty on his hands; and this he said to encourage him under the
weight and burden of government laid upon him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 10:9</span></span>

And it was so, that when he had turned his back to go from Samuel,....
When he had taken his leave of him, and set forward on his journey:

God gave him another heart; not in a moral or spiritual sense, not a new
heart, and a new spirit, as in conversion, but in a civil sense, a right
heart, a heart fit for government; filled with wisdom and prudence to
rule a people; with courage and magnanimity to protect and defend them
against their enemies, and fight for them; a heart not taken up with the
affairs of husbandry, with care for his father's asses, and looking
after his herds, but filled with concern for the civil welfare of
Israel, and with schemes and contrivances for their good, and with warm
resolutions to deliver them out of the hands of their enemies:

and all these signs came to pass that day; the two first, which are not
particularly mentioned as fulfilled, being more private, as finding two
men at Rachel's sepulchre, and meeting with three others going to
Bethel, which came to pass just as they were described; and the third,
which was more public, and gave Saul more reverence and respect among
the people, is next particularly observed.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 10:10</span></span>

When they came thither to the hill,.... Or, to Gibeah, as the Targum,
and so Josephus (e):

behold, a company of prophets met him; as foretold, [Sa1
10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005),

and the Spirit of the Lord came upon him, and he prophesied among them;
the spirit of prophecy, as the Targum, and he sung praises among them;
he joined with them in their psalmody, and performed it as regularly as
if he had been brought up with them. The Jews say (f) he prophesied of
the world to come, of Gog and Magog, and of the rewards of the
righteous, and of the punishment of the wicked.

\(e\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 4. sect. 2.) (f) Hieron. Trad. Heb.
fol. 75. H.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 10:11</span></span>

And it came to pass, that when all that knew him before time,.... As
there must be many that personally knew him, and were acquainted with
him, since Gibeah, the place he was near to, was his native place:

saw that, behold, he prophesied among the prophets; or praised among
them, as the Targum, sung psalms and hymns with them:

what is this that is come unto the son of Kish? a rustic, a plebeian,
that never was in the school of the prophets, or learned music, and yet
is as dexterous at it as any of them:

is Saul also among the prophets? an husbandman, an herdsman that looked
after his father's farms, fields, and cattle, and now among the prophets
of the Lord, bearing his part with them, and performing it as well as
any of them: this was matter of wonder to those who knew his person,
family, and education; and so it was equally matter of admiration that
Saul the persecutor, one of the same tribe, should be among the
preachers of the Gospel, [Act 9:20](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#020).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 10:12</span></span>

And one of the same place answered, and said,.... One of the same city,
and in the same company, that expressed their admiration at what was
come to Saul, and at what he did, and wondering how he came into such
company, and to have such a gift, who was of so mean an education:

but who is their father? the father of the prophets; their fathers were
not prophets, no more than Saul's was; their Father that taught them is
the Lord, and he was able to teach Saul, and bestow on him the gift of
prophecy, as well as on them; and so the Targum, who is their master or
teacher; for though they might have an undermaster or teacher, as
Samuel, or another prophet, yet their chief teacher was God; who could
and did give men the gift of prophecy, and even in the highest sense,
who had neither prophets for their fathers, nor were indeed trained up
in any of the schools of the prophets, which was the case of Amos:

therefore it became a proverb, is Saul also among the prophets? that
when a person of a mean parentage, and of a low life and education, was
raised up to any degree of dignity in sacred and civil things, they used
to apply this proverbial expression to him, or speak of him in this
manner, is Saul among the prophets?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 10:13</span></span>

And when he had made an end of prophesying,.... For, as Procopius
Gazaeus observes, he had not the gift of prophecy always; it did not
continue with him, but, like that of the seventy elders in the times of
Moses, it was designed to make him respectable among the people, and to
be taken notice of as a person that God had honoured with a peculiar
gift, that so, when he should be chosen king, they would the more
readily receive him:

he came to the high place; to return thanks to God for the gift bestowed
on him, and for that high honour and dignity he was raised unto, of
which he had private knowledge; and to pray God to fit him more and more
for government, and to, assist him in it, and help him to discharge his
office in a wise and faithful manner.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 10:14</span></span>

And Saul's uncle said unto him, and to his servant, whither went ye?....
Since they had been absent so long a time. This was his father's
brother, as the Targum, and so Aquila; whose name was Ner, the father of
Abner, [Sa1 14:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#050) who met with him at
the high place, or found him in the city, in his father's house it may
be. Josephus (g) says, Saul went into the house of his kinsman Abner,
whom he loved above all his relations, and that it was he that
discoursed with Saul, and asked him, the questions before and after
related:

and he said, to seek the asses: he first observes the end of their
going, the business they went upon, in which not succeeding, then he
answers more directly to the question:

and when we saw that they were nowhere; could not see them, nor find
them any where, or hear of them where they went:

we came to Samuel; at Ramah, to inquire of him, if he could direct us
which way to go, and what methods to take, to find the asses.

\(g\) Ut supra, (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 4.) sect. 3.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 10:15</span></span>

And Saul's uncle said, &c. l On hearing he had been with Samuel, and
perceiving so great an alteration in Saul, perhaps he began to suspect
something about the kingdom; it being what everyone was talking of, and
expecting every day to hear from Samuel who should be king, according to
the Lord's appointment:

tell me, I pray thee, what Samuel said unto you; the earnestness with
which he put this question seems to confirm the above conjecture.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 10:16</span></span>

And Saul said unto his uncle,.... In answer to his question:

he told us plainly the asses were found; or "in telling told us" (h);
not only plainly in so many words, but he affirmed it with the greatest
certainty that the asses were found, and we need not give ourselves
further trouble about them:

but of the matter of the kingdom, whereof Samuel spake, he told him not;
he said not one word about that, which is commonly ascribed to his
modesty; or he might conceal it, as Josephus (i) observes, because he
thought it would not be believed by his relations, or might create in
them envy to him; and besides, he knew it was the pleasure of Samuel
that it should be kept a secret until the election by lot was over, lest
it should be thought to proceed from Samuel himself; and Saul chose it
should remain so, that it might not be thought to be of his own seeking;
and by keeping it from his relations and friends, it would be a clear
case that he did not make interest for it.

\(h\) "indicando indicavit", Pagninus, Montanus, &c. (i) Ut supra.
(Antiqu. l. 6. c. 4. scet. 3.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 10:17</span></span>

And Samuel called the people together unto the Lord at Mizpeh. Not that
in Gilead, but in the tribe of Benjamin, where the people had been
before convened on a certain occasion, [Sa1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005) and the people called together
could not be every individual of the nation, but the heads and elders of
the people, their representatives, and who were summoned by the orders
of Samuel; perhaps by an herald making proclamation and cry of the same,
as the word signifies; and these were gathered together to the Lord, to
have the following affair transacted before him, and under his guidance
and direction; the priest perhaps being here with the Urim and Thummim,
as Kimchi thinks, and who also conjectures that the ark might be brought
hither at this time, the symbol of the divine Presence; though wherever
the church and people of God were gathered together in his name, in a
solemn manner, there the Lord was.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 10:18</span></span>

And said unto the children of Israel,.... In the name of the Lord, using
the phrase which the prophets used when they spoke in the name of the
Lord:

thus saith the Lord God of Israel; the great Jehovah, the Being of
beings, the covenant God of his people Israel:

I brought up Israel out of Egypt; when in bondage there, with a mighty
hand and outstretched arm, by means of signs and wonders done by the
hands of Moses and Aaron; the Lord working mightily with them, and
thereby inclining Pharaoh and his people to let them go:

and delivered you out of the hand of the Egyptians; at the Red sea,
drowning them in it, when they threatened Israel with an utter
destruction:

and out of the hand of all kingdoms, and of them that oppressed you; as
the Arabic writers, the kingdoms of Og and Bashan in their way to
Canaan, and the Mesopotamians, Moabites, Canaanites, Midianites,
Ammonites, and Philistines, in the times of the judges; all which is
observed to show their ingratitude, and aggravate their guilt.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 10:19</span></span>

And ye have this day rejected your God,.... As their king, by desiring
another to be set over them:

who himself saved you out of all your adversity and your tribulations;
that they had been in at any time in Egypt, in their passage through the
wilderness to Canaan, and after they were settled there:

ye have said unto him, nay, but set a king over us: they did as good as
say God should not be their King, but they would have one set over them
like the kings of the nations about them; Samuel reminds them of this
their request and resolution to have a king, which they had expressed
some time ago, that it might appear to them that this was wholly of
their own seeking; the motion came from themselves, and not from the
Lord, nor from Samuel, and therefore, whatever ill consequences might
follow upon it, they had none to blame but themselves:

now therefore present yourselves before the Lord by your tribes, and by
your thousands; by the heads of their tribes, and by the rulers of the
thousands into which their tribes were divided, that it might be known
either by Urim and Thummim, or rather by casting lots, out of which
tribe, and out of which thousand, house, and family in it, their king
was to be chosen; which method, an it would clearly appear to be a
choice directed by the Lord, so it would prevent all contention and
discord among themselves.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 10:20</span></span>

And when Samuel had caused all the tribes to come near,.... The heads
and representatives of them, to the place where the lots were cast:

the tribe of Benjamin was taken; the lot fell upon that tribe for the
choice of a king out of it; not the tribe of, Reuben, who was the
firstborn, nor the tribe of Judah, to whom the kingdom was promised, but
the tribe of Benjamin, the least of all the tribes, and which sprung
from the youngest son of Jacob, contrary, as it were probable, to the
expectation of all.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 10:21</span></span>

And when he had caused the tribe of Benjamin to come near by their
families,.... By the heads of them, to have lots cast for them, out of
which of the families the king should be chosen:

the family of Matri was taken; that is, by lot; the lot fell upon that
family for the choice of a king out of them: in the account of the
families of the tribe of Benjamin, [Ch1
8:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#001) no mention is made of this family,
nor any where else, and yet no doubt there was such a family, and Saul
was of it; it seems to have its name from the butt or mark arrows were
shot at; some of the Benjamites being famous for their skill in darting
and slinging, and perhaps this family might be so:

and Saul the son of Kish was taken; the lot being cast upon the men in
the family of Matri, though it is not expressed, fell upon Saul; for
though he was not there, as Jarchi observes, the lot fell upon him; for
their names were written on a piece of paper, and put into a box, and
the prophet put in his hand and took out one, and on that was the name
of Saul, and this was the manner of the lot:

and when they sought him, he could not be found; because he had hid
himself, as in the next verse; it is very probable, and indeed plain,
that he was in this assembly at the first opening of it; and knowing
what Samuel had said and done to him, and perceiving in what way the lot
was going concerning the same, the tribe of Benjamin being taken, he
concluded how it would issue, and therefore left the assembly, and hid
himself, as follows.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 10:22</span></span>

Therefore they inquired of the Lord further,.... Or again, by lot, by
which they knew who the person was the was chosen king, but they did not
know where he was, and therefore inquire further how they must come at
him; and this inquiry was made either before the high priest by Urim and
Thummim, or by Samuel the prophet of the Lord: and the inquiry was:

if the man should yet come thither; whether he was already come, or
would come there, and if not, what methods they must take to find him:

and the Lord answered, behold, he hath hid himself among the stuff the
word signifies household stuff, vessels, utensils, arms, &c. which the
people had brought along with them for their use, and were laid up in
some one place; and among these baggages Saul hid himself, hoping that
if he was not found they would proceed to another choice, so free from
ambition was he, and such was his modesty; nor does this seem to be
affected and dissembled, but real; though afterwards, when he was
settled in the kingdom, he did not care to part with it, and sought to
kill David, whom he looked upon as his rival: there were many things
which now concurred, that made him uneasy and unwilling to assume the
government of the people; partly the envy and ill will of some of them,
which he must expect; chiefly the sense he had of his own unfitness for
such an office, being of a mean family, and having had so mean an
education, and so little knowledge of the maxims of government; and
besides, must at once, as soon as on the throne, enter into a war with
the Ammonites; but what might most of all distress him, he perceived by
Samuel's speech to the people, that the affair of a king was displeasing
to the Lord, though he condescended to grant the people's request; and
therefore what comfort and happiness could he expect in such a
situation?

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 10:23</span></span>

And they ran and fetched him thence,.... Being in haste to see their
king elect, and proclaim him:

and when he stood among the people; being brought among them, and
presented to them:

he was higher than any of the people, from the shoulders, and upwards;
which made him look very graceful and majestic; height of stature, and a
comely form, as Kimchi observes, recommend to royal dignity; and make
the people stand more in awe of a prince, and have always been reckoned
among all other nations to make a prince venerable; see Gill on [Sa1
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#002).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 10:24</span></span>

And Samuel said to all the people, see ye him whom the Lord hath
chosen,.... For the choice being made by lot, the disposal of which is
of the Lord, it is properly attributed to him, and the people could not
object to it, but must allow it was the Lord's doing. Eupolemus (k), an
Heathen writer, says, that Saul was made king by Samuel by the counsel
or will of God; and Samuel appeals to their eyes for the goodness of the
choice, a better could not have been made:

that there is none like him among the people? so graceful, so stately,
so prince like and majestic; they wanted to have a king like such the
nations had; and Saul was such an one, had all the outward appearance of
grandeur that could be wished for, and which in other nations
recommended persons to the imperial dignity:

and all the people shouted; made a general ado:

and said, God save the king; or "let the king live" (l); they owned and
saluted him as their king, and prayed he might live long to reign over
them; the Targum is, "let the king prosper"; let his reign be prosperous
and glorious, and let him enjoy all health and happiness, peace and
prosperity.

\(k\) Apud Euseb. Praepar. Evangel. l. 9. c. 30. p. 447. (l) "vivat
rex", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 10:25</span></span>

Then Samuel told the people the manner of the kingdom, According to Ben
Gersom, he laid before them the power a king had over his people, and
the punishment he might inflict upon them, if they rebelled against him;
and some think this is the same he delivered in [Sa1
8:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#010) concerning the arbitrary power of
their kings, and how they would be used by them; and which he here
repeated, and then wrote it, that it might be a testimony against them
hereafter; with which what Josephus (m) says pretty much agrees, that in
the hearing of the king he foretold what would befall them, and then
wrote it, and laid it up, that it might be a witness of his predictions;
but that in

1Sa 8:10-17. Samuel said, was the manner of their king, or how he would
use them, but this the manner of the kingdom, and how the government of
it was to be managed and submitted to, what was the office of a king,
and what the duties of the subject; and yet was different from, at least
not the same with that in [Deu 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#015),
for that had been written and laid up already:

and wrote it in a book, and laid it up before the Lord; in the ark of
the Lord; as Kimchi; or rather by the ark of the Lord, on one side of
it, as Ben Gersom; or best of all, as Josephus (n), in the tabernacle of
the Lord, where recourse might be had to it, at any time, at least by a
priest, and where it would be safe, and be preserved to future times:

and Samuel sent all the people away, every man to his house; for though
Saul was chosen king, he did not take upon him the exercise of
government directly, but left it to Samuel to dismiss the people, who
had been for many years their chief magistrate.

\(m\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 4. sect. 6. (n) Ibid.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 10:26</span></span>

And Saul also went home to Gibeah,.... His native place, where was his
father's house, to which he retired; where were no royal palace, or
princely court, nor any of the ensigns of kingly majesty; and whither it
does not appear that he was followed by the nobility or princes of the
tribes, only accompanied by a few men, as next observed:

and there went with him a band of men; an army, or part of one they seem
to be military men, at least men of strength, valour, and courage;
gallant men, who, in honour to their king elect, freely offered
themselves to be his body guard, however, until he was come to his house
at Gibeah; the Targum is only, "some of the people"

whose heart God had touched; and inclined to show honour and respect to
their king; the Targum describes them,"men that feared to sin, and in
whose hearts the fear of God was put.''

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 10:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 10:27</span></span>

But the children of Belial said,.... Wicked, dissolute, lawless persons;
men without a yoke, as the word signifies, who did not care to be under
the yoke of government, at least not under the yoke of Saul; and these
might be men of wealth, and of larger tribes, and better families than
Saul was of, and therefore envied him, and thought themselves better for
government than he was; and in a jeering scornful manner said:

how shall this man save us? whose family is so mean, and whose tribe is
so small, that they can give but little assistance to deliver us out of
the hands of our enemies, the Philistines and Ammonites; intimating,
that a king ought to have been of a rich family, and a large tribe, and
a prince in it, whose interest and influence were great, not only in his
own tribe, but in others, which would enable him to engage in war with
an enemy, and protect the people; but what, as if they should say, can
be expected from "this man?", this mean contemptible man, of no birth
nor fortune, brought up in an obscure manner, and altogether inexpert in
things civil and military?

and they despised him; on account of the above things, not only in their
hearts, but spared not to speak out, and use opprobrious language, and
with which their actions and conduct agreed:

and brought him no presents; as others did, and as it was usual when a
king came to the throne; nor were any visits made unto him, in token of
their subjection to him, and complacency in him, and by way of
congratulation of him, see [Kg1 4:21](../../../bib/kjv/kg1004.htm#021)
the Targum is, they did not salute him, or ask of his welfare:

but he held his peace, or "was as one that is deaf and dumb" (o); took
no notice of what they said, as if he was deaf and heard it not, and was
as silent as if he had been a dumb man, which showed his wisdom and
prudence; for had he taken notice of them, he must have punished them,
and he judged it more advisable to use lenity and mildness, and not
begin his reign with contention and bloodshed.

\(o\) "et fuit veluti surdus", Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus; "fuit quasi
obmutescens", Drusius; "veluti tacens aut silens", so some in Vatablus;
so the Targum.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 11](sa1011)

</div>
