<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1012)  [Next](sa1014.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 13:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 13

This chapter relates how Saul disposed of his army, [Sa1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001.md) that Jonathan his son smote a
garrison of Philistines, which provoked them to come out with a large
army against them, to the great terror of the Israelites, many of whom
fled to secret places, and to distant parts, [Sa1
13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003.md), that Saul tarried at Gilgal
waiting for Samuel, but he not coming so soon as expected, offered
sacrifice himself, [Sa1 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#008.md) for which
Samuel, when he came, reproved him, and told him the kingdom should not
continue with him, but be given to another man, [Sa1
13:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#011.md) on which Saul departed to
Gibeah, where he continued, the Philistines being encamped at Michmash,
[Sa1 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#015.md) from whence went out
spoilers, in three companies, into the land of Israel, where they met
with no opposition; for there were no weapons in the hands of any but
Saul and Jonathan, the Philistines having taken care that there should
be no smith in the land of Israel to make them any, so that they were
defenceless, [Sa1 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#017.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 13:1</span></span>

Saul reigned one year,.... "Or the son of a year in his reigning" (s);
various are the senses given of these words: some interpret them, Saul
had a son of a year old when he began to reign, Ishbosheth, and who was
forty years of age when his father died, [Sa2
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#010.md), others, who understand the words
of Saul himself, think there is an "ellipsis" or defect of the number,
and that it may be supplied, that Saul was the son of thirty or forty
years, or whatsoever age he may be supposed to be at when he began his
reign; others take the words in a figurative sense, that he was like a
child of a year old, for purity and innocence; so the Targum,"as the son
of a year, in whom there are no faults, so was Saul when he reigned;''or
he was but a year old, reckoning from the time he was turned into
another man, and had another heart, which was immediately after he was
anointed king at Ramah by Samuel; or he was but a year old with respect
to his kingdom: the inauguration of a king is "natalis imperil", the
birthday of his kingdom, and therefore the words are well enough
rendered by us, "Saul reigned one year"; which is to be reckoned either
from his unction at Ramah, or rather from his election at Mizpeh, to the
renewal of the kingdom at Gilgal:

and when he had reigned two years over Israel; which the Jewish
chronologers (t) make to be the whole of his reign, which is not
probable, considering the many things done in his reign, the many
battles he fought with all his enemies on every side of him, and his
long persecution of David; and there were no less than three high
priests in his reign; Josephus says (q) he reigned eighteen years in the
lifetime of Samuel, and twenty two years after his death, in all forty;
which agrees with [Act 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021.md). Some
interpret it he reigned two years well, and the rest in a tyrannical
way; or that at the end of two years, when David was anointed, the
kingdom was not reckoned to him, but to David; and to this purpose Dr.
Lightfoot writes, that he had been king one year from his first
anointing by Samuel at Ramah, to his second anointing by him at Gibeah
(Gilgal I suppose he means); and he reigned after this two years more,
before the Lord cast him off, and anointed David; and the time he ruled
after that was not a rule, but a tyranny and persecution (r); but the
sense Ben Gersom gives is best of all, that one year had passed from the
time of his being anointed, to the time of the renewal of the kingdom at
Gilgal; and when he had reigned two years over Israel, then he did what
follows, chose 3000 men, &c. In the first year of his reign was done all
that is recorded in the preceding chapter; and when he had reigned two
years, not two years more, but two years in all, then he did what is
related in this chapter.

\(s\) "filius anni Saul in regnando ipsum", Montanus. (t) Seder Olam
Rabba, c. 13. p. 35. Juchasin, fol. 11. 1. (q) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 14.
sect. 9. (r) Works, vol. 1. p. 55.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 13:2</span></span>

Saul chose him three thousand men of Israel,.... Out of the 300,000 that
went with him to fight the Ammonites, and returned with him to Gilgal,
where he now was, and had stayed as may be supposed about a year, since
now he had reigned two years. These 3000 men some of them doubtless were
appointed as a guard about his person, and the rest were a standing army
to preserve the peace of the nation, to protect them from their enemies,
to watch the motions of the Philistines, and to be ready on any sudden
invasion:

whereof two thousand were with Saul in Michmash, and in Mount Bethel;
"Michmash", according to Bunting, (s) was four miles from Gilgal. Jerom
(t) says, in his time it was shown a large village on the borders of
Aella, or Jerusalem, retaining its ancient name, nine miles distant from
it, near the village Rama. Adrichomius (u) says it is now called Byra,
and Mr. Maundrell (w) observes that it is supposed by some to be the
same with Beer, whither Jotham fled after he had delivered his parable,
[Jdg 9:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg009.htm#021.md). Michmash is in the Misnah
(x) celebrated for the best wheat being brought from it; and near to it,
as appears from hence, was Bethel, and the mount of that name; and so
Jerom (y) speaks of Bethel as over against Michmash; and this mount very
probably is the same said to be on the east of Bethel, where Abraham
built an altar, [Gen 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/gen012.htm#008.md) for Michmash
lay to the east of Bethel:

and one thousand were with Jonathan in Gibeah of Benjamin; the native
place of Saul, and this Jonathan was the son of Saul, [Sa1
13:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#016). According to Bunting (z.md),
Gibeah, where Jonathan was stationed, was eight miles from Michmash:

and the rest of the people he sent every man to his tent; to their own
houses; or, as the Targum, to their cities; these were they that came at
his summons, and were numbered at Bezek, and went with him to the relief
of Jabeshgilead, and had been with him ever since, and now dismissed.

\(s\) Travels of the Patriarchs, &c. p. 126. (t) De loc Heb. fol. 93. F.
(u) Thestrum Terrae S. p. 28. (w) Journey from Aleppo, p. 64. (x)
Menachot, c. 8. sect. 1. (y) Ut supra, (De loc Heb.) fol. 89. G. (z) Ut
supra, (Travels of the Patriarchs, &c.) p. 127.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 13:3</span></span>

And Jonathan smote the garrison of the Philistines that was in Geba,....
Not the same with Gibeah of Benjamin, as Jarchi; for it can hardly be
thought that Jonathan should place himself with his thousand men where
the Philistines had a garrison; or that if this was the same with that
in the preceding verse, that it should be called by another name in
this; but Gibeah and Geba were two places, as Kimchi observes, both
indeed in the tribe of Benjamin, and it is very probable not far from
one another; see [Jos 18:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#024.md). This
seems to be the same with the hill of God, where was a garrison of the
Philistines, [Sa1 10:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#005.md), who after
their defeat by Samuel contented themselves with some strong holds and
garrisons in some parts of the land to keep Israel in awe; the Targum
understands this of a single person, a governor of the Philistines in
this place, whom Jonathan slew, and so Jarchi; and according to R.
Isaiah he was one that was appointed to gather the tax for them:

and the Philistines heard of it, which alarmed them, and made them
prepare for war:

and Saul blew the trumpet throughout all the land; not he in person, for
he was at Gilgal, as the next verse shows; but he ordered it to be
blown, being aware of the preparations the Philistines were making to
attack him:

saying, let the Hebrews hear; both what his son had done, and what the
Philistines were doing.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 13:4</span></span>

And all Israel heard say that Saul had smitten a garrison of the
Philistines,.... For though it was smitten by Jonathan, yet it was by
the order of Saul, and so ascribed to him; it seems to be a concerted
thing to fall upon the garrisons of the Philistines, and get them out of
their hands, and so deliver Israel entirely from them; but it was not
wise for Saul, if he had such a scheme in his head, to disband his large
army, as he had lately done:

and that Israel also was had in abomination with the Philistines; who
were highly incensed against them by this action, and vowed revenge; the
name of an Israelite was abhorred by them; and perhaps this action might
be attended with much craft and cruelty; and if these garrisons were
held by agreement, they might charge them with perfidy, with breach of
articles, and so their name was made to stink among them, as the word
signifies:

and the people were called together after Saul to Gilgal; by sound of
trumpet.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 13:5</span></span>

And the Philistines gathered themselves together to fight with
Israel,.... To prevent their further encroachments on them, and designs
against them; for they perceived they intended to cast off their yoke,
and free themselves entirely from them:

thirty thousand chariots, and six thousand horsemen; it may seem
incredible that so small a people as the Philistines were, who only were
possessed of five cities, or lordships, with the villages belonging to
them, except what they had taken from Israel; and even if assisted by
the Tyrians, the author of Sirach in the Apocrypha says:"And he
destroyed the rulers of the Tyrians, and all the princes of the
Philistines.'' (Sirach 46:18)though he seems to have respect not to this
time, but when Samuel discomfited them, [Sa1
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010.md). I say it may seem incredible
that they should bring such a number of chariots into the field;
wherefore this must either be understood of 30,000 men that fought in
chariots, as Lyra interprets it, and in which sense it is plain and
certain the word chariots is sometimes used, as in [Sa2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#018.md), or else of some sort of
carriages, not chariots of war, at least not all of them; but what were
brought to carry the baggage of their infantry, which was very large,
and to carry away the goods and substance of the Israelites; some have
thought that there is a mistake of the copier, who instead of "three",
read "thirty": so Capellus; and the rather because in the Arabic and
Syriac versions it is only "three thousand"; but even this is too great
a number, understood of chariots of war; for never any people in the
world was known to have so many chariots of war; Pharaoh in his large
host had but six hundred, [Exo 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/exo014.htm#007.md)
Jabin king of Canaan had indeed nine hundred, [Jdg
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/jdg004.htm#003.md) and David took from the king of
Zobah one thousand chariots; but whether they were all chariots of war
is not certain, [Sa2 8:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#004.md). Solomon
indeed had one thousand and four hundred chariots, but they do not
appear to be chariots of war, but some for use, and some for state and
grandeur. Wherefore, if a mistake in the copy is admitted of, and this
can be confirmed by some MSS, yet we must recur to one or other of the
above senses; some of them must be understood of other sort of
carriages, or of men that fought in these chariots; and allowing ten men
to a chariot, which seems to be the usual number by comparing [Sa2
10:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#018.md) with [Ch1
19:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1019.htm#018.md) then 3000 men would fill three
hundred chariots, which are as many as it can well be thought the
Philistines had Zerah the Ethiopian, who brought into the field an army
of million men, had no more than three hundred chariots, [Ch2
14:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch2014.htm#009.md), and no more had Antiochus
Eupator in his army,"And with him Lysias his protector, and ruler of his
affairs, having either of them a Grecian power of footmen, an hundred
and ten thousand, and horsemen five thousand and three hundred, and
elephants two and twenty, and three hundred chariots armed with hooks.''
(2 Maccabees 13:2)Darius in his vast army had but two hundred (a), and
in the very large one which Mithridates brought against the Romans there
was but one hundred; and now 3000 men in three hundred chariots were but
a proportion to 6000 horsemen, which in those times and countries was a
large cavalry:

and the people as the sand which is on the sea shore in multitude; the
infantry was so large as not to be numbered; however, the phrase denotes
a great multitude of them; Josephus says (b) there were 300,000 footmen:

and they came up, and pitched in Michmash, eastward from Bethaven; where
Saul, before he went to Gilgal, had his quarters, [Sa1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#002.md). Bethaven was a place near
Bethel, on the east of it, [Jos 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/jos007.htm#002.md)
though Bethel itself was afterwards so called when Jeroboam had set up
the worship of the calves there, [Hos
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#015.md) it signifying the house of vanity
or iniquity.

\(a\) Curtius, l. 4. c. 9. (b) Antiqu, l. 6. c. 6. sect. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 13:6</span></span>

When the men of Israel saw they were in a strait, for the people were
distressed,.... By reason of the vast army that the Philistines brought
into the field, greatly superior to theirs, and were likely to be
encompassed by them on every side; so that nothing but destruction was
expected, which gave them the utmost anxiety and uneasiness; though
Abarbinel refers this last clause, not to the people of Israel, but to
the people of the Philistines, and takes it in this sense:

for the people drew nigh; the army of the Philistines was approaching,
and got near to them; and so they were in great danger of being quickly
attacked by them, and destroyed, their numbers being so great:

then the people did hide themselves in caves; of which there were many
in the land of Judea, capable of receiving a large number, as the cave
of Adullam, the cave of Engedi, &c. and such as the Israelites made to
hide themselves when oppressed by the Midianites, [Jdg
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/jdg006.htm#002.md).

and in thickets; woods and forests, or among thorns, as Jarchi; where
there was a very great number of brambles and thorn bushes; some, as
Kimchi, interpret the word of munitions, garrisons, and fortified
places, to which they betook themselves:

in rocks, and in high places, and in pits; in the holes of rocks and
mountains, particularly in Mount Ephraim; see [Sa1
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#022.md) and where there were any pits or
ditches, high or deep places, where they might be out of sight, and be
sheltered from their enemies.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 13:7</span></span>

And some of the Hebrews went over Jordan to the land of Gad and
Gilead,.... As far off as they could from the Philistines, who lay on
the west of the land of Israel, and these countries were to the east.
Kimchi observes, that the land of Reuben is not mentioned, which was on
the other side Jordan also; because that was nearer to it than what was
inhabited by Gad, and the half tribe of Manasseh; and therefore they
chose to go further, thinking themselves there safer:

as for Saul, he was yet in Gilgal; where he stayed till Samuel should
come to him, as directed, [Sa1 10:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#008.md) to
have his advice and counsel:

and all the people followed him trembling; all that were with him, the
army as distinct from the common people; they abode by him, and were at
his command, and were ready to go where he should direct them; but with
trembling hearts when they saw the pain of the people, fleeing into
holes and corners, and considered what a huge host the Philistines were
coming upon them with, and Samuel their prophet not with them to
encourage and counsel them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 13:8</span></span>

And he tarried seven days, according to the set time that Samuel had
appointed,.... He tarried to the seventh day, but not to the end of it,
or towards the close of it, as he should have done:

but Samuel came not to Gilgal; so soon as Saul expected:

and the people were scattered from him; many deserted him, the
Philistines drawing nigh, and Samuel not coming, as Saul expected, and
had given the people reason to expect.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 13:9</span></span>

And Saul said,.... Being impatient, and seeing the people deserting him
apace, and unwilling to engage in a battle without first sacrificing to
God, and imploring his help and assistance:

bring hither a burnt offering to me; that is, a creature for a burnt
offering, a bullock, sheep, goat, or lamb:

and peace offerings; which also were either of the herd, or of the
flock:

and he offered the burnt offering; either he himself, or by a priest. In
this unsettled time, while the tabernacle, altar, and ark, were at
different places, and not yet fixed, it is thought that such who were
not priests might offer, and that in high places, and where the
tabernacle and altar were not.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 13:10</span></span>

And it came to pass, that as soon as he had made an end of offering the
burn offering,.... And before he could offer the peace offerings:

behold, Samuel came; and it was told Saul that he was come:

and Saul went out to meet him; left off sacrificing, and would proceed
no further, leaving the rest for Samuel and out of respect to him, and
to prevent a chiding of him, he went forth to meet him:

that he might salute him, or "bless him" (c); congratulate him on his
coming, ask of his health and welfare, and wish him all peace and
prosperity.

\(c\) "ad benedicendum ei", Montanus.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 13:11</span></span>

And Samuel said, what hast thou done? This question he put to bring him
to a confession of what he had done, otherwise he guessed at it by his
countenance; or rather, by the prophetic spirit he was endowed with, he
knew it certainly that he had offered the sacrifices without waiting for
him:

and Saul said because I saw the people were scattered from me; they were
deserting, and he feared, if he stayed any longer, they would all leave
him; this was one reason of doing what he did:

and that thou camest not within the days appointed; seven days were
appointed, and because the seventh day was come, though it was not gone,
he concluded Samuel would not come at all; and that was another reason
why he did what he did; and by this would have laid the blame on Samuel,
as if he did not keep his time; whereas it was Saul's impatience that
hurried him to this action:

and that the Philistines gathered themselves together to Michmash; where
his station before was, and from thence he might quickly expect them at
Gilgal; and this was another reason why he hastened the sacrifice.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 13:12</span></span>

Therefore said I..... That is, within himself:

the Philistines will come down now upon me to Gilgal; on a sudden,
unprepared for them, especially in a religious way:

and I have not made supplication to the Lord; for his direction and
assistance, and for success in the war; which it seems went along with
sacrifices, or was implied in them:

I forced myself therefore, and offered a burnt offering; it was
reluctant to him, it was against his will as well as the command of
Samuel, to offer before he came, he suggests; but such were the
circumstances he was in, that he was obliged to it; these are the
reasons or excuses he made, and some of them have a specious appearance
in them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 13:13</span></span>

And Samuel said to Saul, thou hast done foolishly,.... Not by intruding
himself into the priest's office, with that he is not charged, but not
waiting the full time till Samuel came; which showed his impatience,
disregard to Samuel, and distrust of God; and though he thought he had
acted wisely, and taken the proper precautions in his circumstances, yet
he acted foolishly; and though a king, Samuel being a prophet of the
Lord, and in his name, spared not to tell him so:

thou hast not kept the commandment of the Lord thy God, which he
commanded thee; by his prophet, that he should wait seven days for his
coming, who would then offer sacrifices, and tell him what he should do;
and not to keep the commandment of God was acting a foolish part:

for now would the Lord have established thy kingdom upon Israel for
ever; that is, for a long time, on his son, and son's son; and then,
according to promise and prophecy, it would come to one of the tribe of
Judah; but now seeing he had acted such a part, it should not continue
long in his family, no longer than his own life, and quickly come into
other hands.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 13:14</span></span>

But now thy kingdom shall not continue,.... That is, in his family, nor
in his tribe, but be removed to another:

the Lord hath sought him a man after his own heart: who was David;
though as yet Samuel knew him not, he knew by divine revelation that
there was another one chosen, to whom the kingdom would be given; a man
every way agreeable to the will of God, and who would fulfil his will,
though he knew not particularly who he was:

and the Lord hath commanded him to be captain over his people; that is,
had appointed him to be king over Israel. God's decrees have the force
of a law in them, and must be fulfilled; and cannot be resisted so as to
be frustrated:

because thou hast not kept that which the Lord hath commanded thee; it
matters not whether the thing commanded is greater or less, it is
disobedience to the command that is the sin, and is resented: this might
seem a small thing, since to offer the sacrifice was not criminal; but
doing it before the time, a little before it should have been done, not
waiting long enough for the prophet; yet it being against the command of
God, or in neglect of it, it was sinful, and severely chastised; and the
rather, that it might be an example to all succeeding kings how they
offended, or broke the least of God's commandments; and this being the
first king of Israel, he was made an example of to the rest.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 13:15</span></span>

And Samuel arose,.... Seemingly in wrath and displeasure, not staying to
offer up the peace offerings which remained; and though no mention is
made of Saul's going with him, yet it seems as if he did, or at least
quickly followed him, as appears from the next verse:

and got him up from Gilgal unto Gibeah of Benjamin; the native place of
Saul, thereby directing Saul where he should go, and which might be a
stronger place than Gilgal; or however where he might expect to be
joined by more persons of his own tribe, as well as in the first place
protect and defend that; and it looks by Samuel's going thither, though
he was displeased with Saul, yet that he did not intend to forsake him
directly and entirely:

and Saul numbered the people that were present with him, about six
hundred men: which was done either before he left Gilgal, or as soon as
he came to Gibeah; so great a desertion was there from him, that of the
3000 first chosen by him, and of the people after called and gathered to
him at Gilgal, only six hundred remained with him; a small number indeed
to encounter so large an army the Philistines had brought into the
field, and which therefore Saul could not face.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 13:16</span></span>

And Saul, and Jonathan his son,.... Who were now joined to their men, on
Saul's coming to Gibeah:

and the people that were present with them; the six hundred men before
numbered: abode in Gibeah of Benjamin; being perhaps a strong fortified
place, not choosing to go forth to meet the army of the Philistines, so
vastly superior to them:

but the Philistines encamped at Michmash; the old quarters of Saul
before he went to Gilgal, [Sa1 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#002.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 13:17</span></span>

And the spoilers came out of the camp of the Philistines in three
companies,.... Saul not daring to come out to fight them, and there
being none throughout the land to oppose them, they sent out three
companies of soldiers to ravage and spoil the country; of so little use
and service was a king to Israel, they were so extremely desirous of;
and this was suffered, to convince them of their vain confidence in him,
and that their trust ought to be in the Lord their God; never was their
country more exposed to rapine and violence than now:

one company turned unto the way that leadeth to Ophrah; a city in the
land of Benjamin, of which see [Jos
18:23](../../../bib/kjv/jos018.htm#023.md) and lay southwest from Michmash,
where the army of the Philistines were:

unto the land of Shual: which the Targum paraphrases,"the land of the
south;''it seems to have had its name from the multitude of foxes in it,
Shual signifying a fox.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 13:18</span></span>

And another company turned the way to Bethhoron,.... Of which name there
were two cities, the upper and nether, and both in the tribe of Ephraim,
of which see [Jos 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/jos016.htm#003.md) this lay
northwest from the camp of the Philistines at Michmash; eight miles from
it, according to Bunting (d):

and another company turned to the way of the border, that looketh
towards the valley of Zeboim, toward the wilderness; some take this to
be the Zeboim which was destroyed with Sodom and Gomorrah; and the
wilderness, the wilderness of Jordan; but as that, so the valley in
which it stood, was turned into a bituminous lake; this seems to be a
city in the land of Benjamin, [Neh
11:34](../../../bib/kjv/neh011.htm#034.md) near to which was a valley, and
this towards the wilderness of Jericho, and so lay eastward; the Targum
calls it the valley of vipers, perhaps from its being infested with
many; and so David de Pomis (e) says it is the name of a place where
plenty of serpents were found, and which he says were called so because
of the variety of colours in them; with which agrees Kimchi's note on
the place; they seem to mean serpents spotted (f), as if they were
painted and dyed of various colours, as the Hebrew word which is thus
paraphrased signifies: according to Bunting (g), it was eight miles from
Michmash.

\(d\) Travels of the Patriarchs, &c. p. 133. (e) Tzemach David, fol. 13.
2. & 153. 1. (f) , Homer. Iliad. 12. ver. 208. "notis maculosus
grandibus", Virgil. Georgic. l. 3. v. 427. (g) Ut supra. (Travels of the
Patriarchs, &c. p. 133.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 13:19</span></span>

Now there was no smith found throughout all the land of Israel,.... The
Philistines, when they ruled over them, having removed them into their
own country, and forbid any to learn or exercise that trade in Israel:

for the Philistines said, lest the Hebrews make swords or spears: this
they did to prevent their having arms, and the use of them, that they
might not rebel against them, and fight with them, and overcome them; it
was a piece of policy to keep them subject to them; so Nebuchadnezzar,
when he conquered the Jews and carried them captive, took care
particularly to carry away their smiths, and left none but the poorest
sort of people in the land, [Kg2 24:14](../../../bib/kjv/kg2024.htm#014.md)
and Porsena, king of the Etrusci, when he made a covenant with the
Romans, upon the expulsion of their kings, made this a condition of
peace with them, that they should use no iron but in husbandry (h). When
this course was taken by the Philistines with the Israelites, and how
long it had continued is not certain; it is probable it might be in the
space of forty years they ruled over Israel, in which Samson was born,
for we never read of any sword or spear that he made use of; and though
there were two battles in the times of Eli, in both which Israel were
beaten, they might make use only of bows and arrows, slings, and stones,
clubs, &c, as also in the battle of Saul with the Ammonites; and as for
the defeat of the Philistines in the time of Samuel, it was by thunder;
and though the Philistines were then subdued, yet, as Samuel grew old,
they regained their power in a good measure, and the Israelites had not
spirit enough to oppose them, nor diligence and industry to learn and
revive the trade of smiths among them; not even for what was necessary
to husbandry, as the following verse shows.

\(h\) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 34. c. 14.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 13:20</span></span>

But all the Israelites went down to the Philistines,.... Were obliged to
go into Palestine, into some one or other of the cities of the
Philistines, or to their garrisons, where the trade of a smith was
exercised:

to sharpen every man his share, and his coulter; which are the parts of
the plough made of iron, with which the earth is cut and thrown up:

and his axe and his mattock; or pick axe; with the one wood is felled
and cut, and with the other stones are dug; and each of these for their
several uses needed sharpening; and when they did, they were obliged to
go to the Philistines to have them done, they having no smiths among
them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 13:21</span></span>

Yet they had a file for the mattocks, and for the coulters, and for the
forks, and for the axes,.... Those that would not go to the Philistines,
or were not able, or thought it too much trouble, these kept files by
them to sharpen those several instruments with upon occasion; though the
words are by some rendered in connection with the preceding, to this
sense, that they went to the Philistines to sharpen them, when the
mouths, or edges, of the mattocks, coulters, &c. were dull; or "blunt"
(i); and so needed sharpening; and even

to sharpen the goads; with which they pricked and pushed on the oxen in
ploughing, when sluggish and remiss. (The word for "file" in the verse
is "pim", and occurs only here in the Hebrew scriptures. It is not used
elsewhere in other Hebrew writings. Therefore the translators of the
1611 Authorised Version had only the root derivation to deduce what the
word meant. Literally, it means "a file with mouths". However, recently
archaeologists have found a stone inscribed with this word. Also they
found a stone inscribed with the word "shekel". Hence they deduced that
the word was really a weight of measure equal to about one third of a
shekel. Newer translations usually translate this as "the charge was a
third of a shekel ...", hence removing the obvious contradiction between
this verse and the preceding one. Editor.)

\(i\) "retusae itaque erant acies vomerum", V. L. "quandoquidem acies
cultrorum aratri", &c. "obtusae erant", Tigurine version.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 13:22</span></span>

So it came to pass in the day of battle,.... When that drew near, and
they were called to it, and obliged to fight or flee, or surrender:

that there were neither sword nor spear found in the hand of any of the
people that were with Saul and Jonathan: which was not owing to their
leaving them behind in the camp, or casting them away from them through
fear, as they followed Saul with trembling, but to the cause now
mentioned. In what manner some preceding battles were fought with the
Philistines and Ammonites, notwithstanding, have been accounted for on
[Sa1 13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#019.md), but it is strange that the
Israelites did not furnish themselves with the arms of the Philistines
at the defeat of them in Ebenezer, [Sa1
7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010.md) and with the arms of the
Ammonites at Jabeshgilead, [Sa1 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#011.md)
and that such a warlike prince as Saul appeared at his first setting out
to be should not in the first place take care to provide armour for his
men by some means or another; for that those that left him should have
arms, and not those that abode with him, does not seem reasonable. It
may be the Benjamites, being expert in slinging, were indifferent to and
neglected the use of any other weapon, or method of fighting:

but with Saul and with Jonathan his son was there found; swords and
spears, and with them only.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 13:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 13:23</span></span>

And the garrison of the Philistines went out to the passage of Michmash.
According to Jarchi, these two places, Michmash where the Philistines
were, and Gibeah where Saul and Jonathan were, lay on two hills over
against each other, and there was a valley between them; and the
garrison of the Philistines drew nigh to the passage of Michmash, which
led to the side of Gibeah, to the valley between them, either with an
intention to besiege Gibeah, or to dare Israel to come out and fight
them: but rather it seems to be some strong pass between the rocks near
Michmash, where the garrison placed themselves to guard and keep against
any sudden surprise; see [Sa1 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#004.md).
The Targum is,"the governor of the Philistines went out to the ford or
passage of Michmash;''and Kimchi interprets it of the princes or
generals of the army; these might go to mark out a camp, and pitch upon
a proper place to draw up in a line of battle.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 14](sa1014.md)

</div>
