<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1015)  [Next](sa1017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 16:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 16

In this chapter Samuel is ordered to anoint a king among the sons of
Jesse of Bethlehem, [Sa1 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001.md) all
whose sons were made to pass before him, excepting David, [Sa1
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006.md) who being then with his father's
sheep, was sent for and was anointed, [Sa1
16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011.md), after which the Spirit of the
Lord departed from Saul, and he became melancholy, and it was advised to
seek out a musician for him, and David was mentioned to him as a proper
person, [Sa1 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014.md) upon which he was
sent for, and acted as a musician to Saul, and also became his
armourbearer, which was the first rise of him, [Sa1
16:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#019.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 16:1</span></span>

And the Lord said unto Samuel,.... In a vision or dream, or by an
articulate voice: how long wilt thou mourn for Saul? he does not blame
him for mourning, but for mourning so long; but how long that was cannot
be said; and though his affection for him might cause him to indulge to
it, yet it was in vain, seeing the sentence was irreversible:

seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel? that is, his
posterity; for he himself reigned as long as he lived, though in a very
inglorious manner:

fill thine horn with oil; with common oil; for that this was the holy
anointing oil kept in the tabernacle, as the Jewish writers generally
suppose, with which they say David and Solomon, and the kings of Judah,
were anointed, there is no reason to believe; since the tabernacle,
where this oil was, was at a distance from Samuel, and which seems to
have been only for the anointing of the priests. This was not a phial he
was bid to take, as when he anointed Saul; but an horn, denoting the
abundance of gifts bestowed on David, and the firmness and duration of
his kingdom:

and go, and I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite; the son of Obed,
whom Boaz begat of Ruth the Moabitess, [Rut
4:21](../../../bib/kjv/rut004.htm#021.md).

for I have provided me a king among his sons; but which he says not;
this was reserved for an later discovery; however God had in his own
mind picked him, whom he would hereafter make known; this was a king for
himself, raised up to fulfil his will; Saul was chosen by him, but then
it was at the request of the people, and so he was rather their king
than his; but this was not at their desire, nor with their knowledge,
but of his own good will and pleasure; the one was given in wrath, and
the other in love; the one was to the rejection of God as King, the
other to the rejection of Saul by the will of God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 16:2</span></span>

And Samuel said, how can I go?.... Which argues weakness of faith in
Samuel, and fear of man, and a diffidence in and distrust of divine
power; for otherwise he that sent him on such an errand could protect
him:

if Saul hear it, he will kill me; should hear that Samuel went and
anointed another king, it would so enrage him, that he would either
immediately lay hands on him, and put him to death, or order him to be
put to death; and indeed were it not that this was done by the command
of God, he would deserve to die; it being an overt act of treason to
anoint another king:

and the Lord said, take an heifer with thee, and say, I am come to
sacrifice to the Lord; a peace offering, which might be done any where
in those unsettled times, the ark being at one place, and the tabernacle
at another; and might be offered upon a private altar, and by a private
person; and as it seems Samuel used to sacrifice at different places;
see [Sa1 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009.md). Ben Gersom relates it as
the sense of one of their Rabbins in his age, that there was a person
slain in those parts, not known by whom he was slain; and so Samuel is
ordered to take an heifer to fulfil the law in [Deu
21:1](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#001.md) and therefore Saul would make no
inquiry into his reason of going thither with an heifer, and this is
commended both by him and Abarbinel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 16:3</span></span>

And call Jesse to the sacrifice,.... His family, both him and his sons,
to partake of the peace offerings; as every offerer had a right to
invite his friends, and whomsoever he pleased, to eat of those parts of
them which belonged to him, as a feast before the Lord:

and I will show thee what thou shall do; when Jesse and his family were
with him:

and thou shalt anoint unto me him whom I name unto thee; that is, anoint
him to be king over Israel, whom he should point out so plainly to him,
as if he called him by name.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 16:4</span></span>

And Samuel did that which the Lord spake,.... He filled a horn of oil,
and took an heifer with him:

and came to Bethlehem; where Jesse and his family lived, which,
according to Bunting (y), was sixteen miles from Ramah; though it could
hardly be so much, since Ramah was six miles from Jerusalem on one side,
as Bethlehem lay six miles from it on the other (z):

and the elders of the town trembled at his coming; for he being now an
old man, and seldom went abroad, they concluded it must be something
very extraordinary that brought him thither; and they might fear that as
he was a prophet of the Lord, that he was come to reprove them, or
denounce some judgment upon them for their sins. The Targum is,"the
elders of the city gathered together to meet him;''out of respect and in
honour to him, and to the same sense Jarchi's note is,"they hasted to go
out to meet him'';see [Hos 11:11](../../../bib/kjv/hos011.htm#011.md).

and, said comest thou peaceably? the word "said" is singular; one of the
elders put this question, the chiefest of them, perhaps Jesse; and the
meaning of it is, whether he came with ill news and bad tidings, or as
displeased with them himself on some account or another; or with a
message from God, as displeased with them; or whether he came there for
his own peace and safety, to be sheltered from Saul; and which, if that
was the case, might not be for their peace and good; but would draw upon
them the wrath and vengeance of Saul; for they doubtless knew that there
was a variance, at least a shyness, between Saul and Samuel.

\(y\) Travels of the Patriarchs, &c. p. 125. (z) Vid. Hieron. de loc.
Heb. fol. 89. F. & 94. B.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 16:5</span></span>

And he said, peaceably I am come to sacrifice unto the Lord,.... Which
he could say with truth, it being one end of his coming, though not the
only one for which he came, and which he was not obliged to tell:

sanctify yourselves, and come with me to the sacrifice; prepare
themselves for it, which was done by washing their garments, &c. and
then attend with him, and assist him in the sacrifice:

and he sanctified Jesse and his sons, and called them to the sacrifice;
he ordered them to sanctify themselves; he distinguished them from the
rest of the inhabitants, and invited them to partake of the feast, the
remainder of the peace offerings.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 16:6</span></span>

And it came to pass, when they were come,.... Jesse and his sons, into
the house where the entertainment was; and perhaps before they sat down,
went into a private apartment by the direction of Samuel, where he
acquainted Jesse with the business he came upon:

that he looked on Eliab; who was Jesse's firstborn, [Ch1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#013.md), called Elihu, [Ch1
27:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1027.htm#018.md).

and said, surely the Lord's anointed is before him; or this is the
person it is his pleasure should be anointed king.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 16:7</span></span>

But the Lord said to Samuel,.... By a secret impulse upon his mind, as
if he had spoken with an articulate voice to him:

look not on his countenance; which was comely and majestic:

or on the height of his stature; which was like that of Saul's; and
because the Lord had chosen him, who was superior to the people in this
respect, Samuel thought he meant to have such an one now anointed king:

because I have refused him; or it is not my pleasure that he should be
king; though Ben Gersom thinks this refers to Saul, that the Lord had
rejected him, though of an high stature, and therefore Samuel should not
look out for such a person to be king; and Abarbinel refers it to the
height of stature itself, that God had rejected that, and laid it aside
as a qualification of a king, or as a rule to judge of a proper person
to be a king; but no doubt it respected Eliab:

for the Lord seeth not as man seeth; man only sees what is without, but
the Lord sees what is within; only the outward visible form of the body
is seen by man, but the inward qualifications and endowments of the mind
are seen by the Lord:

for man looketh on the outward appearance; the comeliness of a man's
person, the majesty of his countenance, the height of his stature, and
size of his body, things which recommended men to be kings among the
nations of the world; See Gill on [Sa1
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#002), or "to the eyes" (a.md); the
liveliness, and briskness, and sharpness of them, thereby to judge of
the sagacity and penetration of the mind, as physiognomists do; who
guess at the disposition of men by them, when they are small or great,
watery or dry, of this or the other colour (b):

but the Lord looketh on the heart; and knows what is in that, what
wisdom and prudence, justice and integrity, mercy and goodness, and
other princely qualifications are in that. The Jewish writers conclude
from hence that the heart of Eliab was not right; it may be, full of
wrath, pride, envy, &c. which disqualified him for government.

\(a\) "ad oculos", Montanus. (b) Vid. Schotti Thaumaturg. Physic. par.
4. l. 7. c. 8.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 16:8</span></span>

Then Jesse called Abinadab,.... His second son, [Sa1
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#013.md).

and made him pass before Samuel: that he might take a full view of him:

and he said, neither hath the Lord chosen this; which he knew by a
private suggestion from him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 16:9</span></span>

Then Jesse made Shammah to pass by,.... His third son, [Sa1
17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#013.md), sometimes called Shimma, and
Shimeah, [Ch1 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#013.md).

and he said, neither hath the Lord chosen this; which he knew in the
same way as before.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 16:10</span></span>

Again Jesse made seven of his sons pass before Samuel,.... Not seven
more, for he had but eight sons in all with David, [Sa1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#012.md) but four more, which with the
other three made seven; three of these four are mentioned by name,
Nathanael, Raddai, and Ozem, [Ch1
2:14](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#014.md), but the fourth we nowhere read
of; perhaps he died quickly after this, was an obscure person, and of no
fame and note, or might be by another woman:

and Samuel said unto Jesse, the Lord hath not chosen these; not anyone
of them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 16:11</span></span>

And Samuel said unto Jesse, are here all thy children?.... For neither
of these being the person God would have anointed king, and yet it was
one of Jesse's sons that was to be anointed, he concluded he must have
more, at least one more, and therefore puts this question to him:

and he said, there remaineth yet the youngest; or, "the little one" (c);
not of a little diminutive stature, for he was a mighty man, a man of
strength, courage, and valour, [Sa1
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#018.md) or of a puerile age, for the
Jews say (d) he was now twenty nine years of age; but that is not
likely, he hardly exceeded more than twenty, or was so much; thereabout
he might be; but he is so called because he was the youngest son, as we
render it:

and, behold, he keepeth the sheep: and from following them, he was taken
and anointed king; see [Psa 78:70](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#070.md).
Some of the greatest of men have been taken from rustic employment, as
Moses, Gideon, Saul, and others:

and Samuel said unto Jesse, send and fetch him; out of the field by a
messenger:

for we will not sit down till he come hither; that is, at table, to eat
of that part of the peace offerings which belonged to the offerer
Samuel, and which he had invited Jesse and his sons to partake of.

\(c\) "parvulus", V. L. (d) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 13. p. 36.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 16:12</span></span>

And he sent and brought him in,.... Sent messengers into the field and
to the flock for him, and being come home Jesse introduced him into the
room where Samuel was:

now he was ruddy; which some understand not of the ruddiness of his
complexion, or of his cheeks, but of the redness of his hair; the former
seems best:

and withal of a beautiful countenance; of comely features: or "beautiful
eyes" (e); bright, clear, and sparkling; eyes that are black or blue are
reckoned beautiful:

and goodly to look to; of a pleasant countenance, delightful to behold;
he carried sweetness as well as majesty in his face; in this he was a
type of Christ, [Sol 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010.md). A beautiful
aspect, as well as shape and height, recommended persons for government,
as with the Ethiopians, as Aristotle (f) relates; so Agamemnon is
represented by Priamus (g) for his personable appearance, as like a
king, and fit to be one:

and the Lord said, arise, anoint him, for this is he; that he had spoken
to him of, and who it was his pleasure should be anointed king; and
therefore, by a secret strong impulse upon his mind, was put upon doing
it immediately, without any hesitation or delay.

\(e\) "simul pulcher oculis", Montanus; "cum pulchritudine oculorum",
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator. (f) Politic. l. 4. c. 4. (g) Homer.
Iliad. 3. v. 166.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 16:13</span></span>

Then Samuel took the horn of oil,.... Out of his pocket, which he
brought along with him by the direction of God:

and anointed him in the midst of his brethren; not in the presence of
them, they sitting around, or standing by and seeing the ceremony
performed; which is not consistent with the secrecy with which Samuel
was directed to manage this affair, and which was necessary to observe,
to keep it from the knowledge of Saul; and with Eliab's treatment of
David afterwards, who would never have addressed him in the manner he
did, had he known that he was anointed king, [Sa1
17:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#028.md) but the sense is, according to
Kimchi and Abarbinel, that he was selected out of them, and separated
from them, and privately anointed by Samuel, and at most only his father
Jesse present; wherefore some observe, that the words may be rendered,
"anointed him from the midst of his brethren" (h); that is, he took him
apart from them, and anointed him:

and the Spirit of the Lord came upon David from that day forward; not as
a spirit of grace and holiness, which probably had come upon him before
this time; but a spirit of prophecy, as did on Saul after his unction;
and which particularly showed itself in music and poetry, in which he
immediately became very eminent, and he was taken notice of for it, and
which was the means of bringing him into Saul's court; and a spirit of
wisdom and prudence, in civil as well as in sacred things; and a spirit
of fortitude, as the Targum, of strength of body, and courage and valour
of mind; whereby he was enabled to encounter with the lion and bear, and
get the mastery of them; which, with all other gifts of the spirit
fitting him for government, he was now endowed with, and which continued
with him:

so Samuel rose up and went to Ramah his native place, and where he
resided; that is, after the festival of the peace offerings, to which
Jesse and his sons were invited; for the anointing seems to be before
that.

\(h\) So Pool, Patrick, &c.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 16:14</span></span>

But the Spirit of the Lord departed from Saul,.... As a spirit of
prophecy as at first, as a spirit of wisdom and prudence in civil
government, and as a spirit of fortitude and courage, as the Targum:

and an evil spirit from the Lord troubled him; the reverse of the
former, which by the permission of God, and as a punishment to him for
his sins, came upon him; he seemed to be a demoniac, as Josephus
represents (i) him, as if possessed with the devil; by whom he was
almost suffocated and strangled, as well as was distracted in his
counsels, and became weak and foolish; lost all courage and greatness of
mind, was timorous and fearful, and alarmed by everything, and was full
of envy, suspicion, rage, and despair.

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 8. sect. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 16:15</span></span>

And Saul's servants said unto him,.... His courtiers, who observing him
to act in a frantic manner, to be dull and melancholy, timorous, and
irresolute, unsteady, divided, and distressed; or his physicians, who
were called in to assist him, and remove his disorder from him:

behold, now an evil spirit from God troubleth thee: the disorder was not
from any natural cause, or any bodily disease, and therefore out of the
reach of physicians to do any service, but was from an evil spirit
suffered of God to harass and disturb him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 16:16</span></span>

Let our Lord now command thy servants which are before thee,.... Meaning
either themselves, or some of a more inferior rank, who were in some
post and office at court, waiters there, such as yeomen of the guards:

to seek out a man who is a cunning player on the harp: a musical
instrument much in use in those days:

and it shall come to pass, when the evil spirit from God is upon thee;
when in a melancholy mood, and Satan takes the advantage of it to
distress and terrify, to spread the gloom, and stir up evil passions,
and promote distraction and confusion:

that he shall play with his hand: upon the harp, that being not an
instrument of wind, but of hand music:

and thou shalt be well: music being a means of cheering the spirits, and
removing melancholy and gloomy apprehensions of things, and so of
restoring to better health of body and disposition of mind; and that
music has such an effect on the bodies and minds of men is certain from
observation and experience in all ages. Music has been found to be
medicine to various diseases, not only for the curing of the bite of
vipers, and of the tarantula, but for easing the pains of the sciatica,
and for helping persons labouring under the disorders of the frenzy (k);
and Pythagoras used to compose the mind, and remove the perturbations of
it, by the use of the harp (l), the thing here advised to.

\(k\) A. Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 4. c. 13. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l.
2. c. 17. Vid. Philostrat. Vit. Apollon. Tyan. l. 5. c. 7. (l) Seneca de
Ira, l. 3. c. 9.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 16:17</span></span>

And Saul said unto his servants,.... Approving of, and pleased with the
advice they gave:

provide me now a man that can play well, and bring him to me; for being
a sovereign prince, he could command whom he would to attend to his
person and service.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 16:18</span></span>

Then answered one of the servants,.... Which the Jews say (m) was Doeg
the Edomite, who out of envy and ill will to David spake of him, that
Saul might have an opportunity of slaying him; but this is not at all
likely; rather it was one of David's friends and acquaintance, that was
desirous of promoting him at court, and no doubt was directed to that
motion by the overruling providence of God:

and said, behold, I have seen a son of Jesse the Bethlehemite; he does
not mention the name of his son, but so describes him, that he might be
easily known by those who knew anything of the family of Jesse; besides
it was sufficient that he was one of Jesse's sons, to find him out:

that is cunning in playing; that is, on the harp; has good skill in
music, and is expert in it:

and a mighty valiant man; as appeared by his encountering with and
slaying the lion and the bear; an event now past, as very probable:

and a man of war some think this character of him was given after the
affair of his fighting with Goliath and killing him, but here put by a
prolepsis or anticipation; and indeed if David had been taken into
Saul's court before that affair, it is difficult to account for Saul's
ignorance of him, since he must be so near him, and so often with him,
as his musician and armourbearer; though that difficulty may be removed,
as may be observed in its proper place:

and prudent in matters; in his talk and conversation, and conduct and
behaviour; knew how to carry himself, even in a prince's court: and a
comely person; which always recommended to the courts of the eastern
nations; See Gill on [Dan 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/dan001.htm#004.md).

and the Lord is with him; prospering and succeeding him in whatsoever he
is engaged; and seeing the Lord was with him, it might be expected the
evil spirit would depart from Saul, when this person, with whom the Lord
was, was in his presence. The Targum is,"the Word of the Lord is for his
help;''all that is said of him showed that he was fit to be in the
palace of a king, and a proper person to be with Saul in his present
circumstances.

\(m\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 93. 2. So in Hieron. Trad. Heb in lib.
Reg. fol. 76. C.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 16:19</span></span>

Wherefore Saul sent messengers to Jesse,.... For David; not choosing to
take him without his leave, though Samuel suggests that kings would do
so, [Sa1 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1008.htm#011.md).

and said, send me David, thy son, which is with the sheep; he had learnt
his name, and what was his employment; and which last he mentions not by
way of contempt, it not being reckoned mean and despicable even in the
sons of great personages, in those times and countries, to attend flocks
and herds: so with the Arabs, as Philo (n) testifies, young men and
maids of the most illustrious families fed cattle; and with the ancient
Romans, the senator (o) fed his own sheep. Paris, son of Priamus, king
of Troy, is said (p) to feed his father's oxen and sheep; and Saul
himself had done the same; but to describe him particularly.

\(n\) De Vita Mosis, l. 1. p. 610. (o) "Pascebatque suas", &c. Ovid.
Fast. l. 1. (p) Coluthi Raptus Helenae, v. 71, 101.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 16:20</span></span>

And Jesse took an ass laden with bread,.... Laden with a load of bread,
as the Targum; with as much as it could carry, or was used to carry; the
Septuagint version is, an omer of bread, which was as much as a man
could eat in one day; and, according to Kimchi and Ben Melech, it may be
interpreted an heap of bread, agreeably to the use of the word in [Jdg
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#016.md), and a bottle of wine; or a skin
of wine, a leather bag or sack, which held more than our bottles; the
Targum is, a flagon of wine:

and a kid; of the goats, as the same Targum:

and sent them by David his son unto Saul; some think that Jesse
suspected that Saul had known the secret of David's being anointed, and
was fearful that he had a design upon his life, and therefore sent this
present by his son to pacify him, and ingratiate him unto him; but
rather he sent it as a token of respect and subjection to his sovereign,
and according to the custom of those times, when men used to carry
presents when they waited upon princes, and indeed in their common
visits; and do in the eastern countries to this day; See Gill on [Sa1
9:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1009.htm#007.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 16:21</span></span>

And David came to Saul, and stood before him,.... As a servant, and
ministered to him in the way, and for the purpose for which he was sent:

and he loved him greatly; being a comely person, and a well behaved
youth, and especially as he was serviceable to him with his music, in
driving away melancholy from him:

and he became his armourbearer; that is, he appointed him to this
office, though we never read that he exercised it; nor did he go with
Saul in this capacity to the battle related in the following chapter: it
may be literally rendered: "and he was to him a bearer of vessels", or
"instruments" (q); and Abarbinel thinks this is to be understood not of
instruments of war, but of instruments of music to play with; which he
brought in and bare before him when he went in to the king.

\(q\) "et fuit ei ferens vasa", Montanus; "ferens instrumenta",
Piscator.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 16:22</span></span>

And Saul sent to Jesse, saying, let David, I pray thee, stand before
me,.... Continue in his service; which was great condescension in him,
and great respect shown to Jesse, not to detain his son without his
leave, and to ask it as a favour of him:

for he hath found favour in my sight: was very acceptable to him which
must be very pleasing to Jesse to hear; especially if he was in any fear
that Saul had an ill design upon him, when he first sent for him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 16:23</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the evil spirit from God was upon Saul,....
See [Sa1 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014.md) though the word evil is
not in the text here; wherefore Abarbinel thinks that this here was the
Spirit of God, which stirred up in him thoughts of divine things, put
him in mind of what God had said, that he had rejected him from being
king, and had rent the kingdom from him; and this filled him with grief
and trouble, and he became melancholy:

that David took an harp, and played with his hands; upon it; and, as
Josephus (r) says, at the same time sung hymns and psalms; made use both
of vocal and instrumental music:

so Saul was refreshed, and was well; became cheerful, his grief was
removed, his black and gloomy apprehensions of things were dispersed,
and he was cured of his melancholy disorder for the present:

and the evil spirit departed from him: at least for a while; he had his
fits and intervals; of the effects of music in a natural way; see Gill
on [Sa1 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#016.md), though no doubt the
music of David was more than natural, being attended with the power and
blessing of God, in order to raise his fame and credit at court.

\(r\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 8. sect. 2.)

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa1017.md)

</div>
