<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1.md)  
  [Previous](sa1006)  [Next](sa1008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001.md)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 7

This chapter gives an account of the ark being brought to Kirjathjearim,
where it continued twenty years, [Sa1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001.md) of the exhortation of Samuel to
the people of Israel to reform from idolatry, and which had its desired
effect, [Sa1 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003.md) of Samuel's praying
for the people, and offering sacrifices for them, and of the success
thereof, victory over their enemies, [Sa1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005.md), and of his administration of
justice to them, and constancy in it, [Sa1
7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015.md).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 7:1</span></span>

And the men of Kirjathjearim came and fetched up the ark of the
Lord,.... From Bethshemesh, which was near unto them, as Josephus (g)
says; they made no difficulty of fetching it, but gladly received it;
for if they knew of what happened to the men of Bethshemesh, they knew
it was not owing to the presence of the ark among them, but to their
irreverent behaviour to it; and though Kirjathjearim was not a Levite
city, and so the men of it could not bear the ark themselves, yet they
might have proper persons from Bethshemesh to do this service:

and brought it into the house of Abinadab in the hill; which; hill was
within the city of Kirjathjearim, and is mentioned either to distinguish
this Abinadab that dwelt on it from another of the same name in the
city, as Kimchi observes; or else to remark the propriety of the place,
and the reason of the choice of it for the ark to be placed in; hills
and high places being in those times accounted fittest for sacred
services to be performed in, as well as places of safety; who this man
was is not certain. Josephus (h) says he was a Levite, but if so he
could only be a sojourner in this place; however he might be, as he
suggests he was, a man of great esteem for religion and righteousness:

and sanctified Eleazar his son to keep the ark of the Lord; not only to
watch it that it might not be taken away, but to keep persons from it,
from touching it, or using it irreverently; and such as were not allowed
to come nigh it; as well as to keep the place clean where it was put;
and for this he was appointed by the priests, or the elders of the city;
and was set apart for this service, and prepared for it by washings and
sacrifices; and the rather he and not his father was invested with this
office, because he was a young man, and his father might be old and
decrepit; and this his son also a holy goodman, wise and prudent, and
active and zealous for God, and true religion; and on all accounts a fit
person for this post.

\(g\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 1. sect. 4. (h) Ibid.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 7:2</span></span>

And it came to pass, while the ark abode in Kirjathjearim, that the time
was long,.... It could not be less than between forty and fifty years,
for it remained here until the times of David, who removed it from hence
after he was made king over all Israel, and when he had reigned over
Judah seven years; and from the death of Eli to that time, which
included the government of Samuel and Saul, it could not be less than
what has been hinted:

for it was twenty years; not that this was all the time the ark was at
Kirjathjearim, but it was so long there before it was much taken notice
of, and sought unto, and the Lord by it; there was a great neglect of
God, and his worship, which through the means of Samuel began to revive
about this time, as it follows:

and all the house of Israel lamented after the Lord; became sensible of
their evil doings, and repented of them, and sought the Lord with
fasting, and prayer, and tears; bewailed their backslidings and
revoltings from him, and cried after a departing God.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 7:3</span></span>

And Samuel spake unto all the house of Israel,.... When they assembled
at one of their three yearly feasts, or as he went from place to place,
exhorting them to repentance and reformation; and perceiving they began
to be awakened to a sense of their sins, and seemed desirous of
returning to God, and restoring his worship:

saying, if ye do return unto the Lord with all your hearts; truly and
sincerely; for he might fear there was hypocrisy and dissimulation at
least in some of them:

then put away the strange gods; as all but the true God are; or the gods
of another people, as the Philistines, Canaanites, &c. Baalim seem
chiefly intended, as appears from the following verse:

and Ashtaroth from among you; female deities, such as with other nations
went by the name of Juno, Venus, &c. so the Arabic version,"the idols of
the women ye secretly worship.''Aquila renders it, "the images of
Astarte"; so they call Venus as Procopius Gazaeus observes, from
"aster", a star; but the word signifies flocks of sheep, and these
deities are supposed by some to be in the form of them; but be they what
they may, they were to be put away out of their houses, and out of their
hearts:

and prepare your hearts unto the Lord, and serve him only; that is,
direct your hearts to him while in his service; let it proceed from the
heart, and let it be done to him only, and not to another with him; or
to him in and by another, as may be pretended, and commonly is by
idolaters:

and he will deliver you out of the hand of the Philistines; under whose
dominion they had been for many years; for though their power over them
was weakened by Samson, yet they were not completely delivered by him;
so all the time of Eli they were not wholly free from them; and
especially since their last defeat by them; when the ark was taken, they
had been under oppression by them; now Samuel promises them deliverance
from it, in case they relinquish their idols, and served the Lord solely
and heartily.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 7:4</span></span>

Then the children of Israel did put away Baalim and Ashtaroth,.... Both
their male and female deities, of which see [Jdg
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#013.md).

and served the Lord Only; Dr. Lightfoot (i) observes, that a spirit of
repentance and conversion came generally upon all the people; a matter
and a time as remarkable as almost any we read of in Scripture, one only
parallel to it; and that is in Acts, chapters two and three, at the
great conversion there.

\(i\) Works, vol. 1. p. 54.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 7:5</span></span>

And Samuel said, gather all Israel to Mizpeh,.... Not Mizpeh in Gilead,
on the other side Jordan, but a city which lay on the borders of Judah
and Benjamin, where the tribes met on the account of the Levite's
concubine, [Jdg 20:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg020.htm#001.md). This order
Samuel gave by messengers sent to the several tribes, or the heads of
them, to meet him at this place:

and I will pray for you unto the Lord; no doubt he prayed for them
privately, that the reformation begun might be carried on, and appear to
be sincere, and hearty, and general, and universal; but he was desirous
that they might appear in a body, and join with him in public prayer for
their spiritual and temporal welfare; that they might have true
repentance for their sins, reform from them, and have remission of them,
and be delivered out of the hands of their enemies.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 7:6</span></span>

And they gathered together to Mizpeh,.... Even all Israel, at least the
heads of the people, and representatives of them:

and drew water, and poured it out before the Lord; drew it from some
fountain near at hand, and poured it out as in the presence of God, who
was where his people were met together. Jerom (k) relates it as
tradition of the Jews, that curses were cast into this water, as in the
water of jealousy, and that idolaters were tried by it; and that
whatever idolater, who denied he worshipped idols, and tasted of it, his
lips so stuck together that they could not be separated, and by this
means was known and put to death; and therefore it is said Samuel judged
now at this place: but it should be observed, this water was not drank,
but poured out; and that as a token of their humiliation, as Jarchi,
that they were before the Lord, as water poured out; and of the
sincerity of their repentance, as the Targum, which is,"they poured out
their heart in repentance, as water;''and of the atonement and expiation
of their sins, which passed away as water to be remembered no more, as
Kimchi, or rather signifying hereby that they thoroughly renounced
idolatry, that nothing of it should remain; as water entirely poured
out, there remains not so much as any smell of it in the cask, as does
of honey or oil, or such kind of liquor; for what a learned writer (l)
says, that this was in token of joy, like that at the feast of
tabernacles, when they drew water out of the fountain of Siloah, seems
not so agreeable, since this was a day of humiliation, fasting, and
prayer, as follows:

and fasted on that day, and said there, we have sinned against the Lord;
Samuel prayed in public for them, with whom they joined; and they fasted
in a literal sense, abstaining from food, and made a confession of their
sins; this was the work of that day:

and Samuel judged the children of Israel in Mizpeh; not that he now
began to judge them, but went on in a more public and vigorous manner to
judge them; he sat, and heard, and tried causes that came before him;
explained the laws of God to them, and enforced the obedience of them;
reformed abuses that were among them, and punished idolaters.

\(k\) Trad. Heb. in lib. Reg. fol. 75. F. (l) L'Empereur, annot. in
Misn. Middot, c. 2. sect. 5. No. 7.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 7:7</span></span>

And when the Philistines heard that the children of Israel were gathered
together to Mizpeh,.... Not knowing it was upon a religious account; but
supposing they met to form schemes and measures to cast off their yoke,
and deliver themselves out of their hands; and were preparing to take up
arms, and fall upon them:

the lords of the Philistines went up against Israel; with forces out of
their several principalities united to fight with them; judging it
advisable to lose no time, but attack them before they were well
prepared and provided to defend themselves:

and when the children of Israel heard it, they were afraid of the
Philistines; because they were unarmed, and not at all prepared for war,
and having no expectation of it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 7:8</span></span>

And the children of Israel said to Samuel,.... To whom they applied, not
as the general of their forces, but as the prophet of the Lord;
believing his prayers for them would be of more avail to them than an
army of men ever so numerous, or so well accoutred:

cease not to cry unto the Lord our God for us: he had been praying for
them that day, and they desired he would continue praying for them, well
knowing that the effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man avails
much; they knew their salvation was of the Lord, and that he only could
save them, and that he must be sought unto for it; and as Samuel had an
interest in him, they beg he would continue to make use of it on their
behalf; in which they expressed their trust in God, their regard to
means, the duty of prayer, and the high esteem they had of the prophet
of the Lord, whom they entreat to pray for them:

that he will save us out of the hands of the Philistines; who were now
coming up against them, and who had for a long time tyrannised over
them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 7:9</span></span>

And Samuel took a sucking lamb,.... Which it might be, and yet more than
eight days old, for under that it might not be sacrificed, [Exo
22:30](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#030.md).

and offered it for a burnt offering wholly unto the Lord; the whole of
it was burnt, skin and all, whereas the skin was the priest's in other
burnt offerings; and this is remarked (m) as one of the three things in
which it differed from other offerings; the word being feminine, the
Jews gather from hence, as Jarchi notes, that females might be offered
at a private altar:

and Samuel cried unto the Lord for Israel; not only offered a sacrifice
for them, but prayed for them:

and the Lord heard him; and answered him, either by causing fire to come
down on the sacrifice, by which it was consumed, or by the voice of
thunder, which frightened and discomfited the Philistines; and the event
of things manifestly showed it.

\(m\) Midrash Schemuel apud Abarbinel in loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 7:10</span></span>

And as Samuel was offering up the burnt offering.... Which he might do
by a priest, as Ben Gersom suggests, he being only a Levite; though he
being a prophet, and an extraordinary person, and this an extraordinary
case, he might do it himself, as Gideon and others, as well as offer it
in another place than where the tabernacle was; Shiloh being now
destroyed, persons and places for sacrifice were now dispensed with: and
before Samuel had made an end of offering the sacrifice:

the Philistines drew near to battle against Israel; and were come as far
almost as Mizpeh, where Israel were, and Samuel was sacrificing:

but the Lord thundered with a great thunder on that day upon the
Philistines; which fulfilled Hannah's prophecy, [Sa1
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1002.htm#010) and this, as Josephus (n.md) says,
was attended with lightning, which flashed in their faces, and shook
their weapons out of their hands, so that they fled disarmed; and also
with an earthquake, which caused gaps in the earth, into which they
fell:

and discomfited them; disturbed, affrighted them, and threw them into
confusion and disorder, as well as destroyed many of them:

and they were smitten before Israel; the meaning of which is not that
they fled before them, and were killed by them; but that before Israel
could come out against them, and fight with them, they were smitten and
destroyed, many of them by the thunder and lightning, and by the earth
opening upon them, and devouring them; for this phrase, "before Israel",
denotes time, as Abarbinel observes, and not place.

\(n\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 2. sect. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 7:11</span></span>

And the men of Israel went out of Mizpeh,.... To which they were
encouraged by hearing or perceiving that the army of the Philistines was
discomfited by the thunder, and lightning, and earthquake:

and pursued the Philistines; who, when they came out, were fleeing from
the opening earth, and frightened with thunder and lightning, and many
were killed, and all put in disorder; so that they stayed not to engage
in battle with Israel, and who had nothing to do but to pursue their
enemy:

and smote them: with what weapons of war they could get at Mizpeh, and
with what some might have with them for private use, and in common wear;
but more especially with the weapons of the Philistines, which they in
their confusion and fright had thrown away:

until they came under Bethcar; a place so called; "car" signifies a
lamb; here might be formerly a temple dedicated to the lamb, unless it
had its name in memory of the lamb Samuel now offered, which was
followed with such success. Josephus (o) calls this place Corraea; and
in the Targum it is Bethsaron, which signifies a fruitful field or
champaign country.

\(o\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 2. sect. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 7:12</span></span>

And Samuel took a stone, and set it,.... Not for worship, but as a
monument of the victory obtained by the help of God: and this he placed

between Mizpeh and Shen; which latter signifies a tooth, and designs the
precipice of a rock which juts out, and hangs over in the form of one:

and called the name of it Ebenezer; which signifies "the stone of help";
and is the same place which by anticipation has this name, [Sa1
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#001.md), so that in the selfsame place
where the Israelites were twice beaten by the Philistines, and the ark
taken, was this salvation wrought for them:

saying, hitherto hath the Lord helped us; this was but the beginning of
their deliverance from the Philistines, and which was owing to the help
of the Lord; and as he had begun to help them, they might hope and
encourage themselves that he would go on to help them until their
deliverance was completed: however, they with Samuel thought it their
duty, which was right, to acknowledge what the Lord had done for them,
and perpetuate the memory of it, though they could not be sure what he
would do for them hereafter; yet as they were sensible of, and thankful
for this instance of his goodness, they hoped for more, and had their
dependence on him for future success against their enemies.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 7:13</span></span>

So the Philistines were subdued,.... Not that their country was
conquered, or they made subject and become tributaries to Israel; but
they were so humbled, as not to attempt to give the people of Israel any
further trouble and distress, who were now delivered from their
oppression and tyranny:

and came no more into the coast of Israel; at this time they did not
gather together their forces dispersed, nor raise and bring a new army
into the land of Israel; they contented themselves with placing
garrisons on the coast, but did not attempt to enter and invade them any
more; that is, for a long time, even until Samuel was grown old, and the
people would have a king, and had one, which offended the Lord, and then
he suffered them to be distressed by them again; but while Samuel was
alone governor they came no more, though they did quickly after Saul was
made king, as it follows:

the hand of the Lord was against the Philistines all the days of Samuel;
not all the days of his life, but all the days of his sole government,
which restrained them from making incursions into the land of Israel;
and indeed in later times, when they did come forth to make war with
them, the battle was against them during the times of Samuel.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 7:14</span></span>

And the cities which the Philistines had taken from Israel were restored
to Israel,.... We nowhere read that the Israelites went out to war with
them, and took these cities from them by besieging and assaulting them;
but they made a demand of them after the above victory obtained, by
which the Philistines were so intimidated, that they quietly surrendered
them to them:

from Ekron even unto Gath, and the coasts thereof, did Israel deliver
out of the hands of the Philistines; not by dint of sword, but by
demand, to which they submitted; and though Ekron, if not Gath, fell to
the tribe of Judah by lot, yet were never in their possession; and so
are to be understood exclusively here, that not they, but the cities and
towns that lay between them and the coasts thereof, which the
Philistines had seized upon, these they were obliged to deliver up again
to Israel; and if Ekron and Gath were delivered, they were not long held
by them, for we soon read of them as in the hands of others:

and there was peace between Israel and the Amorites; who were a
principal nation of the Canaanites, and are put for the whole of them
that remained; and so Josephus (p) calls them the remnant of the
Canaanites; these, finding the Philistines were subdued, were quiet and
peaceable, and gave Israel no more trouble.

\(p\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 6. c. 2. sect. 2.)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 7:15</span></span>

And Samuel judged Israel all the days of his life. Not only before Saul
was made king, but afterwards; for though he had not the exercise of the
supreme government of the nation, yet he might act as a judge under
Saul, and hear and try causes brought before him, and execute justice
and judgment; and as a prophet he taught and instructed the people, and
reformed abuses among them; and besides, he held and exercised his
extraordinary office, to which he was raised up of God, and even took
upon him to reprove Saul himself, and to kill Agag. The Jews say (q) he
judged Israel thirteen years only, eleven by himself, and two with Saul;
but his government must be much larger, his with Saul is reckoned forty
years, [Act 13:21](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#021.md).

\(q\) Seder Olam Rabba, c. 13. p. 35. Midrash Tillim apud Abarbinel in
loc. Kimchi in loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 7:16</span></span>

And he went from year to year in circuit,.... As judges do; or "from the
year in the year" (r) from the time of the year in the year, as the
Targum, from the middle of it, that is, every half year; and so Josephus
says (s), that he went twice a year in circuit: and the places he went
to, and where he held his courts of judicature, were

Bethel, and Gilgal, and Mizpeh; by Bethel is not meant Shiloh, as
Abarbinel, for that was now destroyed; nor Kirjathjearim, where the ark
was, for it would have been called by its name; but the same Bethel that
was near to Ai, and not far from Shiloh, and was in the tribe of
Benjamin, as all those places were. Gilgal was where the tabernacle,
ark, and camp of Israel were first pitched, when they came over Jordan,
and Mizpeh where the people used to be assembled on occasion, see [Sa1
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#005.md),

and judged Israel in all those places; who came from all parts hither
with their causes, and for advice and counsel in all cases, at the
returning periods.

\(r\) "ex anno in anno". (s) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 3. sect. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 7:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 7:17</span></span>

And his return was to Ramah,.... When he had gone his circuit, he came
back to this city, which was his native place, and where his father and
mother had dwelt, see [Sa1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001.md).

for there was his house; and his father's house before him, and perhaps
the same, [Sa1 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#019.md) and there he
judged Israel; here was his fixed residence, and here he was always to
be met with, except when on his circuit; and hither the people of Israel
might come from all parts, to have justice done them between man and
man, or receive information in matters of difficulty and importance:

and there he built an altar unto the Lord: to offer his own sacrifices,
and the sacrifices of the people, either by himself, or by a priest,
when the people came to have justice administered to them; or to desire
him to pray for them, teach and instruct them, or to give them advice.
Shiloh being destroyed, and no place appointed for the tabernacle and
altar, the Jews say, high places for a private altar were lawful, and
even for one that was not a priest to offer; these things, though
settled by law, yet were for a time dispensed with, until things could
be fixed in their proper place and order.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 8](sa1008.md)

</div>
