<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Kings (1 Samuel) Index](sa1)  
  [Previous](sa1016)  [Next](sa1018) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#001)

[1 Kings (1 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa1 17:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO FIRST SAMUEL 17

This chapter relates how the armies of Israel, and of the Philistines,
prepared for battle, and where, [Sa1
17:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#001), describes a champion of the
Philistines, who defied the armies of Israel, [Sa1
17:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#004), and while he was so doing, it
informs us that David came into the camp, and he heard his words, and
signified to one and another his inclination to fight with him, [Sa1
17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#012), which being reported to Saul,
David was sent for by him, and much discourse passed between them about
it, [Sa1 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#031) when we are told the
manner in which he engaged with the Philistine, and the victory he
obtained over him, [Sa1 17:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#038) upon
which the Philistines fled, and Israel pursued them; and on account of
this action David was taken notice of by Saul, and brought to court
again, as the following chapter shows, [Sa1
17:52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#052).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa1 17:1</span></span>

Now the Philistines gathered together their armies to battle,....
Josephus (s) says this was not long after the things related in the
preceding chapter were transacted; and very probably they had heard of
the melancholy and distraction of Saul, and thought it a proper
opportunity of avenging themselves on Israel for their last slaughter of
them, and for that purpose gathered together their dispersed troops:

and were gathered together at Shochoh, which belongeth to Judah; a city
of the tribe of Judah, [Jos 15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035),
which shows that, notwithstanding their last defeat, they had great
footing in the land of Israel, or however had penetrated far into it in
this march of theirs:

and pitched between Shochoh and Azekah; which were both in the same
tribe, and near one another, of which See Gill on [Jos
10:10](../../../bib/kjv/jos010.htm#010); see Gill on [Jos
15:35](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#035).

in Ephesdammim; which, by an apocope of the first letter, is called
Pasdammim, [Ch1 11:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#013) which the Jews
(t) say had this name because there blood ceased.

\(s\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 9. sect. 1. (t) Midrash Ruth, fol. 48. 2. Kimchi
in loc.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa1 17:2</span></span>

And Saul and the men of Israel were gathered together,.... He being
cured, at least being better of his disorder, through the music of
David, and alarmed and aroused by the invasion of the Philistines, which
might serve to dissipate any remains of it, or prevent its return, got
together his forces:

and pitched by the valley of Elah; which Jerom (u) says Aquila and
Theodotion interpret "the valley of the oak"; but the Vulgate Latin
version, the valley of Terebinth; which, according to our countryman
Sandys (w), was four miles from Ramaosophim, where Samuel dwelt; for he
says,"after four miles riding, we descended into the valley of
Terebinth, famous, though little, for the slaughter of Goliath;''and in
the Targum this valley is called the valley of Butma, which in the
Arabic language signifies a "terebinth", or turpentine tree; though some
translate it "the oak"; and, according to some modern travellers (x), to
this day it bears a name similar to that; for they say it is"now called
the vale of Bitumen, very famous all over those parts for David's
victory over Goliath:"

and set the battle in array against the Philistines; prepared to give
them battle.

\(u\) Deloc. Heb. fol. 91. F. (w) Travels, p. 157. ed. 5. (x) Egmont and
Heyman's Travels, vol. 1. p. 305.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa1 17:3</span></span>

And the Philistines stood on a mountain on the one side, and Israel
stood on a mountain on the other side, Before the Israelites are said to
encamp in or by the valley; but here they are said to take the higher
ground, and face the Philistines, who were on a mountain or hill on the
other side over against them, which Kimchi reconciles thus; the whole or
the grand army lay encamped in the valley, and, they that were set in
array, or the first ranks, the first battalion, ascended the mountain to
meet the Philistines. Vatablus takes it to be the same mountain, that on
one part of it the Philistines formed their first battalion, and the
rest of the army was in the valley; and on the other part of the
mountain the Israelites pitched their camp:

and there was a valley between them; the same as in the preceding verse.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa1 17:4</span></span>

And there went out a champion out of the camp of the Philistines,.... Or
a "middle person", or a man "between two" (y); meaning either one that
went and stood between the two armies of Israel and the Philistines, as
the Jewish writers generally interpret it: or a "dueller" (z), as
others, with which our version agrees; one that proposed to fight a
duel, and have the war decided by two persons, of which he would be one:

named Goliath of Gath; which was one of the places where the Anakims or
giants were driven, and left, in the times of Joshua, and from whom this
man descended, [Jos 11:22](../../../bib/kjv/jos011.htm#022).

whose height was six cubits and a span; and taking a cubit after the
calculation of Bishop Cumberland (a) to be twenty one inches, and more,
and a span to be half a cubit, the height of this man was eleven feet
four inches, and somewhat more; which need not seem incredible, since
the coffin of Orestea, the son of Agamemnon, is said (b) to be seven
cubits long; and Eleazar, a Jew, who because of his size was called the
giant, and was presented by Artabanus, king of the Parthians, to
Tiberius Caesar, is said by Josephus (c) to be seven cubits high; and
one Gabbara of Arabia, in the times of Claudius Caesar, measured nine
feet nine inches, as Pliny (d) relates, and who elsewhere (e) speaks of
a people in Ethiopia, called Syrbotae, who were eight cubits high; the
Septuagint version makes Goliath to be only four cubits and a span high,
and so Josephus (f); that is, about eight feet.

\(y\) "vir intermedius", Montanus; "inter duo", Vatablus; "vir
medietatum", Noldius, p. 194. No. 283. (z) "Quidam duellator", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator. (a) Of Scripture Weights and Measures, c. 2. p.
57. (b) Herodot. Clio, sive, l. 1. c. 68. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 7. c. 16.
(c) Antiqu. l. 18. c. 5. sect. 5. (d) Nat. Hist. ib. (e) Ibid. l. 6. 30.
(f) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 9. sect. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa1 17:5</span></span>

And he had an helmet of brass upon his head,.... This was a piece of
armour, which covered the head in the day of battle; these were usually
made of the skins of beasts, of leather, and which were covered with
plates of iron, or brass; and sometimes made of all iron, or of brass
(g); as this seems to have been:

and he was armed with a coat of mail; which reached from the neck to the
middle, and consisted of various plates of brass laid on one another,
like the scales of fishes (h), so close together that no dart or arrow
could pierce between:

and the weight of the coat was five thousand shekels of brass: which
made one hundred and fifty six pounds and a quarter of zygostatic or
avoirdupois weight; and therefore he must be a very strong man indeed to
carry such a weight. So the armour of the ancient Romans were all of
brass, as this man's; their helmets, shields, greaves, coats of mail,
all of brass, as Livy says (i); and so in the age of the Grecian heroes
(j).

\(g\) Vid. Lydium "de re militari": l. 3. c. 5. p. 63. (h) "----Rutilum
thoraca indutus anis Horrebat squamis----" Virgil. Aeneid. l. 11. (i)
Hist. l. 1. c. 22. (j) Pausan. Messenica, l. 3. p. 163. So Homer
frequently describes the Grecians with a coat of mail of brass.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa1 17:6</span></span>

And he had greaves of brass upon his legs,.... Which were a sort of
boots, or leg harnesses, which covered the thighs and legs down to the
heels; such as Iolaus (k) and the Grecians usually wore, as described by
Homer; which are supposed to be double the weight of the helmet,
reckoned at fifteen pounds, so that these must weigh thirty pounds of
avoirdupois weight:

and a target of brass between his shoulders; the Targum is,"a spear or
shield of brass, which came out of the helmet, and a weight of brass
upon his shoulders.''Jarchi says the same, and that it was in the form
of a spear to defend the neck from the sword; it seems to be a corslet
of brass, worn between the helmet and the coat of mail for the defence
of the neck, supposed to weigh thirty pounds (l).

\(k\) Hesiod. Scutum Herc. ver. 122. (l) Vid. Hostii Monomach. David &
Goliath, c. 5.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa1 17:7</span></span>

And the staff of his spear was like a weaver's beam,.... The wooden part
of it, held in the hand; this for thickness was like the beam in the
weaver's loom, about which the warp, or else the web, is rolled; and it
is conjectured that, in proportion to the stature of Goliath, his spear
must be twenty six feet long, since Hector's in Homer (m) was eleven
cubits, or sixteen feet and a half:

and his spear's head weighed six hundred shekels of iron; the iron part
of the spear, the point of it, which has its name in Hebrew from a flame
of fire, because when brandished it looks shining and flaming; and being
the weight of six hundred shekels, amounted to eighteen pounds and three
quarters of avoirdupois weight, and the whole spear is supposed to weigh
thirty seven pounds and a half; and the whole of this man's armour is
thought to weigh two hundred and seventy two pounds, thirteen ounces
(n); which was a prodigious weight for a man to carry, and go into
battle with; and one may well wonder how he could be able with such a
weight about him to move and lay about in an engagement; though this is
nothing in comparison of the weight some men have carried. Pliny (o)
tells us that he saw one Athanatus come into the theatre clothed with a
leaden breastplate of five hundred pounds weight, and shod with buskins
of the same weight:

and one bearing a shield went before him; which when engaged in battle
he held in his own hand, and his sword in the other; the former was
reckoned at thirty pounds, and the latter at four pounds, one ounce;
though one would think he had no occasion for a shield, being so well
covered with armour all over; so that the carrying of it before him
might be only a matter of form and state. His spear is the only piece of
armour that was of iron, all the rest were of brass; and Hesiod (p),
writing of the brazen age, says, their arms and their houses were all of
brass, for then there was no iron; and so Lucretius (q) affirms that the
use of brass was before iron; but both are mentioned together; see Gill
on [Gen 4:22](../../../bib/kjv/gen004.htm#022), hence Mars is called
(r).

\(m\) Iliad. 18. (n) Hostius, ut supra. (o) Nat. Hist. l. 7. c. 20. (p)
Opera & Dies, l. 1. ver. 147, 148. (q) "De rerum natura". l. 5. & "prior
aeris erat", &c. (r) Homer. Iliad. 5. ver. 704, 859, 864. Pindar. Olymp.
Ode 10.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa1 17:8</span></span>

And he stood and cried unto the armies of Israel,.... He stood in the
valley between the two armies, and cried with a loud voice that he might
be heard; and as he was of such a monstrous stature, no doubt his voice
was very strong and sonorous; and as the battalions of Israel designed
by armies were posted on the mountain or hill, his voice would ascend,
and be the more easily heard:

and said unto them, why are ye come out to set your battle in array?
either as wondering at their boldness, to set themselves in battle array
against the Philistines; or rather suggesting that it was needless,
since the dispute between them might be issued by a single combat:

am not I a Philistine, and you servants to Saul? a common Philistine,
according to Jarchi; not a captain of a hundred, or of a thousand; and
yet would fight anyone of them, their general officers, or be they who
they would; or rather, as Abarbinel, he was a prince among the
Philistines, and king of Gath; and though he was, and it was usual with
great persons to engage with their equals, yet he did not insist on
that; but would engage with any man, though of an inferior rank, even
with any of Saul's servants; and by calling the Israelites the servants
of Saul, he might have some respect to Saul's arbitrary government over
them; and since they must be servants and slaves, it was as well to be
servants to the Philistines as to him:

choose you a man for you, and let him come down to me; according to
Jarchi and the Targumist, the challenge first respects Saul their king;
that if he was a man of fortitude and courage, let him come and engage
with him; if not, choose another, and send him down into the valley to
fight with him. These same writers represent him as blustering and
bragging that he killed the two sons of Eli, Hophni and Phinehas, took
the ark captive, and carried it into the temple of Dagon; that he had
been used to go out with the armies of the Philistines, and had obtained
victories, and slain many, and yet had never been made captain of a
thousand among them; all which is improbable, and some of it notoriously
false; for in every battle after the taking of the ark the Philistines
had been beaten.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa1 17:9</span></span>

If he be able to fight with me, and to kill me, then will we be your
servants,.... For which it does not appear he had any commission or
authority to say; nor did the Philistines think themselves obliged to
abide by what he said, since, when he was slain, they did not yield
themselves servants to the Israelites:

but if I prevail against him, and kill him, then shall ye be our
servants, and serve us; to which terms also the Israelites did not
consent; nor did David, who engaged with him, enter the fray on such
conditions.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa1 17:10</span></span>

And the Philistine said, I defy the armies of Israel this day,.... Or
"reproach" (s) them; that is, should they not accept his challenge, and
send down a man to fight with them, he should then upbraid them with
cowardice; and now he disdained them, as if there was not a man among
them that dared to encounter with him:

give me a man that we may fight together; and so decide the controversy
between us; such as were those duels fought between Paris and Menelaus
in the Trojan war, and between the Lacedemonians and the Argives in the
times of Orthryades, and between the Athenians and Romans by the Horatii
and Curiatii, as Grotius observes.

\(s\) "exprobravo". V. L. Pagninus, Montanus; "probro affeci", Tigurine
version; "probro affecero", Junius & Tremellius.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa1 17:11</span></span>

When Saul and all Israel heard these words of the Philistine,.... For
they were delivered with such a tone and strength of voice, as to be
heard very generally, at least by many, and which soon was reported
through the whole army:

they were dismayed, and greatly afraid; which may seem strange, when
there were so many valiant men among them, as Saul himself, who had
behaved with so much courage against the Ammonites, Philistines, and
Amalekites; but now the Spirit of God was departed from him, and he was
become timorous and fearful; and though he was much better than he had
been, yet still he was not the man of spirit and resolution as before:
there was also Abner, the general of his army, a very valiant man, a
great man in Israel, and yet appears not on this occasion; and, what is
more wonderful, Jonathan the son of Saul was present, as appears from
[Sa1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001) who had not only smitten a
garrison of the Philistines, but with one man more only had attacked
another garrison, and routed the whole army of the Philistines, and yet
now shows not his head against a single man: so it is when God cuts off
the spirits of princes, or takes away their courage; victory over this
man, and the glory of it, were reserved for David; and all this fear and
dread throughout the armies of Israel were suffered, that he might
appear the more glorious.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa1 17:12</span></span>

Now David was the son of that Ephrathite of Bethlehemjudah, whose name
was Jesse,.... Before made mention of, [Ch1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1016.htm#001).

and he had eight sons; seven only are mentioned, [Ch1
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/ch1002.htm#013) one of them being, as is thought
by some, a grandson, perhaps Jonadab the son of Shammah; or was a son by
another woman, or died without children, as Jarchi, and therefore not
mentioned:

and the man went among men for an old man in the days of Saul; the
phrase, "among men", either signifies that he was ranked among old men,
infirm and unfit for war, and so excused, and his sons went in his room,
so Kimchi; or he was reckoned among men of the first rank, men of
esteem, credit, and reputation, so Jarchi and R. Isaiah, with which
agrees the Targum; or whenever he went abroad, he was attended by many
men, had a large retinue, which sense Abarbinel mentions, and is that of
Ben Gersom, and agrees with the Talmud (t); but the Syriac and Arabic
versions read "stricken in years", which seems most agreeable.

\(t\) T. Bab. Beracot: fol. 58. 1.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa1 17:13</span></span>

And the three eldest sons of Jesse went and followed Saul to the
battle,.... Either of their own accord, or rather at their father's
motion, or however with his knowledge and consent, who because he could
not go himself, willed them to go; and these were forward, and some of
the foremost that followed Saul to the battle, being zealous and well
disposed to defend their king and country:

and the names of the three sons that went to the battle were Eliab the
firstborn, and next unto him Abinadab, and the third Shammah; who are
the three mentioned by name that passed before Samuel, when he came to
anoint one of Jesse's sons to be king, [Sa1
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#006).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa1 17:14</span></span>

And David was the youngest,.... For the sake of whom this account is
given of Jesse and his family, and who after this makes a considerable
figure in the camp and court of Saul:

and the three eldest followed Saul; as before related, and which is
repeated, that it might be observed that they only of Jesse's sons
followed Saul; not David particularly, but who was providentially sent
to the army at the time the Philistine was defying it.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa1 17:15</span></span>

But David went, and returned from Saul,.... Or "from above Saul";
Josephus (u) says, the physicians of Saul advised to get a man to stand
, "over his head", and sing psalms and hymns to him; and Saul being
recovered from his frenzy and melancholy, by means of David's music, he
was dismissed from him, or had leave to go home, or he returned upon
Saul's taking the field; though one would think, if he was now his
armourbearer, he would have gone with him, see [Sa1
16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#021). It seems that when he was
called to the court of Saul, that he did not continue there, but was
going and coming, was there at certain times when Saul wanted him; and
so when in the camp he might go and return as there was occasion for it:

to feed his father's sheep at Bethlehem; for though he was anointed
king, and was called to court, yet such was his humility, that he
condescended to attend this employment of keeping sheep; and though
Jesse knew all this, yet he kept him at home to this business, when it
might be more reasonably thought he would have lain in the way of
preferment, had he followed Saul to the camp, and appeared in the army;
but he chose to leave things to the providence of God to work the way
for him, and by which he was directed to take the following step, though
perhaps without any design to his son's future promotion.

\(u\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 8. sect. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa1 17:16</span></span>

And the Philistine drew near morning and evening,.... Twice a day he
came near the camp, within the hearing of it. The Jews (w) say, he took
those seasons on purpose to disturb them in reading their "Shema", or
"hear, O Israel", &c. and saying their prayers morning and evening:

and presented himself forty days; Successively, before the armies of
Israel, daring them to send down a man to fight with him, and
reproaching them for their cowardice in not doing it.

\(w\) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 42. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa1 17:17</span></span>

And Jesse said unto David his son,.... His youngest son, that was at
home with him keeping sheep; he had three more at home, and who were
elder than David, and yet he is directed by the providence of God to
pick and send him on the following errand, there being work for him to
do Jesse knew nothing of:

take now for thy brethren an ephah of this parched corn; pointing to a
quantity of it in a certain place; this was wheat or barley dried in a
furnace or oven, and ground into meal, and being mixed with water, or
milk, or butter, or honey, or oil, was eaten, and reckoned very
delicious; and besides this, there was another sort of "kali", the word
here used, which was parched pulse, as beans, peas, &c. parched, and
which to this day is by the Arabs called by this name (x); of both which
mention is made, [Sa2 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#028). Now an
"ephah" was as much as ten men could eat in a day, it consisted of ten
omers, [Exo 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo016.htm#016), and the number ten
is after used of loaves and cheese:

and these ten loaves of bread; or cakes of bread, as Kimchi interprets
it; pieces or morsels of bread, as the Targum; which seems not so
agreeable as loaves or cakes, which are not in the text, but to be
supplied:

and run to the camp to thy brethren; which, according to Bunting (y),
was four miles from Bethlehem; and whither it seems he went on foot, and
is bid to make haste, and even to run, as his brethren might be in want
of provision; and Jesse was very desirous of relieving them, and hearing
from them as soon as possible; it is very likely he had a servant or
servants to attend him, and assist in carrying this load of provision,
which, with what follows, was too much for one man to run with.

\(x\) Vid. Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 2. l. 1. c. 7. col. 47. (y) Travels,
&c. p. 135.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa1 17:18</span></span>

And carry these ten cheeses unto the captain of their thousand,....
Their chiliarch or colonel, who had the command of 1000 men, and under
whom Jesse's sons fought; Jarchi thinks this was Jonathan, who had 1000
men with him at Gibeah, and so now, [Sa1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#002), these cheeses were sent by Jesse
to the captain, to be distributed among his men, or a present to
himself, that he might use his sons well who were under his command:

and look how thy brethren fare; whether in good health, in good spirits,
and in safety:

and take their pledge; that is, if they had been obliged for want of
money to pawn any of their clothes, or what they had with them to buy
food with, that he would redeem and take up the pledge, by paying the
money for which they were pawned; for it is thought that soldiers at
this time were not maintained at the expense of the king and government,
but at their own, and the families to which they belonged: though some
are of opinion that this was some token which they had sent by a
messenger to their father, by which he might know he came from them, so
Ben Gersom; and which David was now to take with him, and return it; or
a token that he was to bring from them, whereby he might be assured of
their welfare; and so the Targum, "and bring their goodness", a token of
their being in good health. The Jews (z) understand it of bills of
divorce to be given to their wives, that if they should die in battle,
or be taken captive, that their wives might marry after three years.

\(z\) Hieron. Trad. Heb. in lib. Reg. fol. 76. D.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa1 17:19</span></span>

Now Saul, and they,.... That is, the sons of Jesse, and brethren of
David:

and all the men of Israel; the soldiers in the army:

were in the valley Elah; or "by" it, near unto it; for they were set in
array on the mountain on the side of it:

fighting with the Philistines; not actually engaged in battle, but drawn
up for it; prepared and in readiness to engage whenever it was
necessary, or they were obliged to it; and perhaps there might be now
and then some skirmishes in the outer parts of the camp.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa1 17:20</span></span>

And David rose up early in the morning,.... Being very ready and eager
to obey his father's orders, and visit his brethren:

and left the sheep with a keeper; which showed his care and faithfulness
in the discharge of his office; he was not unmindful of his father's
sheep, any more than of his commands:

and took; the ephah of parched corn, the ten loaves, and the ten
cheeses:

and went, as Jesse had commanded him; went and carried them to the camp,
according to his orders:

and he came to the trench; foss or ditch, which was cast up all around
the army, partly to prevent the enemy falling on them before, and partly
to prevent deserters from them behind; or the word signifying a wagon or
carriage, which is here used, this might be a fence around the camp made
of wagons fastened to each other; though it may only signify, the camp
itself, which lay in a circular form, with proper guards about it to
watch the enemy. Now David came up to it just

as the host was going forth to the fight; preparing and getting every
thing ready to the battle, and in motion, and upon the march to meet the
enemy:

and shouted for the battle; which was usually done when about to make
the onset, to animate the soldiers, and strike the greater terror into
the enemy; and this noise was sometimes made with the voice in a hideous
and howling way, and was called "barritus" (a) by the Romans; with the
Trojans it was like the noise of cranes in the air (b); it was also
attended with the clashing of shields and spears (c); with the Persians,
it was a rough, boisterous, and confused noise (d).

\(a\) Vid. Valtrimum de re militar. Roman. l. 5. c. 3. p. 314, 315. & A.
Gell. Noct. Attic. l. 1. c. 11. (b) Homer. Iliad. 3. ver. 1, 2, 3. (c)
Vid. Lydium de re militari, l. 4. c. 3. p. 158, 159. (d) Curt. Hist. l.
3. c. 10. Vid. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 4. c. 7.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa1 17:21</span></span>

For Israel and all the Philistines had put the battle in array,.... Both
sides prepared for it, and drew up in line of battle:

army against army; rank against rank, battalion against battalion, the
right wing of the one against the left of the other, &c.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa1 17:22</span></span>

And David left his carriage in the hand the keeper of the carriage,....
That is, he left load of provisions he brought with him in the hand of
the keeper of the bag and baggage of the army, their clothes, and such
like things; not having an opportunity to deliver them to his brethren,
who were just going to engage in battle:

and ran into the army; which showed the valour and courage of David, who
chose rather to expose himself in battle, than to abide with the keeper
of the carriages:

and came and saluted his brethren; asked them of their welfare, in his
father's name and his own.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa1 17:23</span></span>

And as he talked with them,.... About their health, and the errand he
came upon, and the message of his father to them, and how it was with
him, who sent them his best wishes:

behold, there came up the champion, the Philistine of Gath, Goliath by
name: of whom see [Sa1 17:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#004); he came
out of the valley, and drew near to the mountain the Israelites were
descending:

out of the armies of the Philistines: from the plains where they were
encamped, as Kimchi, though they seem to have been encamped on a
mountain as the Israelites were; or from the ranks of the Philistines;
according to the marginal reading, he came out of one of the battalions
that were set in array:

and spake according to the same words; which he had spoken time after
time forty days successively, namely, what is expressed [Sa1
17:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#008),

and David heard them; and observed them.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa1 17:24</span></span>

And all the men of Israel, when they saw the man,.... Even as it should
seem before they heard him; knowing who he was, and what he was about to
say, having seen and heard him forty days running:

fled from him, and were sore afraid; it is pretty much a whole army
should be afraid of one man, and flee from him; they must be greatly
forsaken of God, and given up by him, see [Deu
32:30](../../../bib/kjv/deu032.htm#030); but perhaps they were not so
much afraid of personal danger from him, as that they could not bear to
hear his blasphemy.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa1 17:25</span></span>

And the men of Israel said,.... To one another:

have ye seen this man that is come up? taken notice of him, and observed
him?

surely to defy Israel is he come up; to challenge them to fight with
him, and upbraid them with cowardice that they did not:

and it shall be that the man who killeth him; this, and what follows,
they said to encourage any person to engage with him, though none of
them cared to encounter him themselves:

the king will enrich him with great riches; give him a large gratuity,
make a present of a great sum of money to him:

and will give him his daughter to be his wife, in like manner as Caleb
promised to give his daughter in marriage to the person that should take
Kirjathsepher, [Jdg 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#012),

and make his father's house free in Israel; from all tributes, taxes,
levies, impositions, king's service, and duty; or, as the Targum,"make
his father's house freemen, nobles;''raise it to the rank of nobility.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa1 17:26</span></span>

And David spake to the men that stood by him,.... Who were next to him,
looking upon the Philistine, and hearing what he said:

saying, what shall be done to the man that killeth this Philistine,

and taketh away the reproach from Israel? which he asked not for the
sake of the reward, but to observe the necessity there was of some man's
engaging with him, and killing him, or otherwise it would be a reproach
to Israel, and to signify that he had an inclination to attempt it:

for who is this uncircumcised Philistine, that he should defy the armies
of the living God? there were two things which provoked David, and
raised indignation in him against this man; the one was, the character
of the person that reproached, a Philistine, an uncircumcised person, a
profane man, that had no true religion in him, an alien from the
commonwealth of Israel, and a stranger to the covenants of promise; and
the other was the persons whom he reproached, the armies of the living
God, of the King of kings, and Lord of lords; and which in effect was
reproaching the Lord himself, and which David, filled with zeal for God,
and for his people, could not bear; and the consideration of these
things animated him to engage with him, not doubting of success.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa1 17:27</span></span>

And the people answered him after this manner,.... Told him what was
proposed to be done in honour to the man that should attempt to kill
him, and succeed:

saying, so shall it be done to the man that killeth him; as before
related, that he should be enriched, marry the king's daughter, and his
family be ennobled, [Sa1 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#025).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa1 17:28</span></span>

And Eliab his eldest brother heard when he spake unto the men,.... Heard
the questions he put to them, by which he perceived his inclination:

and Eliab's anger was kindled against David; because what he had said
carried in it a tacit reproach of him, and others, that they had not the
courage, and did not attempt to encounter with the Philistine; or the
displeasure he expressed was either out of affection to him, fearing, or
being assured almost he would perish in the enterprise; or rather out of
envy to him, lest succeeding in so bold an action, he should gain
superior glory to him, and the rest of his brethren, who yet was the
youngest of them:

and he said, why comest thou down hither? for though David had talked
with his brethren, or had begun to talk with them, yet he had not
sufficiently explained the reasons of his coming:

and with whom hast thou left those few sheep in the wilderness? the
wilderness of Judea, or some wilderness near Bethlehem; by this he would
not only insinuate a charge of unfaithfulness, in not taking care of his
father's flock committed to him; but his view was to make him look
little and mean in the eyes of the people, that in the family he
belonged to he was thought to be fit for nothing but to keep sheep, and
those but a small flock, and in doing this was negligent and careless:

I know thy pride, and the haughtiness of thine heart; that he was too
proud to keep sheep, and wanted to advance himself in the army, and make
a figure there, and thereby gratify his vanity and ambition, which was
the reverse of David's character; for, such was his humility, that,
though he was anointed king, and had been preferred in Saul's court, yet
condescended with all readiness to keep his father's sheep; and what he
now proposed was not from any bad principle in his heart, but purely for
the glory of God, and the honour of the people of Israel, who were both
reproached:

for thou art come down that thou mightest see the battle: out of
curiosity, and to take every advantage and opportunity of signalizing
and making himself famous.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa1 17:29</span></span>

And David said, what have I now done?.... That is criminal and
blameworthy; as if he should say, I have only expressed an indignation
against this uncircumcised Philistine, and a concern for the glory of
God, and the honour of the people of Israel:

is there not a cause? either for his coming to the camp, being sent by
his father; or of his expressing himself with indignation at the
Philistine's defiance of the armies of Israel. Some take the sense to
be, that he had done nothing, he had not committed any fact; it was mere
words what he had said, he had attempted nothing, and therefore there
was no reason to bear so hard upon him; to this purpose is the
Targum,"what have I done as yet? is it not a word "only" which I have
spoken?''but the former sense seems best.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa1 17:30</span></span>

And he turned from him towards another,.... From his brother Eliab, to
another person right against him, and directed his discourse to him:

and spake after the same manner: as in [Sa1
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#026); inquiring what encouragement
would he given to a man that should attempt to kill the Philistine, and
expressing his concern to hear the armies of the living God defied by
such a wretch:

and the people answered him again after the former manner; telling him
what gratuities and honours would be conferred on such a person, as in
[Sa1 17:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#025); and the design of his
talking to one, and to another, was, that what he had said might spread
and reach to the ears of Saul, to whom in modesty he did not choose to
apply himself.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa1 17:31</span></span>

And when the words were heard which David spake,.... To one, and to
another, and these reported to other persons, and so they went from one
to another through many hands:

they rehearsed them before Saul; coming to the ears of some of his
courtiers and counsellors, or officers about him, they told him what
such an one had said:

and he sent for him; to his tent or pavilion where he was, to talk with
him on this subject. The whole of [Sa1
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#011) is wanting in the Septuagint
version, according to the Vatican exemplar; and these "twenty" verses
are thought, by some (e), to be an interpolation; and it must be owned
there are difficulties in them, and that the connection of [Sa1
17:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#011) with the following is very clear
and consistent, as also is [Sa1 17:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#050)
left out in the same version; and likewise the last four of the chapter,
[Sa1 17:55](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#055), and five with which the
next begins, [Sa1 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#001).

\(e\) See Dr. Kennicott's Dissert. 2. p. 418, &c.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa1 17:32</span></span>

And David said to Saul, let no man's heart fail because of him,.... The
Philistine, though so gigantic, mighty, and blustering: this he said
within himself, so Kimchi; as David perceived the hearts of most, if not
all, did, since none dared to go out and fight him, but on the contrary
fled from him:

thy servant will go and fight with this Philistine; and therefore there
need be no thought, care, or concern to look out for another man.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa1 17:33</span></span>

And Saul said to David, thou art not able to go against this Philistine
to fight with him,.... Had neither strength of body, nor skill in
military affairs, to encounter with a man of his stature, and warlike
genius and practice:

for thou art but a youth; some say about fourteen or sixteen years of
age, but very probably about twenty, and not more, and so not only weak,
but inexpert in the art of fighting:

and he a man of war from his youth; a gigantic man, trained up in,
inured to, and expert in the affairs of war; so that David could not, on
any account, be a competitor with him, and a match for him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">sa1 17:34</span></span>

And David said unto Saul,.... In answer to his objection of inability to
encounter with one so superior to him; and this answer is founded on
experience and facts, and shows that he was not so weak and inexpert as
Saul took him to be:

thy servant kept his father's sheep; which he was not ashamed to own,
and especially as it furnished him with an stance of his courage,
bravery, and success, and which would be convincing to Saul:

and there came a lion and a bear, and took a lamb out of the flock; not
that they came together; though Kimchi so interprets it, "a lion with a
bear"; but these are creatures that do not use to go together; and
besides, both could not be said with propriety to take one and the same
lamb out of the flock: to which may be added, that David in [Sa1
17:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#035) speaks only of one, out of whose
mouth he took the lamb; wherefore the words may be rendered, "a lion or
a bear" (f); and if the copulative "and" is retained, the meaning can
only be, that at different times they would come and take a lamb, a lion
at one time, and a bear at another.

\(f\) "leo vel ursus", V. L. "leo aut ursus", Junius & Tremellius,
Bochart. Noldius, p. 271.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa1 17:35</span></span>

And I went out after him,.... Whether a lion or a bear; but mention
after being made of his beard, a lion rather is meant:

and smote him; with his fist, or rather with his shepherd's staff:

and delivered it out of his mouth; snatched it out from thence, or
obliged him to drop it, by beating him:

and when he arose against me; after he had let go the lamb, threatening
to tear him in pieces for attempting to disturb him in his prey, and
take it away from him:

I caught him by his beard; such as lions have; hence a lion is often
called in Homer (g) , the well-bearded lion. Kimchi thinks the beard
with the nether jaw is meant, which David caught hold on:

and smote him, and slew him; tore him to pieces, as Samson did, [Jdg
14:5](../../../bib/kjv/jdg014.htm#005), or slew him with some weapon in
his hand.

\(g\) Iliad. 17. ver. 109. & Iliad. 18. ver. 318.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa1 17:36</span></span>

Thy servant slew both the lion and the bear,.... At different times, and
several of them at one time or another; whenever any of them came into
the flock, he used to lay hold on them and kill them, with all the ease
imaginable. The Jews suppose this phrase denotes many of them (h).

And this uncircumcised Philistine shall be as one of them; as he was
like them in nature, savage, cruel and unclean, so he would be in his
end, killed as they; of this David was fully persuaded and assured in
mind having an impulse from the Spirit of God, by which he was certified
of it:

seeing he hath defied the armies of the living God; so that as he justly
deserved to die, he made no doubt of it it would be his case.

\(h\) See Halicot Olam, p. 177.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa1 17:37</span></span>

And David said moreover,.... For the further confirmation of it, and as
more strongly expressing his faith of it; not as owing to any natural
strength or skill of his, but to the power of God, of whose assistance
he made no question:

the Lord that delivered me out of the paw of the lion, and out of the
paw of the bear; for to him he ascribes his deliverance from those
savage creatures, and his victory over them, and on him he relied for
help and salvation in the present case:

he will deliver me out of the hand of this Philistine; David did not go
forth in his own name and strength, but in the name and strength of the
Lord of hosts:

and Saul; seeing him so positive, and fully assured of victory:

said unto David, go, and the Lord be with thee; to help and assist him,
to deliver him out of the hand of the Philistine, and give him victory
over him; the Targum is,"the Word of the Lord be for thy help.''

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">sa1 17:38</span></span>

And Saul armed David with his armour,.... Not with what he wore himself;
for it cannot be thought he would strip himself of his armour in the
field of battle, and when just going to it; and besides what suited the
one would not be fit for the other, their bulk and stature being
different i but this was some armour Saul had brought with him, besides
what he himself wore, to furnish any with that might want it:

and he put an helmet of brass upon his head; such an one, though not so
large as Goliath had, these being usually made of brass; See Gill on
[Sa1 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#005),

also he armed him with a coat of mail; which probably was of brass also,
and like that of Goliath's too, only lesser, [Sa1
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#005).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa1 17:39</span></span>

And David girded his, sword upon his armour,.... Which Saul also perhaps
furnished him with:

and he assayed to go; made an attempt, and had a mind to go thus
accoutred; he at first showed an inclination to go in such an habit, but
afterwards would not:

for he had not proved it; as warriors were wont to do; so Achilles did
(i); he never made trial of such armour before, he had not been used to
it, and knew not how to behave in it, or walk with it on him; it was an
encumbrance to him: Abarbinel renders it, "but he had not proved it"; he
would have gone with it but for that reason; the Targum is,"because
there was no miracle in them;''because if he had made use of this, there
would have been no appearance of a miracle in getting the victory over
the Philistine, as was by using only a sling and stones:

and David said unto Saul, I cannot go with these, for I have not proved
them; he thought fit to acquaint Saul with it that he could not go thus
accoutred, and his reason for it, lest he should be offended with him:

and David put them off him; took off the helmet from his head, ungirt
the sword upon his armour, and stripped himself of his coat of mail, and
went forth entirely unarmed.

\(i\) Homer. Iliad. 19. ver. 384, 385. so Theocrit. Idyll. 10. ver. 61.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:40](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#040)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_040">sa1 17:40</span></span>

And he took his staff in his hand,.... His shepherd's staff, which he
used in keeping his father's sheep, and chose rather to appear in the
habit of a shepherd than of a soldier:

and chose him five smooth stones out of the brook; which ran in the
valley, which became smooth by lying in the water running over them; and
which being smooth were fitter for his purpose, being the more easily
cast out of the sling; though De Dieu is of opinion that these were
parts or pieces of stones, cleft ones, which were rough and rugged, and
which would more easily and firmly be fixed in the forehead of the
Philistine:

and put them in a shepherd's bag which he had, even in a scrip; in which
he had been wont to put things he needed for the good of the flock, and
was such as travellers put their food in; and this might also be the use
of it with shepherds; but, according to the Ethiopic interpreters (k),
it was that piece of the leather in the midst of the sling, in which the
slingers used to put the stones, that they might stick the more firmly:

and his sling was in his hand; which he intended to use in slinging the
stone or stones he had in his scrip; and which was an exercise he had
been accustomed to in all likelihood, and for which the Benjaminites his
neighbours, of the next tribe, were very famous:

and he drew near to the Philistine; marched towards him, thereby
signifying that he accepted his challenge, and would enter the list with
him.

\(k\) Apud Ludolf. Lexic. Ethiop. p. 84.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#041)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_041">sa1 17:41</span></span>

And the Philistine came on, and drew near unto David,.... By slow paces,
because of the weight of his armour, and bulk of his body, yet with a
haughty air, and a proud gait:

and the man that bare the shield went before him; See Gill on [Sa1
17:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#007).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:42](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#042)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_042">sa1 17:42</span></span>

And when the Philistine looked about, and saw David, he disdained
him,.... He looked about for his antagonist, to take a view of him, what
sort of a man he was, expecting to see one much like himself; but
observing a puny young man, he despised him in his heart, and perhaps
looked upon it as an affront to him to send such a man to fight with
him:

for he was but a youth; his age was one reason why he despised him,
being, as before observed, about twenty years of age, and not come to
his full strength, a stripling, as he is called, [Sa1
17:56](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#056), another reason follows:

and ruddy, and of a fair countenance; looked effeminate, had not the
appearance of a soldier, of a weather beaten veteran, exposed to heat
and cold, and inured to hardships.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:43](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#043)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_043">sa1 17:43</span></span>

And the Philistine said unto David, am I a dog?.... Truly David did not
think him much better, because of his impudence, impurity, and barking
blasphemy against God, and the armies of Israel; the Targum is,"am I a
despised dog?''

verily he was by David:

that thou comest to me with staves? or with a staff, the plural for the
singular, to beat him with it as a dog is beaten, and as David used to
beat his dog with, while keeping his father's sheep, when the dog he had
with him did not do his business as he should; he says nothing of his
sling and stones, they being out of sight:

and the Philistine cursed David by his gods: by Dagon and others; he
made an imprecation by them, and wished the greatest evils might befall
him from them; he devoted him to them, and doubted not to make a
sacrifice of him.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#044)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_044">sa1 17:44</span></span>

And the Philistine said to David, come to me,.... He seems to have stood
still, disdaining: to take another step towards such a pitiful
combatant, and therefore bids him come up to him, and he would soon
dispatch him; unless he said this, because David was light and nimble,
and he heavy and unwieldy because of his bigness, and the burden of
armour on him, and therefore could not make such haste as he wished to
destroy his adversary, of which he made no doubt:

and I will give thy flesh unto the fowls of the air, and to the beasts
of the field; the wild beasts he means; though Jarchi thinks he spoke
improperly, since it is not the way of the beasts of the field, as
sheep, oxen, &c. to devour a man, or even to eat any flesh; and
therefore he observes, when David comes, he uses another word, which
signifies the wild beasts of the earth, and so we render it, [Sa1
17:46](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#046); but Kimchi shows that even
these are comprehended in the word here used, see [Isa
18:6](../../../bib/kjv/isa018.htm#006).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:45](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#045)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_045">sa1 17:45</span></span>

Then said David to the Philistine,.... In answer to the contempt he held
him in, and to the threatening words he gave him:

thou comest to me with a sword, and with a spear, and with a shield; the
word for "shield" is not the same with that so rendered, [Sa1
17:41](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#041); which his armourbearer carried
before him, but with that translated a "target", which was between his
shoulders, [Sa1 17:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#006); however, they
were all weapons of war, either defensive or offensive:

but I come to thee in the name of the Lord of hosts, the God of the
armies of Israel, whom thou hast defied; the Lord of all hosts, in
heaven and in earth in general, and in particular the God of the armies
of Israel; which he was at the head of, led on, protected and defended,
having a kind and merciful regard unto them, and which this Philistine
had defied, reproached, and blasphemed; and now David was come, by a
commission from this great Jehovah, to vindicate his honour, and to
avenge his people on him: he had asked for a man, and now the Lord of
hosts, as the Jews (l) observe, comes forth as a man of war, for the
battle was his, as in [Sa1 17:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#047); and
David was his messenger, and came in his name, and was the man into
whose hands he should be given.

\(l\) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 42. 2.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:46](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#046)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_046">sa1 17:46</span></span>

This day will the Lord deliver thee into mine hands,.... Of which he was
assured by divine inspiration, by the impulse of the Spirit of God upon
him; or otherwise he could not have expressed himself with such
certainty, and have given the particulars of what he should do, as in
the following clauses:

and I will smite thee, and take thine head from thee; and yet he had no
weapon in his hand to do it with, [Sa1
17:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#050), but it was revealed to him that
he should do it, and he believed it; though the Philistine no doubt
looked upon all this as romantic:

and I will give the carcasses of the host of the Philistines this day
unto the fowls of the air, and to the wild beasts of the earth; not only
this man's carcass, which should fall and become a prey to fowls and
wild beasts, but the carcasses of the Philistine army, which fleeing
upon the fall of their champion, and pursued by the Israelites as they
were, would be cut off, and become the food of wild creatures, see [Sa1
17:52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#052); though some think the plural is
put for the singular, and that it only means his carcass, who was a
Philistine; but the host of the Philistines, carries it to the other
sense: and this would be done:

that all the earth may know there is a God in Israel; not only the land
of Canaan or Palestine, but the whole earth, and all the inhabitants of
it, who should hear of the fall of this giant by such means, and of the
rout of the Philistine army upon it; the report of which no doubt was
spread far, and near.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:47](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#047)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_047">sa1 17:47</span></span>

And all this assembly shall know,.... The congregation of Israel, and
church of the living God, great part of which were now gathered
together, and were spectators of this wonderful event:

that the Lord saveth not with sword and spear; that is, by outward means
and instruments, by arms and armed men; he does not save by them only,
or by them always; he can save as well without them as with them:

for the battle is the Lord's; it is under his direction; the issue and
event of it depend on his will, and are owing to him; or, as the
Targum,"from the Lord is the victory of wars,''it is he that gives it to
whom he pleases:

and he will give you into our hands; not only this Philistine into the
hands of David, but the army of them into the hands of the Israelites;
David knew, and was assured of this by the Lord, and it was on this he
relied, and was what animated him to engage with this champion in the
manner he did.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:48](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#048)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_048">sa1 17:48</span></span>

And it came to pass, when the Philistine arose,.... Or prepared for the
encounter, and was in all probability in great wrath and fury at hearing
what David said, and which hastened him to it:

and came and drew nigh to meet David; as fast as his unwieldy body, and
heavy load of armour on him, would admit of:

that David hasted and ran toward the army; the army of the Philistines,
from whence this champion came:

to meet the Philistine; to get up to him before he could draw his sword,
or put himself in a posture to make use of any weapon to strike at David
with.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:49](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#049)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_049">sa1 17:49</span></span>

And David put his hand in his bag,.... The shepherd's scrip, in which he
had put the five stones he took out of the brook:

and took thence a stone; and put it into his sling he had in his hand:

and slang it, and smote the Philistine in his forehead; it is made a
difficulty of how he should smite him on his forehead, when he had a
helmet of brass upon his head, [Sa1
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#005); in answer to this Kimchi
observes, that some say, that when David said he would give his flesh to
the fowls of the air, at the mention of that he looked upwards, and what
was upon his forehead fell backwards, and then David slung and smote
him; or he might put back his helmet to talk with David, and hear and be
heard the better; and having nothing to fear from an unarmed man, might
neglect to put it forward again; or there might be some open space left
in the helmet for him to look through, in at which the stone might pass;
so the Targum renders it, he smote him in the house of his eyes, so the
stone passed through the eye hole into his brain: but after all,
supposing his forehead ever so well covered, as the stone slung by David
was under a divine direction, so as to hit a person in motion, it came
with a divine power, which nothing could resist; and supposing this, of
which there need no doubt, it could as easily pass through the helmet of
brass, as pierce into his forehead and sink there; nor can this be
thought the least incredible, if what Diodorus Siculus (m) relates of
the Baleares be true, that they were so dexterous at slinging, that they
not only would sling stones bigger than others could, and were so
directed, that they seldom missed their mark, being inured to it from
their youth, but would even in battle break in pieces shields, helmets,
and all kinds of armour, with which bodies were covered:

that the stone sunk into his forehead; and so into his brain, as a stone
is immersed and sinks in water, when thrown into it; with such force did
it go, and with so much ease did it make its way, through the direction
and power of God:

and he fell upon his face to the earth; Jarchi observes, that it was
most natural for him to have fallen backwards, being struck upon his
forehead; but so it was, that David might have no trouble to cut off his
head, for by this means he fell nearer to him.

\(m\) Bibliothec. l. 5. p. 298.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#050)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_050">sa1 17:50</span></span>

So David prevailed over the Philistine with a sling and with a
stone,.... And with them only, without any other warlike weapon:

and smote the Philistine, and slew him; smote him with the stone, which
brought him to the ground, and then slew him with his own sword, as
afterwards related:

but there was no sword in the hand of David; when he engaged with the
Philistine, and smote him, for he had put off all his armour, [Sa1
17:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#039).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:51](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#051)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_051">sa1 17:51</span></span>

Therefore David ran and stood upon the Philistine,.... Upon his carcass,
as it lay prostrate on the ground, and trampled on him, in just contempt
of him who had defied, reproached, and despised the armies of Israel:

and took his sword, and drew it out of the sheath thereof; which no
doubt was a very large one, and required a good deal of strength to
unsheathe it, and use it; and therefore either David, though so very
young, was naturally very strong, or he had at this time a more than
ordinary measure of strength given him:

and slew him; for it seems that by the blow of the stone he was only
stunned, and fell to the ground, but still had life in him, which David
soon put an end to by his own sword:

and cut off his head therewith; by which it would appear to both armies
looking on that his business was done, and he was thoroughly dispatched:

and when the Philistines saw their champion was dead; of which the
cutting off his head was a demonstrative proof, and which they could
discern at a distance:

they fled; being struck with a panic at this unexpected event, and no
doubt by the Lord; for otherwise, had they given themselves the least
time to reflect on their own numbers and strength, they had no just
occasion to flee; their safety not depending on a single man, though
ever so strong: upon this occasion David penned the ninth psalm; see
[Psa 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa009.htm#001).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:52](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#052)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_052">sa1 17:52</span></span>

And the men of Israel and of Judah arose,.... From their encampment and
entrenchment, or they prepared for a pursuit:

and shouted, and pursued the Philistines; shouted when they first set
out, and continued shouting as they pursued, to animate their own
troops, and terrify the enemy:

until thou come to the valley, and to the gates of Ekron; which was one
of the five principalities of the Philistines; so that they pursued them
to their own cities, and to the very gates of them:

and the wounded of the Philistines fell down by the way to Shaaraim; a
city in the tribe of Judah, and seems to be the same with Sharaim; see
Gill on [Jos 15:36](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#036). Josephus says (n),
there were killed of the Philistines thirty thousand, and twice as many
wounded:

even unto Gath, and unto Ekron; Josephus (o) has it, to the borders of
Gath, and to the gates of Ashkelon, which were two other principalities
of the Philistines; according to Bunting (p), the whole chase was this,
to the valley and river Sorek four miles; from thence to Ekron eight
miles; to Ashkelon twenty miles, and to Gath twenty four miles; that is,
from the place where Goliath was killed.

\(n\) Antiqu. l. 6. c. 9. sect. 5. (o) Ibid. (p) Travels of the
Patriarchs, &c. p. 128.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:53](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#053)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_053">sa1 17:53</span></span>

And the children of Israel returned from chasing after the
Philistines,.... The remainder that escaped having got into their
fortified cities:

and they spoiled their tents; which they left in their camp, all their
armour, goods, money, and provisions, they found there, they seized upon
as their prey and booty; these they did not stay to meddle with as soon
as the Philistines fled, but first pursued them, and slew as many of
them as they could, and then returned to the spoil; which was wisely
done.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:54](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#054)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_054">sa1 17:54</span></span>

And David took the head of the Philistine, and brought it to
Jerusalem,.... After he had been introduced with it to Saul, and when he
had passed through various cities in Israel, carrying the head in
triumph; where he was congratulated by the women, who came out singing
and dancing, and speaking highly in his commendation and praise: why he
carried it to Jerusalem is not easy to say, this not being a royal city,
nor was it wholly in the hands of the Israelites; part of it indeed was
in the possession of Judah and Benjamin, but the stronghold of Zion was
possessed by the Jebusites; and it is generally thought that it was to
the terror of them that the head of Goliath was carried there. R. Joseph
Kimchi thinks, that Nob, where the tabernacle was at this time, was
surnamed Jerusalem, but for what reason cannot be said:

but he put his armour in his tent; not where the army was encamped
before the engagement; for David had not his tent there, and beside the
camp broke up upon this victory obtained; but rather in his tent or
apartment at Bethlehem, when he returned thither, and where he laid up
the armour he took from Goliath; though Abarbinel thinks, and so other
Jews (q), that by his tent is meant the tabernacle of the Lord, called
David's, because of his attachment to it; and certain it is that the
sword of Goliath was either now, or at least hereafter, laid up there,
see [Sa1 21:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa1021.htm#009); where all that went to
sacrifice might see it, and call to mind this wonderful instance of the
power and goodness of God, and praise him for it.

\(q\) Hieron. Trad. Heb. in lib. Reg. fol. 76. E.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:55](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#055)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_055">sa1 17:55</span></span>

And when Saul saw David go forth against the Philistine,.... Set out to
meet him, and engage with him, as he might from the side of the
mountain, where he was encamped:

he said unto Abner, the captain of the host; his own cousin, whom he had
raised to this high post in the army, [Sa1
14:50](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#050),

Abner, whose son is this youth? it is thought strange by many that Saul
should not know who he was, when he had been often at his court, and
served him as a musician, and had been very useful to him, and he loved
him, and made him his armourbearer, and even had just now conversed with
him about encountering with the Philistine, and had clothed him with his
own armour: to get rid of the former part of the objection, some have
supposed that this event happened before David was his musician and
armourbearer, and is by anticipation spoken of in [Sa1
16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#014), but that the connection with
this and the following chapter will not admit of; and besides, before
this event, David is said to return home from Saul, [Sa1
17:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#015); so that it is certain he had
been at Saul's court, and in his presence before: but to remove this
seeming difficulty it may be observed, that Saul, having laboured under
a disorder of body and mind, might easily forget David, and his serving
him in the above capacity; and to which the multiplicity of business,
and of persons in a court, might greatly contribute; and what with the
distance of time, and the different habits in which David appeared,
sometimes as a musician, and sometimes as a shepherd, and at other times
as a soldier, and always as a servant, it is no wonder the king should
not know him again; though after all it is not about his person that he
inquires, but whose son he was, what was his father's name, and from
what family he sprung; for though Saul was made acquainted with this in
the time of his disorder, and therefore sent to his father Jesse for
him, and afterwards desired leave for his continuance; yet this might
slip out of his memory in a course of time, he having had no personal
knowledge of Jesse, nor any correspondence with him, but just at that
time; and it behoved him to know the pedigree of David, since, if he was
victorious, he was not only to be enriched by him, but to have his
daughter for wife, and his family ennobled:

and Abner said, as thy soul liveth, O king, I cannot tell; he swore by
the life of Saul, as Joseph by the life of Pharaoh, that he knew nothing
of him; which need not at all seem strange, that a general of an army,
always employed in military affairs, and often abroad, should know
nothing of a domestic servant of Saul's, under the character of a
musician, and not always at court either; and still less that he should
be ignorant of his family, and know nothing of his father, who lived in
obscurity in Bethlehem, and was an old man in those days.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:56](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#056)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_056">sa1 17:56</span></span>

And the king said, inquire thou whose son the stripling is. Still the
question is the same, being very desirous of knowing of what family he
was, for the reason before given; see Gill on [Sa1
17:55](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#055).

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:57](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#057)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_057">sa1 17:57</span></span>

And as David returned from the slaughter of the Philistine,.... Carrying
his head in triumph, and no doubt accompanied with the acclamations of
the people:

Abner took him and brought him before Saul, with the head of the
Philistine in his hand; to give an answer to the king's question
concerning him, who could best do it himself; and that Saul might have
the opportunity of rewarding him, according to his merit, for so great a
piece of service he had done for Israel, of which the head in his hand
was a sufficient proof.

[1 Kings (1 Samuel) 17:58](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#058)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_058">sa1 17:58</span></span>

And Saul said unto him, whose son art thou, thou young man?.... Still
the question was such as did not necessarily imply ignorance of his
person, but of his family:

and David answered, I am the son of thy servant Jesse the Bethlehemite;
which doubtless refreshed the memory of Saul, and he quickly called to
mind who he was. This interview was very probably at Gibeah of Saul,
which was the place of his birth and residence, [Sa1
10:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa1010.htm#026), and where he kept his court,
and to which he returned after the above victory was obtained.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Kings (1 Samuel) Chapter 18](sa1018)

</div>
