<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2011)  [Next](sa2013) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 12:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SECOND SAMUEL 12

Nathan is sent to David to charge him with his sin, and convince him of
it by a parable, [Sa2 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001); which
being accommodated and applied to David's case, brought him to a
conviction and acknowledgment of it, and repentance for it, which was
forgiven him, [Sa2 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#007); though he is
told the child begotten in adultery should die, and it was quickly
struck with sickness and died; and David's behaviour during its sickness
and at its death is recorded, [Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014); after which Solomon was born to
him of the same woman, and had the name of Jedidiah given him by the
Lord, which signifies the beloved of the Lord, and as a token of
reconciliation, and a confirmation of his sin being forgiven him, [Sa2
12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024); and the chapter is concluded
with the taking of the city of Rabbah, and the spoil in it, and the
usage of the inhabitants of it, [Sa2
12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 12:1</span></span>

And the Lord sent Nathan unto David,.... Quickly after the child was
born begotten on Bathsheba, and when it was known and became the public
talk of people, and the enemies of religion were full of it, and
blasphemed on account of it, [Sa2
12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014); so that David was nine months
or more without any true sense of his sin, his heart hardened, his
graces dormant, the joys of salvation taken from him, and he without any
communion with God, and having little concern about it; though perhaps
he might have some pangs at times, which quickly went off; though some
think he exercised repentance in a private way before; acknowledged his
sin to the Lord, and had a sense of pardon, and before this time penned
the thirty second and the hundred thirtieth psalms on this occasion,
[Psa 32:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa032.htm#001); but Nathan is sent to
awaken and arouse him, to express a sense of his sin, and repentance for
it in public, which he did by penning and publishing the fifty first
psalm after Nathan had been with him, [Psa
51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001); for though the Lord may leave
his people to fall into sin, and suffer them to continue therein some
time, yet not always; they shall rise again through the assistance of
his Spirit and grace, in the acts of repentance and faith, both in
private and public:

and he came unto him, and said unto him: he came as if he had a case to
lay before him, and to have justice done, and he told the story as if it
was a real fact, and so David understood it:

there were two men in one city: pointing at David and Uriah, who both
lived in Jerusalem:

the one rich and the other poor; David the rich man, king over all
Israel; Uriah a subject, an officer in his army, comparatively poor.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 12:2</span></span>

The rich man had exceeding many flocks and herds. In which the wealth of
men lay in those times and countries; these in the parable signify
David's wives and concubines, which were many; he had six wives in
Hebron, and he took more wives and concubines out of Jerusalem, when he
was come from Hebron, [Sa2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002); and
besides his master's, or Saul's wives, given to him, [Sa2
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#008).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 12:3</span></span>

But the poor man had nothing, save one little ewe lamb,.... Uriah had
but one wife, who was much younger than he, called a lamb, an ewe lamb,
a little one. Abarbinel thinks Uriah had been a widower; and had
children by another wife, supposed in the parable, and was much older
than Bathsheba:

which he had bought; for men in those times and countries did not
receive portions with their wives, but gave dowries to them, and for
them:

and nourished up; as his own flesh, as husbands should their wives, [Eph
5:29](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#029),

and it grew up together with him, and with his children; which Kimchi
also supposes Uriah had by a former wife:

it did eat of his own meat, and drink of his own cup, and lay in his
bosom, and was unto him as a daughter; all which are expressive of the
care, kindness, love, and tenderness of a loving husband, whose
affections are endeared to his wife, making her partaker of all he has,
and to share in whatever he eats and drinks, and in his dearest
embraces; and as there were instances of creatures, lambs and others,
particularly tame or pet lambs, used in this way in a literal sense, to
which the reference in the parable is, David had no suspicion of its
being a parable. Bochart (q) has given many instances of creatures
nourished and brought up in such a familiar manner.

\(q\) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 46. col. 521, 522.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 12:4</span></span>

And there came a traveller unto the rich man,.... By which some
understand Satan, who came to David, and stirred up his lust by the
temptations that offered; who is a walker, as the word used signifies,
that goes about seeking whom he may devour, and is with good men only as
a wayfaring man, who does not abide with them; and whose temptations,
when they succeed with such, are as meat and drink to him, very
entertaining but the Jews generally understand it of the evil
imagination or concupiscence in man, the lustful appetite in David, that
wandered after another man's wife, and wanted to be satiated with her:

and he spared to take of his own flock, and of his own herd, to dress
for the wayfaring man that came unto him; when his heart was inflamed
with lust at the sight of Bathsheba, he did not go as he might, and take
one of his wives and concubines, whereby he might have satisfied and
repressed his lust:

but took the poor man's lamb, and dressed it for the man that came to
him; sent for Bathsheba and lay with her, for the gratification of his
lust, she being a young beautiful woman, and more agreeable to his
lustful appetite. The Jews, in their Talmud (r), observe a gradation in
these words that the evil imagination is represented first as a
traveller that passes by a man, and lodges not with him; then as a
wayfaring man or host, that passes in and lodges with him; and at last
as a man, as the master of the house that rules over him, and therefore
called the man that came to him.

\(r\) T. Bab. Succah, fol. 52. 2. Jarchi, Kimchi, & Abarbinel in loc.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 12:5</span></span>

And David's anger was greatly kindled against the man,.... That had done
this, taking it for a real fact:

and he said to Nathan, as the Lord liveth, the man that hath done this
thing shall surely die; which be said in the transport of his wrath and
fury; otherwise a thief, according to the law of Moses, was not to be
put to death, but to make restitution; and if he was not able to make
it, then to be sold, but he was not to die for it; but David thought the
crime was so greatly aggravated by being done by a rich man, and by the
loss the poor man sustained, it being his all, and the fact, in all its
circumstances, so cruel and barbarous, that the guilty person ought to
die: how much more vehemently, and indeed with justice, would he have
passed the sentence of death on him, or condemned him to it, had it been
put in the parable, that the rich man not only took the poor man's ewe
lamb, but killed the poor man himself? but this Nathan left out, that
David might not take his meaning, as Abarbinel thinks, who then would
have been upon his guard, and not have condemned himself; and hereby
also Nathan had this advantage against him, that if this man deserved to
die, who had only taken the poor man's ewe lamb, then how much more
ought he to die, who had not only committed adultery with Bathsheba, but
had slain Uriah?

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 12:6</span></span>

And he shall restore the lamb fourfold,.... Which was according to the
law in [Exo 22:1](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#001); but Kimchi thinks,
because the word is of the dual number, it signifies double the number,
and that the sentence was to restore eight lambs, because he being a
rich man stole from the poor man; so Mr. Weemse (s) renders it, twice
four, twice as much as was commanded in the law; for the Hebrews, he
observes, double in the dual number till they come to seven:

because he did this thing; committed this theft:

and because he had no pity; on the poor man, but took his all. The Jews
observe, that accordingly David was punished with the loss of four of
his children, that which was born of Bathsheba, Ammon, Tamar, and
Absalom; so most of the commentators, but Ben Gersom, instead of Tamar,
has Adonijah.

\(s\) Of the Moral Law, l. 2. ch. 10. p. 252. Vid. Gusset. Ebr. Comment.
p. 776.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 12:7</span></span>

And Nathan said to David, thou art the man,.... The rich man, or who is
designed by him in the parable, and answers to him (t):

thus saith the Lord God of Israel, I anointed thee king over Israel;
that is, ordered Samuel to anoint him, who did, [Sa1
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1016.htm#001); to which this chiefly refers;
and after that he was anointed first by the tribe of Judah, and then by
all the tribes of Israel, by the appointment and providence of God; and
this was great dignity he designed for him, and raised him to:

and I delivered thee out of the hand of Saul; when he persecuted him,
and sought to take away his life.

\(t\) "----- mutato nomine, de te Fabula narratur -----". Horat. Sermon.
l. 1. Satyr. 1. ver. 69,70.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 12:8</span></span>

And I gave thee thy master's house,.... Not his palace at Gibeah, but
rather his family, his wives, servants, wealth, and riches, all being
confiscated through the rebellion of Ishbosheth; or rather his kingdom
he succeeded him in:

and thy master's wives into thy bosom; though we read of no more than
one that belonged to Saul, if he is meant by his master, excepting
Rizpah his concubine, nor ever of David taking them into his bosom and
bed; wherefore this can be understood only of his having them at his
disposal, to give them to whom he pleased; the word may be rendered his
"women", as well as his "wives", and may design his daughters, Merab and
Michal, who were both given to David, though taken again and given to
others: the Jews say, that Eglah, David's sixth wife, was the wife of
Saul; see Gill on [Sa2 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#005),

and gave thee the house of Israel and of Judah; the kingdom of both;
gave him to be king over all the tribes of Israel:

and if that had been too little; either his wives too few, as the Jews
interpret it, or his kingdom too small:

I would moreover have given unto thee such and such things; more and
greater favours; and indeed such he had promised him, as a firm or
stable house or kingdom, and that the Messiah should spring from him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 12:9</span></span>

Wherefore hast thou despised the commandment of the Lord, to do evil in
his sight?.... The commandment referred to is the law of God,
particularly the sixth and seventh precepts of it, [Exo
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013); which David had shown no regard
unto, and by his breaking them had slighted and despised them:

thou hast killed Uriah the Hittite with the sword; and so had despised
and broken the sixth command, [Exo
20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013); for though he had not taken
away his life with his own hand, he had plotted and contrived it, and
had given orders to put him in such a position as would issue in it:

and hast taken his wife to be thy wife; after he had defiled her, being
another man's wife, and had taken such unlawful methods to make her his
wife, whereby he had despised and broken both the sixth and the seventh
commands, [Exo 20:13](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#013),

and hast slain him with the sword of the children of Ammon; though he
had not put him to death with his own sword, he had done that which was
as bad or worse in some respects, he had exposed him to the sword of the
Ammonites, by which it was taken away; and not his only, but that of
some of the Israelites also, which gave that uncircumcised people reason
to triumph over the children of Israel, and even to blaspheme the God of
Israel.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 12:10</span></span>

Now therefore the sword shall never depart from thine house,.... During
his life, and as appeared in the slaughter of his sons Ammon and Absalom
before his death, and of Adonijah quickly after, and in his posterity
through their wars with the children of Israel, and other nations:

because thou hast despised me; his commandments, and that in effect was
despising him the lawgiver:

and hast taken the wife of Uriah the Hittite to be thy wife; which being
repeated shows that it was very displeasing to God, and a very heinous
crime in his sight.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 12:11</span></span>

Thus saith the Lord,.... For what he said was not of himself, but under
a spirit of prophecy:

behold, I will raise up evil against thee out of thine own house: that
is, evil persons, who should be guilty of evil things, and that as a
chastisement of him for the sins he had committed, and those out of his
own family, as Amnon and Absalom:

and I will take thy wives before thine eyes; which is so expressed,
because it was done in his lifetime, and he knowing it, but not able to
hinder it, though he did not, strictly speaking, see it with his eyes:

and give them unto thy neighbour; or friend, meaning his son Absalom, as
they were:

and he shall lie with thy wives in the sight of this sun; pointing to
the sun in the firmament, and which might be then shining in the room
where they were: and which is represented by Homer (u) as seeing all
things, "and eyes" are ascribed to it here in the original; the meaning
is, that this fact should be done in the daytime, openly and publicly,
and was fulfilled, when by the advice of Ahithophel a tent was spread on
the top of the house, and Absalom went in to his father's concubines in
the sight of all Israel, [Sa2 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#022).

\(u\) Odyss. 11. ver. 119. & 12. ver. 380.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 12:12</span></span>

For thou didst it secretly,.... Committed adultery with Bathsheba
privately, and endeavoured to conceal it, by getting her husband killed
in battle, and then marrying her as soon as he could to hide the shame
of it:

but one will do this thing before all Israel, and before the sun; as the
above fact was; that is, he would suffer it to he done, and so order it
in his providence, that everything should concur to the doing of it; as
David's leaving his wives behind him, Ahithophel's wicked counsel he was
suffered to give, and the lustful inclination Absalom was left unto, and
not any of the people of Israel having religion, spirit, and courage
enough to remonstrate against it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 12:13</span></span>

And David said unto Nathan, I have sinned against the Lord,.... Which
confession, though short, was a full one, arising from a thorough
conviction of the evil of the sin he had been guilty of, accompanied
with real brokenness of heart, sincere humiliation, and a sorrow after a
godly sort, as the fifty first psalm, that penitential psalm composed
upon this occasion shows, [Psa 51:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa051.htm#001),

and Nathan said unto David; being fully satisfied with the sincerity and
genuineness of his repentance, of which he gave proof by words and
deeds, and being under the direction and impulse of the Spirit of God:

the Lord hath put away thy sin; would not charge it upon him, impute it
to him, or punish him for it, but freely and fully forgive it, cast it
behind his back, and into the depth of the sea; cause it to pass from
him and never more bring it against him, and which is the Lord's act,
and his only, against whom sin is committed:

thou shall not die; though he should die a corporeal death, yet not by
the immediate hand of God, or by the sword of justice as a malefactor, a
murderer, and adulterer, as he, according to the law, deserved to die;
nor should he die a spiritual death, though his grace had been so low,
and his corruptions had risen so high; nor an eternal death, the second
death, the lost wages of sin.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 12:14</span></span>

Howbeit, because by this deed,.... This complicated wickedness, adultery
with Bathsheba, and the murder of her husband, and occasioning the death
of others:

thou hast given great reason to the enemies of the Lord to blaspheme; to
insult over Israel, and the God of Israel, and to magnify their own
idols on account of the advantage they got when Uriah and other
Israelites were slain; and to speak ill of God as a respecter of
persons, who had cast off Saul and his family from the kingdom, and yet
established David in it, guilty of crimes the other was not; and of the
word, ways, and worship of God, and of the true religion, as all
hypocrisy and deceit, when men that made such pretensions to it were
guilty of such atrocious crimes; wherefore to let such see and know that
the Lord did not approve of and countenance such actions, but abhorred
and resented them:

the child also that is born unto thee shall surely die; which would be a
visible testimony of God's displeasure at his sin, to all men that
should hear of it, and know it; and being taken away in such a manner
would be a great affliction to him, and the more as his affections were
much towards the child, as appears by what follows; or otherwise the
removal of it might have been considered as a mercy, since its life
would have kept up the remembrance of the sin, and have been a standing
reproach to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 12:15</span></span>

And Nathan departed unto his house,.... His own house, which probably
was in the city of Jerusalem, having delivered his message, and brought
David to a sense of his sin, and declared to him from the Lord the
forgiveness of it; yet for the honour of religion, and the stopping of
the mouths of blasphemers, the death of the child is threatened and
foretold, and then Nathan took his leave of him, having nothing more
from the Lord to say to him:

and the Lord struck the child that Uriah's wife bare unto David; for so
she was, and not David's wife, when this child was begotten of her; and,
as a mark of God's displeasure at the sin of adultery, the child was
struck with a sore disease by the immediate hand of God:

and it was very sick; even unto death, as the event showed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 12:16</span></span>

David therefore besought God for the child,.... Perhaps went into the
tabernacle he had built for the ark, and prayed to the Lord to restore
the child, and spare its life; for though the Lord had said it should
die, he might hope that that was a conditional threatening, and that the
Lord might be gracious and reverse it, [Sa2
12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#022),

and David fasted: all that day:

and went in; to his own house from the house of God:

and lay all night upon the earth; would neither go into, nor lie upon a
bed, but lay on the floor all night, weeping and praying for the child's
life, and especially for its eternal welfare: he having through sin been
the means of its coming into a sinful and afflicted state.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 12:17</span></span>

And the elders of his house arose, and went to him, to raise him up from
the earth,.... To persuade him to rise up, and sit upon a seat, and go
to bed, after having taken some food; these were some of the chief
officers at court, and had the management of the affairs of his
household:

but he would not; they could not persuade him to it:

neither did he eat bread with them; that evening, as he had used to do;
they being the princes of his court, who were wont to sit at table with
him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 12:18</span></span>

And it came to pass on the seventh day, that the child died,.... Not the
seventh day from its being taken ill, but from its birth; for it cannot
be thought that David should fast seven days:

and the servants of David feared to tell him that the child was dead;
lest he should be overwhelmed with too much sorrow:

for they said, behold, while the child was yet alive, we spake unto him;
to rise from the ground, and eat food:

and he would not hearken unto our voice; we could not prevail upon him
to do the one nor the other:

how will he then vex himself if we tell him that the child is dead? or
should we acquaint him with it, "he will do mischief" (w) to himself, to
his body; he will tear his flesh to pieces, and cut and kill himself;
this they were afraid of, observing the distress and agony he was in
while it was living, and therefore they concluded these would increase
upon hearing of its death.

\(w\) , Sept. "faciat malum", Pagninus, Montanus; "malum sibi inferet",
Syr. Ar.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 12:19</span></span>

And when David saw that his servants whispered,.... For they said the
above to one another with a low voice, that he might not hear them,
though in the same room with them:

David perceived the child was dead; he guessed it was, and that this was
the thing they were whispering about among themselves:

therefore David said unto his servants, is the child dead? and they
said, he is dead; for putting the question to them so closely, they
could not avoid giving the answer they did, and which he was prepared to
receive, by what he had observed in them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 12:20</span></span>

Then David arose from the earth,.... From the floor on which he lay:

and washed, and anointed himself, and changed his apparel; neither of
which he had done during his time of fasting:

and came into the house of the Lord, and worshipped; went into the
tabernacle he had built for the ark of God, and then in prayer submitted
himself to the will of God, and acknowledged his justice in what he had
done; gave thanks to God that he had brought him to a sense of his sin,
and repentance for it, and had applied his pardoning grace to him, and
given him satisfaction as to the eternal welfare and happiness of the
child, as appears from [Sa2 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#023),

then he, came to his own house; from the house of God, having finished
his devotion there:

and when he required; ordered food to be brought in:

they set bread before him, and he did eat: whereas before, while the
child was living, he refused to eat.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 12:21</span></span>

Then said his servants unto him, what thing is this that thou hast
done?.... Or what is the reason of such conduct and behaviour? they knew
what was done, but they did not know the meaning of it, which is what
they inquired after:

thou didst fast and weep for the child, while it was alive; prayed with
fasting and weeping for it, that it might live and not die:

but when the child was dead thou didst rise and eat bread; and appeared
cheerful; this seemed strange to them, when they expected his sorrow
would be increased.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 12:22</span></span>

And he said, while the child was yet alive,.... And so there was hope it
might be continued:

I fasted and wept; or sought the Lord by prayer, and fasting, and
weeping, that the threatening might not take place, that the child's
life might be spared:

for I said; within himself, thus he reasoned in his own mind:

who can tell whether God will be gracious to me, that the child may
live? and in hope of this he kept praying, fasting, and weeping; he
could not tell but God might repent of the evil he had threatened, as in
some cases he has done; see [Joe 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013).
Abarbinel thinks that David fasted and wept to hide this matter from his
wife, and his servants, and did not let them know that this was in his
punishment, that the child should die.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 12:23</span></span>

But now he is dead, wherefore should I fast?.... And pray; it is to no
purpose, no end can be thought to be answered by it:

can I bring him back again? from the state of the dead, bring him to
life by fasting, and praying, and weeping; that is not to e expected:

I shall go to him; to the state of the dead, to the grave, where his
body was, or would be; to heaven and eternal happiness, where his soul
was, as he comfortably hoped and believed: from whence it appears, that
the Old Testament saints did not suppose an annihilation at death; but
believed the immortality of the soul, a future state after death of
eternal life and bliss:

but he shall not return to me; in the present mortal state, though at
the resurrection they should meet again.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 12:24</span></span>

And David comforted Bathsheba his wife,.... Which is the first time she
is so called, Uriah being dead, and David having married her; which
though at first displeasing to the Lord, because the circumstances
attending it, was afterwards confirmed by him. Bathsheba no doubt was
very much distressed, and greatly disconsolate, on account of the sin
she had committed, and because of the wrath and displeasure of God, and
because of the death of the child, which was a token of it; and she
might have some scruples in her mind whether it was lawful to continue
cohabiting with David. Now David comforted her, by telling her that God
had pardoned that iniquity they had been guilty of, and that he would
give them another son, who should succeed him in the throne, and build
an house for his name:

and went in unto her, and lay with her, as his wife:

and she bare a son; at the proper time:

and he called his name Solomon; either the Lord called him so, or David
by his direction; for this name was given before his birth, [Ch1
22:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1022.htm#009); the Keri or marginal reading is,
"and she called his name", &c. that is, Bathsheba, who had been informed
by David that this was the name the Lord would have him called by, which
signifies "peaceable"; and the birth of this son was a confirmation of
the peace and reconciliation between God and them, and which his name
carried in it; as well as pointed to the peaceable times that should be
during his reign, and in which be was a type of Christ, the Prince; of
peace; who is the author of peace between God and men by the blood of
his cross, and from whom spiritual peace flows, and by whom eternal
peace and happiness is:

and the Lord loved him; and was to him a father, and he to him a son, as
was promised, [Sa2 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#014). This love and
affection of the Lord to Solomon was signified to David by Nathan, as
follows.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 12:25</span></span>

And he sent by the hand of Nathan the prophet,.... Either David did; he
sent by him to Bathsheba, to acquaint her with the name of the child,
that it was to be Solomon; which is not so likely: or "he, David,
delivered it into the hand of Nathan the prophet"; to educate it,
instruct it, and bring it up in the nurture of the Lord; or rather the
Lord sent a message by Nathan the prophet to David, that he loved
Solomon:

and he called his name Jedidiah, because of the Lord: that is, David
also called him by this name, because of the love of the Lord unto him;
for Jedidiah signifies "the beloved of the Lord"; a name and character
which well agrees with the Messiah, Solomon's antitype, [Mat
3:17](../../../bib/kjv/mat003.htm#017).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 12:26</span></span>

And Joab fought against Rabbah of the children of Ammon,.... Of his
being sent against it, and of his besieging it, we read in [Sa2
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2011.htm#001); but it can hardly be thought
that he had been so long besieging it, as that David had two children by
Bathsheba; but the account of the finishing of it is placed here, that
the story concerning Bathsheba might lie together without any
interruption:

and took the royal city; or that part of it in which the king's palace
was, and which, as Abarbinel observes, was without the city, as the
palaces of kings now usually are.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 12:27</span></span>

And Joab sent messengers to David,.... To acquaint him how he had
proceeded, and what success he had had:

and said, I have fought against Rabbah; laid siege to it, and skirmished
with parties that sallied out upon them:

and have taken the city of waters; the same with the royal city, and so
the Targum here renders it; so called because situated by the waterside;
Adrichomius says (x) the river Jabbok flowed round about it: or it
abounded with fountains of water, from whence the other part of the
city, or what was properly the city Rabbah, was supplied with water; and
which communication being cut off, it could not hold out long, which
Joab being sensible of, therefore sent for David. Junius and Tremellius
render the words, "I have intercepted the water from the city"; with
which the account of Josephus (y) agrees, who says, that he cut off the
water from them, and precluded other supplies, so that they were in
great distress for want of food and drink; and in like manner it was
taken by Antiochus some hundreds of years later; for that; historian
says (z) the siege by him lasted long, and they could not prevail,
because of the multitude of men it, until one of the prisoners showed
them a subterraneous passage, through which they came and fetched water;
which they stopped up with stones and such like things, and then through
want of water yielded.

\(x\) Theatrum T. S. p. 34. (y) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 7. sect. 5. (z) Polyb.
Hist. l. 5. p. 414.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa2 12:28</span></span>

Now therefore gather the rest of the people together,.... The rest of
the soldiers in the land of Israel, and come to Rabbah:

and encamp against the city; invest it in form:

and take it; upon a surrender or by storm; for it could not hold out
long:

lest I take the city, and it be called after my name; so great a regard
had Joab, though an ambitious man, to the fame and credit of David his
king: so Craterus (a) at the siege of Artacacna, being prepared to take
it, waited the coming of Alexander, that he might have the honour of it.

\(a\) Curt. Hist. l. 6. c. 6.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 12:29</span></span>

And David gathered all the people together,.... The soldiers that were
with him, or near him; which was done partly to recruit Joab's troops,
who, by the continuance of the siege, and the sallies of the enemy on
them, might be greatly diminished; and partly to make conquests of other
cities of the Ammonites, and to carry off the spoil of them:

and went to Rabbah; which must be after the death of Uriah, and very
probably during the time of Bathsheba's mourning for him:

and fought against it, and took it; by assault.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 12:30</span></span>

And he took their king's crown from off his head,.... The crown of Hanun
the king of the Ammonites, who now fell into his hands, and whom he
stripped of his ensigns of royalty, who had so shamefully abused his
ambassadors, [Sa2 10:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2010.htm#004),

(the weight whereof was a talent of gold with the precious stones): or,
"and a precious stone"; there might be more, as our version suggests,
but there was one in it remarkably large and valuable; Josephus (b) says
it had in it a very precious stone, a sardonyx; and this, according to
the Talmud (c) was of the value of a talent of gold. A talent was equal
to three thousand shekels, as appears from [Exo
38:25](../../../bib/kjv/exo038.htm#025); and was in value, according to
Brerewood (d) of our money, 4500 pounds; but according to Bishop
Cumberland (e) 5067 pounds, three shillings and ten pence. This crown
was of the same value with the golden candlestick in the tabernacle,
[Exo 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/exo025.htm#039); and some think that value
here is meant, and not the weight, a talent of gold being very heavy;
according to Bishop Cumberland (f), ninety three and three quarter
pounds; some say an hundred thirteen pounds ten ounces, and more; too
great a weight to be borne on the head by Hanun or David; but, what with
the gold and precious stones about it, it might be equal in value to a
talent of gold; but weight is expressly mentioned, and the crowns of the
eastern princes were of great bulk and weight, as well as value:
Athenaeus (g) makes mention of one made of ten thousand pieces of gold,
placed on the throne of King Ptolemy, and of some of two cubits, of six,
yea, of sixteen cubits. Some (h) are of opinion that this crown was not
the crown of the king of Ammon, but of Milcom or Molech, their idol, and
that the proper name should be retained in the version, and that David
had a crown made of it he could bear; but if, as others (i), the Syriac
talent is meant, which was but the fourth part of an Hebrew one, the
difficulty is greatly lessened; for it seems to be the same crown David
afterwards wore, as follows:

and it was set on David's head; to show that the kingdom was translated
to him, or was become subject to him; as Alexander, on the conquest of
Darius, put the Persian diadem on his own head (k), in token of that
monarchy being translated to him: though, after all, the phrase, "from
off", may be rendered "from above" or "over" (l) his head, and so it was
set "above" or "over" the head of David, being supported by some means
or other, that its weight did not bear thereon however, Paschalius, who
wrote a learned work, "De Coronis", must be mistaken when be says (m)
this seems to be the first use of a crown in the kingdom of Judah, there
being no mention of a crown before, either of Saul or David, only of
anointing; since express mention is made of Saul's crown, [Sa2
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#010); though his observation may be
just, that this crown, allowed to be worn by David, was a pledge of the
renewal of his royal dignity, and of his acceptance with God upon his
repentance for his above sins:

and he brought forth the spoil of the city in great abundance; which, or
at least part of it, was dedicated to the building of the sanctuary,
[Sa2 8:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2008.htm#011).

\(b\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 7. c. 7. sect. 5.) (c) T. Bab. Avodah Zarah,
fol. 44. 1. (d) De Ponder. & Pret. Vet. Num. c. 4. (e) Of Scripture
Weights and Measures, c. 4. p. 121. (f) Ib. p. 119. (g) Apud Paschalium
de Coronis, l. 9. c, 8. p. 587. (h) Vid. Hieron. Trad. Heb. in 2 Reg.
fol. 78. H. & in Paralipom. fol. 83. M. Weemse of Jewish Weights, p.
141. (i) Pfeiffer. Difficil. Script. Loc. cent. 2. loc. 87. (k) Diodor.
Sic. l. 17. p. 549. (l) "desuper", Montanus, "supra caput David",
Munster. (m) Ut supra, (Apud Paschalium de Coronis) l. 10. c. 10. p.
695.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 12:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 12:31</span></span>

And he brought forth the people that were therein,.... Not all the
inhabitants of the place, but the princes of the children of Ammon, the
counsellors of Hattun, who advised him to use David's ambassadors in so
shameful a manner, and others that expressed their pleasure and
satisfaction in it:

and put them under saws, and under harrows of iron, and under axes of
iron; whereby they were cut asunder, as some were by the Romans and
others (n), or their flesh torn to pieces, and they put to extreme pain
and agony, and so died most miserably; see [Ch1
20:3](../../../bib/kjv/ch1020.htm#003),

and made them pass through the brickkiln; where they burnt their bricks,
by which they were not only scorched and blistered, but burnt to death;
so the word in the "Keri", or margin, signifies, which we follow; but in
the text it is, they caused them to pass through Malcem, the same with
Milcom or Molech, the abomination of the children of Ammon, [Kg1
11:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1011.htm#005); unto which they made their
children pass through the fire, and burnt them; and now in the same
place they themselves are made to pass through, and be burnt, as a
righteous punishment of them for their barbarous and wicked idolatry.
The word used in the Greek version, according to Suidas (o), signifies
an army, or a battalion of men drawn up in a quadrangular form, like a
brick; and in the same sense Josephus (p) uses it; hence a learned man
(q) conjectures that David's army was drawn up in the like form, through
which the Ammonites were obliged to pass, and as they passed were
assailed with darts, and killed; a like punishment to which is what the
Italians call "passing through the pikes":

and thus did he unto all the cities of the children of Ammon; to the
inhabitants of them; that is, the chief, who bad expressed their joy at
the ill usage of his ambassadors: this he did to strike terror into
other nations, that they might fear to use his ambassadors in such like
manner. This action of David's showing so much severity, is thought by
most to be done when under the power of his lust with Bathsheba, in an
hardened and impenitent state, when he had no sense of mercy himself,
and so showed none; which is too injurious to his character; for this
was a righteous retaliation of this cruel people, [Sa1
11:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa1011.htm#002). Which may be observed in other
instances, [Jdg 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/jdg008.htm#006); but the charge of
cruelty in David will be easily removed by following the translation of
a learned (r) man, and which I think the words will bear, "and he
obliged the people that were in it to go out, and put them to the saw",
to cut stones; "and to the iron mines", to dig there; "and to the axes
of iron", to cut wood, with; "after he had made them to pass with their
king" out of the city.

So David and all the people returned unto Jerusalem; in triumph, and
with great spoil.

\(n\) Suetonius in Vita Caii, c. 27. Vid. Herodot. l. 2. c. 139. (o) In
voce (p) Antiqu. l. 13. c. 4. sect. 4. (q) Menochius de Repub. Heb. l.
8. c. 3. col 752. (r) Danzii Commentat. de miligat. David in Ammon.
crudel. Jenae 1710, apud Michael. in 1 Chron. xx. 3. Vid. Stockium, p.
392.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 13](sa2013)

</div>
