<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2005)  [Next](sa2007) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 6:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SECOND SAMUEL 6

In this chapter we are told that David fetched the ark from Baale of
Judah, with an intent to bring it to his own city, [Sa2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001); but Uzzah being smitten for his
error concerning it, David was displeased, and left it at the house of
Obededom, where it remained three months, and proved a blessing to his
house, [Sa2 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006); which David hearing
of, went and brought it from thence with great expressions of joy before
it as it came along, and offered offerings to the Lord at the setting it
in its place, and gave gifts to the people, [Sa2
6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#012); but Michal his wife was
displeased with some of his gestures on that occasion, which made some
difference between them, and which, on Michal's part, was resented by
the Lord himself; for she became barren for it to the time of her death,
[Sa2 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#020).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 6:1</span></span>

Again, David gathered together all the chosen men of Israel, thirty
thousand. Which was done by the advice of his officers, [Ch1
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#001); the word "again" refers either
to the gathering of them when they made him king in Hebron, as the
Jewish writers generally observe; but then they gathered themselves, and
not David: or rather to his gathering them to fight the Philistines a
little while ago; and as they were the choice and young men that were
gathered for war, as being the fittest, so now to fetch up the ark with
dancing and singing, and to protect it; the Septuagint version says they
were about seventy thousand; but the Targum, Syriac, and Arabic
versions, have thirty thousand, agreeably to the Hebrew text.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 6:2</span></span>

And David arose, and went with all the people that were with him,....
The thirty thousand chosen men gathered together, and as many else as
chose to go:

from Baale of Judah, to bring up from thence the ark of God; that is,
they first went to this place, as in [Ch1
13:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#006); in order to fetch the ark from
thence, as here expressed, and then they came from thence with it; this
place is the same that is called Baalah and Kirjathbaal, a city in the
tribe of Judah; hence Judah is added to it, and the same with
Kirjathjearim, [Jos 15:9](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#009); the place
where it was brought to when fetched from Bethshemesh, [Sa1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001); and had been here now near fifty
years; nor was it any where else during this time, only once at Gibeah
of Saul with him, [Sa1 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa1014.htm#018);

whose name he called by the name of the Lord of hosts, that dwelleth
between the cherubim; not the ark, but the Lord, whose is the ark; his
name is called by the name of Jehovah, the infinite, incomprehensible,
eternal, and immutable Being, the Lord of armies above and below; whose
habitation was between the cherubim that overshadowed the mercy seat,
which was above the ark; all this is said, not only to express the
greatness and majesty of God, but for the honour of the ark, which
belonged to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 6:3</span></span>

And they set the ark of God upon a new cart,.... Which was a great
mistake, since it ought not to have been put upon a cart, old or new; it
was to be borne upon men's shoulders, and carried by Levites only, and
those of the family of Kohath, to whom no wagons were given, when others
had them, for the above reason, [Num
7:9](../../../bib/kjv/num007.htm#009); it is strange that so many
priests and Levites, and of the people of Israel gathered together on
that account, and David also, so well versed in the law of God, should
not refer to it; perhaps they were led by the example of the
Philistines, who put it in a new cart, and set it forward towards
Bethshemesh, and were not punished for it; but it should have been
considered they were an ignorant Heathen people, and who had no proper
persons among them to bear it, and so might be dispensed with. This
mistake was afterwards seen by David, and rectified, [Ch1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#002); wherefore there is no reason to
charge the text with an error or escape, and that the word
"Kirjathjearim" is wanting, and to be supplied, as Spinosa (d) suggests:

and brought it out, or "after they had brought it out" (e):

of the house of Abinadab that was in Gibeah; or which was on the hill in
Kirjathjearim, [Sa1 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001),

and Uzzah and Ahio the sons of Abinadab drew the new cart; perhaps not
only Abinadab himself was dead, but Eleazar also, his eldest son, who
was sanctified to keep the ark, as in [Sa1
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa1007.htm#001); and these might be his younger
sons who at this time had the care of it, and it may be especially
Uzzah.

\(d\) Tractat. Theol. Politic. c. 9. p. 176. (e) "quum extulissent",
Piscator.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 6:4</span></span>

And they brought it out of the house of Abinadab, which was at
Gibeah,.... That is, the new cart, which is the last thing spoken of,
[Sa2 6:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#003); and the bringing of the ark
out of his house is mentioned before; though some take this to be the
coffer in which were the presents of the Philistines, which was now
brought out along with the ark, see [Sa1
6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1006.htm#008),

accompanying the ark of God; or "with the ark of God" (f); that is, they
brought the new cart "from" the house of Abinadab on the hill, with the
ark of God upon it:

and Ahio went before the ark; guiding the oxen that drew it, and Uzzah
might go behind, or on one side, to take care that the ark fell not out
of it.

\(f\) "cum arca Dei", Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Piscator.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 6:5</span></span>

And David and all the house of Israel played before the Lord,.... That
is, before the ark, which was a symbol of the presence of the Lord:

on all manner of instruments made of fir wood: which is a general
expression, the particulars follow; though instruments of different
sorts are mentioned, and even some of metal, as cymbals, which were
vessels of brass, they struck one against another, and gave a very acute
sound, being hollow (g):

even on harps, and on psalteries, and on timbrels, and on cornets, and
on cymbals; harps, psalteries, and timbrels, are frequently met with;
cornets, according to Kimchi, are such sort of instruments, that in
playing upon them it required an agitation of the whole body. Now it was
that David penned the sixty eighth psalm, which begins, "let God arise",
&c. [Psa 68:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa068.htm#001), words used by Moses
when the ark set forward, [Num 10:35](../../../bib/kjv/num010.htm#035).

\(g\) Suidas in voce

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 6:6</span></span>

And when they came to Nachon's threshingfloor,.... Who is called Chidon,
[Ch1 13:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#009); he seems to have had two
names; or it was a place that had two names, as say the Jews (h);
according to a tradition of theirs (i), Chidon is the name of the place
where it was said to Joshua, stretch out the spear or shield in thine
hand towards Ai, [Jos 8:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos008.htm#018); so indeed
the word signifies, nor was it unusual to stretch out the shield as a
signal on occasion. Thus Aeneas lifted up his shield in his left hand,
as a token to his Trojans that he was come to relieve them (k): where
this threshingfloor was is not said; some say (l) it was the
threshingfloor of Araunah the Jebusite; it could not be far from
Jerusalem, since Baalejudah or Kirjathjearim was but about a mile from
it, according to Bunting (m), from whence they fetched the ark:

Uzzah put forth his hand to the ark of God, and took hold of it; to keep
it from falling: the reason was:

for the oxen shook it; the same word is used in [Ch1
13:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1013.htm#009); and there it is rendered, "for
the oxen stumbled"; and by their stumbling the cart was shaken, and the
ark in it, and in danger of falling, as Uzzah thought: or "the oxen
shook", for the word "it" is a supplement; they shook as if their
members were plucking asunder and parting, as Kimchi expresses it,
because of the holiness of the ark; as if they were sensible it was
wrong for them to draw it, when it ought to have been carried on the
shoulders of Levites; and by this way, as well as by the death of Uzzah
the error committed was pointed out: but others render it, "for the oxen
stuck in the clay" (n), and could not go on; which Uzzah observing, and
fearing that in their struggle to get out the cart should be overturned,
or that the procession would be retarded too much, took hold of the ark
to take it out, and carry it the remainder of the way, it not being far
from Jerusalem.

\(h\) T. Bab Sotah, fol. 35. 2. (i) Hieron. Trad. Heb. in lib.
Paralipom. fol. 83. G. (k) Virgil. Aeneid. 10. ver. 261, 262. Vid.
Diodor. Sic. l. 20. p. 787. (l) Gloss. in T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 35. 3. (m)
Travels, &c. p. 138. (n) "nam luto haeserunt boves", Noldius, p. 396.
No. 1343. so Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 37. col. 374. ex
Arabica Lingua.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 6:7</span></span>

And the anger of the Lord was kindled against Uzzah,.... And which was
manifest by smiting him:

and God smote him there for his error; committed at this time, which was
complicated; as that the ark was put upon a cart, to which he might be
the chief adviser, as Procopius Gazaeus notes, when it should have been
carried on the shoulders of the Levites; and that be touched it with his
hand, which none but priests might do, supposing him to be a Levite,
which it is not clear he was, however not a Kohathite; and he took hold
of it in order to carry it in his arms, which even Levites, and those
Kohathites, might not do, but with staves put into it, which only they
were to hold; and besides, as Abarbinel observes, he showed little faith
in the power and providence of God, as if he could not take care of the
ark without him:

and there he died by the ark of God; directly, upon the spot, by the
side of it; whether he was struck by lightning, or in what way, cannot
be said; however, he died by the immediate hand of God, in token of his
displeasure: and this shows that it is dangerous in matters of worship
to act contrary to the command of God, even in things that may seem
small and trivial; and though what may be done may be done with a good
intention, as this was, yet that will not excuse the sin; nor are those
who are the most forward and zealous in religious matters exempted from
marks of God's displeasure when they go wrong.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 6:8</span></span>

And David was displeased, because the Lord had made a breach upon
Uzzah,.... He could not easily submit, and be reconciled to the
providence; his heart was ready to rise up against God, and murmur at
him for striking him dead in such an awful manner, for so small a matter
as this might seem to be; and the rather, as this put a stop to the
procession, and cast a damp upon their joy and mirth on this occasion,
and might seem to be an ill omen to David, and be improved by his
enemies against him:

and he called the name of the place Perezuzzah unto this day; the name
he gave the place, which signifies "the breach of Uzzah", continued to
the time of writing this book.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 6:9</span></span>

And David was afraid of the Lord that day,.... Lest he should be smitten
for his error also, and especially as he had discovered some resentment
at the Lord's dealing with Uzzah; when he ought to have been still and
quiet, and submitted to the will of God, and owned his justice in it,
confessed his own error, and been thankful for his sparing mercy
vouchsafed to him:

and said, how shall the ark of the Lord come to me? the meaning of which
is not, how it should be brought to the place provided by him in
Jerusalem, now Uzzah was dead, for there were Levites enough to carry
it, as they afterwards did; but as signifying that it would be either
boldness and presumption in him to do it, since God had shown such a
mark of his displeasure at their proceeding, that he might be in doubt
whether it was the will of God it should come to him; or as fearing it
would be dangerous to him to have it with him, since he might be guilty
of such an error, of the same, or like it, that had been committed.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 6:10</span></span>

So David would not remove the ark of the Lord unto him into the city of
David,.... As yet, but wait a little longer, until he had more
thoroughly considered of it, and made himself acquainted with everything
relative to the ark, that he might know how to behave for the future,
without giving offence:

but David carried it aside into the house of Obededom the Gittite; which
was close by, on one side of the place where they were; this man was a
Levite, as appears from his being afterwards appointed to be doorkeeper
for the ark, and to sing praise before it, and so a proper person to
commit the care of it to, [Ch1 15:18](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#018);
he is called a Gittite, either because he had sojourned in Gath some
time, or rather because he was of Gathrimmon, a city of the Levites,
[Jos 21:24](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#024).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 6:11</span></span>

And the ark of the Lord continued in the house of Obededom the Gittite
three months,.... David, and those with him, returned to their
habitations, where they continued during this time:

and the Lord blessed Obededom, and all his household; him, and all his
family, with spiritual blessings, and with an affluence of temporal good
things; for godliness has the promise of this life, and of that which is
to come; men are not losers but gainers, even in things temporal, for
their attachment to the cause of religion, and the service of God, and
their regard to that in their own houses, as well as in the house of
God. Josephus (o) says, that Obededom was very poor before, and in a low
condition, out of which he soon emerged, and came into affluent
circumstances, so as to be taken notice of by his neighbours, and
reported abroad; by which means David came to the hearing of it, as
follows.

\(o\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 4. sect. 2.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 6:12</span></span>

And it was told King David,.... By some of his courtiers who had heard
of it:

saying, the Lord hath blessed the house of Obededom, and all that
pertaineth unto him, because of the ark of the Lord; it was so suddenly,
in so short a time, and so largely, that it could not escape the notice
and observation of men that knew him; and this increase was not in any
natural way by which it could be accounted for; so that it could be
ascribed to no other cause but the blessing of God, and that on account
of the ark of God that was with him; nothing else could be thought of:

so David went and brought up the ark of God from the house of Obededom
into the city of David with gladness: being animated and encouraged by
the blessing of God on the house of Obededom, because of it, and thereby
freed from those slavish fears he was before possessed of, and filled
with hopes of being blessed also on account of it; if not with temporal
blessings, he needed not, yet with spiritual ones.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 6:13</span></span>

And it was so, that when they that bare the ark of the Lord,.... The
Levites; for now David had seen the former mistake, and rectified it,
and ordered the Levites to "carry" it, as they did upon their shoulders,
with the staves therein, see [Ch1
15:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#002); when these

had gone six paces, he sacrificed oxen and fatlings; upon an altar,
which was at once erected for that purpose; the number and kind of
sacrifices offered were seven bullocks and seven rams, [Ch1
15:26](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#026); and these David offered, not by
himself, but by the priests that were with him, and that as soon as they
had gone six paces from the house of Obededom; whereby they perceived
the Levites, were able to carry the ark, with what was in it, the Lord
helping them, as in [Ch1 15:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#002), and
without stumbling and falling, or any evil attending them; and Kimchi
thinks these six paces were just the measure of the ground Uzzah went
before what befell him; but it is highly probable that he had gone
further; however, no doubt by the order of David, the Levites set down
the ark, and sacrifices were offered by way of thanksgiving to God, and
for the continuance of his goodness, and for atonement for former
errors. Some think these seven oxen and rams were offered, at seven
different times and places, at every six paces an ox and a ram; but this
is not very likely.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 6:14</span></span>

And David danced before the Lord with all his might,.... That is, before
the ark of the Lord; not a set dance, or along with others; but he
leaped and skipped as "car", a lamb, does, and that for joy that the ark
was like to be brought home to his house, without any token of the
divine displeasure, as before; the Targum is,"he praised before the Lord
with all his might;''exerted himself to the uttermost in singing the
praises of God vocally, or by playing on an instrument; to which sense
are the Septuagint, Syriac, and Arabic versions, which is approved of by
Castel (p); who observes, it nowhere appears to have been a custom to
dance before the ark; but it might be now done, though not usual, and
therefore was observed by Michal with contempt, [Sa2
6:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#016); a later writer (q) shows that
dancing is the proper sense of the word:

and David was girded with a linen ephod; which others, besides priests,
sometimes wore, as Samuel did, and which David might choose to appear
in, rather than in his royal robes, as being more agreeable to the
service of God, and lighter for him both to walk and dance in on this
occasion.

\(p\) Lexic. col. 1793. (q) Hackman. Praecidan. Sacr. p. 156, 157.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 6:15</span></span>

So David and all the house of Israel brought up the ark of the Lord,....
The elders of Israel, and the captains over thousands, [Ch1
15:25](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#025); besides the common people;
there might be as large a number with him now as before:

with shouting, and with the sound of the trumpet; with the shouts of the
people in common, and with blowing of trumpets by those who were
appointed for that purpose, and with other instruments of music, see
[Ch1 15:27](../../../bib/kjv/ch1015.htm#027); Josephus says (r), that
seven choirs went before the priests bearing the ark, as the king
commanded, he himself playing on the harp; so the Septuagint version.

\(r\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 4. sect. 2.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 6:16</span></span>

And as the ark of the Lord came into the city of David,.... Being
brought thither on the shoulders of the Levites:

Michal, Saul's daughter, looked through a window; in the king's palace,
to see the procession, which was very grand, and in great pomp, attended
by a vast number of people, and with music of all sorts. She is said to
be Saul's daughter, though David's wife, as having a good deal of her
father's haughty temper and disposition, as appears by what follows:

and saw King David leaping and dancing before the Lord; the ark of the
Lord, by these outward gestures expressing the inward joy of his heart
on this occasion:

and she despised him in her heart; as acting a mean part, quite beneath
himself, and unbecoming his royal dignity.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 6:17</span></span>

And they brought in the ark of the Lord,.... Into the city of David, the
strong hold of Zion:

and set it in his place, in the midst of the tabernacle that David had
pitched for it: or "stretched out"; for this was not the tabernacle of
Moses, David pitched any where; that was at this time at Gibeon, where
it continued to the time of Solomon, [Ch1
21:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch1021.htm#029); but this was a curtain, or
curtains, which he had stretched out or drawn around for the ark to be
pitched in the midst of; and this was not in his own house, for he is
afterwards said to go to that, but somewhere in Jerusalem or the city of
David:

and David offered burnt offerings and peace offerings before the Lord;
that is, before the ark, and that by way of thanksgiving for its being
brought safe thither, without any error or mistake on the side of him,
the Levites, and the people, and without offence to God, and any mark of
his displeasure as before. This must be supposed to be done by priests,
and not by David himself, who was no priest.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 6:18</span></span>

And as soon as David had made an end of offering burnt offerings and
peace offerings,.... Or these were performed according to his order:

he blessed the people in the name of the Lord of hosts; not as a priest,
but as a prince, as the common father of them, wishing them all
happiness and prosperity outward and inward, praying to God to bless
them with all blessings temporal and spiritual, who is the God of armies
above and below, and can do what he pleases, and more than his people
can ask or think.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 6:19</span></span>

And he dealt among all the people,.... Gave a dole unto them, divided
among them:

even among the whole multitude of Israel: and if there were so many as
at first, there were thirty thousand of them, [Sa2
6:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#001); and perhaps more, since it
follows:

as well to the women as men; to both the one and the other; and the
women, it is very probable, were not among those that went to fetch the
ark, but assembled to attend the entrance of it into the city, and were
present at the solemnities of its settlement:

to everyone a cake of bread; or a loaf of bread, of what quantity is not
said, no doubt sufficient for anyone person, or more:

and a good piece of flesh: not only that was good in quality, but large
in quantity, a very large piece of it; the Jews say (s) the sixth part
of a bullock, they dividing it into six parts as we into four quarters;
but it is not likely that such a quantity of flesh should be given to
each person:

and a flagon of wine; but what such a vessel held cannot be said, though
at least we may suppose it equal to a bottle of ours, or more; see [Sol
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#005),

so all the people departed everyone to his house; to refresh themselves
with the provisions David had given them.

\(s\) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 36. 3.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 6:20</span></span>

Then David returned to bless his household,.... His wife, children, and
servants, to wish all happiness to them on this occasion, and pray to
God for blessings on them temporal and spiritual. This was done when he
came from the place where the ark was set, and was come to his own
palace:

and Michal the daughter of Saul came out to meet David; before he had
gotten quite to his own house:

and said, how glorious was the king of Israel today; which she spoke in
an ironical jeering way, meaning the reverse, how inglorious, mean, and
despicable he had made himself to be, by his airs and gestures:

who uncovered himself today in the eyes of the handmaids of his
servants, as one of the vain fellows shamelessly uncovereth himself!
because he had put off his royal robes, and put on a linen ephod; for
that he had stripped himself naked cannot be supposed, nor do her words
import so much though a passionate exaggeration of the case.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 6:21</span></span>

And David said unto Michal, it was before the Lord,.... Before the ark
of the Lord, what was done was done there; she upbraided him with his
dancing and singing, which was designed for the honour and glory of God,
and in thankfulness to him for the bringing the ark to his city, and
therefore she ought not to have reproached him with it, and he adds:

which chose me before thy father, and before all his house; see [Sa1
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#014); which he observed to humble her
pride, and mortify her, as well as to remark the distinguishing goodness
of God to him, which laid him under obligation to express his
thankfulness to him in every shape:

to appoint me ruler over the people of the Lord, over Israel; which was
a high honour conferred upon him, and required the utmost gratitude:

therefore will I play before the Lord; upon the harp, or praise before
him, as the Targum, sing his praise before the ark, unto any instrument
of music, without once imagining I disgrace myself, on the contrary
think it to be the highest honour to me to be employed in such service.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 6:22</span></span>

And I will yet be more vile than thus,.... If this is to be vile, I will
endeavour to be viler still; if to dance before the ark, and sing the
praises of God, be reckoned a lessening of me, I will more and more be
found in doing such things, or what is similar to them:

and will be base in mine own sight: humble himself, and lie low in his
own eyes, admiring the grace and goodness of God to him, thinking he
could never condescend too low to exalt the Lord, and magnify the riches
of his goodness:

and of the maidservants which thou hast spoken of, of them shall I be
had in honour; who the more humble I am, and the more I condescend, by
laying aside all state in acts of devotion and religion, the more shall
I be honoured and spoken well of by them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 6:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2006.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 6:23</span></span>

Therefore Michal the daughter of Saul had no child until the day of her
death. The children she brought up for Adriel were not her own, but
adopted ones, or Adriel's by another woman, [Sa2
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#008); however, she had none after this
time, whatever she had before, and it does not appear that she had any,
though the Jews say she was Eglah, and Ithream her son; see Gill on [Sa2
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#005). And thus she that vilified David
brought a reproach upon herself, as barrenness was always reckoned, and
no one descending from her arrived to royal dignity, and sat on the
throne of David; and so it was ordered in Providence, as Abarbinel
observes, that the seed of David and of Saul might not be mixed.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 7](sa2007)

</div>
