<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2015)  [Next](sa2017.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 16:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SECOND SAMUEL 16

In this chapter is an account of Ziba, the servant of Mephibosheth,
getting his inheritance by misrepresentation of him, and by presents to
David, [Sa2 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001.md); and of Shimei's
cursing David as he passed along, which David bore patiently, and would
not suffer others to avenge it on him, [Sa2
16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005.md); and of Hushai's offer of his
service to Absalom, who admitted him to be of his privy council, [Sa2
16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015.md); and of the counsel which
Ahithophel gave, [Sa2 15:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#020.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 16:1</span></span>

And when David was a little past the top of the hill,.... Of the mount
of Olives, the ascent of which he is said to go up by, and to come to
the top of it, [Sa2 15:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#030.md),

behold, Ziba, the servant of Mephibosheth, met him; of whom see [Sa2
9:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#002.md);

with a couple of asses saddled: and so fit to ride on, but for the
present he used them to another purpose:

and upon them two hundred loaves of bread; an hundred on each ass very
probably:

and an hundred bunches of raisins; or dried grapes, as the Targum:

and an hundred of summer fruits: not in number, but in weight, as
apples, pears, plums, apricots, &c. so the Targum, an hundred pounds of
figs:

and a bottle of wine: a cask or flagon of wine; for a bottle, such as is
in use with us, would have signified nothing in such a company.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 16:2</span></span>

And the king said unto Ziba, what meanest thou by these?.... Are they to
be said, or are they presents?

and Ziba said, the asses be for the king's household to ride on; for
himself, his wives, and children, his courtiers, and the principal
officers of his house; it being usual in those times and countries for
great personages to ride on asses, see [Jdg
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/jdg005.htm#010.md),

and the bread and summer fruits for the young men to eat; the king's
menial servants, his guards and his soldiers:

and the wine, that such as be faint in the wilderness may drink; where
no water was to be had, that their fainting spirits might be revived,
and they be able whether to fight or march.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 16:3</span></span>

And the king said, and where is thy master's son?.... The son of Saul,
who was Ziba's master, meaning Mephibosheth:

and Ziba said unto the king, behold, he abideth at Jerusalem; as there
was reason for it, since he was lame of both his feet, [Sa2
9:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#013.md), though he could have rode upon
an ass, and followed the king, as he proposed to do; but his servant
deceived him, and carried off the asses to serve a purpose for himself,
see [Sa2 19:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#026.md),

for he said, today shall the house of Israel restore unto me the kingdom
of my father; his father Saul; which was far from his thoughts; and a
most wicked suggestion of his servant to blacken his character, and get
his estate from him; nor was there the least probability of the kingdom
coming to him, but all the reverse; for let it go how it would with
David, Absalom, and not Mephibosheth, stood fair for the kingdom.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 16:4</span></span>

Then said the king to Ziba, behold, thine are all that pertaineth to
Mephibosheth,.... Being forfeited to the king by an overt act of treason
as they had been before by the rebellion of Ishbosheth, but had been
graciously restored to Mephibosheth; and had it been true what Ziba
suggested, it would have been a righteous thing to have taken them from
him; though it seems to be too hasty a step in David to take and give
them away without further inquiry:

and Ziba said, I humbly beseech thee that I may find grace in thy sight,
my lord, O king; he had found favour already, but seems not to be
sufficiently thankful for it, and satisfied with it, but craved more and
other favours, when opportunity should serve.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 16:5</span></span>

And when King David came to Bahurim,.... The Targum is, Alemath, perhaps
the same that is said to be a city of the Levites, given unto them out
of the tribe of Benjamin, [Ch1 6:60](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#060.md)
for the man next described, who was of this place, was a Benjaminite,
[Sa2 19:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#016.md); See Gill on [Sa2
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#016.md); David was not yet come to the
city itself, but into the neighbourhood of it, the fields adjacent to
it: and

behold, thence came out a man of the family of Saul; a descendant of a
branch of his family, who had entertained a private grudge and secret
enmity against David, to whom he imputed the fall of the family of Saul:

whose name was Shimei, the son of Gera: which might be a name common in
the tribe of Benjamin, one of Benjamin's sons being named Gera, [Gen
46:21](../../../bib/kjv/gen046.htm#021). Some say (s.md) he was the same
with Nebat, the father of Jeroboam; but he was of the tribe of Ephraim,
this of Benjamin:

he came forth, and cursed still as he came; he came out of Bahurim, of
which place he was, and all the way he came continued cursing David,
until he came near unto him.

\(s\) Hieron. Trad. Helb. in 2. Reg. fol. 79. B.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 16:6</span></span>

And he cast stones at David, and at all the servants of King David,....
Not that he was within the reach of them, or could hurt them, by casting
them at them; but this he did to show his contempt of them, and to
intimate that they deserved to be stoned, and especially David, at whose
adultery he might point by it:

and all the people, and all the mighty men were on his right hand,

and on his left; that is, of David; which is observed, not so much to
indicate the safety of David's person, as the impudence and madness of
Shimei, to cast stones at David when so guarded.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 16:7</span></span>

And thus said Shimei, when he cursed, come out, come out,.... Or rather,
"go out, go out" (t); that is, out of the nation, where he deserved not
to live, as he judged, and out of the kingdom, which he had usurped, as
he supposed; and the repeating the words not only denotes his vehement
desire to have him gone, but the haste he should make to get out, or he
was liable to be overtaken by Absalom and his forces; upbraiding him
also with the hurry he was in, and the speedy flight he was making:

thou bloody man, and thou man of Belial; or wicked man; perhaps
referring by these characters in the one to the murder of Uriah, and in
the other to his adultery with Bathsheba; and these crimes coming fresh
into David's mind hereby, might make him more mild and humble under his
reproaches.

\(t\) "egredere, egredere", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 16:8</span></span>

The Lord hath returned upon thee all the blood of the house of Saul,....
Which he would suggest was shed by David, or, however, that he was the
cause of its being shed; as if he had stirred up the Philistines to that
battle in which Saul and his sons were slain, and had an hand secretly
in the deaths of Ishbosheth and Abner, all which were false
insinuations; and it may be the seven sons of Saul before this time,
though after related, were delivered into the hands of the Gibeonites to
be hanged, to which respect may be had:

in whose stead thou hast reigned; not by right, but by usurpation he
suggests:

and the Lord hath delivered the kingdom into the hand of Absalom thy
son; in this he seems to contradict himself; for if David had got the
kingdom by usurpation, it would rather have, been delivered by the Lord
into the hand of one of Saul's family, and not of David's:

and behold, thou art taken in thy mischief; punished for his sins; the
mischief he had brought on others was retaliated to him:

because thou art a bloody man; guilty of slaying, as the Targum of
shedding innocent blood, and so worthy of death.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 16:9</span></span>

Then said Abishai the son of Zeruiah unto the king,.... A sister's son
of his, and a general in the army, who could not bear to hear the king
abused in this manner:

why should this dead dog curse my lord the king? be suffered to do it
with impunity; a "dog" he calls him, because of his vileness and
baseness, and because of his impudence, and on account of his
reproachful and abusive language, aptly signified by the snarling and
barking of a dog; and a "dead" dog, as being useless, detestable, and
abominable:

let me go over, I pray thee, and take off his head; go over the plain
where David and his men were, to the hill on which Shimei was, and
strike off his head with his sword; which he could easily do, and soon
put an end to his cursing.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 16:10</span></span>

And the king said, what have I to do with you, ye sons of Zeruiah?....
It seems as if Joab, the brother of Abishai, joined with him in this
request to have leave to take off the head of Shimei; and though David
had to do with them as his relations, his sister's sons, and as they
were generals in his army; yet in this case he would have nothing to do
with them, would not take their advice, nor suffer them to take revenge
on this man for his cursing him: or "what is it to me, or to you" (u)?
what signifies his cursing? it will neither hurt me nor you:

so let him curse; go on cursing after this manner; do not restrain him
from it, or attempt to stop his mouth: or, "for he will curse" (w); so
is the textual reading; you will not be able to restrain him, for the
following reason:

because the Lord hath said unto him, curse David; not by way of command,
or a precept of his; for to curse the ruler of the people is contrary to
the word and law of God, [Exo 22:28](../../../bib/kjv/exo022.htm#028.md),
nor by any operation of his spirit moving and exciting him to it; for
the operations of the Spirit are to holiness, and not to sin; but by the
secret providence of God ordering, directing, and overruling all
circumstances relative to this affair. Shimei had conceived enmity and
hatred to David; God left him to the power of this corruption in his
breast, opened a way in Providence, and gave him an opportunity of
exercising it on him: it was not a bare permission of God that Shimei
should curse David; but it was his will, and he ordered it so in
Providence, that he should do it; which action was attended with the
predetermined concourse of divine Providence, so far as it was an
action; though, as a sinful action, it was of Shimei, sprung from his
own heart, instigated by Satan; but as a correction and chastisement of
David, it was by the will, order, and appointment of God, and as such
David considered it, and quietly submitted to it:

who shall then say, wherefore hast thou done so? for though Shimei might
justly be blamed, and reproved for it, yet the thing itself was not to
be hindered or restrained, it being according to the will and providence
of God, to answer some good end with respect to David.

\(u\) "quid mihi et vobis", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus. (w) "quia",
Moatanus.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 16:11</span></span>

And David said to Abishai, and all his servants,.... In order to make
them easy, and reconcile them to this usage of him:

behold, my son, which came forth of my bowels, seeketh my life; meaning
Absalom:

how much more now may this Benjamite do it? who was not only of the same
tribe that Saul was, but of the same family, and so bore an ill will to
David because of his succession in the throne:

let him alone, and let him curse; do nothing to restrain him, not even
by words, and much less by any violent actions, and still less by taking
away his life:

for the Lord hath bidden him; in the sense explained in [Sa2
16:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#010.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 16:12</span></span>

It may be that the Lord will look on mine affliction,.... Through the
rebellion of his son, and now aggravated by the cursing of Shimei; that
is, with an eye of pity and commiseration, and deliver him out of it: or
"look upon my eye" (x); for there is a various reading; the tear of mine
eye, as the Targum; so Jarchi and R. Isaiah; the tears in it, which fell
plentifully from it, on account of his troubles, and particularly the
curses and reproaches of Shimei:

and that the Lord will requite me good for his cursing this day; he does
not speak with assurance, yet with hope; he knew his sins deserved such
treatment, but also that God was gracious and merciful, and pitied his
children, and resented all ill usage of them; and therefore hoped he
would favour him with such intimations of his love as would support him,
comfort, refresh him, and do him good, see [Rom
8:28](../../../bib/kjv/rom008.htm#028.md).

\(x\) "in oculum meum", Montanus; "oculum meum lachrymantem", Munster.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 16:13</span></span>

And as David and his men went by the way,.... In the high road that led
to Bahurim, taking no notice of the cursing of Shimei, which made him
bolder and more impudent; here is a large pause in the Hebrew text, in
the midst of this verse:

Shimei went along on the hill side over against him; as David and his
men walked in the plain, he went on a range of hills that ran along
right against them:

and cursed as he went; continued his curses and imprecations, to which
he was the more emboldened by the behaviour of David and his men:

and threw stones at him, and cast dust; in a way of contempt, though the
stones recoiled on his own head, and the dust flew in his own face, as
the consequence of things showed; and now David composed and penned the
seventh psalm, [Psa 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa007.htm#001.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 16:14</span></span>

And the king, and all the people that were with him, came weary,....
With their journey, and through grief and trouble at what they met with:

and refreshed themselves there: that is, at Bahurim, with food and rest;
which revived their spirits, and put as it were new life and soul into
them, as the word used signifies. Josephus (y) says, when David came to
Jordan, he refreshed his weary men.

\(y\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 9. sect. 4.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 16:15</span></span>

And Absalom, and all the people, the men of Israel, came to
Jerusalem,.... At the same time that David and his people came to
Bahurim; which, as Josephus (z) says, was a place near to Jerusalem;
and, according to Bunting (a), was little more than a mile from it;
though elsewhere (b) he makes it three miles; so that had not David made
the hasty flight he did, he had fallen into the hands of Absalom:

and Ahithophel with him: a famous counsellor, and who had been of
David's privy council, and chief in it, see [Sa2
15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#012.md) and whom David refers to in [Psa
55:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa055.htm#012.md).

\(z\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 9. sect. 4. (a) Travels, &c. p. 144. (b) Ib. p.
150.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 16:16</span></span>

And it came to pass that when Hushai the Archite, David's friend, was
come unto Absalom,.... Who came into Jerusalem at the same time that
Absalom did, and who, no doubt, took the first opportunity to make his
court to him, [Sa2 15:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#037.md),

that Hushai said unto Absalom, God save the king, God save the king; or
"may the king live" (c), live long, and his kingdom be permanent; these
words are very ambiguous, he might mean David, who was true and lawful
king, though he would have them understood of Absalom, who was king by
usurpation, in which he used great deceit and flattery; and that he
might not be suspected of it, but be thought to be sincere and truly
loyal to Absalom, he repeats the wish.

\(c\) "vivat rex", Pagninus. Montanus, &c.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 16:17</span></span>

And Absalom said to Hushai, is this thy kindness to thy friend?....
Meaning to David; though he would not mention his name, nor his title,
nor even the relation of a father he stood in to him, only speaks of him
as Hushai's friend: Hushai had professed great friendship to David, and
David had been a friend to Hushai, had raised him to great honour in
making him a counsellor, and had bestowed many favours and benefits on
him, as Absalom knew full well; and therefore, to try his integrity, he
puts this question, not as displeased with him, but overjoyed that such
a trusty friend of David, and a wise counsellor of his, had deserted
him, and come over to him and his party; nor does he mean to charge him
with ingratitude, which he could not do without reproaching himself; on
whom it might be justly retorted, is this thy kindness to thy father
that begot thee, and has always expressed such a strong affection for
thee, as to rebel against him?

why wentest thou not with thy friend? with David, when he went out of
Jerusalem; for Absalom knew not that Hushai had been with David, but
thought he stayed behind at Jerusalem, when David fled, which made him
less suspicious of him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 16:18</span></span>

And Hushai said to Absalom,.... In answer to his questions:

nay, but whom the Lord, and his people, and all the men of Israel
choose: here again he speaks very ambiguously; for this circumlocution,
or descriptive character of the king of Israel, better agrees with
David, whom he might bear in mind, than with Absalom; for the Lord had
chosen David, and he was anointed by his order, and all the people of
Israel had chosen and anointed him likewise; but as for Absalom, it was
only a part of them that had declared for him, nor was there any
evidence of the Lord's choosing him; though Hushai undoubtedly would be
under stood of him, and as interpreting the voice of the people to be
the voice of God:

his will I be, and with him will I abide; though he designed no such
thing, which was a great piece of dissimulation and hypocrisy; and if he
meant David, it was a piece of deceit and equivocation: there is a
various reading in the first clause; we follow the marginal reading, "to
him" or "his", but the textual reading is "not": and both may be taken
in by rendering the words by an interrogation, "shall I, or should I not
be his" (d)? I will; that is, be his servant, faithfully obey his
commands, be closely attached to him, and continue with him as a loyal
subject.

\(d\) "non ero", Montanus; "non essem ejus?" Junius & Tremellius.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 16:19</span></span>

And again, whom should I serve?.... Or "secondly" (e), a second reason
is here given for serving Absalom: the first was the choice of God and
the people, the second follows:

should I not serve in the presence of his son? as I have served in thy
father's presence, so will I be in thy presence: he signifies, that as
the kingdom was not translated into another family, but continued in
succession in David's house, the alteration made was of no great
consequence; it was indifferent to him whom he served, the father or the
son; and he could as freely, and would as faithfully serve the son as
the father; nor did he think it any breach of friendship to David, nor
would David resent it, that he should serve his son, and do the best
offices, and give him the best counsel he could; and he seems to bespeak
the office of a counsellor, in which he had been to David, that he might
be admitted into the presence of Absalom, and be of his privy council,
and have the opportunity of giving his best advice.

\(e\) "secunda", Montanus, Munster, Vatablus; "secundo", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 16:20</span></span>

Then said Absalom to Ahithophel,.... Having two such able counsellors as
he and Hushai, he directs his speech to Ahithophel, as being his first
and chief counsellor:

give counsel among you what we shall do; he orders them to form a
counsel, consult among themselves what was proper to be now done at
Jerusalem, whether it was right to stay here or pursue after David and
his men. Absalom did not send to the high priest to ask counsel of God,
by Urim and Thummim before the ark, but wholly confided in his privy
council.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 16:21</span></span>

And Ahithophel said unto Absalom,.... Either immediately of himself,
without consulting with others; or after a consultation had been held
between them, he as the president of it, and their mouth, gave the
following advice; though the former seems most correct:

go in unto thy father's concubines, which he hath left, to keep the
house; and lie with them; there were ten of them, [Sa2
15:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#016.md),

and all Israel shall hear that thou art abhorred of thy father; this
fact will be so abominable to him, and he will so highly resent it, as
never to forgive thee, and be reconciled unto thee:

then shall the hands of all that are with thee be strong; he intimates
that they were now weak, and did not act with spirit; they were fearful
that David and Absalom would be reconciled, and then they should be
reckoned traitors, and fall a sacrifice to David's vengeance, for their
treason against him: but by Absalom's taking such a step as this, which
would make him for ever the object of his father's hatred, their hands
and hearts would be strengthened, and their fears removed, and they
would not have the least jealousy of a reconciliation between them, and
of their being left to the resentment of David. Some think this was not
his only reason for giving this counsel, but also to revenge David's
abuse of Bathsheba, his son's daughter, as she is supposed to be; see
Gill on [Sa2 15:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#012.md); however, it was so
ordered in Providence, that this advice should be given and taken, to
fulfil the prophecy of the Lord to Nathan, [Sa2
12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 16:22</span></span>

So they spread Absalom a tent on the top of the house,.... On the top of
his father's palace; this, as houses in Jerusalem and Judea were, was
built flat, [Deu 22:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu022.htm#008.md); and it was on
the very spot from whence David had a sight of Bathsheba, and conceived
an impure lust after her. The Targum renders it, a canopy; which Kimchi
describes as consisting of four pillars, upon and round about which
curtains were hung:

and Absalom went in unto his father's concubines in the sight of all
Israel; they saw the tent or canopy erected, and saw him go into it, and
might reasonably conclude he lay with his father's concubines, or half
wives, in it; and this being done in so public a manner fulfilled the
prophecy, which said it should be done in the sight of the sun, and of
all Israel, [Sa2 12:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#011.md); this shows how
corrupt the people of Israel were at this time, at least those that were
with Absalom, that there should be none to object to the counsel
Ahithophel gave, nor any to remonstrate against the execution of it, but
all seemed to look upon it with pleasure; nor even did Hushai, David's
friend, oppose it; perhaps he saw it was to no purpose.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 16:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2016.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 16:23</span></span>

And the counsel of Ahithophel, which he had counselled in those
days,.... Both in the days of David, and in the days of Absalom, before
and since the rebellion:

was as if a man had inquired of the oracle of God; such an opinion was
entertained of it, so well satisfied were they with it, and as confident
of success in taking it, as if the Lord himself had been consulted by
Urim and Thummim; this is a very great exaggeration of Ahithophel's
counsel, and is observed as a reason why it was so readily taken, though
so bad in the preceding instance:

so was all the counsel of Ahithophel, both with David and with Absalom;
Ahithophel was a crafty man, a time server, that temporized with
princes, and knew how to suit his counsels with their tempers and
interests: to David he gave good counsel, what was acceptable with him,
and to Absalom bad counsel, which was pleasing to him.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 17](sa2017.md)

</div>
