<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2004)  [Next](sa2006) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SECOND SAMUEL 5

In this chapter we have an account of all the tribes of Israel coming to
Hebron, and anointing David king over them, [Sa2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001); of his expedition against the
Jebusites in Jerusalem, and taking from them the strong hold of Zion,
[Sa2 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006); of his building an house for
himself, and of his building up his family, by taking more wives and
concubines, and having more children, whose names are given, [Sa2
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011); and of an invasion of the land
by the Philistines, and David's victory over them, [Sa2
5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 5:1</span></span>

Then came all the tribes of Israel to David unto Hebron,.... All the
rest of the tribes, save the tribe of Judah, who had made him king over
them in Hebron seven years ago. These were ambassadors sent in the name
of the several tribes to him, quickly after the deaths of Abner and
Ishbosheth; from having any hand in which David had sufficiently cleared
himself, and which had tended to reconcile the minds of the people of
Israel to him:

and spake, saying, we are thy bone and thy flesh; for though he was of
the tribe of Judah, yet as all the tribes sprung from one man, they were
all one bone, flesh, and blood; all nearly related to each other, all of
the same general family of which David was; and so, according to their
law, a fit person to be their king, [Deu
16:18](../../../bib/kjv/deu016.htm#018); and from whom they might expect
clemency and tenderness, being so near akin to them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 5:2</span></span>

Also in time past, when Saul was king over us,.... Even over all the
tribes of Israel:

thou wast he that leddest out and broughtest in Israel; that led out the
armies of Israel against their enemies, fought their battles for them,
obtained victories, and brought the troops under his command home in
safety; and the remembrance of these valiant acts of his, which then
endeared him to the people, was now another reason for their choosing
him king: and another follows, the chiefest of them all:

and the Lord said to thee; when anointed by Samuel; for though what
follows is not recorded in so many words, yet the sense of it is
expressed in the anointing him to be king, whose office, as such, lay in
doing the following things:

thou shalt feed my people Israel; as a shepherd feeds his flock; hence
kings were frequently called shepherds, and David particularly, in which
he was an eminent type of Christ, see [Psa
78:71](../../../bib/kjv/psa078.htm#071),

and thou shalt be a captain over Israel; the Targum is,"and thou shalt
be king over Israel;''which gives the true sense of the tribes, and
which was the chief and prevailing reason with them to make him their
king; and which they, at least many of them, would have done before,
even immediately upon the death of Saul, but that they were persuaded by
Abner to yield obedience to Ishbosheth he set up.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 5:3</span></span>

So all the elders of Israel came to the king to Hebron,.... Which either
explains what is meant by the tribes coming to him, [Sa2
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#001); namely, coming by their elders as
their representatives; or else the meaning is, that the messengers the
tribes sent, when they returned and reported the favourable reception
they had met with from David; the elders of the several tribes, the
princes or principal men met, and came together to David in Hebron:

and King David made a league with them before the Lord; the states of
the nation; he entered into a covenant with them; he on his part
promising to rule them in justice and judgment according to the laws,
and they promising to yield a cheerful obedience to him in all things
just and lawful: and this was done "before the Lord"; either before the
ark of the Lord, as Abarbinel; but that was in Kirjathjearim, from
whence it was after this brought by David to this city; rather, as
Kimchi observes, wherever all Israel, or the greater part of them, were
assembled, there the divine Shechinah or Majesty dwelt; so that what was
done in a public assembly was reckoned as done before the Lord, and in
his presence; or this covenant was made before the Lord, and each party
appealed to him as witness of it, so that it was a very solemn one:

and they anointed David king over Israel; that is, over all Israel,
which was the third time of his being anointed; the first was by Samuel,
pointing out the person the Lord chose and appointed king; the second
was by the tribe of Judah, when they invested him with the office of a
king over them; and now by all the tribes, when he was inaugurated into
the whole kingdom of Israel; and not only the elders came at this time,
but great numbers of the people from the several tribes, and continued
with David some days, eating, drinking and rejoicing, see [Ch1
12:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1012.htm#001).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 5:4</span></span>

David was thirty years old when he began reign,.... Over Judah, which
was the age of his antitype Christ, when he entered upon his public
ministry, [Luk 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/luk003.htm#023),

and he reigned forty years; and six months, as appears by [Sa2
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#005); but the months are not mentioned,
only the round number of years given: two reasons the Jews (a) give for
this; the one, that he fled six months from Absalom; the other is, that
he was ill in Hebron so long, and therefore are not reckoned.

\(a\) Hieron. Trad. Heb. in lib. Reg. fol. 77. I.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 5:5</span></span>

In Hebron he reigned over Judah seven years and six months,.... So long
the kingdom of Israel continued in the house of Saul after his death;
and by this it appears that David was near thirty eight years of age
when the elders of Israel came and made him their king:

and in Jerusalem he reigned thirty and three years over all Israel and
Judah; which in all made forty years and six months, see [Kg1
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#011); upon his being made king over
all the tribes, as soon as he had taken the strong hold of Zion, which
he immediately attacked, as follows, he removed the seat of his kingdom
from Hebron to Jerusalem.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 5:6</span></span>

And the king and his men went to Jerusalem,.... Which, at least part of
it, belonged to the tribe of Benjamin; and therefore until all Israel,
and that tribe, with the rest, made him king, he did not attempt the
reduction of it, but now he immediately set out on an expedition against
it:

unto the Jebusites, the inhabitants of the land: who inhabited the
country about it, and even dwelt in that itself; for the tribe of Judah
could not drive them out at first from that part of it which belonged to
them, nor the tribe of Benjamin from that part which was theirs; in
short, they became so much masters of it, that it was called, even in
later times, Jebus, and the city of the Jebusites; see [Jos
15:63](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#063) [Jdg
1:21](../../../bib/kjv/jdg001.htm#021),

which spake unto David; when he came up against them, and besieged them:

except thou take away the blind and lame, thou shalt not come in hither;
which many understand of their idols and images, which had eyes, but saw
not, and feet, but walked not, which therefore David and his men in
derision called the blind and lame; these the Jebusites placed for the
defence of their city, and put great confidence in them for the security
of it, and therefore said to David, unless you can remove these, which
you scornfully call the blind and the lame, you will never be able to
take the place. And certain it is the Heathens had their tutelar gods
for their cities as well as their houses, in which they greatly trusted
for their safety; and therefore with the Romans, when they besieged a
city, the first thing they attempted to do was by any means, as by songs
particularly, to get the tutelar gods out of it (b); believing otherwise
it would never be taken by them; or if it could, it was not lawful to
make the gods captives (c): and to this sense most of the Jewish
commentators agree, as Kimchi, Jarchi, Ben Gersom, and R. Isaiah, who
take them to be images; some say, made of brass, which were placed
either in the streets of the city, or on the towers: it was usual with
all nations to place on their walls both their household and country
gods, to defend them from the enemy (d). A learned countryman of ours
(e) is of opinion that these were statues or images talismanically made,
under a certain constellation, by some skilful in astrology, placed in
the recess of the fort, and intrusted with the keeping of it, and in
which the utmost confidence was put: but it seems better with Aben Ezra
and Abarbinel, and so Josephus (f), to understand this of blind and lame
men; and that the sense is, that the Jebusites had such an opinion of
the strength of their city, that a few blind and lame men were
sufficient to defend it against David and his army; and perhaps in
contempt of him placed some invalids, blind and lame men, on the walls
of it, and jeeringly told him, that unless he could remove them, he
would never take the city:

thinking: or "saying" (g); this was the substance of what they said, or
what they meant by it:

David cannot come in hither; it is impossible for him to enter it, he
cannot and shall not do it, and very probably these words were put into
the mouths of the blind and lame, and they said them frequently.

\(b\) Vid. Valtrinum de re militar. Rom. l. 5. c. 5. (c) Vid. Macrob.
Saturnal. l. 3. c. 9. Alex. ab Alex. Genial. Dier. l. 6. c. 4. (d)
Cornel. Nepot. Vit. Themistocl. l. 2. c. 7. (e) Gregory's Notes and
Observations, &c. ch. 7. (f) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 3. sect. 1. (g) "dicendo",
Pagninus, Montanus.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 5:7</span></span>

Nevertheless, David took the strong hold of Zion,.... A fortress without
the city, and separate from it, and which was very strong; and the
taking it might facilitate the taking of the city, which yet as appears
by what follows, was very difficult to do:

the same is the city of David; it was afterwards so called, where he
built an house, and dwelt.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 5:8</span></span>

And David said on that day,.... On which he took the strong hold of
Zion:

whosoever getteth up to the gutter; where it is generally supposed the
blind and lame were, whether images or real men: but what is meant by
"Tzinnur", we render "gutter", is not easy to say; we follow some of the
Jewish writers, who take it to be a canal, or water spout, used to carry
off the water from roofs of houses into cisterns, as the word is
rendered in [Psa 42:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa042.htm#007); which is the
only place besides this in which it is used in Scripture; but R. Isaiah
takes it to be the bar or bolt of the gate, and the sense to be, whoever
got up to the gate, and got in at that, unbolting it, or breaking
through it; the Targum interprets it of the tower of the city, or strong
fortress, and so Abarbinel; but Jarchi says it was a ditch, agreeably to
which Bochart (h) translates the words, and indeed more agreeably to the
order of them;"whosoever smites the Jebusites, let him cast into the
ditch (next the wall) both the blind and the lame, extremely hated by
David.''But a learned modern writer (i) gives a more ingenious and
probable interpretation of these words thus;"whosoever (first) smiteth
the Jebusites, and through the subterraneous passages reaches the lame
and the blind, &c.''and which seems to be favoured by Josephus, as he
observes; who says (k), the king promised the command of the whole army
to him who should , "through the subterraneous cavities", go up to the
citadel, and take it: to which I would add that the word is used in the
Chaldee paraphrase of [Ecc 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc001.htm#007), of the
several subterraneous passages, through which the rivers flow out of and
reflow into the ocean: remarkable is the note of Theodoret,

"a certain Hebrew says, Aquila renders it "through a pipe"; on which, he
observes, David being willing to spare the walls of the city, ordered
the citizens should enter into the city by an aqueduct;''according to
the Jews, there, was a cave underground, which reached from the king's
house in Jerusalem to Jericho, when it was taken by Nebuchadnezzar; See
Gill on [Jer 39:4](../../../bib/kjv/jer039.htm#004); in which story
there may be a mixture of fable; yet it is not improbable that there was
such a subterraneous passage; since Dio Cassius (l) speaks of several
such, through which the Jews made their escape in the last siege of the
city:

and smiteth the Jebusites, and the lame and the blind; or even the lame
and the blind men the Jebusites had placed to mock David; and therefore
it follows:

that are hated of David's soul: because he was despised and jeered at by
them, and through them: if these could be understood of their idols and
images, the phrase would be easily accounted for, nothing being more
abominable to David than idolatry:

he shall be chief and captain; these words are not in the original text
here, but are supplied from [Ch1 11:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#006);
that is, he shall be chief commander of the army, as Joab became, who
was the first that went up and smote them:

wherefore they said, the blind and the lame shall not come into the
house; that is, either the Jebusites said this, that their images,
called in derision by David the blind and the lame, if these did not
keep David out, they should never be intrusted with the safety of their
fort any more (m); or rather because the blind and the lame men said
this of David, he shall not come into the house, the fort, or citadel,
therefore David hated them; which is the sense of the above learned
writer (n).

\(h\) Phaleg. l. 4. c. 36. col. 304. (i) Dr. Kennicott's Dissert. 1. p.
35. (k) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 7. c. 3. sect. 1.) (l) Hist. l. 66. (m)
Gregory, ut supra. (Notes and Observations, &c. ch. 7.) (n) Dr.
Kennicott, ut supra. (Dissert. 1. p. 35.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 5:9</span></span>

So David dwelt in the fort,.... The strong hold of Zion, which he took:

and called it the city of David; from his own name, to keep up the
memory of his taking it, and of his habitation in it:

and David built round about, from Millo and inward; built a wall about
it, and enlarged the place, increased the buildings both within and
without. Millo is supposed to be a ditch round the fort, full of water,
from whence it had its name; or was a large hollow place which divided
the fort from the lower city, and which afterwards Solomon filled up,
and made it a level, and therefore is called so here by anticipation;
though Jarchi says it was done by David. According to Dr. Lightfoot (o),
it was a part or Sion, or some hillock, east up against it on the west
side; his first sense is best, Millo being no other than the fortress or
citadel; which, as Josephus says (p), David joined to the lower city,
and made them one body, and erecting walls about it made Joab
superintendent of them; and this was the "round about", or circuit,
which David made, reaching from Millo, or the citadel, to that again,
which is meant by "inward", or "to the house" (q), as it should be
rendered; that is, to the house of Millo, as in [Kg2
12:20](../../../bib/kjv/kg2012.htm#020); and so it is said [Ch1
11:8](../../../bib/kjv/ch1011.htm#008); that David built the city "from
Millo round about"; that is, to the same place from whence he began (r).

\(o\) Works, vol. 2. Chorograph. Cent. c. 24. p. 25. (p) Antiqu. l. 7.
c. 3. sect. 2. (q) "et ad domum". (r) See Dr. Kennicott, ut supra,
(Dissert. 1.) p. 49, &c.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 5:10</span></span>

And David went on, and grew great,.... In honour and wealth, in fame and
reputation, in subduing his enemies, obtaining conquests over them, and
enlarging his dominions:

and the Lord God of hosts, of armies above and below:

was with him: to whom all his prosperity and success was owing. The
Targum is,"the Word of the Lord God of hosts was for his help,''or his
helper.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 5:11</span></span>

And Hiram king of Tyre,.... This was father of that Hiram that lived in
the times of Solomon, whose name was Abibalus before he took the name of
Hiram, which became a common name of the kings of Tyre; his former name
may be seen in the ancient historians quoted by Josephus (s); of the
city of Tyre; see Gill on [Isa 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa023.htm#001);
which was built one year before the destruction of Troy (t). This king,
on hearing of David's being acknowledged king by all Israel, and of his
taking Jerusalem out of the hands of the Jebusites:

sent messengers to David; to congratulate him upon all this:

and cedar trees, and carpenters, and masons; these might not be sent at
first, but David intending to build himself an house, might, by the
messengers on their return, request of Hiram to send him timber and
workmen for that purpose; the people of Israel being chiefly employed in
cultivating their fields, and vineyards, and oliveyards, and feeding
their flocks and herds, few of them had any skill in hewing: timber and
stone, and building houses, at least not like the Tyrians and Sidonians;
see [Kg1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/kg1005.htm#006); and accordingly he sent
him cedars from Lebanon, a great part of which was in his dominions, and
artificers in wood and stone, to build his house in the most elegant
manner:

and they built David an house; to dwell in, a stately palace, called an
house of cedar, [Sa2 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2007.htm#002).

\(s\) Contr. Apion. l. 1. sect. 17, 18. (t) Justin e Trogo, l. 18. c. 3.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 5:12</span></span>

And David perceived that the Lord had established him king over
Israel,.... By the prosperity and success which attended him in
everything he set his hand to:

and that he had exalted his kingdom for his people Israel's sake; for
their advantage and glory more than for his own.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 5:13</span></span>

And David took him more concubines and wives out of Jerusalem, after he
was come from Hebron,.... He had six when he was at Hebron, [Sa2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002), and now he took more, which was
not to his honour, and contrary to the law of God, [Deu
17:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu017.htm#017); the concubines were a sort of
half wives, as the word may signify, or secondary ones, and under the
others:

and there were yet sons and daughters born to David; besides those in
Hebron mentioned in [Sa2 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 5:14</span></span>

And these be the names of those that were born unto him in
Jerusalem,.... The names of his sons, for his daughters are not
mentioned, and these seem to be such only that were born of his wives,
see [Ch1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#009),

Shammua, and Shobab, and Nathan, and Solomon; these four were by
Bathsheba; the first of these is called Shimea, [Ch1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#005).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 5:15</span></span>

Ibhar also, and Elishua, and Nepheg, and Japhia. Elishua is called
Elishama, [Ch1 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#006).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 5:16</span></span>

And Elishama, and Eliada, and Eliphalet. Seven more by some other wife
or wives; nine are mentioned in [Ch1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#006); there being in that account two
Eliphalets, and another called Nogah; which two, one of the Eliphalets,
and Nogah, might die without sons, as Kimchi thinks, and so are not
mentioned here.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 5:17</span></span>

But when the Philistines heard that they had anointed David king over
Israel,.... That the civil war in the nation was now at an end, which
they hoped would have issued in their destruction, and therefore lay
still and quiet; but now being united under the government of David, and
he hereby greatly strengthened and become powerful; and hearing also of
his success against Jerusalem, and the friendship he had contracted with
Hiram king of Tyre, they thought it was high time to bestir themselves,
and put a stop to his power and greatness; and now it was, as Kimchi
thinks, that David penned the second psalm, which begins, "why do the
Heathen rage", &c. [Psa 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/psa002.htm#001),

all the Philistines came up to seek David: in order to fight him, all
the five principalities of the Philistines combined together against
him; perhaps his old friend Achish king of Gath was now dead, or had now
entertained a different opinion of him:

and David heard of it; that they had invaded his kingdom, and sought to
fight him:

and went down to the hold; some fortified place or strong hold near
Jerusalem, which lay lower than the city, or than the strong hold of
Zion, in which David dwelt; hither he went, not so much for safety, or
with an intention to abide there, but as a rendezvous for his men, and
to prepare to meet the Philistines.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 5:18</span></span>

The Philistines also came and spread themselves in the valley of
Rephaim. Or "of the giants", as [Jos
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008); which lay to the west of
Jerusalem; of which; see Gill on [Jos
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#008); the Philistines spreading
themselves in it, shows that they were very numerous.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 5:19</span></span>

And David inquired of the Lord,.... By Abiathar, and the Urim and
Thummim, in the ephod he had on:

saying, shall I go up to the Philistines? who by this time were gone
from the valley to an higher place, to Mount Perazim, as in [Isa
28:21](../../../bib/kjv/isa028.htm#021),

wilt thou deliver them into my hand? here two questions are put
together, and an answer returned to both, contrary to a notion of the
Jews; see Gill on [Sa1 23:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa1023.htm#011),

and the Lord said to David, go up, for I will doubtless deliver the
Philistines into thine hand; by which oracle he had both the mind of God
that he should go up, and was assured of victory.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 5:20</span></span>

And David came to Baalperazim,.... As it was after called, for here it
has its name by anticipation, and whither the Philistines were come from
the valley of Rephaim; see [Ch1 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#011);
which was at no great distance, the one being the hill, to which the
other was the valley, computed to be about three miles from Jerusalem,
in the way to Bethlehem (u), between which places were two hours'
travels (w):

and David smote them there; there a battle was fought, in which David
had the victory assured him:

and said, the Lord hath broken forth upon mine enemies before me, as the
breach of waters; as when waters, through their mighty force, break down
the banks of rivers, and carry all before them; or as one breaks an
earthen vessel full of water, so the Targum on [Ch1
14:11](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#011).

therefore he called the name of the place Baalperazim; which signifies
"the master of breaches", where the Philistines were broke in upon, and
broken to pieces, of which God was the author, and which gave David the
mastery over his enemies; the Targum renders it "the plain of breaches",
and seems to take it to be the same with the valley of Rephaim; see [Sa2
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#022).

\(u\) Bunting's Travels, &c. p. 138. (w) Maundrell's Journey from
Aleppo, &c. p. 87. ed. 7.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 5:21</span></span>

And they left their images,.... Their idol gods, which they brought with
them to protect and defend them, and give them success; perhaps in
imitation of the Israelites, who formerly brought the ark of God into
their camp against the Philistines, [Sa1
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa1004.htm#003); and it appears to have been the
custom of other countries, in later times, to bring their gods with them
to battle (x):

and David and his men burnt them: that is, his men burnt them at his
command, [Ch1 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#012); agreeably to the
law of God, that so no profit might be made of them, [Deu
7:5](../../../bib/kjv/deu007.htm#005); the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin
versions, and others, render it, "and took them", or "carried them away"
(y); as they might do, and, after they had exposed them in triumph, then
burnt them.

\(x\) "Omnigenumque Deum", &c. Virgil. Aeneid. l. 8. (y) , Sept.
"tulit", V. L. Tigurine version, Montanus; "sustulit", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 5:22</span></span>

And the Philistines came up yet again,.... And, as Josephus says (z),
with an army three times larger than the former:

and spread themselves in the valley of Rephaim; in the same place where
they were before, [Sa2 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#020).

\(z\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 4. sect. 1.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 5:23</span></span>

And when David inquired of the Lord,.... For though he had success
before, and got the victory, he would not engage again with them without
having the mind and will of God, on whom he knew victory alone depended:

he said, thou shalt not go up; that is, directly, and in a straight
line:

but fetch a compass behind them; and get to the rear of them, instead of
falling upon them in the front:

and come upon them over against the mulberry trees: which grew in the
valley of Rephaim, and near where the Philistines had pitched.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 5:24</span></span>

And let it be, when thou hearest the sound of a going in the tops of the
mulberry trees,.... Of a going of the wind on the tops of these trees,
making a rustling upon them, and that in such a manner as to resemble
the going of men, or march of armies, as if they were moving in the air
over the tops of the mulberry trees; which Jarchi and R. Isaiah
interpret of angels being sent of God, and moving at that time to help
David, and destroy the Philistines; so the Targum on [Ch1
14:15](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#015). These trees being in Judea
account for silk there, [Eze 16:10](../../../bib/kjv/eze016.htm#010);
though some think time was not known so early; others suppose it was,
and to be the Hebrew byssus mentioned by Pausanias (a), as being of a
yellow colour:

that then thou shall bestir thyself; or move towards the camp of the
Philistines, and fall upon them in the rear, who, by reason of the sound
in the trees, would not hear the motion of the Israelites; or, if they
heard it, would take it to be no other than the motion of the trees they
heard, both sounds being confounded together; or they would take the
sound they heard for the motion of the enemy in the front, and give way,
and so fall into the hands of the Israelites in their rear, which must
throw them into the utmost confusion and consternation:

for then shall the Lord go out before thee to smite the host of the
Philistines: by an angel or angels; so the Targum,"for then shall go
forth the angel of the Lord, to make thee prosperous to slay in the camp
of the Philistines;''

that being the precise time for the salvation of Israel, and the
destruction of the Philistines, and the token of it.

\(a\) Eliac. sive, l. 5. p. 294.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2005.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 5:25</span></span>

And David did so as the Lord commanded him,.... In all things he was
obedient to the command of God; Saul was not: he got behind the army of
the Philistines, as he was directed; and when he heard the sound in the
mulberry trees, he arose and fell upon his enemies:

and smote the Philistines from Geba until thou come to Gazer; or from
Gibeon, as in [Ch1 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/ch1014.htm#016); a city in
the tribe of Benjamin, near to which this battle was fought, and where
the pursuit began, which was carried as far as Gazer, a city that lay on
the borders of the Philistines, as Josephus says (b); and so far they
were pursued, and were smitten as they fled; and, according to Bunting
(c), it was a space of eighteen miles.

\(b\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 4. sect. 1. (c) Travels, &c. p. 138.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 6](sa2006)

</div>
