<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2)  
  [Previous](sa2002)  [Next](sa2004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SECOND SAMUEL 3

This chapter begins with the continuation of the war between the house
of Saul and the house of David, [Sa2
3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001); and gives an account of the wives
of David, and his sons by them, [Sa2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002); of a quarrel between Ishbosheth
and Abner, [Sa2 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#006); and of Abner's
proposal to make a league with David; but David would not see his face
unless Michal his wife was returned to him, who was accordingly, [Sa2
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#012); and of the interest Abner made
with the elders of Israel in favour of David, which he reported to him,
and promised to make more, [Sa2 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#017);
but Joab returning from a pursuit, and with great spoil, just as Abner
departed, and hearing of it, chided David for letting him go, and
privately sent for him back, and treacherously murdered him, [Sa2
3:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#022); from which murder David cleared
himself and his kingdom, and for it made dreadful imprecations on Joab
and his family, [Sa2 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#028); and buried
Abner with great lamentation, expressing much concern for his death, and
the high opinion he had of him, [Sa2
3:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#031).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 3:1</span></span>

Now there was a long war between the house of Saul and the house of
David,.... The recent battle, though so much in favour of David, did
not, put an end to the war between him and Ishbosheth, which lasted five
years longer; for it was when Ishbosheth had reigned two years that that
battle was fought, and he reigned five years longer; for not till his
death, and when David had reigned above seven years in Hebron, was he
made king over all Israel; and during this time peace was not made, but
the war carried on; though perhaps not in pitched battles, of which we
no more read, but in skirmishes:

but David waxed stronger and stronger; he having the advantage in all
such skirmishes, and persons continually coming over to his side from
the several tribes:

and the house of Saul waxed weaker and weaker: being always worsted
whenever they skirmished with David's men, and by continual revolts from
them. This is reckoned an emblem of the kingdoms of Christ and
antichrist, the one increasing more and more, as it has and will do, and
the other decreasing, and before long will be consumed; and of the two
parties in a regenerate man, grace and indwelling sin, the one as to its
exercise growing stronger and stronger, and the other as to its
influence on the outward conversation weaker and weaker.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 3:2</span></span>

And unto David were sons born in Hebron,.... He was married before he
came there, had wives in his state of exile, but had no children by them
there, at least no sons; if any, only daughters:

and his firstborn was Amnon, of Ahinoam the Jezreelitess; who being
mentioned first, and her son his firstborn, seems to have been his wife
before be took Abigail; he had not much comfort of this firstborn son of
his; see [Sa2 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 3:3</span></span>

And the second, Chileab, of Abigail the wife of Nabal the Carmelite,....
That is: who had been the wife of Nabal. This son's name is called
Daniel, [Ch1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#001); and was the first
name he had, and which his father gave him, because as if he should say,
"God hath judged me", and pleaded the cause of his reproach from Nabal,
[Sa1 25:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#039); but why he should be
called Chileab is not easy to say; the name is commonly thought to
signify "like unto his father", or "all father": had all the features of
his father, and was exceedingly like him; the Jews have a fabulous story
concerning this (w), not worth relating:

and the third, Absalom the son of Maacah, the daughter of Talmai king of
Geshur; in [Sa1 27:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa1027.htm#008) we read of
David's invading the land of the Geshurites; and the Jews say (x) that
he then took the daughter of this king captive, and she being a
beautiful woman married her, after made a proselyte according to the law
in [Deu 21:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu021.htm#010); but it should be
observed that David slew all the women of that country, and left not any
alive; and besides that lay to the south of Judah, whereas this Geshur,
of which Talmai was king, was a part of Syria, [Sa2
15:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2015.htm#008); and lay to the north of the land
of Israel; and with this king David hereby entered into an alliance, to
strengthen his interest against Ishbosheth in those parts; of the
trouble he met with from Absalom, see [Sa2
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001), &c. contrary to the expectations
he had raised when he gave him the name of Absalom, or Leabsalom, as in
[Ch1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/ch1003.htm#002); that is, one given "for his
father's peace".

\(w\) Jarchi, Kimchi, & Abarbinel in loc. (x) Tanchuma apud Abarbinel in
loc.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 3:4</span></span>

And the fourth, Adonijah the son of Haggith,.... The same that usurped
the throne before his father's death, to anticipate Solomon, and died by
his order, [Kg1 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1001.htm#005),

and the fifth, Shephatiah the son of Abital; of whom we read nowhere
else.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 3:5</span></span>

And the sixth, Ithream, by Eglah David's wife,.... Who also is not
spoken of in any other place; only, in a like chronological account as
the former, it is remarked that the mother of this only is called
David's wife; the reason of which is supposed to be, either because she
was a person of no note, and had nothing else to distinguish her; but
the same may be said of the two foregoing; or because she was his
beloved wife, his heifer, as her name signifies; hence the Jews (y) take
her to be Michal his first wife, whom he greatly loved, and who, though
she had no children after her contempt of David for playing before the
ark, unto the day of her death, yet might have before: but it should be
observed, that as yet she was not returned to David in Hebron; and when
she was returned, did not seem to continue there long enough to have a
son there; and besides, being his first wife, would not be reckoned
last; but still more foreign is another notion of the Jews (z), that she
was Saul's widow, who though she might not be married to another might
be married to a king, as David was; and this they suppose receives some
confirmation from [Sa2 12:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2012.htm#008); but after
all it may be this phrase "David's wife", as some have observed, by a
figure the rhetoricians call "zeugma", or "hypozeugma", is to be joined
to everyone of the women before mentioned, [Sa2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002), who were his wives, and so called
to distinguish them from his concubines, by whom he had sons also.
Polygamy, or plurality of wives, which David gave into, is no favourable
part of his character.

\(y\) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 21. 1. Hieron. Trad. Heb. in 2 Reg. fol.
77. F. (z) In Kimchi & Ben Gersom in loc.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 3:6</span></span>

And it came to pass, while there was war between the house of Saul and
the house of David,.... As long as that continued, as it did until the
following quarrel happened between Ishbosheth and Abner:

that Abner made himself strong for the house of Saul; or was strongly in
the interest of that house, and used his utmost endeavours to support
and confirm it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 3:7</span></span>

And Saul had a concubine, whose name was Rizpah, the daughter of
Aiah,.... By whom he had two sons, [Sa2
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2021.htm#008). Josephus (a) calls her father's
name Sibathus:

and Ishbosheth said to Abner; though the word "Ishbosheth" is not in the
text, it is rightly supplied; for no other can be supposed to speak:

wherefore hast thou gone in unto my father's concubine? and defiled her;
though perhaps it was not so much the act of uncleanness that so much
offended him, or the dishonour reflected on him and his family thereby,
as it discovered an ambitious view in Abner to get the kingdom into his
own hands, to which this was the leading step; see [Kg1
2:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#022). Whether Abner was really guilty
of this sin or no is not easy to determine; though, by his not
absolutely denying it, it looks as if it was not merely a jealousy of
Ishbosheth, or a false report made unto him; though, especially if he
was not fully satisfied of it, it would have been his wisdom to have
said nothing of it to him, since his continuance on the throne so much
depended on him.

\(a\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 1. sect. 4.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 3:8</span></span>

Then was Abner very wroth for the words of Ishbosheth,.... If false he
had a good deal of reason for it; and if true, he thought he deserved
better at his hands, than to be reproved for and upbraided with what he
might think was a very small fault, and might easily be connived at, and
especially in one that had been so serviceable to him:

and said, am I a dog's head; such a mean, vile, contemptible person with
thee, as if no better than a dog, and as useless and as unserviceable as
a dead dog, the head of a dog cut off; see [Sa1
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa1024.htm#014) [Sa2
9:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2009.htm#008); or am I esteemed and to be
treated as a head of dogs, a keeper of a pack of hounds, and not as a
general of the armies of Israel? so Jarchi and others; but it seems
rather to respect the filthy nature of a dog, that will couple with any;
and so the sense is, am I such a filthy lustful creature that care not
with whom I lie, no more, than a dog?

which against Judah do show kindness to the house of Saul thy father,

to his brethren, and to his friends; who in opposition to the tribe of
Judah, which alone abode by David, had shown respect to the family of
Saul, and all his friends, by his close attachment to Ishbosheth:

and have not delivered thee into the hand David; when it was in his
power to have done it many a tithe:

that thou chargest me today with a fault concerning this woman? he
neither denies nor owns the charge, and yet, by his not denying it,
tacitly owns it; though, by his way of speaking, he suggests as if it
was no fault at all, at least a very trifling one, and such as ought not
to have been mentioned to him, considering the services he had done to
Ishbosheth and his family.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 3:9</span></span>

So do God to Abner, and more also,.... He wishes the worst of evils to
himself, such as he cared not to name; but left them to be supposed what
he meant as utter ruin and destruction of himself, soul and body:

except as the Lord hath sworn to David, even so I do to him; meaning if
he did not do that David, which God had sworn should be done, namely,
what follows, the translation of the kingdom to him; by which it appears
that Abner knew of the promise and oath of God respecting this matter;
and therefore acted against his conscience, in setting up Ishbosheth on
the throne; which he knew would not prosper, and that he was fighting
against God; which shows what a hardened wicked creature he was, and how
far ambition, and being thought to be of consequence, will carry a man.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 3:10</span></span>

To translate the kingdom from the house of Saul,.... Which was what the
Lord had sworn to do, [Sa1 15:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa1015.htm#028); and
which Abner now threatens to do, insolently taking that to himself which
belonged to the Lord, and as if he could not do it without him:

and to set up the throne of David over Israel and over Judah; over the
one as well as over the other; for it was set over Judah already:

from Dan even unto Beersheba; which were the utmost borders of the land
of Israel, from north to south, and so includes the whole.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 3:11</span></span>

And he could not answer Abner a word again,.... That is, he would not,
he durst not; otherwise, if it was fact he charged him with, he could
have insisted on the truth of it, and aggravated the crime and scandal
of it; and observed it to him, that the kindness he had shown him was no
excuse for it; but such things, though he would, he durst not say:

because he feared him; he had the army at his command, and could
dethrone him when he pleased; and it has been the fate of greater men
than Ishbosheth to be awed by their generals, and even David himself;
see [Sa2 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#039).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 3:12</span></span>

And Abner sent messengers to David on his behalf,.... On his own
account, and not on the account of Ishbosheth, or the people of Israel;
but to obtain terms for himself, or in his own name, as representing him
and standing in his stead; or secretly, as Kimchi explains it, unknown
to Ishbosheth, or the people of Israel. The Targum is,"out of his
place;''he sent them from the place where he was, from Mahanaim:

saying, whose is the land? the land of Israel, is it not thine, David?
verily it is; to whom does it belong but unto thee, to whom the Lord has
given it? not to any of Saul's posterity: this he ordered the messengers
to say in the first place, in order to ingratiate himself to David, and
gain his messengers an audience. The Targum is,"I swear by him that made
the earth;''so Jarchi says, it is an oath by him whose the earth is,
even by the living God, whose is the earth, and the fulness thereof:

saying also, make thy league with me; he desired to enter into a
covenant of friendship with him, that everything that had passed might
be forgiven and forgotten:

and, behold, my hand shall be with thee, to bring about all Israel unto
thee: he promises on his part to do his utmost to bring all Israel under
his government and to obedience to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 3:13</span></span>

And he said, well, I will make a league with thee,.... He accepted of
the offer, he was ready and willing to enter into a covenant of
friendship with him, and forgive all past offences:

but one thing I require of thee; as the condition of this covenant:

that is, thou shall not see my face; be admitted into my presence, or
have any mark of my favour and respect:

except thou first bring Michal, Saul's daughter, when thou comest to see
my face; he insisted on it that Michal, Saul's daughter, and his wife,
should be brought along with him, and presented to him; this was the
preliminary to the league and covenant; if this was not complied with,
the proposal would not be attended to. This shows the great affection
David retained for his first wife, though he had had six since, see [Sa2
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#002), and though she had lived with
another man, [Sa1 25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044); as also his
great regard to the honour of Saul's family, that one of them might
share with him in the grandeur of the kingdom; though this also might be
a piece of policy in him, to gain the friends of Saul's family to him.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 3:14</span></span>

And David sent messengers to Ishbosheth, Saul's son,.... When Abner's
messengers returned to him, and acquainted him with the condition of
David's entering into a league with him, it is highly probable that
Abner sent them or others to David, to let him know that he could not do
this of himself; that it was advisable for him to write to Ishbosheth,
whose sister she was, and demand her of him; and that then he would use
his interest with Ishbosheth to grant it, and this method David took:

saying, deliver me my wife Michal, which I espoused to me for an hundred
foreskins of the Philistines; two arguments he made use of to enforce
his demand; one is, that it was his wife he required, to whom he had a
right, and no other man; and the other is, that he had purchased her at
a great expense, at the risk of his life, in slaying an hundred
Philistines, whose foreskins he paid in for her at the instance of Saul;
he mentions but one hundred, though he gave two hundred as her dowry, no
more being required than one hundred; see [Sa1
18:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa1018.htm#025). Josephus very wrongly says six
hundred (b); the Syriac and Arabic have here two hundred.

\(b\) Antiqu. l 7. c. 1. sect. 4.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 3:15</span></span>

And Ishbosheth sent and took her from her husband,.... Her second
husband, to whom Saul had given her, [Sa1
25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044),

even from Phaltiel the son of Laish; he is called Phalti in [Sa1
25:44](../../../bib/kjv/sa1025.htm#044).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 3:16</span></span>

And her husband went with her along weeping behind her,.... Because of
his great affection to her, unwilling to part with her, but forced to it
at the command of the king her brother:

to Bahurim; a city in the tribe of Benjamin, [Sa2
19:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2019.htm#016); perhaps the same with Almon,
[Jos 21:18](../../../bib/kjv/jos021.htm#018); these two words being of
the same signification; and the Targum has it hero Almuth; so Alemeth in
[Ch1 6:60](../../../bib/kjv/ch1006.htm#060). It seems to be the same
Josephus (c) calls Bachures, and says it was not far from Jerusalem.
Bunting (d) says it was something more than a mile towards the
northeast, and at this time is a fair castle strongly fortified,
standing in a high place, and in the valley near it, at the stone Bohan,
[Jos 15:6](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#006); see [Sa2
17:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2017.htm#018),

then said Abner to him, go, return, and he returned; by which it appears
that Abner came with her to introduce her to David, without whom he was
not to see his face; and he did not choose her husband should go with
her any further, and was at his orders obliged to go back, who otherwise
would have gladly accompanied her further still, through his great
affection for her.

\(c\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 9. sect. 7. (d) Travels, p. 144.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 3:17</span></span>

And Abner had communication with the elders of Israel,.... Had a
conference with the chiefs of the several tribes about the affairs of
the kingdom:

saying, ye sought for David in time past to be king over you; that is,
at the death of Saul, and not before; for it was pretty generally known
throughout the kingdom that David was anointed by Samuel and Saul
himself had declared that he knew the kingdom would come to him; so that
upon his death it was the general expectation and desire of the people
that the government would devolve upon him, as it doubtless would, if
Abner had not set up one of Saul's house, and persuaded the Israelites
to own him their king.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 3:18</span></span>

Now then do it,.... Make him your king, and I shall no longer oppose it
as I have done:

for the Lord hath spoken of David; concerning his being king, and the
saviour of his people Israel:

saying, by the hand of my servant David I will save my people Israel out
of the hand of the Philistines, and out of the hand of all their
enemies; and which, though where recorded in so many words, yet was the
sense of the promise of making him king, and the design of his unction;
and besides they might have been spoken to Samuel, though not written;
and which he might report, and so might pass from one to another to be
generally known.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 3:19</span></span>

And Abner also spake in the ears of Benjamin,.... Of the inhabitants of
the tribe of Benjamin, of which tribe he was, and among whom he had the
greatest influence; and with whom it was necessary to take some pains,
because of their attachment to the family of Saul, which was of that
tribe; and being near to that of Judah, might give David a good deal of
trouble, if they were not won over to him:

and Abner went also to speak in the ears of David in Hebron; having
sounded the elders of Israel, and won their thoughts about the change of
government, and found them well disposed to David, and had prevailed
upon them to consent to make him king, and had gained the tribe of
Benjamin on his side, went and reported to David the success he had:

all that seemed good to Israel, and that seemed good to the whole house
of Benjamin; how agreeable it was to the elders of Israel, and
particularly to the tribe of Benjamin, to have David king over them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 3:20</span></span>

So Abner came to David to Hebron, and twenty men with him,.... Before he
went privately to him, and conferred with him, but now, having gained so
many of the Israelites in favour of David, he appeared more publicly and
brought perhaps some of the principal of the nation with film, to join
in the league and covenant to be made:

and David made Abner and the men that were with him a feast; not only in
honour to them, as great personages, especially Abner, and as expressive
of reconciliation; but as a token of the covenant they were entering
into, and for the confirmation of it; it being usual to have feasts when
covenants were made; see [Gen 26:28](../../../bib/kjv/gen026.htm#028).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#021)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 3:21</span></span>

And Abner said to David, I will arise and go,.... Into the several parts
of the land of Israel:

and will gather all Israel unto my lord the king; the princes of the
several tribes, and the elders of the people, their heads and principal
men:

that they may make a league with thee; come into the league and covenant
now made with Abner, and those with him:

and that thou mayest reign over all that thine heart desireth: which he
supposed reached to all the people of the house of Israel and of Judah,
though David had not expressed any eager and impatient desire of
government, but waited the Lord's time to be put into the possession of
the whole kingdom of Israel:

and David sent Abner away, and he went in peace; with inward
satisfaction of mind, pleased that things were so well settled and
adjusted to the content of all parties, and with outward satiety of
body, no insults or attempts being made upon him by any of David's men;
which perhaps would not have been the case if Joab had been at court, as
may be concluded from what follows.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#022)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 3:22</span></span>

And, behold, the servants of David and Joab came from pursuing a
troop,.... A troop of robbers, that made an incursion into the land,
taking the advantage of a civil war between Israel and Judah; such as
the Edomites, Amalekites, and especially the Philistines; which Joab
hearing of went out in pursuit of them, and overtook them:

and brought in a great spoil with them; which they took from them:

but Abner was not with David in Hebron: when Joab and his army entered
the city with their booty:

for he had sent him away, and he was gone in peace; he had just
dismissed him, and he was gone off safely.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#023)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 3:23</span></span>

When Joab and all the host that was with him were come,.... To Hebron,
or rather to David's court; for their coming to the city is before
mentioned; this must be understood not of the whole army, of all the
common soldiers, but of the chief officers, who with Joab came to court,
to wait upon David, and report their success:

they told Joab, saying, Abner the son, of Ner came to the king; some of
the courtiers informed him of it, who knew it would not be very
agreeable to him:

and he hath sent him away, and he is gone in peace: instead of seizing
him, and laying him in a prison as his enemy, he has let him go with all
the marks of friendship and good will.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#024)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 3:24</span></span>

Then Joab came to the king,.... To the apartment where he was; perhaps
he was told the above at his first entering into the king's palace, by
some in waiting, before he came to the king, which filled him with
wrath, so that he came to him in a passion:

and said to him, what hast thou done? which was very insolent in a
subject to say to his prince:

behold, Abner came unto thee; I have been credibly informed of it, and
am assured it is a fact which cannot be denied; he represents it as if
he had done a wrong thing to admit him to come to him; but perhaps the
great fault was that he had let him go:

why is it that thou hast sent him away, and he is quite gone? or "going,
is gone" (e); is clean gone off, when he ought to have been laid hold on
as a traitor, and put in irons.

\(e\) "et abiit eundo", Pagninus, Montanus.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#025)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 3:25</span></span>

Thou knowest Abner the son of Ner,.... Thou canst not be ignorant what a
cunning deceitful man he is, nor of his designs; or dost thou not know?
art thou ignorant? so read the Septuagint, Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and
Arabic versions, with an interrogation:

that he came to deceive thee: with false hopes, or to lead into wrong
measures with an intention to involve and ruin him:

and to know thy going out, and coming in; the affairs of his court, the
secrets of his government, to observe his conduct and behaviour, and all
his actions, and improve them against him:

and to know all that thou doest; he suggests that he came not as a
friend, but as a spy, and therefore ought to have been taken up, and
detained, and not dismissed. This Joab said to set David against him,
fearing, if he should be received into favour, he would be a rival of
his; and besides his breast was full of revenge against him for the
death of his brother.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#026)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 3:26</span></span>

And when Joab was come out from David,.... Which perhaps he did at once,
as soon as ever he had spoken his mind, and flew out of the room in a
great passion, not waiting for the king's answer, since we read of none
returned; though it may be the king disdained to give him one, or cared
not to confer with him while in his passion, until it subsided; or chose
not to provoke him more, for it is plain he had great power over him;
which generals of armies at this time very much assumed, see [Sa2
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#039);

he sent messengers after Abner; in the name of the king, as Abarbinel
rightly supposes, and so Josephus (f); for otherwise it can hardly be
thought he would have returned on a message from Joab only, who he knew
bore him ill will:

which brought him again from the well of Sirah; which might have its
name from the thorns and briers that grew about it. Josephus (g) calls
it Besira, and says it was twenty furlongs or two and an half miles from
Hebron:

but David knew it not; that Joab had sent messengers in his name after
Abner to fetch him back; it was not done by his order, with his consent
or knowledge; this is observed, to clear David from any concern in the
death of Abner, as follows.

\(f\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 1. sect. 5. (g) Ibid.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#027)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 3:27</span></span>

And when Abner was returned to Hebron,.... Alone, and not the twenty men
with him; not to David's court, but just to the city, to the gate of it:

Joab took him aside in the gate: where he was waiting for him, and met
him; this was a public place, where people were continually passing and
repassing, and where courts of judicature used to be held; wherefore
Abner might think himself safe here with Joab, and have no suspicion at
all of his design, and shows how fearless Joab was of God or men:

to speak with him quietly; peaceably, in a friendly manner, as all his
gestures towards him showed; so that Abner made no difficulty of turning
aside with him, supposing he had something to communicate to him from
the king, which he had forgot:

and smote him under the fifth rib, that he died; in the same place that
Abner had smote his brother, of which see [Sa2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2002.htm#023); and this he did:

for the blood of Asahel his brother; for Abner's shedding his brother's
blood; but this was not the only reason, and perhaps not the chief; but,
as Josephus (h) observes, because he was fearful if Abner was received
into the friendship of the king, he would be preferred unto him, and
take his place as general of the army, as being an older and more
experienced officer; so Procopius Gazaeus, and Theodoret.

\(h\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 1. sect. 5.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#028)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa2 3:28</span></span>

And afterward, when David heard it,.... That Joab had sent to fetch
Abner back, and that he had stabbed him in the gate of the city, and he
was dead; it was some time after it was done that the news of it was
brought to David; this circumstance is observed, the more to clear the
king from any concern in this affair:

he said; in a public manner, in open court, before all his princes; he
called God to witness, and, as Josephus (i) says, stretching out his
right hand to God, he cried aloud:

I and my kingdom are guiltless before the Lord for ever from the blood
of Abner the son of Ner; he was sensible it would be known that Abner
had been with him, and that Joab his general had killed him; and
therefore it might be suspected that he had an hand in it, and that it
was done by his order, with his privy council; and therefore, to purge
him and them from it, he made this public declaration, that neither he
nor his council knew anything of it; and that it was not done with their
knowledge and consent, and by their order, but through the resentment of
a single person; and therefore hoped that no man would impute the
shedding of this blood unto them, or that God would punish them for it;
and he was the rather led to make this public declaration, because he
knew that the death of Abner in this way would be resented by the
friends of Saul's family, and be an obstruction to the union of the two
kingdoms, which it was known Abner was endeavouring to bring about.

\(i\) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 1. sect. 6.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#029)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 3:29</span></span>

Let it rest on the head of Joab,.... That is, the blood of Abner, who
was the shedder of it; let the guilt of it be charged to him, and let
punishment for it be inflicted on him:

and on all his father's house; on Abishai his brother, and other
relations that might be privy to the death of Abner, and advising to it,
and ready to assist in it if necessary:

and let there not fail from the house of Joab; let there be always in
his family, and of his seed, one or other of the persons described as
follows:

one that hath an issue; a gonorrhoea, which was reckoned infamous, and
very impure, according to the Jewish law, and rendered persons unfit for
society; see [Lev 15:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev015.htm#001),

or that is a leper; whose disease was very loathsome and infectious, and
shut him out of the company of men; see [Lev
13:1](../../../bib/kjv/lev013.htm#001),

or that leaneth on a staff; being blind, as Aquila renders the word; or
through weakness of body, not being able to walk without one; or through
some disease of the feet, as the Jewish writers generally understand it;
and R. Isaiah interprets it of the gout particularly: the word for
"staff" is rendered "spindle", [Pro
31:19](../../../bib/kjv/pro031.htm#019); and to this sense it is
rendered here in, the Vulgate Latin, Syriac, and Arabic versions; and
then the meaning is, let his posterity, or some of them, be so poor,
that they shall be obliged to get their livelihood in so mean a way as
by spinning; or let them be of such an effeminate disposition, as be
more fit to handle the spindle, and do the, work of women, than to use
the sword:

or that falleth on the sword; not by it honourably in the field of
battle, but cowardly destroying themselves with it:

or that lacketh bread; and is obliged to beg it: all which David might
say, not by a spirit of prophecy, but in a passion; and to show with
what horror he resented the action, and how detestable it was to him,
and how far it was for him to have any concern in it: but though it was
a very wicked action in Joab to murder Abner in this manner, and for the
reasons he did; yet it was a just vengeance from the Lord on Abner for
fighting against God, and acting against the dictates of his own
conscience; for his rebellion against David, and perfidy to Ishbosheth,
and for having been the cause of much bloodshed in Israel.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#030)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 3:30</span></span>

So Joab and Abishai his brother slew Abner,.... For though it was only
Joab that gave him the thrust of which he died, Abishai was in the
secret, and was consenting and advising to his death, and so an
accessory to it; and might be present, ready to assist in it, if
occasion required; and so Josephus (k) expressly says, that Abishai his
brother was with him when he drew his sword, and smote him:

because he had slain their brother Asahel at Gibeon in the battle: which
was no just reason at all; his blood was shed in war, this in peace, in
cold blood, and under the guise of friendship; that was shed with
reluctance, and after fair warning, and in defence of himself; but this
wilfully in Joab, unawares to Abner, and in great deceit and hypocrisy;
see [Kg1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#005).

\(k\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 7. c. 1. sect. 6.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#031)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 3:31</span></span>

And David said to Joab, and to all the people that were with him,.... To
his whole court, Joab being present: for he did not flee, nor was he
laid hold on in order to be brought to justice; which shows how great
his power was, and that he was too hard for David, as in [Sa2
3:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#039); however this he did, he enjoined
his whole court, and Joab also, to express public mourning on this
account:

rend your clothes and gird you with sackcloth; which were expressions of
mourning used on various occasions, and on account of the dead, and
which with the Heathens were carried to a greater excess, even to the
tearing of their flesh:

and mourn before Abner; before his corpse, as carried to the grave, when
it was usual to make great lamentations: see [Act
8:2](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#002),

and King David himself followed the bier; or "bed" (l) on which his body
was laid, and carried to the grave. On these the rich and noble among
the Greeks and Romans were carried, and those of the meaner sort on
biers (n); and so with the Jews; See Gill on [Luk
7:14](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#014); some of which were gilded with
gold, and were made of ivory, and had ivory feet (o); that of Herod's
was all of gold, inlaid with precious stones, and the body covered with
purple, and followed by his sons and kindred, the soldiers going before
armed, and their leaders following (p); the bier or bed with the Romans
was sometimes carried by six persons, sometimes by eight or more (q). It
was not usual for kings, as the Jews say (r), to attend a funeral, to go
out of the doors of their palace after their own dead, and much less
others; but David did this to satisfy the people, and to root out of
their mind all suspicion of his having any hand in Abner's death; and to
show that he was not slain by his will, and with his consent.

\(l\) , Sept. "lectum", Piscator. (n) Salmuth. ad Pancirol. par. 1. tit.
62. p. 343. Kirchman. de Funer. Roman. l. 2. c. 9. p. 375. (o) Alstorph.
de lect. vet. c. 19. p. 149. (p) Joseph. de Bello Jud. l. 1. c. 33.
sect. 9. (q) Kirchman. ut supra. (de Funer. Roman. l. 2. c. 9. p. 375.)
(r) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 2. sect. 3. Maimon in Hilchot Ebel. c. 7. sect.
7. David de Pomis, Lexic. fol. 119. 4.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#032)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa2 3:32</span></span>

And they buried Abner in Hebron,.... According to the Jewish account of
places of burial (s), he was buried in the midst of the city, though
burying places were generally without; and so Fuller (t) places this in
his map; whether the cave of Machpelah, which was near Hebron, was now
used for a burying place, is not certain:

and the king lifted up his voice and wept at the grave of Abner; made a
great outcry, a loud lamentation, so as to be heard by all the people;
and which no doubt was real and hearty, and not done merely with
political views:

and all the people wept; through concern for the death of Abner,
especially on account of the manner in which it was, and in imitation of
the king, and being affected with his tears and cries.

\(s\) Cippi Heb. p. 8. (t) Pisgah-Sight, &c. in the Map of Judah.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#033)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa2 3:33</span></span>

And the king lamented over Abner,.... Delivered an elegy or funeral
oration, which he had composed on this occasion, as Josephus (u)
suggests: for he had cried and wept before, but now he expressed
something as follows:

and said, died Abner as a fool dieth? the meaning of the interrogation
is, he did not; the Targum is"did Abner die as wicked men die?''no, he
did not; he did not die for any wickedness he had been guilty of; he did
not die as a malefactor, whose crime has been charged and proved in open
court, and sentence of condemnation pronounced on him righteously for
it; but he died without anything being laid to his charge, and much less
proved, and without judge or jury; he was murdered in a clandestine,
insidious, and deceitful manner; so the word "fool" is often taken in
Scripture for a wicked man, especially in the book of Proverbs; the
Septuagint version leaves the word untranslated,"died Abner according to
the death of Nabal?''no; but it could hardly be thought that David would
mention the name of any particular person on such an occasion.

\(u\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 7. c. 1. sect. 6.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#034)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_034">sa2 3:34</span></span>

Thy hands were not bound, nor thy feet put into fetters,.... As
malefactors are when they are taken up for any crime, and especially
when proved upon them, and condemned for it, and brought forth to be
executed. This was not his case, and had he been aware of the design
against him, as his hands and feet were at liberty, he might have
defended himself; or if he found he had too many to deal with, might
have made use of his feet and fled:

as a man falleth before wicked men, so fellest thou; as a man being
before bloodthirsty and deceitful men, falls before them, through
treachery and deceit, privately and unawares, so fell Abner before Joab
and Abishai; this David said in the presence of Joab, and before all the
people, to declare the plain fact how it was, to express his detestation
of it, and to show he had no hand in it; and Joab must be an hardened
creature to stand at the grave of Abner, and hear all this, and not be
affected with it:

and all the people wept again over him; over Abner, being laid in his
grave; they had wept before, but hearing this funeral oration delivered
by the king in such moving language, and in such a mournful tone, it
drew tears afresh from them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:35](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#035)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_035">sa2 3:35</span></span>

And when all the people came to cause David to eat meat while it was yet
day,.... The custom was to bury in the daytime, and after the funeral
was over to provide and send in food to the relations of the deceased,
and come and eat with them; as was also the usage with the Greeks and
Romans (w); See Gill on [Jer 16:5](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#005) and
See Gill on [Jer 16:7](../../../bib/kjv/jer016.htm#007); and kings
themselves used to attend those feasts; for the Jews say (x),"when they
cause him (the king) to eat, all the people sit upon the ground, and he
sits upon the bed;''but in this case David refused to eat with them:

David sware, saying, so do God to me, and more also; may the greatest
evils, and such as I care not to mention, befall me; and even more and
worse than I can think of and express:

if I taste bread, or ought else, till the sun be down; perhaps the
funeral was in the morning, as funerals with the Jews generally now are;
for otherwise if it was now towards evening, his abstinence from food
till that time would not have seemed so much, nor required much notice,
and still less an oath.

\(w\) Vid. Kirchman. de Funer. Roman, l. 4. c. 5. & 6. (x) Misn. ut
supra. (Sanhedrin, c. 2. sect. 3.) David de Pomis ut supra. (Lexic. fol.
119. 4.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:36](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#036)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_036">sa2 3:36</span></span>

And all the people took notice of it,.... Not only of his oath, that he
would not eat food till evening, but of his whole conduct at the funeral
of Abner; the sorrow he expressed for his death, and the oration he made
on account of it, in which he pretty severely reflected on his murderer:

and it pleased them; that he showed such a concern for his death, and
that it was a clear case he had no hand in it:

as whatsoever the king did pleased all the people; what he did at this
time, burying Abhor with so much pomp and ceremony; and indeed he had so
much the hearts of the people, and such a share in their affections, and
they had such an high opinion of him, that all that he did in public and
private affairs they reckoned well done; they were highly approved of by
them, such an interest had he in them.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#037)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_037">sa2 3:37</span></span>

For all the people and all Israel understood that day,.... Not the
people of Judah only, but of Israel also, to whom the knowledge of these
things came; they knew and were satisfied by his conduct and behaviour,
by his words and actions:

that it was not of the king to slay Abner the son of Ner; it was not by
the counsel or advice of the king, as the Targum; it was without his
knowledge and consent, was contrary to his mind and will; that he had no
manner of concern in it, and that if it had been in his power he would
have prevented it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:38](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#038)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_038">sa2 3:38</span></span>

And the king said unto his servants,.... His courtiers, giving a reason
why he mourned as he did; or "had said" (w), and so is a reason why the
people concluded, and were fully satisfied, he had no hand in his death;
but the first is best, because what follows was said not to the people
at the grave, but to his servants at court:

know ye not that there is a prince and a great man fallen this day in
Israel? a "prince", being of the royal family, his father was Saul's
uncle, and he his own cousin; a "great" man, being general of the army,
a very valiant and skilful commander, a man of great wisdom and parts.
David says nothing of his grace and virtue, only of his grandeur, his
high birth and civil excellencies; he praises him in what he was
commendable, and proceeds no further; and this was sufficient to show
there was just cause of mourning on civil accounts; and this they might
easily know and perceive, that the fall or death of such a man, which
had that day happened in Israel, was a public loss, and matter of
lamentation; and the rather as he was employing all his excellent
talents in civil affairs, and all his interest in the people of Israel,
to unite them to Judah, and bring them under the government of David.

\(w\) "nam dixerat", Junius & Tremellius.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 3:39](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#039)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_039">sa2 3:39</span></span>

And I am this day weak, though anointed king,.... Which seems to be
given as a reason, or for an excuse why he did not inflict just
punishment upon the murderer, according to the law of God, because he
was "weak"; not in body or mind, but with respect to the kingdom, that
was like a tender branch, or in its infant state; and great care and
caution were to be used that it was not overturned: he was a king by
unction, not by birth; a son of the late king was yet up against him,
and was possessed of the far greater part of the kingdom; he was indeed
anointed by Samuel to be king over all Israel; but as yet he was not put
into the possession of the kingdom he was anointed to; he was anointed
and made king over Judah, and invested with the office of king there,
and settled in it; and yet his power was not very great there, for as
follows:

and these men, the sons of Zeruiah, be too hard for me; his sister's
sons, Joab and Abishai, they were a check upon him; he could not do what
he would, their influence was so great, both in the court and in the
camp; the one was general of the army, and the other a considerable
officer in it, and both variant men, and very respectable among the
people, for their achievements in war, and the success they had; so that
they were very much out of the reach of David to bring them to justice,
without shaking his kingdom; and therefore in point of prudence he
thought it best to connive at this fact until he was more established in
the kingdom. Whatever may be said for this conduct, it is certain he was
too dilatory, and which did not sit easy upon his mind, and therefore
gave it in charge to Solomon before his death not to suffer Joab to go
to his grave in peace, [Kg1 2:5](../../../bib/kjv/kg1002.htm#005). Some
take these words, "weak" and "hard", in a different sense, that David
was weak or "tender" (x), as it may be rendered, tenderhearted, of a
merciful disposition, and therefore spared Abner when he was in his
hands, though he had done him so much harm, who was the Lord's anointed;
but these men, his sister's sons, were of cruel tempers, more unmerciful
than he, and therefore slew him; but the first sense seems best:

the Lord shall reward the doer of evil according to his wickedness;
which may be considered either as an imprecation of evil on Joab, or a
prediction, that sooner or later righteous judgment would be rendered to
him by the Lord; with whom he leaves it to take vengeance on him,
satisfying himself with this for the present, that though it was not in
his power to do it, the Lord would in his own time and way: but after
all that can be said in favour of David, he seems to have been too much
in fear of men, and too distrustful of the power and promise of God to
establish him in his kingdom, and was too negligent of public justice;
which had it been exercised, might have prevented other sins, as the
murder of Ishbosheth, to which the authors of it might be encouraged by
this lenity.

\(x\) "tener", Pagninus, Montanus.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 4](sa2004)

</div>
