<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[2 Kings (2 Samuel) Index](sa2.md)  
  [Previous](sa2013)  [Next](sa2015.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#001.md)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel)](../../../bib/kjv/sa2001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sa2 14:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SECOND SAMUEL 14

This chapter relates that Joab, perceiving David's inclination to bring
back Absalom, employed a wise woman of Tekoah to lay before him a
feigned case of hers, drawn up by Joab, whereby this point was gained
from the king, that murder might be dispensed with in her case, [Sa2
14:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#001.md); which being applied to the case
of Absalom, and the king finding out that the hand of Joab was in this,
sent for him, and ordered him to bring Absalom again, though as yet he
would not see his face, [Sa2 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#021.md);
and after some notice being taken of the beauty of Absalom's person,
particularly of his head of hair, and of the number of his children,
[Sa2 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#025.md); it is related, that after
two full years Absalom was uneasy that he might not see the king's face,
and sent for Joab, who refused to come to him, till he found means to
oblige him to it, who, with the king's leave, introduced him to him,
[Sa2 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#028.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sa2 14:1</span></span>

Now Joab the son of Zeruiah,.... The general of David's army:

perceived that the king's heart was towards Absalom; and longed to have
him returned, though he knew not how to bring it about with credit to
himself, his crime being so foul, and worthy of death. This Joab
perceived by some words he now and then dropped, and by his conduct, not
seeking by any ways and means to bring him to justice, and being now
reconciled to the death of Amnon; wherefore Joab devised a way to make
known to him his own mind, and the sense of the people, which would
serve to encourage him to restore him; and the rather Joab was inclined
to take such a step, as he knew it would establish him in the king's
favour, and ingratiate him into the affection of Absalom, the next heir
to the crown, as well as please the people, whose darling he was. Though
Abarbinel is of opinion that Joab proceeded upon another view of things,
not because he saw the heart and affection of David were towards
Absalom, but the reverse; that though David restrained himself and his
servants from going out after Absalom, yet Joab knew that the heart of
the king was against him, and that his heart was to take vengeance on
him, though he did not go out to seek him; he perceived there was still
enmity and hatred in his heart to take vengeance on Absalom, and
therefore he took the following method to remove it, and reconcile his
mind to him; and so the Targum,"and Joab the son of Zeruiah knew that
the heart of the king was to go, out against Absalom;''and it may be
observed, that when Joab had so far prevailed upon him as to admit him
to bring him back to Jerusalem, he would not suffer him to see his face,
nor did he for two years after.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:2](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sa2 14:2</span></span>

And Joab sent to Tekoah,.... Which Kimchi says was a city in the tribe
of Asher, and others in the tribe of Benjamin, but it seems rather to be
in the tribe, of Judah, [Ch2 11:5](../../../bib/kjv/ch2011.htm#005.md);
according Jerom (s), it was twelve miles from Jerusalem, though in
another place (t) he says it was but nine; of this place was Amos, and
some think (u) the woman after mentioned was his grandmother. It was
proper to lay the scene of the affair to be proposed to the king at some
distance, that it might not soon and easily be inquired into:

and fetched thence a wise woman; one much advanced in years, as Josephus
says (w), whose years had taught her wisdom by experience; a woman of
good sense, and of a good address, apt at expression and reply, and knew
how to manage an affair committed to her; and among other things,
perhaps, was famous for acting the part of a mourner at funerals, for
which sometimes women were hired; however, she was one that was talked
of for her wisdom and prudence, and Joab having heard of her, sent for
her as one for his purpose. The Jews (x) say, that Tekoah was the first
place in the land of Israel for oil, and because the inhabitants were
much used to oil, wisdom was found among them:

and said unto her, I pray thee feign thyself to be a mourner; a woman of
a sorrowful spirit, and in great distress, and show it by cries and
tears:

and put on now mourning apparel; black clothes, such as mourners usually
wore:

and anoint not thyself with oil; as used to be done in times of feasting
and rejoicing, to make them look smooth, and gay, and cheerful, and of
which there might be much use at Tekoah, if so famous for oil:

but be as a woman that had a long time mourned for the dead; her
countenance pale and foul with weeping, her mourning clothes almost worn
out, &c.

\(s\) Proem. in Amos, & Comment. in Jer. vi. 1. (t) De loc. Heb. in.
voce "Elthei", fol. 91. B. (u) In Hieron. Trad. Heb. in 2 Reg. fol. 78.
1. (w) Antiqu. l. 7. c. 8. sect. 4. (x) T. Bab. Menachot, fol. 85. 2.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:3](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sa2 14:3</span></span>

And come to the king,.... At his palace, in the above condition and
circumstances:

and speak on this manner unto him; something to the following purpose he
dictated to her:

so Joab put the words in her mouth; the substance of what she should
say; the fable she was to deliver as her own case might be framed by
Joab, and which she delivered word for word exactly as he put it, and
the application of it; but as he knew not what questions the king would
ask her, so he could not dictate to her what to reply, unless he
supposed this and the other, and so formed answers; but this he left to
her prudence, and for the sake of which he chose a wise woman to manage
this affair.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:4](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sa2 14:4</span></span>

And when the woman of Tekoah spake to the king,.... Or after she had
spoken to him, being introduced by Joab, as is probable; when she had
saluted him with God save the king, or May the king live, or some such
like expressions:

she fell on her face to the ground, and did obeisance; to him as her
king, in reverence of his majesty:

and said, help, O king; signifying that she was in great distress, and
came to him for assistance and deliverance.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sa2 14:5</span></span>

And the king said unto her, what aileth thee?.... Or what is thy case?
What is the condition, and what the circumstances, that thou art in,
which require help and assistance? intimating that he was ready to grant
it on knowledge thereof; however, he was ready to hear what she had to
say:

and she answered, I am indeed a widow woman; of a truth a widow, as the
Targum; she was really one, a widow indeed, as in [Ti1
5:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#003.md); not one that was separated from
her husband, he being alive, or divorced from him on any account; and
therefore she adds:

and mine husband is dead; and has been a long time; this she said to
move the pity and compassion of the king, who, as the supreme magistrate
in God's stead, was a Father of the fatherless, and the judge of the
widow.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:6](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sa2 14:6</span></span>

And thy handmaid had two sons,.... Two are observed, that her case might
suit with Amnon and Absalom:

and they two strove together in the field; they quarrelled, and fought
in the field, where there were no witnesses of what they did to each
other; whereby she would suggest that Ammon was killed in the field, of
which there were no witnesses, and therefore Absalom ought not to die;
whereas it was in Absalom's house, at his table, and where the rest of
the king's sons were present, and witnesses of it:

and there was none to part them; which, had there been, might have
prevented the sad disaster; this, as Abarbinel thinks, is pointed at
David, who when Amnon forced Tamar, did not correct him for it, nor seek
to make peace between the brethren, and hence followed what had
happened:

but the one smote the other, and slew him; as say the accusers of him
that is living; for the fable supposes there was none with them;
however, she suggests, as the above writer observes, that one gave the
first blow, and so was the aggressor; and that he that was smitten rose
up in his own defence, and in his passion slew him that smote him; which
is observed to lessen the crime, and to intimate that Amnon was the
aggressor, who first began the sin and quarrel, in ravishing Tamar, and
so reproaching Absalom; and therefore his blood was upon his own head.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sa2 14:7</span></span>

And, behold, the whole family is risen against thine handmaid,.... Who
had sheltered her son, that slew his brother, from the avenger of blood;
and not only the next akin, the avenger of blood, but even all the
kindred and relations of the deceased, those of her husband's family
rose up as one man, demanding justice:

and they said, deliver him that smote his brother, that we may kill him
for the life of his brother whom he slew; pretending great regard to the
deceased, and a zeal for justice, when the main thing aimed at was to
get the inheritance into their own hands, as appears by what follows:

and we will destroy the heir also; and hereby she would insinuate to the
king, that the reason why the rest of the king's sons spake against
Absalom to him, and stirred him up to punish him with death, was because
he was heir to the crown, and they thought by removing him to make way
for themselves:

and so they shall quench my coal that is left; she had but one son, as
she represents her case, who was like a coal left among ashes, in the
ruins of her family; the only one to support her, keep alive her family,
and bear up and continue her husband's name; and, as the Targum,"they
seek to kill the only one that is left;''

and so the family be extinct:

and shall not leave to my husband neither name nor remainder upon the
earth; should he be delivered up to them and slain; but herein the fable
or apologue differed greatly from the case it was intended to represent;
for had Absalom been put to death, as the law required, David had sons
enough to inherit his throne, and keep up his name.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:8](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sa2 14:8</span></span>

And the king said to the woman, go to thine house,.... Go home and make
thyself easy:

and I will give charge concerning thee; intimating that he would inquire
into her case; and if it was as she had represented it, he would give
orders that she should not be disturbed, or be obliged to deliver up her
son, and that he should be safe from those that sought his life.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:9](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sa2 14:9</span></span>

And the woman of Tekoah said unto the king, my lord and king,.... With
much vehemence, and yet with great respect, fearing an inquisition into
her case; which it would not bear, being a fable, and being very
desirous of having sentence on it immediately pronounced:

the iniquity be on me and on my father's house; let the crime be imputed
to me and my family, and punishment inflicted on us for it, if I have
misrepresented the case, told lies, and deceived the king:

and the king and his throne be guiltless; let neither he nor his kingdom
be charged with any sin, or suffer any damage on that account: or else
the sense is, supposing that the king through much business should
forget and neglect this affair; and her son should be put to death,
through the violence and rage of the family; then she wishes that the
fault and punishment of such neglect might not fall upon the king and
his kingdom, but upon her and her family: in this form she put it, for
the honour of the king, and because she would not be thought to wish ill
to him and his kingdom; yet tacitly suggests, that should this be the
case, he and his kingdom must expect to answer and suffer for it.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:10](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sa2 14:10</span></span>

And the king said, whoever saith ought unto thee,.... Demanding her to
deliver up her son to justice, and reproaching her for not doing it:

bring him to me; give him in charge to a proper officer to be brought
before me, and I shall chastise him for it:

and he shall not touch thee any more; give her any further trouble, by
words or deeds.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:11](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sa2 14:11</span></span>

Then said she, I pray thee, let the king remember the Lord thy God,....
Who is a God gracious and merciful, and imitate him in showing mercy to
the distressed; pitying their case, having compassion upon them, and
relieving them, as she hoped he would commiserate her case, and provide
for the safety of her son. Some think she desires not only to give his
word, but his oath, for her son's safety: "remember the Lord thy God";
i.e. make mention of him, as men do when they swear by him; swear to me
by the Lord thy God:

that thou wouldest not suffer the revengers of blood to destroy any
more, lest they destroy my son, or, "from multiplying the avenger of
blood" (o); that there might not rise one after another to destroy her
son: her meaning is, that the king would swear to her, and give out a
general prohibition, an universal edict, that no one should slay her
son; otherwise if only the avenger of blood that was next of kin was
forbidden, others would rise up one after another, so that he would
never be in safety:

and he said, as the Lord liveth; if she desired an oath, he granted her
request, and swore by the living God:

there shall not one hair of thy son fall to the earth; so far shall his
life be from being touched, or taken away, that the least hurt shall not
be done him, as this proverbial expression signifies.

\(o\) "a multiplicando redemptorem sanguinis", Montanus; so the Tigurine
version.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:12](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sa2 14:12</span></span>

Then the woman said, let thine handmaid, I pray thee, speak one word
unto my Lord the king,.... Having gained her point, and gotten a decree
from him confirmed by an oath, that her son though he had killed his
brother should not die; she proceeds to accommodate the parable, and
apply it to the case of Absalom, and improve it in his favour:

and he said, say on; gave her leave to say what she had further to
observe to him; see [Luk 7:40](../../../bib/kjv/luk007.htm#040.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sa2 14:13</span></span>

Wherefore then hast thou thought such a thing against the people of
God?.... That they would be so wicked as to slay my son, or that they
are the people of God that would slay Absalom; people so cruel could not
be reckoned such, as the king's sons; so Abarbinel; who gives it as the
sense of Ephodaeus, that by the people of God are meant Absalom, and his
men; or Absalom only, one man being sometimes called people, [Exo
21:8](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#008.md); and she expostulates with the
king how he could entertain such a thought, as to seek to take away his
life, when he had so fully expressed himself in her case on behalf of
her son, who had slain his brother; or rather the meaning is, why he
should think of doing such a thing as this, so contrary to the will of
the people of Israel, the people of God, who would be greatly offended
and grieved at it; so contrary to their wishes, which were to see him
fetched back from an Heathenish court and country, where he was in
danger of being corrupted, and to be restored to his father's favour and
to his country, that he might be upon the spot at his death, to succeed
in the throne and kingdom; for the provocation that Absalom had to kill
Amnon had greatly lessened the evil in the esteem of the people:

for the king doth speak this thing as one which is faulty: he
contradicts and condemns himself, in swearing that her son who had
killed his brother should not die, nor an hair of his head be hurt, but
should be in the utmost safety; and yet he sought to put his own son to
death for a like crime, as the next clause explains it:

in that the king doth not fetch home again his banished; meaning
Absalom, who was in a foreign country, an exile, [Sa2
13:34](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#034.md), and in danger of falling into
idolatry; not daring to come home, lest his father should order him to
be put to death; and which he might justly fear he would, should he
return without leave, since he sought not by any means to fetch him
back.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:14](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sa2 14:14</span></span>

For we must needs die,.... As all must, herself, the king, and his sons,
and indeed all men; this is the common case and lot of men; particularly
she insinuates that David must die, and that there must be a successor
named, and perhaps a dispute would arise about one; which might be
fatal, if Absalom was not recalled in his lifetime; and that Amnon must
have died in a little time if he had not been killed by his brother; and
Absalom, he must die also quickly, and therefore what signifies taking
away his life? he may as well live a little longer; this, however
plausible, was but bad reasoning in the case of a malefactor:

and are as water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered up again;
which sinks into the earth, and cannot be got out of it again; so men,
when they die, are buried in the earth, and cannot be gathered or
restored to life again, until the resurrection of the dead; and since
Amnon is dead, and he cannot be brought to life again, it is best to be
easy, and not seek to take away the life of another; which is to bring
him into the same irrecoverable state and condition:

neither doth God respect any person; the words in the original are, "God
doth not take away the soul or life" (p); of every offender, but spares
them notwithstanding the crimes they have committed; and therefore it
became the king to be sparing and merciful to offenders, and
particularly to his own son; and perhaps she any tacitly have respect to
David himself who had been guilty both of murder and adultery, either of
which deserved death; and yet God had not taken away his life, but in
his great mercy had spared him; and therefore, since he had received
mercy, he should show it: or "God hath not taken away his soul or life";
the life of Absalom; he had not cut him off himself by his immediate
hand, nor suffered the king's sons to take away his life, nor any other
to seize upon him, and bring him to justice, whom David might have
employed; but had by his providence protected and preserved him; so that
it seemed to be his will and pleasure that he should not be put to
death:

yet doth he devise means that his banished be not expelled from him;
from his word, worship, and ordinances, as Absalom was; and by
protecting him by his providence, it looked as if it was his will, and
he would find out ways and means for bringing him back to his country,
his father's court, and the sanctuary of the Lord; even as, by the law
concerning the cities of refuge for the manslayer, provision was made
that at the death of the high priest the exiled person might return to
his country.

\(p\) "et non tollet Deus animam", Montanus; so the Tigurine version.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:15](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sa2 14:15</span></span>

Now therefore that I am come to speak of this thing unto my lord the
king,.... Of the case of Absalom, under a feigned one of hers:

it is because the people have made me afraid; having heard of their
whisperings, murmurings, and uneasiness among them, because Absalom was
not sent for home, fearing there would be an insurrection in the nation,
or an invasion of it by Absalom at the request of his friends; in which
he might be supported by the king of Geshur; or however that disputes
would arise about the succession, at the death of David; on these
accounts she determined to speak to the king, and him them to him in the
manner she had done; though some understand this of the discouragement
the people laid her under, telling her the king would not hear her;
nevertheless she was resolved to make trial:

and thy handmaid said, I will now speak unto the king; it may be the
king will perform the request of his handmaid; not only with respect to
her own son, as feigned; but with respect to Absalom, the grand thing in
view.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:16](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sa2 14:16</span></span>

For the king will hear,.... She was fully persuaded of it, as now he had
heard her:

to deliver his handmaid out of the hand of the man that would destroy me
and my son together out of the inheritance of God; he had given his word
and his oath that he would deliver her son from the avenger of blood,
that neither he nor any other should destroy him; which would have been
the destruction of her and her whole family out of the land of Israel,
the land which God had chosen for his inheritance, and had given to the
of Israel to be theirs; and since the king had heard her, and granted
her this favour, she doubted not but that he would deliver his own son
from death, and restore him to the inheritance of the land, where he
might worship the Lord God of his fathers, of which he was now deprived.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:17](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">sa2 14:17</span></span>

Then thine handmaid said, the word of my lord the king shall now be
comfortable,.... Or, "for rest" (q); what will give ease and
satisfaction not only to her, but to all the people of Israel, when they
shall hear of the king's intention and resolution to bring back Absalom:

for as an angel of God, so is my lord the king; as they are very wise,
knowing, and understanding creatures, so was David:

to discern good and bad; to hear both the one and the other, and to
discern the difference between them, and choose and pursue what is
right, as in all other things, so in the present case:

therefore the Lord thy God shall be with thee; as to counsel and advise,
so to assist in performance, and to prosper and succeed; the Targum
is,"the Word of the Lord thy God shall be for thine help.''

\(q\) "ad requiem", Pagninus, Montanus; "ad tranquillitatem", Tigurine
version; "ad quietem", Vatablus, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">sa2 14:18</span></span>

Then the king answered and said unto the woman,.... Understanding
plainly what she meant by all this, that the case she brought was a
feigned one, and that the intention of it was to let him know the sense
of the people with respect to Absalom, and the recall of him:

hide not from me, I pray thee, the thing that I shall ask thee; he
suspected that this was not a scheme of her own, but some considerable
person had formed it, and made use of her to execute it, which was what
he desired to know:

and the woman said, let my lord the king now speak; ask what question he
pleases, I am ready to answer.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">sa2 14:19</span></span>

And the king said, is not the hand of Joab with thee in all this?....
That is, is not this done by the advice, assistance, and direction of
Joab? did not he form this scheme for thee, and direct thee to this
method, and put thee upon prosecuting it?

and the woman answered and said, as thy soul liveth, my lord the king;
what I am about to say is as sure as thou art alive; though this may be
only a wish that he might long live and be happy; nothing is more
desirable than thy valuable life:

none can turn to the right hand or the left from ought that my lord the
king hath spoken; he has hit upon the truth of the matter; there is no
dissimulation or prevarication to be used; the thing cannot be denied;
for thy servant Joab he bade me, and put all these words in the mouth of
thine handmaid: he sent for me, and laid his commands on me, and
directed me what to say to the king, and how to conduct this affair.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">sa2 14:20</span></span>

To fetch about this form of speech hath thy servant Joab done this
thing,.... Feigned a story in such form and manner as had been delivered
to the king, that it might be accommodated and applied to the case of
Absalom, and to transfer it in a figure to the king, to use the
apostle's phrase, [Co1 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/co1004.htm#008.md),

and my lord is wise, according to the wisdom of an angel of God; as not
only to understand the design of this fable or parable, but of such
sagacity and penetration as to find out the author of it; and even

to know all things that are in the earth; either in the whole world, or
rather in the land of Israel; and it is to be understood not of all
actions natural and moral done by men in it, which would be to ascribe
omniscience to him; but of all political things, all things respecting
civil government; that he had such a spirit of discerning of men and
things, that nothing could be said or done, or scheme formed, but he got
intelligence of it, and insight into it; and which was carrying the
compliment to a great height.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:21](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">sa2 14:21</span></span>

And the king said unto Joab,.... Who was present, or but at a little
distance, waiting the issue of this affair:

behold now I have done this thing; have agreed to recall Absalom, at the
suit of this woman, which thou hast put her upon; or, according to the
textual reading, "thou hast done this thing" (r); contrived this scheme,
to let me know the mind of the people with respect to Absalom, or to
represent to me the propriety of sending for him home:

go, therefore, bring the young man Absalom again; I give my consent to
it, and you may send for him, or fetch him as soon as you please; it is
thought he calls him a young man, to extenuate his crime, that it was
done in youthful heat and passion, and therefore he should pass it over.

\(r\) "fecisti", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:22](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">sa2 14:22</span></span>

And Joab fell to the ground on his face, and bowed himself,.... Or bowed
so low as to the ground, in reverence of the king:

and thanked the king; for giving him leave to fetch Absalom home, as if
it was a favour done to himself: or "blessed" (s) him; wished all
happiness and prosperity might attend him, in consequence of this grant,
which he knew would be acceptable to the people:

and Joab said, today thy servant knoweth that I have found grace in thy
sight, my lord, O king, in that the king hath fulfilled the request of
his servant; he might presume upon this, that as the king had given
orders at his request to recall Absalom, who had murdered his brother,
which was tacitly giving him a pardon; so he would forgive him the
murder of Abner, [Sa2 3:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2003.htm#030.md), and think
no more of it; since he perceived now, which he had not so clearly
perceived before from that time, that he found grace in his sight, or
shared in his favour and good will, as now he saw he did.

\(s\) "et benedixit", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius,
Piscator.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:23](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">sa2 14:23</span></span>

So Joab arose and went to Geshur,.... Where Absalom was with his
grandfather, the king of the place; see [Sa2
13:37](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#037.md),

and brought Absalom to Jerusalem; from thence, which, according to
Bunting (t), was the distance of eighty eight miles from it.

\(t\) Travels, &c. p 146, 148.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:24](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">sa2 14:24</span></span>

And the king said,.... Very probably to Joab, when he informed him of
Absalom's being come to Jerusalem:

let him turn to his own house; depart from the king's palace, where Joab
had brought him, and go to his own house, which was in Jerusalem; for
here he had one before he fled to Geshur; see [Sa2
13:20](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#020.md),

and let him not see my face; which he ordered, partly to show his
detestation of the crime he had been guilty of, and some remaining
resentment in his mind at him on account of it; and partly for his
credit among some of the people at least, who might think it was a crime
so great as not to go unpunished, though others were of a different
mind; and also for the greater humiliation of Absalom, who, the king
might think, had not been sufficiently humbled for his sin, or had not
truly repented of it:

so Absalom returned to his own house, and saw not the king's face; in
obedience to his father's orders.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:25](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">sa2 14:25</span></span>

But in all Israel there was none to be so much praised as Absalom for
his beauty,.... Which is observed to account in some measure for the
interest he had in the affections of the people, both now and hereafter:

from the sole of his foot to the crown of his head there was no blemish
in him; not any spot, freckle, wart, scurf, or scab; nothing deficient
or superfluous in him; no disproportion of parts, nor any disagreeable
feature; but an entire symmetry, and perfect comeliness, which made him
very respectable. The Talmudists (u) make him to be of a gigantic
stature.

\(u\) T. Bab. Niddah, fol. 24. 2.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">sa2 14:26</span></span>

And when he polled his head,.... Or cut off the hair of it; for that was
one thing, a good head of hair which he had, that made him look very
comely and beautiful:

for it was at every year's end that he polled it; or cut it off once a
year; but the Jews say (w) he was a perpetual Nazarite:

because the hair was heavy upon him, and therefore he polled it; it grew
so very thick and long in one year's time, that he was obliged to cut
it; and what might add to the weight of it, its being oiled and
powdered; and, as some say, with the dust of gold, to make it look
yellow and glistering:

he weighed the hair of his head at two hundred shekels, after the king's
weight; and a shekel being the weight of half an ounce of avoirdupois
weight, as Bishop Cumberland (x) has shown from various writers, the
weight of his hair must be an hundred ounces; which was a very great
weight indeed on his head. Some think that the price it was sold at, and
not the weight of it, is meant; which they suppose was sold to women for
ornament about their temples, and the money given either to the poor, or
for the use of the sanctuary; and reckoning a shekel at two shillings
and sixpence, as some do, the value of it came to twenty five pounds of
our money; but the above mentioned writer (y) reduces it to about two
shillings and four pence farthing; which makes the value somewhat less;
but inasmuch as it is not so probable that a person of such rank should
sell his hair, nor does it appear that any, such use was made of hair in
those times as suggested; and this being said to be according to the
king's weight or stone, by which all weights were to be regulated, it is
best to understand this of the weight, and not of the price of his hair;
which, according to Josephus (z), was five pounds; but, according to the
above account, it must be six pounds and a quarter. The Jews say (a)
this weight was according to what the inhabitants of Tiberias and
Zippore used, but do not tell us what it was.

\(w\) Maimon. & Bartenora in Misn. Nazir, c 1. sect. 2. Bemidbar Rabba,
sect. 9. fol. 194. 3. Gloss. T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 10. 2. (x) Scripture
Weights and Measures, ch. 4. p. 103. (y) Ibid. p. 104. (z) Antiqu. l. 7.
c. 8. sect. 5. (a) T. Bab. Sotah, fol. 10. 2.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:27](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">sa2 14:27</span></span>

And unto Absalom there were born three sons,.... Who very probably died
young; and the rather it may be thought so, since their names are not
given, and more especially since it is said that Absalom had no sons,
and therefore erected a pillar to keep up the remembrance of his name;
unless it can be thought that that was set up before he had any sons,
which is not so likely; see [Sa2
18:18](../../../bib/kjv/sa2018.htm#018.md),

and one daughter, whose name was Tamar; and whom he named after his
sister Tamar, who was ravished by Amnon; the Septuagint version in some
copies adds,"and she became the wife of Rehoboam, the son of Solomon,
and bore to him Abia;''and so says Josephus (b); see [Kg1
15:22](../../../bib/kjv/kg1015.htm#022.md),

she was a woman of a fair countenance; as was her aunt, after whom she
was named, [Sa2 13:1](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#001.md); by this it
appears that she lived to a woman's estate, though the sons of Absalom
died young.

\(b\) Ut supra. (Antiqu. l. 7. c. 8. sect. 5.)

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">sa2 14:28</span></span>

So Absalom dwelt two full years in Jerusalem,.... After his return from
Geshur:

and saw not the king's face; all that time; which was owing either to
the king's resentment of the fact committed by him, or to state policy.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:29](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#029.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_029">sa2 14:29</span></span>

Therefore Absalom sent for Joab, to have sent him to the king,.... To
introduce him into his presence, being uneasy to be thus confined at his
own house, and not suffered to come to court:

but he would not come to him; knowing the king's mind, and being
unwilling to disoblige him by a troublesome solicitation:

and when he sent again the second time, he would not come; knowing his
business with him; and perhaps between the first time of his sending and
this he had sounded the king about it, and found it was not agreeable to
him to admit him to access to him as yet.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:30](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#030.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_030">sa2 14:30</span></span>

Therefore he said unto his servants,.... That did his business for him
in the field, in keeping his flocks, and tilling his ground:

see Joab's field is near mine: for great personages in those days
attended to husbandry:

and he hath barley there, go and set it on fire; it being ripe, and so
capable of being fired, and therefore must be some time in March or
April, when barley harvest began; he served Joab as Samson did the
Philistines, [Jdg 15:4](../../../bib/kjv/jdg015.htm#004.md); which shows
him to be a bold, and revengeful, and ungrateful man, to use his friend,
and the general of the king's army, after this manner:

and Absalom's servants set the field on fire; as their master had bid
them, and which is no wonder; for as they murdered Ammon at his command,
they would not stop at burning Joab's field, when he bid them do it; see
[Sa2 13:28](../../../bib/kjv/sa2013.htm#028.md).

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:31](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#031.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_031">sa2 14:31</span></span>

Then Joab arose, and came to Absalom unto his house,.... Provoked at
what he had done, and to know the reason of it; and which was answering
Absalom's end:

and said unto him, wherefore have thy servants set my field on fire?
which was not only injurious to his property, but a malicious action.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:32](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#032.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_032">sa2 14:32</span></span>

And Absalom answered Joab,.... Neither denying the fact, nor being
ashamed of it, nor asking pardon for it; but endeavouring to vindicate
it, by giving a reason as he thought sufficient for it:

behold, I sent unto thee, saying, come hither, that I may send thee to
the king; which was assuming great authority over a person in such an
high office as Joab was; had he been king, he could not have used more,
to send for him, and command his attendance, and send him on what errand
he thought fit, as here:

to say, wherefore am I come from Geshur? why did the king send for me?
why did not he let me alone where I was? to what purpose am I brought
hither, since I am not admitted to court?

it had been good for me to have been there still; and better, where he
lived in a king's court, and had honour and respect shown him, suitable
to his rank; and where he had his liberty, and could go where he
pleased; and where this mark of his father's displeasure, not suffering
him to see his face, would not be so manifest as here, and so less
disgraceful to him:

now therefore let me see the king's face; that is, speak to the king,
and intercede for me, that I may see his face; which he was so
importunate for, not from affection to the king; but that being at
court, he might be able to ingratiate himself among the courtiers and
others, and carry the point which his ambition prompted him to, supplant
the king, and seize the crown:

and if there be any iniquity in me, let him kill me; signifying he chose
to die, rather than to live such a life he did: but of being put to
death he was not much afraid; presuming partly upon his innocence,
thinking that the killing of his brother was no crime, because he was
the aggressor, had ravished his sister, and for it ought to die; and
since justice was delayed, and not done him, he had committed no
iniquity in putting him to death; and partly on his father's affection
to him, which he was sensible of; at least he had reason to believe he
would not now put him to death; for had he designed that, he would have
ordered it before now, since he had had him so long in his hands.

[2 Kings (2 Samuel) 14:33](../../../bib/kjv/sa2014.htm#033.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_033">sa2 14:33</span></span>

So Joab came to the king, and told him,.... What Absalom had said to
him:

and when he had called for Absalom; sent messengers to his house to
order him to come to him:

he came to the king, and bowed himself on his face to the ground before
the king; made a very reverend bow to him, according to the custom of
those times, throwing himself at his feet in great submission to him:

and the king kissed Absalom; in token of his reconciliation to him;
which laid the foundation of his after troubles from him, related in the
following chapters.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Kings (2 Samuel) Chapter 15](sa2015.md)

</div>
