<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Song of Solomon (Canticles) Index](sol.md)  
  [Previous](sol003)  [Next](sol005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001.md)

[Song of Solomon (Canticles)](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">sol 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO SONG OF SOLOMON 4

In this chapter is contained a large commendation of the church's beauty
by Christ; first, more particularly, by an enumeration of several parts,
as her eyes, hair, teeth, lips, temples, neck, and breasts, [Sol
4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001.md); and more generally, [Sol
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#007.md); And having observed where he
himself was determined to go, he invites her to go with him; which he
enforces, partly from the danger she was exposed unto where she was [Sol
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006.md); and partly from the comeliness of
her person and graces in his esteem; with which he was ravished, and
therefore was extremely desirous of her company, [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009.md); And then enters into some new
descriptions of her; as a garden and orchard, as a spring and fountain,
[Sol 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012.md); all which she makes to be
owing to him, [Sol 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015.md); And the
chapter is closed with an order from Christ to the winds to blow on his
garden, and cause the spices of it to flow out; and with an invitation
of the church to Christ, to come into his garden, and relax there, [Sol
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016.md).

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">sol 4:1</span></span>

Behold, thou art fair, my love; behold, thou art fair,.... The same as
in [Sol 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#015.md); here repeated by Christ,
to introduce the following commendation; to express the greatness of his
love to his church; and show that he had the same opinion of her, and
esteem for her, notwithstanding what had passed between that time and
this;

thou hast doves' eyes within thy locks; the same comparison; see Gill on
[Sol 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#015.md); only with this difference,
here her eyes are said to be "within her locks": which, whether
understood of the ministers of the Gospel; or of the eyes of the
understanding, particularly of, the eye of faith, as has been observed
on the above place; do not seem so much to design the imperfection of
the sight of the one or of the other, in the present state, as eyes
within or under locks and in some measure covered with them, hinder the
sight of them; as the modesty of either of them; locks being decently
tied up, as the word signifies (i), is a sign thereof, as the contrary
is a sign of boldness and wantonness. Doves' eyes themselves are
expressive of modesty and humility, and, this phrase added to them,
increases the idea; such ministers, who have the largest gifts, greatest
grace, light, and knowledge, are the most humble, witness the Apostle
Paul; and this phrase expresses the beauty of them, not only in the eyes
of Christ, but in the eyes of those to whom they publish the good
tidings of salvation: and so it may denote what an exceeding modest
grace faith is, which receives all from Christ, and gives him all the
glory, and takes none to itself; and what a beauty there is in it,
insomuch that Christ is ravished with it, [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009.md); and seems rather to be the sense
here;

thy hair is as a flock of goats; like the hair of goats, so Ben Melech.
Hair adds much to the comeliness of persons, and is therefore frequently
mentioned, both with respect to the bride and bridegroom, in this song,
[Sol 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#001.md); and so in all poems of this
kind (k); and one part of the comeliness of women lies in their hair;

"let a woman, says Apuleius (l), be adorned with ever such fine
garments, and decked with gold and jewels, yet, without this ornament,
she will not be pleasing; no, not Verus herself.''

The women (m) in Homer, are described by their beautiful hair; nor is it
unusual to compare the hair of women, and represent it as superior to a
fleece of the choicest flock (n). And here the church's hair is said to
be like the hair of goats, for that is the sense of the expression; and
which is thought to be most like to human hair, [Sa1
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/sa1019.htm#013.md); and it is compared to that, not
so much for its length and sleekness, as for its colour, being
yellowish; which, with women formerly, was in esteem, and reckoned
graceful (o); this being the colour of the hair of some of the greatest
beauties, as Helena, Philoxena, and others, whose hair was flaxen and
yellow; hence great care was taken to make it look so, even as yellow as
gold (p): the Jewish women used to have their perukes, or false hair, of
goats' hair, and still have in some places to this day (q); and it
should seem the Roman women also had, to which the poet (r) refers. And
the church's hair here is said to be like the hair of a flock of goats,

that appear from Mount Gilead; or rather "on Mount Gilead", as Noldius:
Gilead was a mountain in the land of Israel, beyond Jordan, famous for
pasturage for cattle, where flocks of goats were fed, as was usual on
mountains (s); and, being well fed, their hair was long, smooth, neat,
and glistering; and so to spectators, at a distance, looked very
beautiful and lovely; especially in the morning at sun rising, and,
glancing on them with its bright and glittering rays, were delightful.
So R. Jonah, from the use of the word in the Arabic language, which
signifies the morning, interprets it, which "rise early in the morning";
and which, as Schultens (t) observes, some render,

"leading to water early in the morning;''

the Vulgate Latin version is, "that ascend from Mount Gilead", from a
lower to a higher part of it; which is approved of by Bochart (u). Now
the hair of the church may be interpreted either of believers, the
several members of the church of Christ; the hairs of the head are
numerous, grow upon the head, and have their nourishment from it; are
weak in themselves, but depend upon the head, and are an ornament to it:
so the saints, though few in comparison of the world, yet by themselves
are a great number, which no man can number; these grow upon Christ, the
Head of the church, and receive their nourishment from him; and, though
weak in themselves, have strength from him, and have their dependence on
him; and are an ornament and crown of glory to him; and who are cared
for and numbered by him, so that no one can be lost; see [Eze
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/eze005.htm#001.md). Or rather it may be interpreted
of the outward conversation of the saints; hair is visible, is a
covering, and an ornament, when taken care of, and managed aright, and
has its dependence and is influenced by the head: the good conversation
of the church and its members is visible to all, as the hair of the
head, and as a flock of goats on Mount Gilead; and is a covering, though
not from divine justice, yet from the reproaches of men; is ornamental
to believers, and to the doctrine they profess; especially when their
conversation is ordered aright, according to the weird of God, and is
influenced by grace, communicated from Christ, the Head.

\(i\) "intra ligamina tua", some in Vatablus; "vittam suam", Cocceius;
"constrictam comam tuam", Michaelis, so Jarchi. Vid. Horat. Carmin. l.
2. Ode 11. v. 23, 24. (k) Vid. Barthii Animadv. ad Claudian. Nupt.
Honor. Ode 1. v. 12. (l) Metamorph. l. 2. (m) Juno, Iliad. 10. v. 5.
Diana, Odyss. 20. v. 80. Minerva, Iliad. 6. v. 92. Latona, Iliad. 1. v.
36. & 19. v. 413. Circe, Odyss. 10. v. 136, 220, 310. Calypso, Odyss. 5.
v. 30. Helena, Iliad. 3. v. 329. & passim; Thetis, Iliad. 18. v. 407. &
20. v. 207. Ceres, Odyss. 5. v. 125. Nymphs and others, Odyss. 6. v.
222, 238. & 12. v. 132. & 19. v. 542. So Venus is described by Claudian.
de Nupt. Honor. v. 99. "Casariem tunc forte Venus subnixa corusco
fingebat solio". (n) "Quae crine vincit Boetici gregis vellus", Martial.
l. 5. Ep. 38. (o) "Nondum illi flavum", &c. Virgil. Aeneid. 4. prope
finem. Vid. Horat. Carmin. l. 1. Ode 5. v. 4. Martial. Epigr. l. 5. Ep.
65. (p) "Aurea Caesaries", Virgil. Aeneid. 8. v. 659. Vid. Barthii
Animadv. ad Claudian. de Rapt. Proserp. l. 3. v. 86. (q) Vid. Braunium
de Vest. Sacerdot. l. 1. c. 9. p. 201. (r) "Hoedina tibi pelle", &c.
Martial. Epigr. l. 12. Ep. 38. (s) Theocrit. Idyll. 3. v. 1, 2. (t)
Animadv. in loc. (u) Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 2. c. 5. col. 628.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">sol 4:2</span></span>

Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep,.... That is, like the teeth of a
flock of sheep; as her eyes were like the eyes of doves, and her hair
like the hair of goats: and Galen long ago observed, that human teeth
are much like the teeth of sheep, in figure, order, and structure, as
well as are small and white; neatly set, innocent and harmless, not
ravenous and voracious, cropping herbs and grass only (w); the whiteness
of the teeth is chiefly intended, in which the beauty of them lies, for
which they are sometimes compared (x) to Parian marble for whiteness.
The Targum interprets these teeth of the priests and Levites; but it is
much better to understand them of the ministers of the Gospel: teeth are
bony, solid, firm, and strong, sharp to cut and break the food, and
prepare it for the stomach: all which well agree with ministers; who are
strong in the Lord, and in his grace, to labour in the word and
doctrine; to oppose gainsayers, withstand Satan's temptations; bear the
reproaches of the world, and the infirmities of weaker saints; and
remain firm and unmoved in their ministry; unshaken by all they meet
with, from without and from within: they are sharp to rebuke such who
are unsound in the faith, or corrupt in their morals, and to penetrate
into Gospel truths; to cut and rightly divide the word of truth, and
break the bread of life to others, and so chew and prepare spiritual
food for souls; not raw and crude; not hard and difficult of digestion,
but plain and easy to be understood. And they are like to a flock of
sheep,

that are even shorn; on which no wool is left, sticking out here and
there; which is another good property of teeth, that are of equal size
and bigness, do not stand out, nor rise up one above another; and are as
if they had been "cut and planed, and made alike" (y), as some render
the word: which may denote the equality of Gospel ministers in power and
authority; one having no superiority over another; all having the same
mission and commission, employed in the same work, preaching the same
Gospel; and though their gifts are different, yet there is a harmony and
agreement in the doctrines they preach;

which came up from the washing; white and clean, which is another
property of good teeth; as the teeth of sheep be, and they themselves
are, when just come up out of the washing pit: this may signify the
washing of regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost, which are
necessary to ministers of the word, in order to preach it; and more
especially the purity of their lives and conversations, in which they
should be examples to the flock;

whereof everyone bear twins, and none is barren among them; the figures
are just and beautiful; it is common with sheep to bear twins, or more,
in the eastern countries, as the philosopher observes (z); frequent
mention is made of goats bearing twins (a): these may answer to the two
rows of teeth, and the word for "teeth" is in the dual number; and when
these are white and clean, and equal, are well set, and not one wanting,
none rotten, nor shed, nor fallen out, look very beautiful. This may
express the fruitfulness and success of Gospel ministers, in bringing
many souls to Christ; and was particularly true of the apostles, and
first ministers of the Gospel, who were instrumental in the conversion
of many; and who bore twins to Christ, Jews and Gentiles; and none were
without their usefulness. Likewise all this may be understood of
believers in general, and of meditation and faith in them; by meditation
they feed upon Christ, his Gospel, doctrines, and promises; they chew
the end, and ruminate on the word of God; and are equal, alike partakers
of the same grace, and blessings of it; and are sanctified, and, in some
measure, cleansed, from the pollution of their minds and actions; ascend
heavenwards in their thoughts, desires, and affections; and are not
"barren" and unfruitful in the knowledge of Christ and his Gospel; and
generally, through meditation, bring forth the "twins" of prayer and
praise: by faith also they feed on Christ and his grace; and which is
"alike", precious faith in all, as to nature and quality; is "pure",
sincere, and unfeigned; is always fruitful, and bears the "twins" of
love to Christ, and of love to his saints; and is not "barren", but
attended with the fruits of righteousness.

\(w\) In Salazar apud Marckium in loc. (x) Theocrit. Idyll. 6. v. 37,
38. (y) "caesae vel dedolatae", Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 1. I. 2. c. 45.
col. 493. "aequarum", Junius & Tremellius; "statura aequalium",
Cocceius. (z) Aristot. de Animal. Hist. l. 6. c. 19. (a) Theocrit.
Idyll. 1. v. 25. & 3. v. 34. & 5. v. 54. & 8. v. 44.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">sol 4:3</span></span>

Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet,.... To a "thread" for thinness,
to "scarlet" for colour; thin red lips being beautiful, as well as white
teeth; so the beautiful Aspasia had red lips (b), and teeth whiter than
snow; hence we read of red and purple lips (c). Now as lips are the
instruments of speech, the words of the church, and of all true
believers, may be designed; what is said by them in their prayers, which
are filled, not with great swelling words of vanity, exalting
themselves, and magnifying their works, like the Pharisee; but with
humble confessions of sin, and acknowledgments of their unworthiness of
mercy; and they are constant, like one continued thread, they go on
praying all their days: and the scarlet colour may denote the fervency
of them, whereby they become available with God; and the acceptableness
of them to God, through the mediation of Christ, whose blood, and not
any worthiness of theirs, is pleaded in them: their words of praise also
may be signified hereby; which are not filled with big swollen encomiums
of themselves, and of what they have done; but with expressions of the
goodness and grace of God to them; and with thankfulness for all
mercies, both temporal and spiritual, bestowed upon them; and these are
hearty and sincere, coming from a heart inflamed with the love of God,
which make such lips look like scarlet; and that being in great esteem
may intimate the acceptableness of them to God, through the blood and
sacrifice of Christ. To which may be added, that the doctrines of the
Gospel, delivered by the ministers of the church, who are her lips, may
be taken into the sense of this clause; which are like a "thread", spun
out of the Scriptures, and are harmonious and all of a piece, consistent
and closely connected; the subject and matter of which are the blood,
sufferings, and death of Christ, and the blessings that come thereby;
and which also, like scarlet, are valuable and precious;

and thy speech is comely; which explains the preceding clause; and
shows, that by her lips her speech is meant, which is "comely", that is,
graceful and amiable; as it is when believers speak of Christ, of his
person, offices, and grace; and for him, in vindication of his truths
and ordinances; when they speak to him, in prayer or in praise; and
when, in common conversation, their speech is with grace;

thy temples are like a piece of a pomegranate within thy locks; not like
a piece of the tree, but of the fruit, when the shell of it bursts of
itself, through the abundance of liquor in it; such the Israelites found
at one of their stations, and therefore called it "Rimmonparez", the
pomegranate of rupture, or the bursted pomegranate; and in the tribe of
Zebulun was a city called Remmonmethoar, the beautiful pomegranate, [Jos
19:13](../../../bib/kjv/jos019.htm#013); now the rind being broken (d.md)
it appears full of grains or kernels, of a white colour, interspersed
with a reddish purple juice, like blood, as Pausanias remarks (e), and
looks very beautiful; and is aptly used to set forth the church's
beauty, who, like her beloved, is "white and ruddy", [Sol
5:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol005.htm#010.md), by which may be meant
ecclesiastical officers, placed on an eminence in the church; to take
care, among other things, of the discipline of it, according to the laws
of Christ, [Ti1 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017.md); The temples, in
the Hebrew tongue (f), have their name from the thinness and tenderness
of them, having but little flesh on them, and covered with a thin skin;
and, in the Greek tongue (g), from the evident beating of the pulse in
them; and their situation is between the ear and the eye: all which
denote, that such officers should be spiritual men, and have as little
carnality in them as may be; that they should use great tenderness in
the administrations of their office, particularly in giving admonitions
and reproofs: and, as by the beating of the pulse the state of a
constitution is discerned, whether healthy or not; so the state of the
church may be judged of by the discipline of it; if that is neglected,
it is in a bad state, and in a declining condition; but if strictly
observed, it is in a healthful and flourishing one: and the temples
being between the eye and the ear may teach, that, in the management of
church affairs, the officers are to make use of both; their ears are to
be open to all; and they are not to shut their eyes against clear and
plain evidence: and being said to be "within her locks", may be
expressive of the meekness and humility of such officers, who are not to
lord it over God's heritage; and of the private manner in which
admonitions are to be given, in case of private offences; and of the
affairs and concertos of a church being kept private, and not blazed
abroad. And these may be compared to "a piece of a pomegranate", because
of their being full of gifts, and grace, and good works, visible to men;
and for their harmony and union among themselves, and with the church
and its members; and the strict regard that, in all things, is had to
the rules and laws of Christ; all which make the officers of the church,
and the discipline of it, acceptable to him. It may be further observed,
that the temples, taken largely, include the "cheeks" also; and so some
render the word (h) here; and the purple juice of the pomegranate well
expresses the colour of them; hence we read of purple cheeks (i): and
this may denote the beauty and modesty of the church; whose blushing
looks, and ruddy cheeks, made her extremely beautiful in the eye of
Christ.

\(b\) Aelian. Var. Hist. l. 12. c. 1. (c) , Theocrit. Idyll. 15.
"Purpureis labellis", Ovid. Amor. l. 3. Eleg. 13. (d) , Sept. "sicut
fragmen", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Junius & Tremellius; "pars vel
frustum", Michaelis. (e) Boeotica, sive l. 9. p. 578. (f) "tenuis faciei
pars", Marckius; "tenuior", Michaelis. Vid. Kimchii Sepher Shorash. rad.
(g) . (h) , Sept. "genae tuae", Pagninus, Cocceius. (i) "Purpureas
genas", Ovid. Amor. l. 1. Eleg. 4. Statii Thebaid. l. 1. v. 538. Ausonii
Parental. 23. v. 16. "Purpurissatae buccae", Plauti Trucul. Act. 2. Sc.
2. v. 35. "genre", Apulei Apolog. p. 239.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">sol 4:4</span></span>

Thy neck is like the tower of David, builded for an armoury,.... This
was either the strong hold of Zion; or some tower erected by David for
an armoury, wherein his worthies or mighty men bring up their shields;
Mr. Sandys (k) says, it stood aloft in the utmost angle of a mountain,
whose ruins are yet extant: though the neck is compared to this, not for
its height, seeing a high and outstretched neck is a token of pride and
haughtiness with the Jews, [Isa 3:16](../../../bib/kjv/isa003.htm#016.md);
see [Psa 74:5](../../../bib/kjv/psa074.htm#005.md); and so the phrase is
used in Latin writers (l); but for its being ornamented with spoils hung
up in it, as golden shields after mentioned, as the neck is with pearls,
jewels, and chains of gold, [Sol 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010.md);
The word for "armoury" is from "alaph", "to teach"; not as being a
pattern to teach artificers, as Jarchi; nor to show passengers their
way, as R. Jonah and others, who think this tower was built as a
"pharus", for such a purpose (m); but it was as an arsenal, in which
young learners of the art of war laid up their weapons, as well as what
were taken from an enemy; or what were made and laid up here, as a store
in time of need. By the church's neck may be meant either the ministers
of the word, set in the highest part of the body, the church, next to
Christ the Head, and in subjection to him; to whom they hold, and whose
name, cause, and interest, they bear up and support in the world; and
are the means of conveying spiritual food from him to the souls of men;
and are adorned with the gifts and graces of the Spirit: and may be
compared to the "tower of David", for their integrity and uprightness,
and for their strength and immovableness, standing firm and unmoved
against the batteries of Satan and the world, and for the defence of the
Gospel; and to that "built for an armoury", they being furnished with
the whole armour of God. An ancient writer (n) supposes the Apostle Paul
is particularly meant; that eminent exalter of Christ the Head, and who
was set for the defence of the Gospel: or it may be rather the
Scriptures themselves are meant; which point out and hold forth Christ
the Head, and make him manifest to the sons of men; and are a means of
conveying spiritual breath; when attended with a divine power, then are
they spirit and life; and of conveying food to the souls of men, very
nourishing and satisfying; and are bespangled with glorious truths and
precious promises; where every truth is a golden link, and every promise
a pearl, to a believer: and they may be compared to the "tower of David"
for their sublimity, being out of the reach and above the capacity of a
natural man; and for their firmness and immovableness, which Satan and
all his emissaries will never be able to remove out of the world; and
like to that as "built for an armoury",

whereon there hang a thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men: no
other armour is mentioned, as in this armoury, but shields; they being a
principal part of armour, and are especially (o) so called, as in the
Septuagint version of [Kg1 14:26](../../../bib/kjv/kg1014.htm#026.md);
these shields are armour of mighty men; mighty, through God and his
grace, to perform mighty actions, and do great exploits; being furnished
from the spiritual armoury with the whole armour of God, to repel
Satan's temptations, to defend the Gospel, and refute error;
particularly the ministers of the word are those mighty men; though it
is applicable to all saints.

\(k\) Travels, p. 139. Vid. Adrichom. Theatrum Terrae Sanctae, p. 168.
(l) Vid. Barthii Animadv. ad Claudian. in Rufin. l. 1. v. 53. & l. 2. v.
294. (m) Vid. Castell. Lexic. col. 3904. so Pagninus and Tigurine
version. (n) Psellus in ioc. (o) Vid. Cuperi Observ. l. 1. c. 7. p. 42.
& Gutberleth. de Saliis, c. 12. p. 69.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">sol 4:5</span></span>

Thy two breasts are like two young roes that are twins,.... Or, "two
fawns, the twins of a doe": Providence, as Plutarch observes (p), has
given to women two breasts, that, should they have twins, both might
have a fountain of nourishment; and are fitly compared to twins of the
doe. The hind, for the most part, brings but one roe at a time; but
there are some, the philosopher says (q), bring twins; by which the
beauty of the breasts is expressed: "young roes" may point at the
smallness of them, large breasts are not accounted handsome; and
"twins", at their equal size and shape, not one larger nor higher than
the other, that would be a deformity; twins are generally alike;

which feed among the lilies; and are fat and plump: the allusion may be
to the putting of lilies in the bosom, between the breasts, as other
flowers; lilies are reckoned among the decorations of women, in the
Apocryha:

"And pulled off the sackcloth which she had on, and put off the garments
of her widowhood, and washed her body all over with water, and anointed
herself with precious ointment, and braided the hair of her head, and
put on a tire upon it, and put on her garments of gladness, wherewith
she was clad during the life of Manasses her husband.'' (Judith 10:3)

or rather to the creatures mentioned, the roes and hinds, which feed
among lilies, in fields where lilies grow; for these grow in fields as
well as in gardens, and are called the "lilies of the field", [Mat
6:28](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#028); and we read (r.md) sometimes of
harts and hinds among lilies. By "breasts" may be meant, either the
ministers of the word, who impart "the sincere milk of the word", and
who deliver out the nourishing doctrines of grace, like milk out of the
breast, [Co1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1003.htm#002.md); and may be like to
"roes" for their affection to those who are under their ministry; and
pleasant to them, to whom they are made useful; and for their sharp
sightedness and penetration into the mysteries of grace; and for their
quick dispatch in doing their work, though through many difficulties,
which, like young roes, they leap and skip over: and "two" of them show
a sufficient number of them Christ provides for his church; and being
"twins" express their equal authority, and harmony of doctrine; and
feeding "among lilies" is where Christ himself feeds, [Sol
2:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#016.md); where Christ feeds they feed,
and where they feed Christ feeds, even among his saints, comparable to
lilies, [Sol 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#002.md); or these "breasts"
may design the two Testaments, the Old and New, which contain the whole
sincere milk of the word; are like "young roes", pleasant and delightful
to believers; and, as "twins", are alike, agree in their doctrines
concerning Christ, and the blessings of grace through him; the types,
figures, prophecies, and promises of the one, have their completion in
the other; and both abound with the lilies of Gospel doctrines and
promises: though rather these "breasts" may point at the two ordinances
of the Gospel, baptism, and the Lord's supper; which are breasts of
consolation to believers, out of which they suck, and are satisfied; and
through feeding on Christ in both, they receive much nourishment and
strength; and are very amiable and lovely to the saints, when they enjoy
the presence of Christ in them, and have the discoveries of his love to
them; and may be said to be "twins", being both instituted by Christ,
and both lead unto him, and require the same subjects; and are received
and submitted to by saints, comparable to lilies, as before.

\(p\) De Liberis Educand. vol. 2. p. 3. (q) Aristot. de Animal. l. 6. c.
29. (r) "En aspicis ilium, candida qui medius cubat inter lilia,
cervum?" Calphurnius apud Bochart. Hierozoic. par. 1. l. 3. c. 24. col.
924.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">sol 4:6</span></span>

Until the day break, and the shadows flee away,.... Until the day of
grace breaks on every elect sinner, and the shadows of darkness,
ignorance, and unbelief, are in a great measure fled and gone; or until
the everlasting day breaks, and there will be no more night, nor any
darkness of affliction, nor any more desertion, doubts, and fears; see
[Sol 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#017.md). They are the words of
Christ, declaring whither he would go till that time came, as follows:

I will get me to the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense:
the allusion may be to the mountains and hills where these odoriferous
plants grew. It is said of Pompey the great, that when he passed over
Lebanon (later mentioned, [Sol 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008).md)
and by Damascus, he went through sweet smelling groves and woods of
frankincense and balsam (s); and Lebanon is thought, by some (t), to
have its name from the frankincense that grew upon it; though rather
from the whiteness of the snow continually on it. By this "mountain" and
"hill" may be meant the church of Christ, gathered together in Gospel
order, so called for its visibility and immovableness, [Isa
2:2](../../../bib/kjv/isa002.htm#002.md); and for the trees of
righteousness which are planted and flourish there, the saints; and for
the fragrancy of their graces; and for the sweet smelling odour of their
sacrifices of prayer and praise; and because of the delight and pleasure
Christ takes in his people, and they in him here; where they have mutual
communion, so that it is to them both a mountain of myrrh and a hill of
frankincense: particularly, here Christ delights to be, and here he
resolves to dwell until his second coming.

\(s\) Florus de Gest. Roman. l. 3. c. 5. (t) Vid. Gabr. Sionita de
Orient. Urb. c. 6. p. 14.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">sol 4:7</span></span>

Thou art all fair, my love,.... Being justified by the righteousness of
Christ, washed in his blood, and sanctified by his Spirit; of the title,
my "love", see [Sol 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#009.md). The church is
often said by Christ to be "fair", his "fair one", and the "fairest
among women", [Sol 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#008.md); but here "all
fair", being a perfection of beauty, and perfectly comely through his
comeliness: this is said to show her completeness in Christ, as to
justification; and that, with respect to sanctification, she had a
perfection of parts, though not of degrees; and to observe, that the
church and "all" the true members of it were so, the meanest and weakest
believer, as well as the greatest and strongest. It is added,

there is no spot in thee; not that the saints have no sin in them; nor
any committed by them; nor that their sins are not sins; nor that they
have no spots in them, with respect to sanctification, which is
imperfect; but with respect to their justification, as having the
righteousness of Christ imputed to them, and covered with that spotless
robe, they are considered as having no spot in them; God sees no sin in
them, so as to reckon it to them, and condemn them for it; and they
stand unblamable and unreproveable in his sight; and will be presented
by Christ, both to himself and to his father, and in the view of men and
angels, "not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing", [Eph
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#027.md), upon them.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">sol 4:8</span></span>

Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, with me from Lebanon,.... This is
a new title given the church, my "spouse"; here first mentioned, because
the day of espousals was over, [Sol
3:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol003.htm#011.md); and having on the wedding
garment, in which she was so fair and spotless, as before described, she
looked somewhat like a bride, and the spouse of Christ; and is chiefly
used by Christ, to prevail upon her to go with him, which relation,
duty, and affection, obliged her to do. The invitation is to come with
him from Lebanon, which is repeated, to show earnestness and vehemency;
not Lebanon, literally taken, a mountain to the north of the land of
Canaan, famous for odoriferous trees, and where to be was delightful;
but figuratively, the temple, made of the wood of Lebanon, and
Jerusalem, in which it was, which in Christ's time was a den of thieves,
and from whence Christ called out his people; or this being a pleasant
mountain, may signify those carnal sensual pleasures, from which Christ
calls his people off. Some render the words, "thou shalt come with me",
&c. (u), being influenced by the powerful grace of Christ, and drawn by
his love; and what he invites and exhorts unto, he gives grace to enable
to perform;

look from the top of Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the
lions' dens, from the mountains of the leopards; Amana is thought by
some to be the mountain which divided Cilicia from Syria, taken notice
of by several writers (w); but it seems too distant from Lebanon;
perhaps it is the same with Abana, from whence was a river of that name,
[Kg2 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/kg2005.htm#012.md); where, in the "Keri" or
margin, it is read Amana; so the Targum here explains it of the people
that dwelt by the river Amana, which washed the country of Damascus:
Jarchi takes it to be the same with Hor, a mountain on the northern
border of Israel; and indeed, wherever mention is made of this mountain,
the Targum has it, Taurus Umanus; and, according to Ptolemy (x), Amanus
was a part of Mount Taurus, with which it is joined by Josephus (y); and
with that and Lebanon, and Carmel, by Aelianus (z), Shenir and Hermon
were one and the same mountain, called by different names; Hermon might
be the common name to the whole; and that part of it which belonged to
the Sidonians was called by them Sirion; and that which the Amorites
possessed Shenir, [Deu 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/deu003.htm#009.md); Now all
these mountains might be called "dens of lions", and "mountains of
leopards"; both because inhabited by such beasts of prey; hence we read
of the lions of Syria (a), and of leopards (b) in those parts; in the
land of Moab, and in the tribe of Gad, were places called Bethnimrah,
and the waters of Nimrim, which seem to have their names from leopards
that formerly haunted those places, [Num
32:36](../../../bib/kjv/num032.htm#036.md); or because inhabited by cruel,
savage, and tyrannical persons; particularly Amana, in Cilicia or Syria,
as appears from Strabo (c), Lucan (d), and Cicero (e); and Shenir and
Hermon were formerly, as Jarchi observes, the dens of those lions, Og
king of Bashan, and Sihon king of the Amorites: unless rather these were
the names of some places near Lebanon; for Adrichomius (f) says,

"the mountain of the leopards, which was round and high, was two miles
from Tripoli northward, three from Arce southward, and one from
Lebanon.''

Now these words may be considered as a call of Christ to his people, to
come out from among wicked men, comparable to such creatures; and he
makes use of two arguments to enforce it: the one is taken from the
nature of such men, and the danger of being with them; who are like to
lions, for their cruel and persecuting temper; and to leopards, for
their being full of the spots of sin; and for their craftiness and
malice, exercised towards those who are quiet in the land; and for their
swiftness and readiness to do mischief; wherefore it must be both
uncomfortable and unsafe to be with such persons: the other argument is
taken from their enjoyment of Christ's company and presence, which must
be preferable to theirs, for pleasure, profit, and safety, and therefore
most eligible. Besides, Christ chose not to go without his church; she
was so fair, as before described, and so amiable and lovely in his
sight, as follows.

\(u\) "venies", Pagninus, Montanus, Mercerus, Junius & Tremellius. (w)
Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 22. Mela de Situ Orbis, l. 1. c. 12. Solin.
Polyhistor. c. 51. (x) Geograph. l. 5. c. 8. (y) Antiqu. l. 5. c. 6. s.
1. (z) De Animal. l. 5. c. 56. (a) Aristot. Hist. Animal. l. 6. c. 3,
Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 8. c. 16. (b) Vid. Ignatii Epist. ad Roman. p. 58.
Brocard. in Cocceii Lexic. p. 123. (c) Geograph. l. 14. p. 465. & l. 16.
p. 517. (d) Pharsalia, l. 3. v. 244. "vencre feroces, et cultor", Amana.
(e) Ad Attic. l. 5. Ep. 20. (f) Theatrum Terrae Sanctae, p. 186.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">sol 4:9</span></span>

Thou hast ravished my heart, my sister, my spouse,.... Here another new
title is given to the church, "my sister", with the repetition of the
former, my "spouse": for one and the same person, with the Hebrews,
might be sister and spouse; see [Co1
9:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1009.htm#005.md). And this may be used in a love
strain, and so not improper in a love poem, as this was (g); see [Sol
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#008.md); likewise the church may be called
Christ's sister, because of his incarnation, in virtue of which he is
not ashamed to call his people his brethren, and so his sisters, [Heb
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/heb002.htm#011.md); and on account of their
adoption; in which respect, he that is Christ's Father is theirs; and
which is evidenced in regeneration; when they, through grace, do the
will of his Father, and so are his brother, and sister, and mother, [Mat
12:50](../../../bib/kjv/mat012.htm#050.md). And, upon the whole, it is used
to express the great affection of Christ for the church, and his high
esteem of her; and which appears by his saying, "thou hast ravished my
heart"; which is but one word in the Hebrew text, and nowhere else used,
and is variously rendered: the Vulgate Latin version is, "thou hast
wounded my heart" (h): with one of love's darts, [Sol
2:5](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#005.md); "thou hast drawn my heart unto
thee", so some Jewish writers (i); which is surprising, since no love
nor loveliness are in her of herself; this shows how free and unmerited
the love of Christ is; according to the use of the word with the
Talmudists (k), the sense is, "thou hast coupled mine heart with thine";
the heart of Christ and his church are so closely knit and joined
together in love, that they are but one heart, and can never be
separated: others, "thou hast seized my heart"; or, "claimed it for
thyself" (l); thou art master over it; it is no more mine, but thine The
Septuagint version is, "thou hast unhearted us"; Father, Son, and
Spirit; particularly the second Person: or thou hast stolen away my
heart; I have no heart left in me; which, as it is the case through
fear, is sometimes through love: this sense is approved by Aben Ezra.
Some render it just the reverse, "thou hast heartened me" (m); put heart
into me, animated me, made me of good cheer; so the word is used in the
Syriac version of [Mat 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/mat009.htm#002.md). The sense
may be, that such was the love of Christ to his church, and so much was
he charmed by her, that the thought of his having her company in heaven
to all eternity animated him to endure all sufferings he did for her
sake, [Heb 12:2](../../../bib/kjv/heb012.htm#002.md); The Targum is,

"thy love is fixed upon the table of my heart;''

where the church herself was fixed, [Sol
8:6](../../../bib/kjv/sol008.htm#006.md);

thou hast ravished my heart with one of thine eyes; the allusion may be
to the custom of the eastern women; who, when they walked abroad or
spoke to any, showed but one eye, the other, with the rest of the face,
being covered with a veil (n): the eyes of women are ensnaring to lovers
(o); the church has more eyes than one. Mention is made of the eyes of
the understanding, [Eph 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#018.md); faith is
one of them, and may he here chiefly intended; by which a soul looks on
Christ, the glories of his person, and the fulness of his grace; and
looks so him for the blessings of grace now, and eternal glory
hereafter: and with this Christ's heart is ravished; even with "one
look" from it, or "glance" of it, as some (p) render it;

with one chain of thy neck; with the several graces of the Spirit,
linked together as in a chain; which were about the neck of the church,
and as ornamental to her as a pearl necklace, [Sol
1:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#010.md); and with every link in this
chain Christ's heart is ravished and delighted. The Vulgate Latin
version is, "with one lock of hair of thy neck": which hung down in it,
and looked very beautiful; and with which lovers are sometimes taken
(q).

\(g\) "Sive tibi conjux, sive futura soror", Tibullus. (h) "vulnerasti
cor meum", V. L. so Ben Melech; and Kimchi Sepher Shorash. rad. (i)
Jarchi, David de Pomis, Lexic fol. 69. 3. (k) "Cor copulasti mihi",
Buxtorf. Hottinger. Smegma, p. 164. Vid. Misn. Sabbat, c. 5. s. 2. (l)
"Occupasti", Lutherus, Marckius; "vendicasti", Tigurine version. (m)
"Animasti me", Cocceius, Schmidt. (n) Tertuilian. de. Virg. Veland. c.
17. Le Bruyn's Voyage to the Levant, ch. 40. p. 157. (o) See Prov. vi.
25. So the poet says of Helena, ' , Theocrit. Idyll. 18. "Perque tuos
oculos qui rapuere meos", Ovid. Amor. l. 3, Eleg. 10. Vid. Barthii ad
Claudian. Nupt. Honor. v. 6. (p) "uno aspecto oculorum tuorum", Junius &
Tremellius, so Ainsworth. (q) ' ' , Theocrit. Idyll. 5.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">sol 4:10</span></span>

How fair is thy love, my sister, my spouse!.... Of these titles; see
Gill on [Sol 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#008.md); See Gill on [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009.md); and of the love of the church to
Christ; see Gill on [Sol 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003.md); here
said to be "fair", lovely and delightful, grateful and acceptable; as it
is to Christ, in the several acts and effects of it, and therefore the
word is plural, "thy loves" (r); being exceeding beautiful in his eye,
and extremely well pleasing to him; therefore says, "how fair!" as
admiring it, it being hard to say how fair it was; and this appears from
the large manifestations of Christ's love to those that love him; and
from his causing all things to work together for the good of such; and
from his preparing and laying up things, unseen and unheard of, for
them;

how much better is thy love than wine! which is saying the same thing of
her love to him she says of his to her, [Sol
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#002.md); her love to Christ is more
pleasant, more cheering, and more acceptable to him, than the wine of
legal sacrifices, or than all burnt offerings; or than any duty
whatever, unless that is the principle from whence it flows, [Mar
12:33](../../../bib/kjv/mar012.htm#033.md);

and the smell of thine ointments than all spices! the same with Christ's
ointments, commended [Sol 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#003.md); namely,
the graces of the Spirit, which are in Christ without measure, and from
him communicated to his people; and when exercised by them, are very
delightful to him, and preferred by him to "all spices": even to all
those used in the holy anointing oil, typical of them, [Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023.md).

\(r\) "amores tui", Pagninus, Montanus, &c.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">sol 4:11</span></span>

Thy lips, O my spouse, drop as the honeycomb,.... Words, for sweetness,
delight, and pleasure, like that; so the speech of persons, flowing from
their mouth and tongue, is said to be sweeter than the honeycomb (s);
and lovers are said to be sweeter to one another than the sweet honey
(t): so the lips or words of the church in prayer, as the Targum; or in
praise of Christ, and thankfulness to him; or in the ministration of the
doctrines of the Gospel, which are pleasant words; or in common
conversation, are pleasing to Christ; when, like the honey, they drop
freely and without constraint; gradually, at proper seasons and
opportunities, as prudence directs; and continually, more or less, ever
dropping something to the glory of divine grace, and the good of souls;

honey and milk are under thy tongue; rolled, as a sweet morsel, there:
the ancients had a sort of food of this mixture, a cake made of honey
and milk, called by the Greeks "meligala" (u), and sometimes "candylos"
(w), which was the same composition; Galen (x) says, it was not safe to
take goats' milk without honey; Jove is said (y) to be nursed with such
a mixture: and this being very grateful to the taste, the speech of the
church for pleasantness is compared unto it; so Pindar (z) compares his
hymn or ode to honey mixed with milk, as being sweet and grateful; and
in Plautus (a),

"your words are honey and milk:''

and, it may be further observed, that such a mixture of milk and honey,
with poppies in it, was given to the newly married bride, and drank when
brought home to her husband (b); which was now the case of the church.
The doctrines of the Gospel may be meant, comparable to honey and milk;
to "honey", for their sweetness and acceptableness: for their nourishing
nature; and for, their being gathered out of the choice flowers of the
Scriptures, by the laborious ministers of the word, who are like to
bees; see [Psa 19:10](../../../bib/kjv/psa019.htm#010.md); to "milk", for
the purity of them and the nourishment had by them; for their being easy
of digestion, when mixed with faith; and for their being of a cooling
nature, to allay the heat of a fiery law in the conscience; and for the
recovery and restoration of souls by them, in a declining condition; see
[Pe1 2:2](../../../bib/kjv/pe1002.htm#002.md); these may be said to be
"under the tongue", when they have a place in the heart, are the subject
of constant meditation, a sweetness is tasted in them; and they are had
in readiness to speak of them upon all occasions;

and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon; the ancients
formerly scented their garments; Calypso gave to Ulysses sweet smelling
garments (c): such are Christ's robe of righteousness, and garments of
salvation, which are said to "smell of myrrh, aloes, and cassia"; with
which the saints being arrayed, the smell of their raiment is as "the
smell of a field the Lord has blessed", and so like the smell of
Lebanon, a mountain abounding with odoriferous trees and plants; see
[Psa 45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008.md). Or the outward conversation
garments of the saints may be designed, the mention of which fitly
follows the lips and tongue; for when works go along with words, and
practice with profession; when to lips dropping the doctrines of the
Gospel, like the honeycomb, are joined the sweet smelling garments of an
agreeable life and conversation; the Christian is very much ornamented,
and becomes lovely and amiable.

\(s\) Vid. Theocrit. Idyll. 21. v. 26, 27. Homer. Iliad. 1. v. 249. (t)
Plauti Asinaria, Act. 3. Sc. 3. v. 24. (u) Vid. Cohen de Lara, Ir David,
p. 52. The word is used in T. Hieros. Challah, fol. 57. 4. (w)
Athenaeus, l. 1. c. 8. p. 9. & l. 14. c. 13. p. 644. Suidas in voce,
Aristoph. Pax, & Florent. Christian. in ibid. p. 633. (x) Lib. de Bono
Sapore, c. 4. (y) Lactant. de Fals. Relig. l. 1. c. 22. See Isa. vii.
15. (z) Nemea, Ode 3. d. 10, 11. (a) Trucul. Act. 1. Sc. 2. v. 75, 76,
(b) "Nec pigeat tritum niveo cum lacte papaver sumere, et expressis,
mella liquata favis", Ovid. Fasti, l. 4. v. 149, 150. (c) , Homer.
Odyss. 5. v. 264. & 21. v. 52.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">sol 4:12</span></span>

A garden enclosed is my sister, my spouse,.... At a little distance from
Bethlehem are pools of water, and below these runs a narrow rocky
valley, enclosed on both sides with high mountains which the friars, as
Mr. Maundrell says (d) will have to be the enclosed garden here alluded
to; but it is more likely that the allusion is to a garden near
Jerusalem, called the king's garden, Adrichomius (e) makes mention of,
which was shut up, and only for the king's use and pleasure: to which
the church may be compared; for its being distinguished from the world's
wide waste, by the sovereign grace of God; and for the smallness of it
in comparison of that; and for its pleasantness and fruitfulness, having
pleasant and precious plants of great renown; or consisting of persons
of different gifts and graces; in whose hearts these are not naturally,
or do not grow there of themselves; but are sown or planted and raised
up by the Spirit of God, for which the fallow ground of their hearts is
thrown up: and that everything may be kept in good order, as in a
garden, the plants are watered with the grace of God; the trees of
righteousness are pruned by Christ's father, the vinedresser; the fences
are kept up, and the whole is watched over night and day; and here
Christ, the owner of it, takes his delightful walks, and grants his
presence with his people. And the church is like an "enclosed" garden;
for distinction, being separated by the grace of God, in election,
redemption, effectual calling, &c. and for protection, being encompassed
with the power of God, as a wall about it; and for secrecy, being so
closely surrounded, that it is not to be seen nor known by the world;
and indeed is not accessible to any but to believers in Christ; and is
peculiarly for his use, who is the proprietor of it; see [Sol
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016.md);

a spring shut up, a fountain sealed; the allusion may be to the sealed
fountains great personages reserved for their own use; such as the kings
of Persia had, of which the king and his eldest son only might drink
(f); and King Solomon might have such a spring and fountain in his
garden, either at Jerusalem or at Ethan, where he had pleasant gardens,
in which he took great delight, as Josephus (g) relates: and near the
pools, at some distance from Bethlehem, supposed to be his, is a
fountain, which the friars will have to be the sealed fountain here
alluded to; and, to confirm which, they pretend a tradition, that
Solomon shut up these springs, and kept the door of them sealed with his
signet, to preserve the waters for his own drinking; and Mr. Maundrell
(h), who saw them, says it was not difficult so to secure them, they
rising underground, and having no avenue to them, but by a little hole,
like to the mouth of a narrow well. Now the church may be thus compared,
because of the abundance of grace in her, and in each of her members,
which is as a well of living water, springing up unto everlasting life,
[Joh 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/joh004.htm#014.md); and because of the
doctrines of the Gospel, called a fountain, [Joe
3:18](../../../bib/kjv/joe003.htm#018.md); with which Gospel ministers
water the plants in Christ's garden, the members of the church; whereby
they are revived, refreshed, and flourish; and their souls become as a
watered garden, whose springs fail not. Though some read this clause in
connection with the former; "a garden enclosed art thou, with a spring"
or flow of water "shut up, and with a fountain sealed" (i); meaning
Christ and his fulness; from whence all grace is received by the church
and its members; and with which they are supplied, and their souls are
watered: and the phrases, "shut up" and "sealed", which, whether applied
to the doctrines of grace and truth, in and from Christ, may denote the
secrecy and safety of them from the men of the world; or to the grace of
Christ, communicated by him to the saints, may denote the security of
it, the invisible operations of it, and the sole exercise of it on him:
for these phrases denote the inviolable chastity of the church to
Christ, in her faith, love, service, and worship; see [Pro
5:15](../../../bib/kjv/pro005.htm#015.md); and are used in the Jewish
writings (k), to express the chastity of the bride. Ambrose affirms (l),
that what Plato (m) says concerning Jove's garden, elsewhere called by
him the garden of the mind, is taken out of Solomon's Song.

\(d\) Journey from Aleppo, &c. p. 89. Edit. 7. (e) Theatrum Terrae
Sanctae, p. 170. (f) Theatrum Deipnosoph. l. 12. c. 2. p. 515. (g)
Antiqu. l. 8. c. 7. s. 3. Vid. Adrichom. p. 170. (h) Journey from Aleppo
&c. p. 88, 89. (i) "Cum fluctu obserato, cum fonte obsignato", Marckius,
so some in Michaelis. (k) T. Bab. Yoma, fol. 75. Apud Wagenseil. Sota,
p. 240. Seder Tephillot, fol. 203. 1. Ed. Basil. vid. Targum, Jarchi &
Aben Ezra in loc. (l) De Bono Mortis, c. 5. (m) In Sympos. p. 1194.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">sol 4:13</span></span>

Thy plants are an orchard of pomegranates,.... These plants are the
members of the church, true converts, believers in Christ; pleasant
plants, plants of renown, planted in the church by Christ's heavenly
Father, and shall never be plucked up; or, thy gardens, as it may be
rendered (n); particular churches, well taken care of and watered; these
make an orchard, or are like one, even a paradise, as the word (o)
signifies: it is generally thought to be a Persic word; see [Neh
2:8](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#008); but Hillerus (p.md) derives it from
to "separate", it being a garden, separated and enclosed as before; one
like Eden's garden, exceeding pleasant and delightful: and not like an
orchard of any sort of trees, but of "pomegranates", of which there were
plenty in Canaan, hence called a "land of pomegranates", [Deu
8:8](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#008.md); many places in it had their names
from thence, [Jos 15:32](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#032.md). To which
believers in Christ may be compared, for the various sorts of them (q),
for their largeness, fruitfulness, and uprightness; saints have gifts
and grace, differing from one another as to size, but all pomegranates,
trees of righteousness; some are larger, and excel others, are full of
all the fruits of righteousness; but all are, more or less, fruitful and
upright in heart: and so the saints of the higher class may be here
designed, as those of a lower are by other trees and spices after
mentioned;

with pleasant fruits; that are valuable, precious, and desirable, of
which an enumeration follows:

camphire, with spikenard; or "cypresses", or "cyprusses with nards" (r);
both in the plural number: the former may intend cypress trees, so
called on account of their berries and fruits growing in clusters; see
[Sol 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#014.md); and the latter, because
there are different sorts of them, as "nardus Italica", "Indica", and
"Celtica": to these saints may be compared, because pleasant and
delightful, of a sweet smell, and rare and excellent.

\(n\) Vid. Guisium in Misn. Sheviith, c. 2. s. 2. (o) Sept. "paradisus",
Pagninus, Montanus, Tigurine version, Cocceius, Marckius, Michaelis. (p)
Onomastic. Sacr. p. 291. (q) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 13. c. 19. (r) So
Junius & Tremellius, Piscator.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">sol 4:14</span></span>

Spikenard and saffron,.... The former is the best sort of nard, and
therefore mentioned and repeated, to which saints may be compared,
because of the graces of the Spirit in them; which, when exercised, give
a sweet odour, and are exceeding grateful to Christ; see [Sol
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#012.md); and the latter, according to
Schindler (s), seems to have been read "carcos", the same with "crocus",
and is a plant well known by us for its cheering nature; and has its
name from the Arabic, "zaffran", because of its yellow or golden colour;
but "crocus", from "Corycus" (t), a mountain in Cilicia, where it grew;
it is properly joined with spikenard, since itself is a "spica", and is
sometimes called "spica Cilissa" (u). Next follow

calamus and cinnamon, with all trees of frankincense; "calamus" is the
sweet cane in [Isa 43:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa043.htm#024.md); "cinnamon"
is the rind or bark of a tree; both grow in India (w) and in Arabia (x);
as also trees of "frankincense", which are only in Arabia; hence one of
the Arabias is called "thurifera" (y), for they do not grow in all
Arabia: the two first were ingredients in the holy anointing oil, and
the latter in the holy perfume, [Exo
30:23](../../../bib/kjv/exo030.htm#023.md);

myrrh and aloes, with all the chief spices; Solomon's gardens might be
furnished with all these; and with the above trees, plants, and spices,
from Arabia Felix, where, as Appianus (z) says, "cassia" grew in marshy
places; myrrh and frankincense were gathered from trees, cinnamon from
shrubs, and their meadows naturally produced nard; hence called
"aromatifera", the spicy country (a): myrrh was also an ingredient in
the anointing oil; and aloes, according to the Targum, is the same with
lign aloes; see [Num 24:6](../../../bib/kjv/num024.htm#006.md); not the
herb which has a very bitter juice, but the tree of a sweet odour, which
Isidore (b) distinguishes, and is what is meant in [Psa
45:8](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#008.md); and were both of a very fragrant
smell. Now all these trees, plants, and spices, signify truly precious
souls, possessed of the graces of the Spirit; comparable to them for
their valuableness and excellency, their sweet smell, and the reviving
and refreshing nature of them; which make the subjects of these graces
very agreeable to Christ, and to one another. What a garden is the
church thus planted!

\(s\) Lexic. Pentaglott. col. 910. (t) "Corycii pressura croci", Lucan.
Pharsal. l. 9. v. 809. (u) Ovid. Fast. l. 1. v. 76. in Ibin, v. 200.
Propert. l. 4. Eleg. 6. v. 74. (w) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 12. c. 19, 22.
Strabo, l. 15. p. 478. (x) Herodot. Thalia, c. 107. "Cinnamoni et multi
pastor odoris Araba", Propert. l. 3. Eleg. 13. v. 8, 9. (y) Plin. Nat.
Hist. l. 12. c. 14. (z) Apud Schindler. Lexic. col. 1192. (a) Strabo.
Geograph. l. 16. p. 538. Vid. p. 535. (b) Origin. l. 17. c. 8, 9.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">sol 4:15</span></span>

A fountain of gardens, a well of living waters, and streams from
Lebanon. Some (c) take these words to be the words of Christ continued,
speaking still of his church, and explaining and enlarging upon what he
had said of her, [Sol 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#012.md); but they
are rather the words of the church; who, upon hearing herself commended,
and knowing that all her fruitfulness, and the flourishing condition she
was in, were owing to the grace of Christ, breaks forth in these words,
and ascribes all to him, saying, "O fountain of gardens, O well of
living waters", &c. for so the words may be rendered in the vocative
case (d). By the "gardens" may be meant particular distinct churches,
such as were gathered in the first times of the Gospel, and since, as
the churches of Asia, &c. separated from the world, and planted with
trees of righteousness, such as are before described: and though there
are many gardens or churches, there is but one "fountain" which supplies
them all with gifts and grace, and that is Christ, and his fulness, the
fountain from whence flow all grace, and the blessings of it: who also
is the "well of living waters"; a well deep and large, fathomless and
bottomless, dug by sovereign grace, and full of all grace; signified by
"waters", for the abundance of it; and said to be "living", because by
it dead sinners are quickened, and drooping saints revived; and is ever
running (e), ever flowing and overflowing; so that there is always a
supply for all Christ's gardens, and for all believers in all ages; who,
with the bucket of faith, draw water with joy out of this well, or wells
of salvation, [Isa 12:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa012.htm#003.md); and the flows
of grace from hence are like "streams from Lebanon", because of the
abundance of it; the constant and continued supplies of it; the rapidity
and force with which it comes, bearing down all obstacles in its way,
and for the pleasure it gives, the flows of it being as delightful and
grateful as streams of water in hot countries. Respect seems to be had
to several places called by these names; there was one, called "the
Fountain of Gardens", which flowed from Lebanon, six miles from Tripoli,
and watered all the gardens, whence it had its name, and all the country
that lay between these two places (f); and there was another, called
"the Well of living Waters", a little mile to the south of Tyre; it had
four fountains, from whence were cut various aqueducts and rivulets,
which watered all the plain of Tyre, and all its gardens; which
fountains were little more than a bow's cast from the main sea, and in
which space six mills were employed (g): and there is a rupture in Mount
Lebanon, as Mr. Maundrell (h) says, which runs up it seven hours'
travelling; and which, on both sides, is steep and high, and clothed
with fragrant greens from top to bottom; and everywhere refreshed with
"fountains", falling down from the rocks, in pleasant cascades, the
ingenious work of nature; and Rauwolff (i), who was on this mountain in
1575, relates;

"we came (says he) into pleasant groves, by delightful "rivulets" that
arose from "springs", that made so sweet a noise, as to be admired by
King Solomon, [Sol 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#015.md);''

and these streams gave rise to some rivers, as Jordan, Eleutherus, &c.
(k) to which the allusion is here. There were two cities, one in the
tribe of Judah, and the other in the tribe of Issachar, called Engannim,
the fountain of gardens, [Jos 15:34](../../../bib/kjv/jos015.htm#034.md).

\(c\) So Cocceius, Schmidt, Heunischius, Marckius, Michaelis. (d) So
Ainsworth, Junius & Tremellius, Piscator, Marckius. (e) "Flumine vivo",
Virgil. Aeneid. l. 2. v. 715, "Semper fluenti", i.e. "naturali", Servius
in ibid. (f) Adrichom. Theatrum Terrae Sanctum, p. 107, 108. (g) Ibid.
p. 6. (h) Journey from Aleppo, &c. p. 142, 143. (i) Travels, part. 2.
ch. 12. p. 187, 188. Ed. Ray. (k) Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 5. c. 20. Joseph.
Antiqu. l. 5. c. 3. s. 1.

[Song of Solomon (Canticles) 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">sol 4:16</span></span>

Awake, O north wind,.... These words, according to some (l), are the
words of the church continued, praying for the spirit; to which sense
the order and connection of the words seem to incline; though the
language suits best with Christ, who has the command of the winds, and a
right and property in the garden, the church: nor does it seem so
agreeable, that the church should petition Christ to let loose the north
wind upon her, if by that are meant afflictive dispensations of
Providence; but agrees well enough with Christ, since these come not
without his will and order, and by him made to work together for good;
by which he nips the corruptions of his people, tries their graces, and
causes them to come forth into exercise: though some (m) think this is a
command to the north wind to remove, and be gone, and blow no longer,
since it was spring, [Sol 2:11](../../../bib/kjv/sol002.htm#011.md); and
would be harmful to the plants in the garden; and the verb "blow" is
singular, and only in construction with the south wind; and, besides,
winds diametrically opposite (n) cannot blow together in the same
horizon, with a continued blast: though others (o) are of opinion, that
both winds are designed, being both useful to gardens; the one to
scatter the clouds, and make the air clear and wholesome, and restrain
the luxuriance of the plants; and the other, being moist and warming, of
use to bring plants and fruits to maturity; and both may design the
Spirit of God, in his different operations and effects, through the law
and the terrors of it, and by the Gospel and its comforting doctrines;

and come, thou south, blow upon my garden; the church, Christ's
property, as she asserts in the latter part of the verse: the Spirit of
God is intended by the "south", or south wind; who is compared to the
"wind", because it blows like that, freely, and as he pleases, when,
where, and on whom, and imperceptibly, powerfully, and irresistibly,
[Joh 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/joh003.htm#008.md); and to the "south wind",
because it is a warm wind, brings serenity, and makes fruitful with
showers of rain: so the Spirit of God warms the cold heart of a sinner;
thaws his frozen soul, and comforts with the discoveries of divine love;
brings quietness and peace into the conscience; and makes fruitful in
grace and good works, by causing the rain of Gospel doctrines to descend
and distil upon men. The end to be answered is,

that the spices thereof may flow out; the spices in the garden, the
odoriferous plants, might emit a fragrant smell; though Virgil (p)
represents the south wind as harmful to flowers; so it might be in
Italy, where it dried them up, as Servius on the place observes; and yet
be useful to them in Palestine, where it blew from the sea, and is
sometimes so called, [Psa 107:3](../../../bib/kjv/psa107.htm#003.md).
Spices denote the graces of believers, rare, precious, and odorous; and
their "flowing out" the exercise of them, their evidence, increase, and
the ripening of them; when they diffuse a sweet odour to Christ and
others, and make it delightful to walk in his garden; as it is to walk
in one after a delightful shower of rain, and when the wind gently blows
upon it. And hence what is prayed for being granted, the church speaks
again, and invites Christ, saying;

let my beloved come into his garden; which "coming" is to be understood,
not of Christ's first, nor of his second coming; but of his spiritual
coming, to visit his people, grant his presence, and manifest his love;
which is very desirable by them; and, when granted, is reckoned a great
favour, and is an instance of the condescending grace of Christ, [Joh
14:22](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#022.md); the church is "his garden" by
his own choice, his Father's gift, the purchase of his blood, and the
power of his grace: and here he is invited to come,

and eat his pleasant fruits; meaning either the graces of the Spirit,
which are his fruits; and called Christ's, because they come from him,
and are exercised on him, and he is the author and finisher of them: or
the good works of believers, which are performed by virtue of union to
him, and abiding in him; are done in his strength, and designed for his
glory: and both are "pleasant", that is, well pleasing and acceptable to
him; the graces of the Spirit, when in exercise, as appears from [Sol
4:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol004.htm#009.md); and good works, when done in
faith, from a principle of love, and to his glory: and he may be said to
eat them when he expresses his well pleasedness with them, and
acceptation of them.

\(l\) So Cocceius, Marckius, Michaelis. (m) Foliot, Sanctius, & Tig.
Not. in loc. So Ambrose is Psal. i. 5. p. 686. (n) Aristot. Meteorolog.
l. 2. c. 6. (o) Jarchi & Aben Ezra in loc. (p) "Floribus austrum
perditus", Bucolic. Eclog. 2. v. 58.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Song of Solomon (Canticles) Chapter 5](sol005.md)

</div>
