<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1.md)  
  [Previous](th1004)  [Next](th2000.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001.md)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 5:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 THESSALONIANS 5

In this chapter the apostle discourses concerning the suddenness of
Christ's coming, and the necessity of sobriety and watchfulness, and
being on our guard with respect unto it, and then proceeds to exhort to
several duties of religion, and closes the epistle with prayers for the
saints, salutations of them, advice unto them, and with his usual
benediction. Having spoken of the coming of Christ in the preceding
chapter, the apostle signifies he had no need to write of the time and
season of it; since it was a well known thing that it would be sudden,
and at an unawares, like the coming of a thief in the night, and the
travail of a woman with child, though certain and inevitable; and would
bring sure destruction on wicked men, unthought of by them, [Th1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001.md) but such was the state and
condition of the saints, being not in the night of nature's darkness and
unregeneracy, but enlightened by the spirit of God, that they were not
ignorant of these things, nor liable to be surprised unawares hereby,
[Th1 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#004.md), however, in consideration of
their being in the light, and not in darkness, it became them to behave
accordingly, and not indulge themselves in sleep and sloth, but be
watchful and sober, and on their guard, having on their spiritual
armour, [Th1 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006.md) and the rather, since
they were not appointed to the wrath they deserved, but to salvation by
Christ; whose end in dying for them was, that they might live together
with him, and therefore should exhort and comfort, and edify one
another, [Th1 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#009.md) and then follow
various exhortations, some, which respect their ministers, their
knowledge of them, love to them, and esteem for them, on account of
their dignity, office, work, and usefulness, [Th1
5:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#012.md) others, which concern themselves
and one another, as church members, [Th1
5:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#013.md) others, which regard also them
that are without, [Th1 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#014.md) and others
which relate to joy and thanksgiving, to prayer and praise; to the gifts
of the spirit, and the ministry of the word; and to a trial and
examination of what is good, and an abiding by it, and an abstinence
from all evil, and every appearance of it, [Th1
5:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#016.md) and the whole is concluded with
prayers for them, for their perfect sanctification, and entire
preservation to the coming of Christ; which were put up in faith,
grounded upon the faithfulness of God who had called them to grace and
glory, [Th1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md) and with a request to
them to pray for him, and other ministers of the Gospel, and to salute
all the brethren, [Th1 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#025.md) and with a
charge to read this letter to them all, [Th1
5:27](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#027.md) and with his usual benediction,
[Th1 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#028.md).

[1 Thessalonians 5:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 5:1</span></span>

But of the times and the seasons, brethren,.... Of the coming of Christ,
his "appointed time" and "his day", as the Ethiopic version renders it;
of the resurrection of the dead in Christ first, and of the rapture of
all the saints in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, things treated
of in the preceding chapter: and which might excite a curiosity to know
the times and seasons of them; as in what year they would come to pass;
in what season of the year, whether winter or summer; in what month, and
on what day of the month; and whether in the night season, or in the
daytime; and in what hour, whether at midnight, cockcrowing, morning, or
noonday: to repress which the apostle observes,

ye have no need that I write unto you; to write to them concerning the
things themselves was necessary and useful, to stir up and encourage
their faith, hope, and expectation of them; to allay their grief for
departed friends, and to comfort one another under the various trials
and exercises of life; but to write to them about the time of these
things would be trifling and unnecessary, would be an idle speculation,
and an indulging a vain curiosity; and, besides, was impracticable: for
of that day and hour knows no man; the times and seasons the Father hath
put in his own power; for these things are equally true of Christ's
second coming, as of the kingdom of Christ coming with power and glory,
and of the destruction of Jerusalem, [Mat
24:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#036.md). The Vulgate Latin and Arabic
versions read, "ye have no need that we write unto you"; the reason
follows;

[1 Thessalonians 5:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th1 5:2</span></span>

For yourselves know perfectly,.... With great exactness and accuracy,
with great clearness and perspicuity, as a certain truth, which was made
plain and evident to them, and about which there could be no question;
and which perfect knowledge they had, either from the words of Christ,
[Mat 24:42](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#042.md), or from the ministration
of the apostle and his fellow labourers, when among them:

that the day of the Lord; of the Lord Jesus, when he will show himself
to be King of kings, and Lord of lords, and the Judge of the whole
earth; and which is sometimes styled the day of the Son of man, and the
day of God, for Christ will appear then most gloriously, both in his
divine and human nature; the day of redemption, that is, of the body
from the grave, and from corruption and mortality; and the last day in
which will be the resurrection of the dead, and the day of judgment, in
which Christ will come to judge the quick and dead: and which

so cometh as a thief in the night; at an unawares, and the Lord himself
in that day will so come, [Rev 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/rev003.htm#003.md)
respect is had not to the character of the thief, nor to the end of his
coming; but to the manner of it, in the dark, indiscernibly, suddenly,
and when not thought of and looked for; and such will be the coming of
Christ, it will be sudden, and unknown before hand, and when least
thought of and expected: and since the Thessalonians knew this full
well, it was needless for the apostle to write about the time and season
of it; which they were sensible of, could no more be known and fixed,
than the coming of a thief into anyone of their houses.

[1 Thessalonians 5:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th1 5:3</span></span>

For when they shall say,.... Or men shall say, that is, wicked and
ungodly men, persons in a state of unregeneracy:

peace and safety; when they shall sing a requiem, to themselves, promise
themselves much ease and peace for years to come, and imagine their
persons and property to be very secure from enemies and oppressors, and
shall flatter themselves with much and long temporal happiness:

then sudden destruction cometh upon them; as on the men of the old world
in the times of Noah, and on the inhabitants of Sodom and Gomorrah in
the days of Lot; for as these, will be the days of the Son of man, as at
the time of the destruction of Jerusalem, so at the last day; see [Luk
17:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk017.htm#026.md) and as was the destruction of
literal Babylon, so of Babylon in a mystical sense, or antichrist and
his followers: and which will be

as travail upon a woman with child; whose anguish and pains are very
sharp, the cause of which is within herself, and which come suddenly
upon her, and are unavoidable; and so the metaphor expresses the
sharpness and severity of the destruction of the wicked, thus the
calamities on the Jewish nation are expressed by a word which signifies
the sorrows, pangs, and birth throes of a woman in travail, [Mat
24:8](../../../bib/kjv/mat024.htm#008.md), and likewise that the cause of
it is from themselves, their own sins and transgressions; and also the
suddenness of it, which will come upon them in the midst of all their
mirth, jollity, and security; and moreover, the inevitableness of it, it
will certainly come at the full and appointed time, though that is not
known:

and they shall not escape; the righteous judgment of God, the wrath of
the Lamb, or falling into his hands; to escape is impossible, rocks,
hills, and mountains will not cover and hide them; before the judgment
seat of Christ they must stand, and into everlasting punishment must
they go.

[1 Thessalonians 5:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th1 5:4</span></span>

But ye, brethren, are not in darkness,.... In a state of unregeneracy,
which is a state of darkness, blindness, and ignorance, and which is the
condition of all men by nature; they are born in darkness, and are
brought up in it, and willingly, walk in it; they are covered with it,
as the earth was covered with darkness in its first creation; and dwell
in it, as the Egyptians did for some days, in thick darkness, darkness
which might be felt; their understandings are darkened with respect to
the true knowledge of God, the nature of sin, the way of salvation by
Christ, the work of the spirit of God upon the soul, and the necessity
of it, the Scriptures of truth, and the mysteries of the Gospel; and
which is the case of God's elect themselves, while unregenerate: but now
these persons were called out of darkness, turned from it, and delivered
from the power of it; and therefore knew that the day of the Lord comes
as above described, by the metaphors of a thief in the night, and a
woman with child, and needed not to be informed about that matter: or

that that day should overtake you as a thief; or seize and lay hold upon
you as a thief who comes in the dark, and lays hold upon a person
suddenly; but these saints were not in the dark, but in the light, and
so could see when the day of the Lord came; and would not be surprised
with it, as a man is seized with terror and fright, when laid hold on by
a thief; since they would be, or at least should be on their watch, and
be looking out for, and hasting to the coming of the day of God.

[1 Thessalonians 5:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th1 5:5</span></span>

Ye are all children of light,.... Or enlightened persons, whose
understandings were enlightened by the spirit of God, to see their lost
state by nature, the exceeding sinfulness of sin, the insufficiency of
their righteousness to justify them before God, the fulness,
suitableness, and excellency of Christ's righteousness, the way of
salvation by Christ, and that it is all of grace from first to last; to
understand in some measure the Scriptures of truth, and the mysteries of
the Gospel; to have knowledge of some things that are yet to be done on
earth, as the bringing in of the fulness of the Gentiles, the conversion
of the Jews, the destruction of antichrist, the second coming of Christ,
the resurrection of the dead, the change of living saints, and the
rapture of both up into the air to meet Christ, the burning of the
world, and the new heavens and new earth, where Christ and his saints
will dwell; as also to have some glimpse of the heavenly glory, of the
unseen joys, and invisible realities of the other world: and this the
apostle says of them all, in a judgment of charity, as being under a
profession of the grace of God, and in a church state, and nothing
appearing against them why such a character did not belong to them:

and the children of the day; of the Gospel day, in distinction from the
night of Jewish darkness; and of the day of grace which was come upon
their souls, in opposition to the night of ignorance and infidelity,
which was past; and of the everlasting day of glory, being heirs of, and
having a right unto, and a meetness for the inheritance of the saints in
light:

we are not of the night, nor of darkness; that is not the children of
darkness, as the Syriac and Arabic versions read; and the former changes
the person, and reads, "ye are not the children of the night", &c. of
the night of the legal dispensation, or of Gentile ignorance; or of a
state of natural darkness, in unregeneracy and was no need to write unto
them concerning the time and season of Christ's coming, and lays a
foundation for the following exhortations.

[1 Thessalonians 5:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 5:6</span></span>

Therefore let us not sleep as do others.... As the rest of the Gentiles,
as unconverted persons, who are in a state of darkness, and are children
of the night; let us not act that part they do, or be like them; which
professors of religion too much are, when they indulge themselves in
carnal lusts and pleasures, and are careless and thoughtless about the
coming of the day of the Lord; and get into a stupid, drowsy, and
slumbering frame of spirit; when grace lies dormant as if it was not,
and they grow backward to, and slothful in the discharge of duty, and
content themselves with the bare externals of religion; and become
lukewarm and indifferent with respect to the truths and ordinance of the
Gospel, the cause of God, the interest of religion, and glory of Christ;
and are unconcerned about sins of omission or commission: and are
willing to continue in such a position, being displeased at every
admonition and exhortation given them to awake; but this is very
unbecoming children of the light, and of the day:

but let us watch; over ourselves, our hearts, thoughts, affections,
words and actions; and over others, our fellow Christians, that they
give not into bad principles and evil practices; and against sin, and
all appearance of it; against the temptations of Satan, the snares of
the world, and the errors of wicked men, who lie in wait to deceive; and
in the word and ordinances, and particularly in prayer, both unto it, in
it, and after it; and for the second coming of Christ, with faith,
affection, and patience; and the rather, because of the uncertainty of
the time of it;

and be sober; not only in body, abstaining from excessive eating and
drinking, using this world, and the good things of it, so as not to
abuse them, or ourselves with them; but also in mind, that the heart be
overcharged with the cares of this world; for men may be inebriated with
the world, as well as with wine; and the one is as prejudicial to the
soul as the other is to the body; for an immoderate care for, and
pursuit after the world, chokes the word, makes it unfruitful, and runs
persons into divers snares and temptations, and hurtful lusts. The
Arabic version renders it, "let us repent"; and the Ethiopic version,
"let us understand"; as intending the sobriety of the mind, repentance
being an after thought of the mind, a serious reflection on past actions
with sorrow and concern; and thinking soberly, and not more highly than
a man ought to think of himself, his gifts, his attainments and
abilities, in opposition to pride, vanity, and self-conceit, is very
becoming; and shows a true and well informed understanding and judgment,
and that a man is really sober and himself.

[1 Thessalonians 5:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th1 5:7</span></span>

For they that sleep, sleep in the night,.... The night is the usual
season for sleep, and sleep is only for such who are in darkness, and
are children of the night; and not proper to be indulged by such who are
children of the day, and of the light:

and they that be drunken, are drunken in the night; drunkenness is a
work of darkness, and therefore men given to excessive drinking love
darkness rather than light, and choose the night for their purpose. To
be drunk at noon is so shameful and scandalous, that men who love the
sin, and indulge themselves in it, take the night season for it; and
equally shameful it is, that enlightened persons should be inebriated,
either with the cares of this life, or with an over weening opinion of
themselves.

[1 Thessalonians 5:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th1 5:8</span></span>

But let us, who are of the day, be sober,.... As in body, so in mind;
let us cast off the works of darkness, and have no fellowship with them;
since the day of grace has passed upon us, the darkness is gone, and the
true light shines, let us walk as children of the light, living soberly,
righteously, and godly:

putting on the breastplate of faith and love; this is the coat of mail,
[Sa1 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#005.md) which was made of iron or
brass; and the Ethiopic version here calls it, "the iron coat." The
allusion seems to be to the high priest's breastplate of judgment, in
which were put the Thummim and Urim, which signify perfections and
lights; faith may answer to the former, and love to the latter: these
two graces go together, faith works by love, and love always accompanies
faith; as there can be no true faith where there is no love, so there is
no true love where faith is wanting: "faith" is a considerable part of
the Christian soldier's breastplate, and answers the end of a
breastplate, it being that grace which preserves the vitals of religion,
and keeps all warm and comfortable within; and secures the peace and joy
of the saints, as it has to do with Christ and his righteousness;
wherefore this breastplate is called "the breastplate of righteousness",
[Eph 6:14](../../../bib/kjv/eph006.htm#014.md), it fortifies the soul, and
preserves it from Satan's temptations, from his fiery darts entering,
and doing the mischief they would; it defends the heart against the
errors of the wicked, for a man that believes has a witness in himself
to the truths of the Gospel, and therefore cannot be easily moved from
them; and strengthens a man against the carnal reasonings of the mind,
for faith in the promises of God surmounts all the difficulties that
reason objects to the fulfilling of them; and secures from the fears of
death, the terrors of the law, and dread of the wrath of God: and love
is the other part of the breast plate; love to God and Christ is a means
of keeping the believer sound both in faith and practice; for a soul
that truly loves God and Christ cannot give in to principles that
depreciate the grace of God, and derogate from the glory and dignity of
the person and office of Christ, or the work of the Spirit; and such
love the ordinances and commands of Christ, and hate every false way of
worship, or invention of men; and love to the saints is the bond of
perfectness, knits them together, preserves unity and peace, and
fortifies against the common enemy:

and for an helmet, the hope of salvation; the helmet is that part of
armour which covers the head, and was made of brass, [Sa1
17:5](../../../bib/kjv/sa1017.htm#005.md) and used to be anointed with oil,
that it might shine the brighter, last the longer, and more easily repel
blows; to which this grace of the Spirit, hope of salvation by Christ,
is fitly compared: for by "salvation" is meant salvation by Christ,
spiritual salvation, and that as complete in heaven; and hope is a grace
wrought in the soul by the spirit of God, which has for its foundation
Christ and his righteousness, and for its object the heavenly glory; it
covers the head in the day of battle, and preserves from being overcome
by sin and Satan, when one that is destitute of it says there is no
hope, and we will walk every man after the imagination of his own evil
heart; it erects the head in time of difficulty, amidst tribulation and
afflictions; it defends it from fears of divine wrath which is revealed
from heaven, and sometimes in appearance seems to hang over it; and it
preserves from Satan's temptations, and being carried away with the
error of the wicked, from the hope of the Gospel: and thus a Christian
clothed and armed with these graces, faith, hope, and love, should be so
far from indulging himself in sin and sloth, that he ought always to be
sober and watchful, and prepared to meet the enemy in the gate; and be
ready, always waiting for his Lord's coming.

[1 Thessalonians 5:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th1 5:9</span></span>

For God hath not appointed us to wrath,.... To destruction and ruin, the
effect of wrath; though there are some that are vessels of wrath, fitted
for destruction, of old ordained to condemnation, and who are reserved
for the day of evil; but there are others who are equally children of
wrath, as deserving of the wrath of God in themselves as others, who are
not appointed to it; which is an instance of wonderful and
distinguishing grace to them:

but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ; salvation is alone by
Christ, he alone has wrought it out; it is in him, and in no other; he
was appointed to this work, was called and sent, and came to do it, and
has done it; and God's elect, who were chosen in him, are appointed in
the counsel and purpose of God, to obtain, possess, and enjoy this
salvation; and which, as this appointment may be known, as it was by
these Thessalonians; the Gospel having come to them, not in word only,
but in power, and in the Holy Ghost, and in much assurance; as it is an
encouragement to faith and hope, so it excites to sobriety and
watchfulness, and the discharge of every duty. The doctrine of
predestination does not lead to despair, but encourages the hope of
salvation; and it is no licentious doctrine, for election to salvation
by Christ is through sanctification of the Spirit, and unto holiness;
and good works are the fruits of it, and are what God has foreordained
his people should walk in.

[1 Thessalonians 5:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th1 5:10</span></span>

Who died for us,.... The elect of God, who are not appointed to wrath,
but to salvation by Christ, on which account he died for them; not
merely as a martyr to confirm his doctrine, or only by way of example,
but as a surety, in the room and stead of his people; as a sacrifice for
their sins, to make atonement for them, and save them from them; so that
his death lays a solid foundation for hope of salvation by him:

that whether we wake or sleep: which phrases are to be understood, not
in the same sense in which they are used in the context; as if the sense
was, whether a man indulges himself in sin, and gives way to sleep and
sloth, and carnal security, or whether he is awake and on his watch and
guard, he shall through the death of Christ have eternal life secured to
him; not but that there is a truth in this, that eternal life and
salvation by Christ, as it does not depend on our watchfulness, so it
shall not be hindered by the sleepy, drowsy frame of spirit, the
children of God sometimes fall into: but rather natural sleep and waking
are intended; and the meaning is, that those for whom Christ died are
always safe, sleeping or waking, whatever they are about and employed
in, and in whatsoever situation and condition they are in this world;
though it may be best of all to interpret the words, of life and death;
and they may have a particular regard to the state of the saints at
Christ's second coming, when some will be awake, or alive, and others
will be asleep in Christ, or dead; and it matters not which they are,
whether living or dead; see [Rom 14:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom014.htm#007.md)
for the end of Christ's dying for them, and which will be answered in
one as well as in another, is, that

we should live together with him: Christ died for his people, who were
dead in trespasses and sins, that they might live spiritually a life of
sanctification from him, and a life of justification on him, and by him;
and that they might live a life of communion with him; and that they
might live eternally with him, in soul and body, in heaven, and reign
with him there, and partake of his glory; and this all the saints will,
whether they be found dead or alive at his coming; for the dead will
immediately arise, those that sleep in the dust will awake at once, and
they that are alive will be changed, and both will be caught up in the
clouds, to meet the Lord in the air, and be for ever with him: now the
consideration of the death of Christ, and this end of it, which will
certainly be answered, serves greatly to encourage hope of salvation by
him, and faith in him, and an earnest expectation of his second coming.

[1 Thessalonians 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th1 5:11</span></span>

Wherefore comfort yourselves together,.... Either with the doctrine of
the resurrection of the dead, the second coming of Christ, and the
thoughts of being for ever with him, and one another, and so may be a
repetition of the advice in [Th1 4:18](../../../bib/kjv/th1004.htm#018.md)
or with this consideration, that they were not in a state of darkness,
ignorance, and infidelity, but were children of the light, and of the
day, being called out of darkness into marvellous light, and should
enjoy the light of life; and with the doctrine of predestination, they
being appointed not to that wrath they were deserving of, but to be
possessed of salvation by Jesus Christ, of which they could never fail,
since the purpose of God according to election always stands sure, not
upon the foot of works, but upon his own sovereign and unchangeable
grace; or with the doctrine of Christ's sufferings and death, in their
room and stead, whereby the law was fulfilled, justice satisfied, their
sins atoned for, pardon procured, an everlasting righteousness brought
in, and their salvation fully accomplished, things the apostle had
spoken of in the context: the words will bear to be rendered, "exhort
one another"; that is, not to sleep, as do others, or indulge themselves
in sin and sloth; but to be sober, and upon their watch and guard, and
in a posture of defence against the enemy; to put on the whole armour of
God, and particularly the plate of faith and love, and for an helmet the
hope of salvation:

and edify one another; by praying together, conversing with each other
about the doctrines of the Gospel, and the dealings of God with their
souls; abstaining from all corrupt communication, which has a tendency
to hurt each other's principles or practices, or to stir up wrath and
contention; attending only to those things which are for the use of
edifying, whereby their souls might be more and more built upon Christ,
and their most holy faith; and be a rising edifice, and grow up unto an
holy temple in the Lord, and for an habitation of God through the
Spirit:

even as also ye do; which is said in their commendation, and not through
flattery, but to encourage them to go on in this way; and from whence it
may be observed, that mutual consolation, exhortation, and edification,
are things the saints should be stirred up to frequently, even though
they are regarded by them, and much more then should these be pressed
upon them who are careless and negligent of them.

[1 Thessalonians 5:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th1 5:12</span></span>

And we beseech you, brethren,.... Not in a natural or civil, but
spiritual relation; and what follows relating to the ministers of the
word, the apostle addresses this church on their behalf, not in an
imperious and authoritative manner, but by way of entreaty, with great
humility and strong affection:

know them that labour among you; who were not non-residents, but were
upon the spot with them; and where indeed should pastors be, but with
their flocks? and husbandmen and vinedressers, but in their fields and
vineyards? and stewards, but in the families where they are placed? and
parents, but with their children? nor were they loiterers in the
vineyard, or slothful servants, and idle shepherds, but labourers; who
laboured in the word and doctrine; gave up themselves to meditation,
reading, and prayer; laboured hard in private, to find out the meaning
of the word of God; and studied to show themselves workmen, that need
not be ashamed; and preached the word in season and out of season;
faithfully dispensed all ordinances, and diligently performed the duties
of their office; and were willing to spend and be spent, for the glory
of Christ, and the good of souls, and earnestly contended for the faith
of the Gospel; and all this they did, as among them, so for them, for
their spiritual good and welfare: some render the words, "in you"; they
laboured in teaching, instructing, and admonishing them; they laboured
to enlighten their understandings, to inform their judgments, to raise
their affections, and to bring their wills to a resignation to the will
of God; to refresh their memories with Gospel truths; to strengthen
their faith, encourage their hope, and draw out their love to God and
Christ, and the brethren: and what the apostle directs them to, as their
duty towards these persons, is to "know" them; that is, not to learn
their names, and know their persons, who they were; for they could not
but know them in this sense, since they dwelt and laboured among them,
and were continually employed in instructing them; but that they would
make themselves known to them, and converse freely and familiarly with
them, that so they might know the state of their souls, and be better
able to speak a word in season to them; and that they would take notice
of them, show respect to them, and an affection for them; acknowledge
them as their pastors, and account of them as stewards of the mysteries
of God, and own them as ministers of Christ; and reckon them as
blessings to them, and acknowledge the same with thankfulness; and obey
them, and submit unto them in the ministry of the word and ordinances,
and to their counsel and advice, so far as is agreeable to the word of
God: the Arabic version renders it, "that ye may know the dignity of
them that labour among you"; and so conduct and behave towards them
accordingly:

and are over you in the Lord; are set in the highest place in the
church, and bear the highest office there; have the presidency and
government in it, and go before the saints, and guide and direct them in
matters both of doctrine and practice, being ensamples to the flock; the
Syriac version renders it, "and stand before you"; ministering unto you
in holy things, being servants to you for Jesus' sake: and this "in the
Lord"; or by the Lord; for they did not take this honour to themselves,
nor were they appointed by men, but they were made able ministers of the
word by God; received their gifts qualifying them for this work from
Christ, and were placed as overseers of the church by the Holy Ghost:
and it was only in things pertaining to the Lord that they were over
them; not in things civil, which distinguishes them from civil
magistrates; nor in things secular and worldly, they had nothing to do
in their families, to preside there, or with their worldly concerns,
only in the church of Christ, and in things pertaining to their
spiritual welfare; and though they were over them, yet under Christ, and
in subjection to him, as their Lord and King; governing not in an
arbitrary and tyrannical way, lording it over God's heritage, usurping a
dominion over the faith of men, coining new doctrines, and making new
laws; but according to the word of God, and laws of Christ, in the fear
of the Lord, and with a view to the glory of God, and in love to souls:
hence the Arabic version renders it, in the love of the Lord; the
phrase, "in the Lord", is omitted in the Syriac version:

and admonish you; or instruct you, put into your minds good and
wholesome things, and put you in mind of the doctrines of the Gospel, of
the duties of religion, of former experiences; and give warning of sin
and danger, and reprove and rebuke with faithfulness; and as the case
requires, either in public or private, and with sharpness or tenderness.

[1 Thessalonians 5:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th1 5:13</span></span>

And to esteem them very highly,.... Or, as the Ethiopic version renders
it, "honour them abundantly"; for such are worthy of double honour, and
to be had in reputation; they should be honourably thought of, and be
high in the affections of the saints, who should esteem them better than
themselves, or others in the community; and should be spoke well of, and
their characters vindicated from the reproach and obloquy of others; and
should be spoke respectfully to, and be honourably done by; should be
provided for with an honourable maintenance, which is part of the double
honour due to them in [Ti1 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1005.htm#017.md) and
this should be

in love; not in fear, nor in hypocrisy and dissimulation; not in word
and in tongue only, but from the heart and real affection: the Syriac
version renders it, "that they be esteemed by you with more abundant
love"; with an increasing love, or with greater love than is shown to
the brethren in common, or to private members: and that for their works'
sake; for the sake of the work of the ministry, which is a good work as
well as honourable; is beneficial to the souls of men, and is for the
glory of God, being diligently and faithfully performed by them; on
which account they are to be valued, and not for an empty title without
labour.

And be at peace among yourselves. The Vulgate Latin version reads, "with
them"; and so the Syriac version, connecting the former clause with
this, "for their works' sake have peace with them"; that is, with the
ministers of the word; do not disagree with them upon every trivial
occasion, or make them offenders for a word; keep up a good
understanding, and cultivate love and friendship with them; "embrace
them with brotherly love", as the Ethiopic version renders the words,
understanding them also as relating to ministers; a difference with them
is of bad consequence, and must render their ministry greatly useless
and unprofitable to those who differ with them, as well as render them
very uncomfortable and unfit for it. The Arabic version renders it, "in
yourselves"; as referring to internal peace in their own souls, which
they should be concerned for; and which only is attained to, enjoyed,
and preserved, by looking to the blood, righteousness, and sacrifice of
Christ: or else it may regard peace among themselves, and with one
another as brethren, and as members of the same church; which as it is
for their credit and reputation without doors, and for their comfort,
delight, and pleasure within, in their church state and fellowship, so
it tends to make the ministers of the Gospel more easy and comfortable
in their work: thus the words, considered in this sense, have still a
relation to them.

[1 Thessalonians 5:14](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">th1 5:14</span></span>

Now we exhort you, brethren,.... This is said either to the ministers of
the word that laboured among them, presided over them, and admonished
them; and the rather, because some of these things here directed to are
pressed upon the members of the church in [Th1
5:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011.md) and which otherwise must make a
repetition here; or to the members in conjunction with their pastors:

warn them that are unruly; or disorderly, idle persons, working not at
all, busying themselves with other men's matters, and living upon the
church's stock, reprove them for their sloth, exhort them to work with
their own hands, to do their own business, and with quietness eat their
own bread; or such who keep not their places in the church, but are like
soldiers that go out of their rank, desert their companies, and fly from
their colours, or stand aside, rebuke these, and exhort them to fill up
their places, to abide by the church, and the ordinances of Christ; or
such who are contentious and quarrelsome, turbulent, headstrong, and
unruly, that cause and foment animosities and divisions, check them,
admonish them, lay them under censure, for such a custom and practice is
not to be allowed of in the churches of Christ.

Comfort the feebleminded: such as are not able to bear the loss of near
and dear relations; are ready to stagger under the cross, and at the
reproaches and persecutions of the world; and are almost overset with
the temptations of Satan; and are borne down and discouraged with the
corruptions of their hearts, speak a comfortable word to them, encourage
them with the doctrines of grace, and the promises of the Gospel.

Support the weak; who are weak in faith and knowledge, strengthen them,
hold them up; or as the Syriac version renders it, "take the burden of
the weak" and carry it, bear their infirmities, as directed in [Rom
15:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#001.md),

be patient towards all men; towards the unruly, the feebleminded, and
the weak as well as to believers; give place to wrath, and leave
vengeance to him to whom it belongs; exercise longsuffering and
forbearance with fellow creatures and fellow Christians.

[1 Thessalonians 5:15](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">th1 5:15</span></span>

See that none render evil for evil unto any man,.... Not an ill word for
an ill word, railing for railing, nor an ill action for an ill action;
no, not to any man whatever, not to an enemy, a persecutor, a profane
person, as well as not to a brother, a believer in Christ; and this the
saints should not only be careful of, and guard against in themselves,
but should watch over one another, and see to it, that no such practice
is found in each other.

But ever follow that which is good; honestly, morally, pleasantly, and
profitably good; even every good work, which is according to the will of
God, is done in faith, from love, and to the glory of God; and
particularly acts of beneficence and liberality to the poor; and which
are not to be once, or now and then done, but to be followed and pursued
after, and that always;

both among yourselves, and to all men; not only to the household of
faith, though to them especially, and in the first place, but to all
other men, as opportunity offers, even to our enemies, and them that
persecute us, and despitefully use us; do good to their bodies, and to
their souls, as much as in you lies, by feeding and clothing the one,
and by praying for, advising, and instructing the other.

[1 Thessalonians 5:16](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">th1 5:16</span></span>

Rejoice evermore. Not in a carnal, but in a spiritual way, with joy in
the Holy Ghost; and which arises from a view of pardon by the blood of
Christ, of justification by his righteousness, and atonement by his
sacrifice; not in themselves, as the wicked man rejoices in his
wickedness, and the hypocrite and formalist in his profession of
religion, and the reputation he gains by it; and the Pharisee and
legalist in his morality, civility, negative holiness, and obedience to
the rituals of the law; for such rejoice in their boastings, and all
such rejoicing is evil; but in the Lord Jesus Christ, in the greatness,
fitness, fulness, and glory of his person, in his blood, righteousness,
and sacrifice, in what he is in himself, and is made unto his people,
and in what he has done, and is still doing for them, and particularly
in the salvation he has wrought out; and not in the things of this life,
and the attainments of it, either of body, or of mind, or of estate, as
in strength, wisdom, or riches; but in things spiritual, that our names
are written in heaven, and we are redeemed by the blood of Christ, and
called by his grace, and shall be glorified together with him; and not
only in prosperity, but in adversity, since all things work together for
good, and afflictions serve for the exercise of grace; and especially,
since to suffer reproach and persecution for the sake of Christ, and his
Gospel, is a great honour, and the Spirit of God, and of glory, rests on
such, and great will be their reward in heaven: and there is always
reason, and ever a firm ground and foundation for rejoicing with
believers, let their circumstances or their frames be what they will;
since God, their covenant God, is unchangeable, and his love to them is
from everlasting to everlasting invariably the same; the covenant of
grace, which is ordered in all things, and sure, is firm and immovable;
and Jesus, the Mediator of it, is the same today, yesterday, and for
ever.

[1 Thessalonians 5:17](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">th1 5:17</span></span>

Pray without ceasing. Not that saints should be always on their knees,
or ever lifting up their hands, and vocally calling upon God; this is
not required of them, and would clash with, and break in upon other
parts of religious worship, and the duties of civil life, which are to
be attended to, as well as this, and besides would be impracticable; for
however willing a spiritual man might be to be engaged in this work
always, yet the flesh is weak, and would not be able to bear it; and it
requires food and drink, sleep and rest, for its refreshment and
support; for all which there must be time allowed, as well as for other
actions of animal life, and the business of a man's calling. But the
meaning is, that believers should be daily, and often found in the
performance of this duty; for as their wants daily return upon them, and
they are called to fresh service, and further trials and exercises, they
have need of more grace, strength, and assistance, and therefore should
daily pray for it; and besides certain times both in the closet, and in
the family, in which they should attend the throne of grace, there is
such a thing as mental prayer, praying in the heart, private
ejaculations of the soul, which may be sent up to heaven, while a man is
engaged in the affairs of life. The Ethiopic version renders the words,
"pray frequently"; do not leave off praying, or cease from it through
the prevalence of sin, the temptations of Satan, or through
discouragement, because an answer is not immediately had, or through
carelessness and negligence, but continue in it, and be often at it; see
[Luk 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#001.md). These words are opposed to
the practice of such, who either pray not at all, or, having used it,
have left it off, or who only pray in a time of trouble and distress,
and bear hard on those who think they should not pray but when under the
influences of the Spirit, and when his graces are in a lively exercise:
the reason for this rule of praying with frequency and constancy is,
because the saints are always needy, they are always in want of mercies
of one kind or another, and therefore should continually go to the
throne of grace, and there ask for grace and mercy to help them in time
of need.

[1 Thessalonians 5:18](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">th1 5:18</span></span>

In everything give thanks,.... That is, to God the Father, in the name
of Christ; see [Eph 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/eph005.htm#020.md) thanks are to
be given to him for all things, as the Ethiopic version renders it; for
all temporal good things; for our beings, the preservation of them; for
food and raiment, and all the mercies of life; for the means of grace,
the word and ordinances, and the ministers of the Gospel; for spiritual
blessings, for electing, redeeming, regenerating, adopting, pardoning,
justifying, and persevering grace: for a meetness for heaven, a right
unto it, and a good hope of it; and especially for Jesus Christ, for
such an husband, such an head, such a surety and Saviour, and advocate
with the Father, as he is; and for life, peace, joy, comfort,
righteousness, and salvation in him: and thanks should be given to God
in every circumstance of life; in adversity, as Job did; when not in so
comfortable and agreeable a frame of soul as to be wished for, since it
might be worse, and is not black despair; even under the temptations of
Satan, since they might be greater and heavier, and since the grace of
God is sufficient to bear up under them, and deliver out of them, and
since there is such a sympathizing high priest and Saviour; and in
afflictions of every kind, since they are all for good, temporal, or
spiritual, or eternal.

For this is the will of God; which may refer either to all that is said
from [Th1 5:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#011.md) to this passage, or
particularly to this of giving thanks; which is the revealed and
declared will of God, is a part of that good, perfect, and acceptable
will of his, and what is well pleasing in his sight, and grateful to
him; see [Psa 69:30](../../../bib/kjv/psa069.htm#030.md) and is

in Christ Jesus concerning you; either declared in and by him, who has
made known the whole of the will of God, and so the Arabic version,
"which he wills of you by Jesus Christ"; or which is exemplified in
Christ, who for, and in all things, gave thanks to God, and had his will
resigned to his in every circumstance of life; or, which being done, is
acceptable to God through Christ. The Alexandrian copy reads, "for this
is the will of God towards you in Christ Jesus"; that is, with respect
to you who are in Christ secretly by election, and openly by the
effectual calling; and who, of all men in the world, have reason to be
thankful for everything, and in every circumstance.

[1 Thessalonians 5:19](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">th1 5:19</span></span>

Quench not the spirit. By which is meant, not the person of the Spirit,
but either the graces of the spirit, which may be compared to light, and
fire, and heat, to which the allusion is in the text; such as faith,
which is a light in the soul, a seeing of the Son, and an evidence of
things not seen; and love, which gives a vehement flame, which many
waters cannot quench; and zeal, which is the boiling up of love, the
fervency of it; and spiritual knowledge, which is also light, and of an
increasing nature, and are all graces of the spirit: and though these
cannot be totally extinguished, and utterly put out and lost, yet they
may be greatly damped; the light of faith may become dim; and the flame
of love be abated, and that wax cold; the heat of zeal may pass into
lukewarmness, and an indifference of spirit; and the light of knowledge
seem to decline instead of increasing; and all through indulging some
sin or sins, by keeping ill company, and by neglecting the ordinances of
God, prayer, preaching, and other institutions of the Gospel; wherefore
such an exhortation is necessary to quicken saints, and stir them up to
the use of those means, whereby those graces are cherished and preserved
in their lively exercise; though rather the gifts of the Spirit are
intended. The extraordinary gifts of the Spirit, bestowed on the
apostles at the day of Pentecost, are represented under the symbol of
fire, to which perhaps the apostle may here have respect; and the more
ordinary gifts of the Spirit are such as are to be stirred up, as coals
of fire are stirred up, in order that they may burn, and shine the
brighter, and give both light and heat, [Ti2
1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006.md) and which may be said to be
quenched, when they are neglected, and lie by as useless; when they are
wrapped up in a napkin, or hid in the earth; or when men are restrained
from the use of them; or when the use of them is not attended to, or is
brought into contempt, and the exercise of them rendered useless and
unprofitable, as much as in them lies. And even private persons may
quench the Spirit of God, his gifts of light and knowledge, when they
hold the truth in unrighteousness, imprison it, and conceal it, and do
not publicly profess it as they ought.

[1 Thessalonians 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">th1 5:20</span></span>

Despise not prophesyings. Or "prophecies"; the prophecies of the Old
Testament concerning the first coming of Christ, concerning his person,
office, and work, his obedience, sufferings, and death, his resurrection
from the dead, ascension and session at God's right hand; for though all
these are fulfilled, yet they have still their usefulness; for by
comparing these with facts, the perfections of God, his omniscience,
truth, faithfulness, wisdom, &c. are demonstrated, the authority of the
Scriptures established, the truths of the Gospel illustrated and
confirmed, and faith strengthened; and besides, there are many
prophecies which regard things to be done, and yet to be done under the
Gospel dispensation, and therefore should not be set at nought, but
highly valued and esteemed: also the predictions of Christ concerning
his own sufferings and death, and resurrection from the dead, and what
would befall his disciples afterwards, with many things relating to the
destruction of Jerusalem, his second coming, and the end of the world,
these should be had in great esteem; nor should what the apostles
foretold concerning the rise of antichrist, the man of sin, and the
apostasy of the latter days, and the whole book of the Revelations,
which is no other than a prophecy of the state of the church, from the
times of the apostles to the end of the world, be treated with neglect
and contempt, but should be seriously considered, and diligently
searched and inquired into. Yea, the prophecies of private men, such as
Agabus, and others, in the apostle's time, and in later ages, are not to
be slighted; though instances of this kind are rare in our times, and
things of this nature should not be precipitantly, and without care,
given into: but rather prophesyings here intend the explanation of
Scripture, and the preaching of the word, and particularly by persons
who had not the gift of tongues, and therefore men were apt to despise
them; see [Co1 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002.md). Just as in our
days, if persons have not had a liberal education, and do not understand
Latin, Greek, and Hebrew, though they have ministerial gifts, and are
capable of explaining the word to edification and comfort, yet are set
at nought and rejected, which should not be.

[1 Thessalonians 5:21](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">th1 5:21</span></span>

Prove all things,.... That are said by the prophets, all the doctrines
which they deliver; hear them, though they have not the gift of tongues,
and all desirable advantages; do not reject them on that account, and
refuse to hear them, for so, many useful men may be laid aside, and the
Spirit of God in them be quenched; try their gifts, and attend to their
doctrines, yet do not implicitly believe everything they say, but
examine them according to the word of God the test and standard of
truth; search the Scriptures, whether the things they say are true or
not. Not openly erroneous persons, and known heretics, are to be heard
and attended on, but the ministers of the word, or such who are said to
have a gift of prophesying; these should make use of it, and the church
should try and judge their gift, and accordingly encourage or
discourage; and also their doctrines, and if false reject them, and if
true receive them.

Hold fast that which is good; honest, pleasant, profitable, and
agreeable to sound doctrine, to the analogy of faith, and the Scriptures
of truth, and is useful and edifying, instructive both as to principle
and practice; such should be held fast, that no man take it away; and be
retained, though a majority may be against it, for the multitude is not
always on the side of truth; and though it may be rejected by men of
learning and wealth, as Christ and his doctrines were rejected by the
Scribes and Pharisees, and rulers of the people; and though it may be
reproached as a novel, upstart notion, or a licentious one, since these
were charges against the doctrine of Christ, and his apostles; and
though it may be attended with affliction and persecution, yet none of
these things should move from it, or cause to let it go.

[1 Thessalonians 5:22](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#022.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_022">th1 5:22</span></span>

Abstain from all appearance of evil. Of doctrinal evil. Not only open
error and heresy are to be avoided, but what has any show of it, or
looks like it, or carries in it a suspicion of it, or may be an occasion
thereof, or lead unto it; wherefore all new words and phrases of this
kind should be shunned, and the form of sound words held fast; and so of
all practical evil, not only from sin itself, and all sorts of sin,
lesser or greater, as the (w) Jews have a saying,

"take care of a light as of a heavy commandment,''

that is, take care of committing a lesser, as a greater sin, and from
the first motions of sin; but from every occasion of it, and what leads
unto it, and has the appearance of it, or may be suspected of others to
be sin, and so give offence, and be a matter of scandal. The Jews have a
saying very agreeable to this (x),

"remove thyself afar off (or abstain) from filthiness, and from
everything, , "that is like unto it".''

\(w\) Pirke Abot, c. 2. sect. 1. (x) Apud Drusium in loc.

[1 Thessalonians 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_023">th1 5:23</span></span>

And the very God of peace,.... Or "the God of peace himself". The
apostle follows his exhortations with prayer to God, knowing the
weakness and impotency of the saints to receive them, and act according
to them, and his own insufficiency to impress their minds with them; and
that unless the Lord opened their ears to discipline, and sealed
instruction to them, they would be useless and in vain: wherefore he
applies to the throne of grace, and addresses God as "the God of peace";
so called, because of the concern he has in peace and reconciliation
made by the blood of Christ, and because he is the giver of peace of
conscience, and the author of peace, concord, and unity among the
saints, and of all happiness and prosperity, both in this world, and in
that which is to come; See Gill on [Rom
15:33](../../../bib/kjv/rom015.htm#033.md). And the apostle might choose to
address God under this character, partly to encourage boldness, freedom,
and intrepidity at the throne of grace, and partly to raise hope,
expectation, and faith of having his requests answered, since God is not
an angry God, nor is fury in him, but the God of peace: and the
petitions he puts up for the Thessalonians are as follow: and first,
that God would

sanctify you wholly; or "all of you", as the Arabic version; or "all of
you perfectly", as the Syriac version. These persons were sanctified by
the Spirit of God, but not perfectly; the Gospel was come to them in
power, and had wrought effectually in them, and they were turned from
idols to serve the living God, and had true faith, hope, and love,
implanted in them, and which they were enabled to exercise in a very
comfortable and commendable manner; but yet this work of grace and
sanctification begun in them was far from being perfect, nor is it in
the best of saints. There is something lacking in the faith of the
greatest believer, love often waxes cold, and hope is not lively at all
times, and knowledge is but in part; sin dwells in all; the saints are
poor and needy, their wants continually return upon them, and they need
daily supplies; the most holy and knowing among them disclaim perfection
in themselves, though desirous of it. Their sanctification in Christ is
perfect, but not in themselves; there is indeed a perfection of parts in
internal sanctification, every grace is implanted, there is not one
wanting; the new creature, or new man, has all its parts, though these
are not come to their full growth; there is not a perfection of degrees,
and this is what the apostle prays for; for sanctification is a
progressive, gradual work, it is like seed cast into the earth, which
springs up, first the blade, then the ear, then the full corn in the
ear, and is as light, which shines more and more to the perfect day.
Sanctified persons are first as newborn babes, and then they grow up to
be young men, and at last become fathers in Christ; and this work being
begun, is carried on, and will be performed, fulfilled, and made
perfect: and it is God's work to do it; he begins, and he carries it on,
and he will finish it; and therefore the apostle prays to him to do it;
this is his first petition: the second follows,

and I pray God your whole spirit, soul and body, be preserved blameless
unto the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ. A like division of man is made
by the Jews: says one of their writers (y).

"a man cannot know God, unless he knows , "his soul, his breath, or his
spirit, and his body".''

Says (z) R. Isaac,

"worthy are the righteous in this world, and in the world to come, for
lo, they are all holy; their body is holy, their soul is holy, their
spirit, and their breath is holy''

See Gill on [Heb 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/heb004.htm#012.md). Some by
"spirit" understand the graces and gifts of the Spirit in a regenerate
man; and by "the soul", the soul as regenerated, and as it is the seat
and subject of these graces; and by the body, the habitation of the
soul, which is influenced by the grace that is last; and this is a sense
not to be despised. Others by "the spirit" understand the rational and
immortal soul of man, often called a spirit, as in [Ecc
12:7](../../../bib/kjv/ecc012.htm#007.md) and by the soul, the animal and
sensitive soul, which man has in common with brutes; see [Ecc
3:21](../../../bib/kjv/ecc003.htm#021.md) and by the "body", the outward
frame of flesh and blood, and bones; but rather "spirit" and "soul"
design the same immaterial, immortal, and rational soul of man,
considered in its different powers and faculties. The "spirit" may
intend the understanding, [Job 32:8](../../../bib/kjv/job032.htm#008.md)
which is the principal, leading, and governing faculty of the soul; and
which being enlightened by the Spirit of God, a man knows himself,
Christ Jesus, and the things of the Spirit, the truths of the Gospel,
and receives and values them. The "soul" may include the will and
affections, which are influenced by the understanding; and in a
regenerate man the will is brought to a resignation to the will of God,
and the affections are set upon divine things, and the body is the
instrument of performing religious and spiritual exercises: and these
the apostle prays may be

preserved blameless; not that he thought they could be kept from sinning
entirely in thought, word, or deed; but that they might be preserved in
purity and chastity from the gross enormities of life, and be kept from
a total and final falling away, the work of grace be at last completed
on the soul and spirit, and the body be raised in incorruption, and
glory; and both at the coming of Christ be presented faultless, and
without blame, without spot or wrinkle, or any such thing, first to
himself, and then to his Father.

\(y\) Aben Ezra in Exod. xxxi. 18. (z) Zohar in Lev. fol. 29. 2.

[1 Thessalonians 5:24](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#024.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_024">th1 5:24</span></span>

Faithful is he that calleth you,.... Into the fellowship of his Son, and
to his kingdom and glory, and who continues to do so, not only
externally by his word, but internally by his Spirit and grace.

Who also will do it. Two things the apostle mentions as the ground of
confidence that the above petition, would be heard and answered; that
is, that God would wholly sanctify them, and preserve the whole of them
blameless to the coming of Christ; and they are the faithfulness of God,
and the effectual calling of his saints. God is faithful to his word,
his covenant and promises; he has promised to sanctify and cleanse his
people from all their sins, and to preserve them safe to his kingdom and
glory; agreeably the Arabic version renders this last clause, "and will
execute his promise": and the effectual calling is a sure pledge of
glorification; whom God calls he justifies and glorifies; as sure as he
gives grace, he will give glory; and whom he calls to his eternal glory,
he will make perfect, stablish, strengthen, and settle. The
Complutensian edition reads, "who also will make your hope firm"; that
is, with respect to the above things.

[1 Thessalonians 5:25](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#025.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_025">th1 5:25</span></span>

Brethren, pray for us. Which is added with great beauty and propriety,
after the apostle had so earnestly and affectionately prayed for them;
and this is directed, not to the pastors of the church only, but to all
the members of it, whom the apostle styles "brethren" in a spiritual
relation, as he often does; and of whom he requests, that they would
pray for him, and the rest of his fellow ministers and labourers in the
word, that God would more and more qualify and fit them for their work,
assist in private studies and meditations, give them freedom of thought,
liberty of expression, and a door of utterance, and follow their
ministrations with a divine blessing and success, and deliver them out
of the hands of unreasonable men; See Gill on [Heb
13:18](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#018.md).

[1 Thessalonians 5:26](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#026.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_026">th1 5:26</span></span>

Greet all the brethren with an holy kiss. In opposition, to an unchaste
and hypocritical one. His meaning is, that they would salute the members
of the church in his name, and give his Christian love and affections to
them. And his view is to recommend to them brotherly love to each other,
and to stir them up to the mutual exercise of it more and more.

[1 Thessalonians 5:27](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#027.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_027">th1 5:27</span></span>

I charge you by the Lord,.... Or "I adjure by the Lord"; by the Lord
Jesus: it is in the form of an oath, and a very solemn one; and shows
that oaths may be used on certain and solemn occasions:

that this epistle be read unto all the holy brethren; to all the members
of the church, who are called "holy", because they were sanctified or
set apart by God the Father in election; and were sanctified by the
blood of Christ, or their sins were expiated, or atoned for by the
sacrifice of Christ in redemption; and were sanctified or made holy by
the Spirit of God in regeneration; and were enabled by the grace of God
to live holy lives and conversations. Now this epistle being directed
only to some of the principal members of the church, it may be to one or
more of their elders; lest he or they should be tempted on any account
to conceal it, the apostle in a very solemn manner adjures, that it be
read publicly to the whole church whom it concerned, that all might
hear, and learn, and receive some advantage from it; from whence we may
learn, as is observed by many interpreters, that the sacred Scriptures,
neither one part nor another, nor the whole of them, are to be kept from
private Christians, but may be read, and heard, and used by all.

[1 Thessalonians 5:28](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#028.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_028">th1 5:28</span></span>

The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you, Amen. This is the
apostle's usual salutation in all his epistles, and the token of the
genuineness of them, [Th2 3:17](../../../bib/kjv/th2003.htm#017.md). See
Gill on [Rom 16:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#020.md), [Co1
15:23](../../../bib/kjv/co1015.htm#023.md), [Co2
13:14](../../../bib/kjv/co2013.htm#014.md).

The subscription to this epistle is not genuine, which runs thus, "The
first Epistle unto the Thessalonians was written from Athens"; whereas
it appears from [Th1 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001.md) compared with
[Act 18:1](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#001.md) that it was written from
Corinth, and not from Athens; nor are these last words, "from Athens",
in Beza's Claromontane copy; though they stand in the Syriac and Arabic
versions of the London Polygot Bible, which add, "and sent by Timothy",
and in the Alexandrian copy, and Complutensian edition.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 2 Thessalonians Introduction](th2000.md)

</div>
