<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Thessalonians Index](th1)  
  [Previous](th1002)  [Next](th1004) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Thessalonians Chapter 3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001)

[1 Thessalonians](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">th1 3:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 THESSALONIANS 3

In this chapter the apostle expresses his great love to the
Thessalonians, by sending Timothy to then, to establish and comfort
them; and declares his satisfaction with the things he brought of them,
and concludes the chapter with fervent prayers for them: such was his
affection for them, that he chose rather to be left alone at Athens, and
send Timothy to them, though so very dear and useful to him, as his
characters show, to the end that they might be established and
comforted, [Th1 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002) and not be shaken
with the afflictions the apostles met with, seeing these were no other
than what God had appointed them to; and besides, they had been apprized
of them before hand by the apostle, [Th1
3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#003) but however, lest Satan should get
an advantage of them, the apostle could not be easy without sending to
know how things stood with them, [Th1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#005) next he proceeds to give an
account of the success of this mission, and the satisfaction it gave him
and his fellow ministers to hear of their faith and charity, their
remembrance of them, and desire to see them, [Th1
3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#006) which comforted them under their
afflictions, made them lively and cheerful, filled them with joy and
thankfulness, and put them upon praying to God to see their face, and
perfect what was lacking in their faith, [Th1
3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#007) and then follow the petitions
themselves, which are made both to God the Father, and our Lord Jesus
Christ, that their way might be directed to them, that they might
increase and abound in love to one another, and to all men, as they did
to them, and that God would establish them in holiness in his sight, at
the coming of Christ, [Th1 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#011).

[1 Thessalonians 3:1](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">th1 3:1</span></span>

Wherefore when we could no longer forbear,.... Or "bear", as the word
properly signifies; or "bear that", as the Ethiopic version reads; that
is, "that desire", as the Arabic version renders it; that ardent and
longing desire of seeing them again, expressed in the latter part of the
preceding chapter; which was as fire in their bones, and was retained
with great pain and uneasiness; but now they could hold it no longer,
and like Jeremiah, [Jer 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/jer020.htm#009) were
weary with forbearing, and could not stay; or it was like a burden,
which they stood up under as long as they could, even Paul, Silas, and
Timothy, but now it became insupportable:

we thought it good to be left at Athens alone: that is, Paul and Silas,
or Paul only, speaking of himself in the plural number; for he seems to
have been alone at Athens, at least at last; he considering everything,
thought it most fit and advisable when at Athens, where he waited for
Silas and Timothy, having ordered them to come thither to him from
Berea, [Act 17:14](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#014) either to send
orders to Berea for Timothy to go from thence to Thessalonica, to know
the state of affairs there, and Silas elsewhere; or if they came to him
to Athens, of which Luke gives no account, he immediately dispatched
Timothy to Thessalonica, and Silas to some other part of Macedonia, for
from thence they came to him at Corinth, [Act
18:5](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#005) such was his desire of knowing
how things were at Thessalonica, that he chose rather to be left alone
at Athens, disputing with the unbelieving Jews, and Heathen philosophers
of the Epicurean and Stoic sects, sustaining all their scoffs and jeers
alone; and was content to be without his useful companions, Silas and
Timothy, who might have been assisting to him at Athens, in hope of
hearing of his dear friends at Thessalonica.

[1 Thessalonians 3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">th1 3:2</span></span>

And sent Timotheus our brother,.... In a spiritual relation, having the
same heavenly Father, and belonging to the same Jerusalem, which is
free, and the mother of us all; of the same household and in the same
relation to Christ, the firstborn among many brethren; or their brother
in the ministry, who was employed in the same business, and did the same
work they did; or he is so called, on account of that strict and
intimate friendship which subsisted between them, by virtue of which
they stuck as close as brethren, or closer to one another than brethren
usually do:

and minister of God; of his making, and not man's; of his calling and
sending, and of his blessing and succeeding; and who was a minister of
the things of God, of the mysteries of God, of the truths of his Gospel;
and who ministered according to the ability God gave him, and was
faithful to him:

and our fellow labourer in the Gospel of Christ; he was a labourer, and
not a loiterer in the Lord's vineyard; one that laboured in the word and
doctrine, that studied to show himself a workman, that gave himself
wholly to meditation, reading, exhortation, and doctrine, and preached
the word in season and out of season and was a fellow labourer with him
who laboured more abundantly than any of the apostles; and not in the
law, but in the Gospel, even in the Gospel of Christ, of which he is the
sum and substance, author and preacher. The Vulgate Latin and Ethiopic
versions leave out these words, and so do Beza's ancient copy and the
Alexandrian manuscript, "and our fellow labourers", reading the latter
part of the clause in connection with the former thus, "a minister of
God in the Gospel of Christ", as the former of these versions, "in the
doctrine of Christ", as the latter. These characters are given of
Timothy, partly to show what honour was done the Thessalonians, in
sending such a messenger to them; and partly that they might receive him
with the greater respect, and treat him according to his character,
office, and dignity; and chiefly to observe to them the apostle's great
affection for them, in parting with so dear and useful a minister for
their good and advantage, as follows:

to establish you; which though the work of God, it is usually done by
the ministry of the word; and then is the end of the Gospel ministration
answered to the churches, when they are established by it; for
notwithstanding the saints are in a stable condition, as in the arms of
love, and in the hands of Christ, and in the covenant of grace, and upon
the rock of ages, and in a state of regeneration, justification, and
adoption, from whence they can never fall totally and finally; yet they
are often very unstable in their hearts and frames, in the exercise of
grace, and discharge of duty, and in their adherence to the cause and
interest, Gospel and ordinances of Christ, through the prevalence of
corruption, the temptations of Satan, and the reproaches and
persecutions of men: and these Thessalonians were young converts, and
just planted together as a church; and at their first setting out,
sustained a considerable shock of afflictions, which made the apostle
concerned for their establishment in the faith which they had received:

and to comfort you concerning your faith. This is another end of the
Gospel ministry, to comfort afflicted minds, and distressed consciences;
it is the will of God that his people should be spoke comfortably to;
the doctrines of the Gospel are calculated for that purpose, and the
ministers of it should be Barnabases, sons of consolation. These saints
might be in some doubt about the grace of faith, whether it was right or
not, or about the doctrine of faith they had received; and therefore
Timothy is sent to comfort them under their afflictions, which might
have created these doubts, and to remove them, by showing them that
their faith was like precious faith with the apostles; and that the
doctrine of faith they embraced was the faith once delivered to the
saints, and was the true faith of Christ: the words will bear to be
rendered, "to exhort you concerning your faith", as the Vulgate Latin
version renders them; that is, to exhort you to continue in the faith,
to stand fast in it, in the exercise of the grace of faith, and in the
doctrine of faith, and in the profession of both. The Syriac version
renders it, "to ask", or inquire of you concerning your faith, being
willing to know how it stood, since they left them, as in [Th1
3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#005).

[1 Thessalonians 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">th1 3:3</span></span>

That no man should be moved by these afflictions,.... Which the apostle
endured for the sake of preaching the Gospel among them, and which he
feared might be a means of troubling their minds, of shaking their
faith, and moving them from the hope of the Gospel; for though none of
these things moved him, who was an old soldier of Christ, and used to
hardness, and an apostle of Christ; yet these were young converts, and
not used to such things, and therefore might be staggered at them, and
be offended, as stony ground hearers are; and though the apostle hoped
better things of them, yet was he concerned for them, that no one among
them might be unhinged by them, or succumb under them:

for yourselves know that we are appointed thereunto; by the immutable
decree of God: afflictions, as to their nature, measure, and duration,
are appointed for the people of God, and they are appointed for them;
this is the case of all who will live godly in Christ Jesus, and
especially of Gospel ministers; of which these saints had been apprized
by the apostle, and therefore was nothing new, unheard of, and
unexpected, or to be looked upon as a strange thing; and seeing this was
the appointment of heaven, and the will of God, they should be patiently
endured, and quietly submitted to.

[1 Thessalonians 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">th1 3:4</span></span>

For, verily, when we were with you,.... In presence, in person, as they
then were in heart and affection; when they were first among them, and
preached the Gospel to them:

we told you before; before it came to pass;

that we should suffer tribulation: which they might say by virtue of
Christ's prediction to all his disciples, that they should have
tribulation in the world; and upon its being the common case of God's
people, and the usual way through which they enter the kingdom; and the
Apostle Paul might foretell this, upon the discovery that was made to
him how many things he should suffer for the sake of Christ, and which
therefore he always, and in every place expected; and he might have a
particular revelation of the disturbance and opposition he was to meet
with at Thessalonica:

even as it came to pass, and ye know; referring to the tumult and uproar
in [Act 17:5](../../../bib/kjv/act017.htm#005), and which should be
considered so far from being a discouragement, that it was a great
confirmation of the truth of their mission and ministry; nor could it be
so surprising to them as it might have been had they had no previous
taste of it.

[1 Thessalonians 3:5](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">th1 3:5</span></span>

For this cause, when I could no longer forbear,.... Or "bear" the above
vehement desire of seeing them, or of hearing from them. Here the
apostle speaks in the singular number, and seems to intimate, as if what
was said before of the like kind is to be understood singly of him; for
these words are a repetition and summary of the foregoing, with some
diversity:

I sent to know your faith; how it stood, whether it was staggering
through these afflictions, or firm; whether it was weak or strong, what
was wanting in it; and whether it grew and increased. The Arabic version
adds, "and charity"; for of this, as well as of faith, Timothy brought
an account, as appears from the following verse.

Lest by some means the tempter; Satan, so called from his common and
constant employ in tempting men to sin; see [Mat
4:3](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#003)

have tempted you with success, and got an advantage over them, improving
these afflictions to such a purpose as to move them from the hope of the
Gospel, and relinquish the profession of it; for otherwise there was no
question to be made but he had tempted them, or solicited them to it;
for none of the saints are free from his temptations; the apostle
himself was not, nor indeed our Lord Jesus Christ: but the apostle's
fears were, lest he should so have tempted them as to have gained upon
them, and have persuaded them to have turned their backs upon the
Gospel, and not expose their name and credit, and hazard the toss of
worldly substance, and even life itself, for the sake of it.

And our labour be in vain: in preaching the Gospel among them; not with
respect to God, to whom the word never returns void and empty; nor with
regard to the apostles, whose judgment was with the Lord, and their work
with their God, who will of his own grace reward them; but with respect
to the Thessalonians, to whom, should Satan gain his point, it would be
of no use and service, for which the concern was. The Ethiopic version
reads, "and your labour be in vain": in receiving the apostles,
embracing and professing the Gospel, and suffering for it; see [Gal
3:4](../../../bib/kjv/gal003.htm#004) but the common reading is best,
and agrees with what the apostle elsewhere says, [Gal
4:11](../../../bib/kjv/gal004.htm#011).

[1 Thessalonians 3:6](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">th1 3:6</span></span>

But now when Timotheus came from you unto us,.... At Corinth, as appears
from [Act 18:5](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#005) which shows that this
epistle was not written from Athens, as the subscription to it asserts,
but from Corinth; for as soon as ever Timothy came from Thessalonica, to
the apostle at Corinth, and made the report to him, he immediately sent
them this epistle which is here suggested: "but, now", &c. just now;
"lately", as the Syriac version renders it, a very little while ago,
Timothy was just come:

and brought us good tidings of your faith and charity; of their faith,
the grace of faith, that it was of the right kind; as far as could be
judged, it was the faith of God's elect, like precious faith with
theirs; an unfeigned one, strong and lively, operative and growing: or
of the doctrine of faith, as received and embraced by them; as that they
were greatly led, and had much light into it, and had, for the time,
made considerable proficiency in it; that they held it fast, and stood
fast in it, and contended for it, notwithstanding all the afflictions,
reproaches, and persecutions which they either saw in the apostles, or
endured themselves for the sake of it; and likewise of the profession of
both the grace and doctrine of faith, which they held fast, and without
wavering, and that in a pure conscience, which was good news indeed.
Timothy also brought an account of their "charity", or love, which faith
works by; these two graces are always found together; they are wrought
in the soul by one, and the same hand, and at the same time; where the
one is, the other is; and as the one flourishes and increases, so does
the other. And by this grace is meant love to God, to Christ, to his
truths, ordinances, ways, and worship, and to one another, and even to
all men; and which was without dissimulation, in sincerity, in deed, and
in truth, and was constant and fervent: and this was not the whole of
the report, for it follows,

and that ye have a remembrance of us always they bore in memory the
persons of the apostles; and when they made mention of their names, it
was with the greatest respect and reverence; nor were they forgetful
hearers of the word, but remembered with great affection and pleasure
the truths, the doctrines, and exhortations they delivered to them, so
as to put them in practice, and longed for another visit from them, to
have their memories refreshed by them:

desiring greatly to see us, as we also to see you, they had an equal
desire to see their spiritual fathers, as they had to see their
spiritual children. Now such a report as this concerning their steady
faith in Christ, their fervent love to one another, and their
affectionate regard to the ministers of the word, was a sort of a
Gospel, as the word used signifies; or it was good news and glad tidings
to the apostle, and those that were with him.

[1 Thessalonians 3:7](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">th1 3:7</span></span>

Therefore, brethren, we were comforted over, you,.... Or "in you", as
the Vulgate Latin version; or "from you", as the Arabic; or "by you", as
the Syriac; or "for you", as the Ethiopic; that is, on account of them,
either by what they had heard was in them, or had heard from them. This
gave abundant consolation

in all our affliction and distress: which they met with at Corinth,
where the apostle laboured with his own hands, and ministered to his
own, and the necessities of others, and was greatly opposed, reproached,
and persecuted; see [Act 18:3](../../../bib/kjv/act018.htm#003), but the
news of the good estate and condition the Thessalonians were in, was a
great relief and comfort to him, particularly their faith:

by your faith: by the report of it, that it grew exceedingly, and that
they walked in the truth; see [Jo1
5:4](../../../bib/kjv/jo1005.htm#004). The Alexandrian copy reads, "in
all your distress and affliction, and by your faith."

[1 Thessalonians 3:8](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">th1 3:8</span></span>

For now we live,.... Before they were dead men, lifeless, disconsolate,
dispirited, carrying about with them the dying of the Lord Jesus, and
death working in them, and they, as it were, under the sentence of that,
being killed all the day long for Christ's sake; but now, upon this
news, in the midst of all their sore trials and troubles, their spirits
revived, and they became alive and cheerful; see [Psa
22:26](../../../bib/kjv/psa022.htm#026), it was like life from the dead
unto them:

if ye stand fast in the Lord: or "our Lord", as the Syriac and Ethiopic
versions read; that is, "in the faith of the Lord", as the Arabic
version renders it: they were in the Lord secretly by electing grace,
and openly by regenerating grace, and they abode in him; and by
persevering grace, they were rooted and built up in Christ, and
established in the faith of him, of his person, office, and grace; they
were steady in the exercise of grace upon him, and stood fast in the
liberty wherewith he had made them free, and continued steadfastly in
the doctrines and ordinances of the Gospel; for the "if" here is not
expressive of doubting, but of reasoning, "seeing ye stand fast in the
Lord"; of which they were assured by Timothy: and this gave them fresh
spirit and life amidst the deaths in which they often were.

[1 Thessalonians 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">th1 3:9</span></span>

For what thanks can we render to God again or you,.... They had given
thanks to God for them before, for their faith, love, and patience; see
[Th1 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1001.htm#002) and now having received a
further account of them, they looked upon themselves bound to give fresh
thanks to God for them, for the increase of their faith and love, and
for their perseverance, as they did; see [Th2
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003) since these are gifts of God's
grace; but they knew not where to begin, what to render, and when to
end: the phrase is much like that in [Psa
116:12](../../../bib/kjv/psa116.htm#012) "what shall I render unto the
Lord", &c.

for all the joy wherewith we joy for your sakes before our God: the joy
they had was all joy, perfect and complete in its kind; see [Jam
1:2](../../../bib/kjv/jam001.htm#002) and it was not for themselves, on
their own account, because of any worldly interest or advantage they had
therein, but for the sake of these Thessalonians, whose spiritual
welfare they rejoiced at: nor was their joy of a carnal nature, but
spiritual; it was a joy in the Holy Ghost, and which was hearty and
sincere: it was "before God our" God, their covenant God and Father; it
was in his sight and presence, who sees and knows all things, all
actions, and the principles of them. Though this last clause, "before
our God", is in the Syriac version, placed at the beginning of the next
verse, according to which, it refers, not to thanks or joy before God,
but to prayer before him.

[1 Thessalonians 3:10](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">th1 3:10</span></span>

Night and day praying exceedingly,.... This good news, not only
comforted their hearts, and revived their spirits, and filled them with
joy and thankfulness, but also sent them to the throne of grace to pray
without ceasing, continually, night and day, and as often as they went
thither, and that with great fervency and earnestness, in a multitude of
petitions; or, as the Arabic version renders it, "with prayers exceeding
a multitude"; with innumerable requests:

that we might see your face: once more, and converse face to face:

and might perfect that which is lacking in your faith? in the grace of
faith; for though they remembered their work of faith with pleasure, and
had had good tidings of it very lately, and were thankful that it grew
exceedingly as it did, yet they knew it was not perfect, there was
unbelief attending them: and though it is God's work to increase faith,
as well as to produce it, yet, as the ministry of the word is the means
of the first planting of it, so it also is of the increase of it. This
may likewise be understood of the doctrine of faith, which though they
had received in the love of it, and had made considerable progress in
their knowledge of it; yet they knew but in part, and needed to be
taught the way of God, and truths of the Gospel more perfectly; and the
ministry of the word is for the perfecting of the saints in the
knowledge of the Son of God, and of other truths; wherefore the apostle
desired greatly to see them, that he might be an instrument of
instructing them, more perfectly in the knowledge of divine things; and
in this, and in the following epistle, he does particularly instruct
them about the rise and fall of antichrist, the coming of Christ and the
resurrection of the dead, articles of faith in which they seemed to have
been deficient: but now, though these saints had deficiencies in their
faith, yet they were not what the Jews call (o) , "such as are deficient
in faith", or want faith entirely, a phrase somewhat like this which is
here used.

\(o\) Maimon. Hilch. Mechira, c. 7. sect. 8, 9.

[1 Thessalonians 3:11](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">th1 3:11</span></span>

Now God himself, and our Father,.... The Oriental versions leave out the
copulative "and", and read, "God himself, our Father" the first person
in the Trinity, who is God himself, truly and properly so; and who is a
God that hears prayer; and who is omnipotent, and able to do more than
the saints can ask or think; and omniscient, and knows their persons and
cases, and what is proper for them, and how and when to help and supply
them; and he is also the God of all grace, the author and giver of it,
and who is able to make it abound, and increase it, and so a very proper
object of prayer: and who is likewise the Father of Christ, and of all
the saints, not only by creation, in which sense he is the Father of all
men, but by adopting grace; and which is mentioned to encourage freedom
and boldness in prayer, which children may use with a father, and to
raise an expectation of succeeding and receiving an answer; for if
earthly parents hear their children, and give good things to them, how
much more will not our heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit, and all
other good gifts, unto his children? And this shows that the apostle
prayed to God in the manner Christ directed, [Mat
6:9](../../../bib/kjv/mat006.htm#009)

and our Lord Jesus Christ: who is equally the object of prayer with God
his Father and ours; who is sometimes distinctly prayed unto, as in [Act
7:59](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#059) and often in conjunction with his
Father, as in all those places in the epistles, where grace and peace
are wished for from them both; see [Rom
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#007), and sometimes he is set before
the Father, as in [Th2 2:16](../../../bib/kjv/th2002.htm#016) to show
the entire equality between them, and that he is equally addressed as
he, being truly and properly God, who knows all things, and is the
Almighty, and whose grace is sufficient for us, and therefore rightly
applied unto, as here: the petition put up to them both is, that they
would

direct our way unto you: a journey is not to be taken without the will
of God, without seeking to know it, without submission to it, and
dependence on it; nor is there any prosperous one, but by it; see [Jam
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/jam004.htm#013). Men may devise their own ways,
but God directs their goings; especially a good man's steps are ordered
by the Lord, and particularly ministers; who, as they are often directed
to subjects and matter, in a very providential way, so to places, and
are ordered both where and when to go; see [Act
16:6](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#006). The apostle was aware, that
there were obstacles in his way of coming to Thessalonica, for he had
attempted it once and again, but Satan, and his emissaries, hindered;
and therefore he desires that God and Christ would remove them out of
the way, and make his way straight and plain, as the word signifies,
that he might once more see their faces.

[1 Thessalonians 3:12](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">th1 3:12</span></span>

And the Lord make you to increase,.... That is, the Lord the Spirit; so
that the object of prayer, addressed by the apostle, is Father, Son, and
Spirit, as in [Rev 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev001.htm#004). The
Alexandrian copy reads "God". The Spirit is God, equally with the Father
and the Son, and so a fit object of prayer with them, which otherwise he
would not be. The request is, that he would cause these saints to
increase in number, as the first churches greatly did: and in the gifts
of the Spirit, which he divides to men severally as he will; and in his
graces, as in faith, in hope, in holiness, in humility, in knowledge, in
spiritual joy and strength, an increase in all which is from him:

and abound in love one towards another; for though they were taught of
God to love one another, and did do so, and the apostle had had good
tidings of their love; yet it was not perfect, there was room for a
further exercise of it, by serving each other by it, in things spiritual
and temporal; and he had his request, for it did abound in everyone of
them towards each other, [Th2 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/th2001.htm#003)

and towards all men; the men of the world, who were without, were not
members of the church, nor professors of the Christian religion, but
enemies to that, and to Christ, and to them; and yet they were to love
them as men, and pray for them, and do them all the good that lay in
their power:

even as we do towards you; for the love of the apostle, and those with
him, abounded more and more towards these saints, and was so far from
being weakened, that it was increased by their absence from them; and
they were more abundantly desirous of seeing them, and were even quite
impatient until they sent to them, and heard of them.

[1 Thessalonians 3:13](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">th1 3:13</span></span>

To the end he may stablish your hearts,.... Which are very unstable and
inconstant in their frames, and in the exercise of grace, and have need
to be established in the love of God, against the fears of men, the
frowns of the world, the temptations of Satan, and in, and with the
doctrines of grace; See Gill on [Th1
3:2](../../../bib/kjv/th1003.htm#002),

unblamable in holiness before God, even our Father. There is no holiness
in men naturally; what is in them without the grace of God is only a
show; true holiness is from the Spirit of God; and this is a stable
thing in itself, and can never be removed or taken away; but the acts of
it, through the prevalence of corruption, the force of Satan's
temptations, and the snares of the world, are fickle and inconstant; and
the saints need to be established in the discharge of duty, as well as
in the exercise of grace: and whereas the apostle prays, that they might
be "unblamable in holiness", the Alexandrian copy reads, "in
righteousness" so one of Stephens's; it must be observed, that no man is
perfectly holy in this life; no man is without sin in himself, or lives
without the commission of it; holiness in the best is imperfect; no man,
as yet, is in himself sanctified wholly; there is no unblamable holiness
but in Christ; and in him the saints are without spot and blemish, who
is their sanctification and their righteousness; but in themselves they
are full of spots and stains; yet through the grace of God their hearts
may be so established with principles of holiness, and they may be so
assisted in the acts of it daily, as to give no just cause of blame to
men, and so to behave as to approve themselves "before God", who sees
the heart, and knows from what principles all actions flow: and this the
apostle desires may be at the coming of our Lord Jesus; or unto the
coming of him, as in [Th1 5:23](../../../bib/kjv/th1005.htm#023) Either
at death, when he comes into his garden, and gathers his lilies, and
takes his to himself to be for ever with him; or at the day of judgment,
when he comes to judge the quick and dead; and which coming of his is
certain, and will be quickly and suddenly, and with great glory and
power: and, as it is here added,

with all his saints; meaning either his holy angels, or rather the souls
of his people, whom he will bring with him, and will raise their dead
bodies, and reunite them to their souls, when they shall be for ever
with him; and then shall they be unblamable in holiness, both in soul
and body, and shall be presented by him, first to himself, and then to
his Father, faultless, and without spot, or wrinkle, or any such thing.
The Vulgate Latin, Arabic, and Ethiopic versions add, "Amen"; and so
does Beza's ancient copy, and the Alexandrian manuscript.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Thessalonians Chapter 4](th1004)

</div>
