<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](ti1000)  [Next](ti1002) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

INTRODUCTION TO 1 TIMOTHY 1

In this chapter, after the inscription and salutation, the apostle
having entreated Timothy to abide at Ephesus, observes, that his end
was, that he might check the false teachers there, whom he describes;
and then he gives an account of his apostleship, and also of his
conversion, to the encouragement of sinners, and to the glory of the
grace of God; and closes with an exhortation to Timothy to constancy and
perseverance in his Christian warfare. The inscription and salutation
are in [Ti1 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001) and much in the common
form; and whereas, when he went into Macedonia, he desired Timothy to
continue at Ephesus, his end was, to restrain the false teachers from
preaching the doctrine they did, which was contrary to the Gospel,
fabulous, useless, and unedifying, [Ti1
1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003) for though these men set up for
teachers of the law, they went off, and strayed from its general end,
which was love with faith, through their ignorance of it, [Ti1
1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005) not but that the law itself was
good, as Gospel ministers full well knew; which is said to prevent an
objection against them, as laying it aside as useless; but the abuse of
it is what is complained of, it being made for some persons, and not for
others who are mentioned, between which, and the sound doctrine of the
Gospel, there is an agreement, [Ti1
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#008) which leads on the apostle to
observe his call to the office of a preacher of it by Christ, his
qualification for it, and investiture with it, for which he gives
thanks, [Ti1 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012) And in order to
illustrate the grace of God in converting him first, and then making him
a minister of the word, he takes notice of his state and condition
before conversion, what a vile sinner he had been, and of the abundant
grace God bestowed on him in it, [Ti1
1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013) And that this case of his might
not seem strange and incredible, he observes, that this is the sum of
the Gospel, that Christ came into the world to save the chief of
sinners, such an one as he was, [Ti1
1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015). And besides, the end of the Lord
in his conversion was, by the pattern of longsuffering he showed in him,
that others might be encouraged to believe in Christ also, [Ti1
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016) and then for all this grace
bestowed on him, he ascribes honour and glory to God, [Ti1
1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017) and renews his charge to Timothy
to fight manfully against the false teachers, to which he should be the
more induced by the consideration of the prophecies that went before of
him, [Ti1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018) and to hold faith and
good conscience, which had been dropped by some professors; of which
instances are given in Hymenaeus and Philetus, [Ti1
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019).

[1 Timothy 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 1:1</span></span>

Paul an apostle of Jesus Christ,.... His name was well known to Timothy,
and very dear to him; and so was his office as an apostle, and which he
mentions, not so much for Timothy's sake, but for the sake of others,
that what he delivers in this epistle might come with its proper weight
and authority, and be regarded: of this his office, as well as name; see
Gill on [Rom 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001). How he came into
this office next follows, not of himself, nor by men,

by the commandment of God; the appointment and decree of God, by which
he was separated to this office, even from eternity, and is the same
with the counsel or will of God, [Eph
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/eph001.htm#001) or it may refer to the order given
by the Holy Ghost to the church; to set apart him and Barnabas, to the
work of the ministry, [Act 13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002) though
this commandment is called the commandment of God

our Saviour; by whom is meant God the Father; and this character of him
is mentioned, to show that the embassy the apostle was sent on as such,
and in which the discharge of his office greatly lay, was the affair of
salvation, to publish and declare that to the sons of men; and also to
show the concern which God the Father has in that work: he resolved upon
it, and appointed his people to it, and determined upon saving them by
his Son, whom he pitched upon to be his salvation; he drew the scheme of
it by his infinite wisdom, and sent his Son into the world to execute
it; and he sends his ministers to publish the Gospel of it, and his
Spirit to reveal and apply it to the hearts of his chosen ones; and
keeps them by his power unto it, and will at last put them into the full
possession of it; so that this character well suits with him, to whom it
is also given, [Tit 3:4](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#004) as well as
with his Son Jesus Christ, to whom it is more commonly ascribed, and
from whom he is here distinguished: for it follows,

and Lord Jesus Christ, which is our hope; who is both the author, and
the ground and foundation of the grace of hope of salvation, and eternal
life; not earthly enjoyments, nor any external thing whatever; not birth
privileges, carnal descent, religious education, morality and civility,
obedience to the law of Moses, moral or ceremonial; nor a profession of
Christ, nor a bare subjection to his ordinances, but he himself: and
there is good ground to hope for pardon through his blood, which was
shed for it; and for justification by his righteousness, which is freely
wrought out, and freely imputed; and for salvation by him, since it is
in him, and in no other, and is completely effected by him, and that for
the worst of sinners, and is wholly of free grace, and which everyone
that believes in him shall enjoy; and so for eternal life, which hope is
conversant with; and good reason there is for it in Christ, seeing it is
in him, and in his gift; what his grace gives a meetness for, and his
righteousness a title to; and which he is possessed of in the name of
his people, prepares for them, and will introduce them into. The
Complutensian edition reads, "of the Father, and, our Saviour Jesus
Christ"; and so the Ethiopic version, "of God, and our Saviour Jesus
Christ".

[1 Timothy 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#002)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 1:2</span></span>

Unto Timothy my own son in the faith,.... Not in the flesh, or by
natural descent, but in a spiritual sense, in the faith of Christ; for
Timothy was not related to the apostle according to the flesh, as some
have thought, but the relation was spiritual; though the apostle was not
properly his spiritual father, or the instrument of his conversion; for
Timothy was a converted person, and a disciple of Christ, and well
reported of by the brethren, when the apostle first met with him, [Act
16:1](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#001) but he calls him his son, either
because of his age, being a young man; or because of his affection for
him, so the Vulgate Latin version reads, "a beloved son"; or rather,
because he was instructed more largely by the apostle into the doctrine
of faith; and as a son, with a father, served with him in the Gospel of
Christ. It may be rendered "a true or genuine son in the faith", in
distinction from nominal Christians, formal professors and hypocrites.
Timothy was a real Christian, a true believer, and an hearty and upright
professor and preacher of the faith of Christ, as well as truly
regenerated by the Spirit of God,

Grace, mercy, and peace from God our Father, and Jesus Christ our Lord;
the Arabic version reads, "and Lord Jesus Christ our Lord". The form of
salutation is the same as in all the epistles of the apostle, only that
"mercy" is here inserted; and when he wishes "grace" to Timothy, he may
mean a fresh discovery of the love and free favour of God unto him, and
an increase of grace in him, and of the gifts of the Spirit upon him;
and by "mercy" he may intend a fresh application of the pardoning mercy
of God, through Christ, and all assistance, and success in his work as a
minister, and all succour and support under every trial and exercise,
and mercy at the last day, or the mercy of our Lord Jesus Christ unto
eternal life; and by "peace" he may design peace of conscience through
the blood of Christ, and all prosperity, temporal, spiritual, and
eternal. And all this being wished for equally from Christ, as from God
the Father, is a proof of the proper deity of our Lord.

[1 Timothy 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#003)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 1:3</span></span>

As I besought thee to abide, still at Ephesus,.... Where it seems he now
was, being left here by the apostle, and where he was desired by him to
continue:

when I went into Macedonia; not when he went his first journey there,
for Timothy was then along with him, [Act
16:3](../../../bib/kjv/act016.htm#003) and so he seems to be in his
journey through it, in [Act 20:3](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#003). It
may be this may refer to a journey which Luke has given no account of:

that thou mightest charge some, that they teach no other doctrine; than
the doctrine of Christ and his apostles; than what had been preached by
the apostle at Ephesus, and the saints there had received; than what was
agreeably to the Scriptures of truth, and was according to godliness;
for all other doctrines must be divers and strange ones: nor would he
have them teach in another way, in new words, but hold fast the form of
sound words; for new words often produce new doctrines: the apostle
perhaps by other doctrine chiefly respects the doctrine of justification
by the works of the law. It seems as if there were some teachers in this
place the apostle was suspicious of, or he had heard that they began to
innovate in the doctrine of faith; wherefore he desires Timothy to
continue a while, in order to be a check on these persons, and to charge
them not to introduce any new doctrine; for it was only "some", and not
all that taught there, he was so to charge. Some refer this to hearers;
and render, the words, "that they follow no other doctrine"; but it
seems best to understand it of teachers; the Syriac and Arabic versions
render the words as we do.

[1 Timothy 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#004)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 1:4</span></span>

Neither give heed to fables,.... Old wives' fables, [Ti1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007) or Jewish fables, [Tit
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#014) the traditions of the elders;
anything that was not true; or if it was, yet idle, vain, trifling, and
unprofitable:

and endless genealogies; not of deities, as the Theogony of the
Gentiles, or the ten Sephirot or numbers in the Cabalistic tree of the
Jews, or the Aeones of the Gnostics and Valentinians, which are said to
proceed from one another, as some have thought; but both the public and
private genealogies of the Jews, which they kept to show of what tribe
they were, or to prove themselves priests and Levites, and the like; of
which there was no end, and which often produced questions and debates.
By reason of their captivities and dispersions, they were much at a loss
to distinguish their tribes and families. Some care Ezra took of this
matter, when the Jews returned from the Babylonish captivity. It is said
(a), that ,

"ten genealogies (or ten sorts of persons genealogized) came out of
Babylon; priests, Levites, Israelites, profane (or unfit for the
priesthood, though they sprung from priests) proselytes, freemen
(servants made free), bastards, Nethinim or Gibeonites, such whose
father was not known, and those that were took up in the streets.

These Ezra brought up to Jerusalem thus distinguished, that they might
be taken care of by the sanhedrim, and kept distinct; but these would
often intermix and cause disputes; and sometimes these mixtures were
connived at through partiality or fear (b).

"Says R. Jochanan, by the temple, it is in our hands, (the gloss adds,
to discover the illegitimate families of the land of Israel,) but what
shall I do? for lo, the great men of this age are hid (or impure): in
which he agreed with R. Isaac, who said, the family that is hid, let it
be hid. Abai also saith, we have learned this by tradition, there was a
family of the house of Tzeriphah, beyond Jordan, and a son of Zion, (a
famous man, a man of authority,) set it at a distance, (proclaimed it
illegitimate,) by his authority. And again, there was another, and he
made it near (or pronounced it right) by his power. Again, there was
another family, and the wise men would not discover it.

By which we may see what management there was in these things, and what
a foundation was laid for questions and debates. Of these public and
private genealogies; see Gill on [Mat
1:16](../../../bib/kjv/mat001.htm#016), to which may be added what R.
Benjamin says (c) of some Jews in his time, who were the Rechabites, and
were very numerous, and had a prince over them of the house of David;
and, adds he, they have a genealogical book, , "and extracts of
questions", which I should be tempted to render "clusters of questions",
which are with the head of the captivity; and this comes very near to
what our apostle here says. And when it is observed, that Herod, that he
might hide the meanness of his descent and birth, burnt all the
genealogical writings in the public archives (d), it must be still more
difficult to fix the true account of things; and for the loss of the
genealogical book, the public one, the Jews express a very great
concern: for they say (e), that "from the time the book of genealogies
was hid, the strength of the wise men was weakened, and the light of
their eyes grew dim. Says Mar Zutra, between Azel and Azel, (that is,
between [Ch1 8:38](../../../bib/kjv/ch1008.htm#038) and [Ch1
9:44](../../../bib/kjv/ch1009.htm#044)) there is need of four hundred
camel loads of commentaries.

So intricate an affair, and such an endless business was this. And this
affair of genealogies might be now the more the subject of inquiry among
judaizing Christians, since there was, and still is, an expectation
among the Jews, that in the times of the Messiah these things will be
set aright. Says Maimonides (f),

"in the days of the King Messiah, when his kingdom shall be settled, and
all Israel shall be gathered to him, , "they shall all of them be
genealogized", according to his word, by the Holy Ghost, as it is said,
[Mal 3:3](../../../bib/kjv/mal003.htm#003) he shall purify the sons of
Levi, and say, this is a genealogized priest, and this is a genealogized
Levite; and shall drive them away who are not genealogized (or related)
to Israel, as it is said, [Ezr 2:63](../../../bib/kjv/ezr002.htm#063).
Hence you learn, that by the Holy Ghost they shall be genealogized,
those that arrogate and proclaim their genealogy; and he shall not
genealogize Israel but by their tribes, for he shall make known that
this is of such a tribe, and this is of such a tribe; but he shall not
say concerning such an one he is a bastard, and this is a servant; for
so shall it be, that the family that is obscure shall be obscure.

Or else the genealogical account of their traditions may be meant, which
they trace from Moses to Joshua, from Joshua to the elders, from the
elders to the prophets, from the prophets to the men of the great
synagogue, and from one doctor to another (g), which to pursue is
endless, tedious, and tiresome:

which minister questions; as the traditions of the elders, and the
genealogical account of them did; the Talmud is full of the questions,
debates, contentions, and decisions of the doctors about them:

rather than godly edifying, which is in faith; and which is the
principal end of preaching, hearing, and conversation; and that may be
called "godly edifying, or the edification of God", as it may be
rendered, which he is the author of, and which he approves of, and is
by, and according to his word; or that in which souls are built up an
habitation for God, and are built up in faith and holiness, and by an
increase of every grace: and this is "in faith", not only in the grace
of faith, but by the doctrine of faith, on which the saints may build
one another, and by which they are edified through the faithful
ministration of it by the ministers of the word; when fabulous stories
and disputes, about genealogies, are useless and unedifying: not that
the apostle condemns all genealogies, such as we have in the writings of
the Old Testament, and in the evangelists, nor all inquiries into them,
and study of them, which, rightly to settle, is in some cases of great
importance and use, but the private and unprofitable ones before
mentioned. Some copies read, "the dispensation of God, which is in
faith"; meaning the dispensation of the mysteries of grace, which are in
the doctrine of faith, which becomes a faithful steward of them, and not
fables and genealogies, which issue in questions, quarrels, and
contentions,

\(a\) Misn. Kiddnshin, c. 4. sect. 1. (b) T. Bab. Kiddushin, fol. 71. 1.
& Hieros. Kiddushin, fol. 65. 3. (c) Massaot, p. 83. (d) Euseb. Eccl.
Hist. l. 1. c. 7. (e) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 62. 2. (f) Hilchot Melacim,
c. 12. sect. 3. (g) Pirke Abot, c. 1. sect. 1, &c.

[1 Timothy 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#005)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 1:5</span></span>

Now the end of the commandment is charity,.... By the "commandment" may
be meant, the order given to Timothy, or the charge committed to him;
see [Ti1 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018) to forbid the teaching
of another doctrine, and to avoid fables and endless genealogies; the
end and design of which was to cultivate peace, to maintain and secure
brotherly love, which cannot long subsist, when a different doctrine is
introduced and received; and to promote godly edification, which is
brought about by charity or love, for charity edifies; but is greatly
hindered by speculative notions, fabulous stories, and genealogical
controversies and contentions: or by it may be intended the ministration
of the Gospel, called the commandment, [Ti1
6:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#014), because enjoined the preachers
of it by Christ; the end of which is to bring persons to the obedience
of faith, or to that faith which works by love, to believe in Christ, to
love the Lord, his truths, ordinances, people, and ways; or rather the
moral law is designed, which is often called the commandment, [Rom
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom007.htm#008) since of this the apostle treats
in some following verses; the end and design, sum and substance,
completion and perfection of which law are love to God, and love to one
another; see [Mat 22:36](../../../bib/kjv/mat022.htm#036), which charity
or love, when right,

springs out of a pure heart; which no man has naturally; every man's
heart is naturally impure; nor can he make it pure; by the strength of
nature, or by anything that he can do: there are some that are pure in
their own eyes, and in the esteem of others, and yet are not cleansed
from their filthiness, and are inwardly full of all manner of impurity;
though there are some that have pure hearts, and they are such, who have
clean hearts created in them by the Spirit of God; who are regenerated
and sanctified by him; whose hearts are purified by faith; and who have
their hearts sprinkled from an evil conscience by the blood of Christ;
and who are not double minded, speak with a heart and a heart, but whose
hearts are sincere and upright, and without hypocrisy; so that charity
or love, from such a heart, is love without dissimulation, which is not
in tongue and words only, but in deed and in truth; it is an unfeigned
love, or loving with a pure heart fervently,

And of a good conscience; there is a conscience in every man, that
accuses or excuses, unless it is cauterized or seared: but this
conscience is naturally evil and defiled, and does not perform its
office aright; either it takes no notice of, and is not concerned about
sin, and has no remorse for it, or it takes notice of little things, and
lets pass greater ones, or speaks peace when destruction is at hand: a
good conscience is a conscience purified by the grace of God, and purged
from dead works by the blood of Christ; under the influence of which a
man acts uprightly in the discharge of his duty, and exercises a
conscience void of offence towards God and man; and charity, proceeding
from such a conscience, is of the right kind: and of faith unfeigned;
with which a man really, and from the heart, believes what he professes;
so did not Simon Magus, and all other temporary believers, whose faith
is a feigned faith, a dead and inactive one; whereas true faith is an
operative grace, it is attended with good works, and particularly it
works by love: and that charity or love, which springs from faith
unfeigned, is unfeigned love also, such as answers the design, and is
the substance of the commandment. These words may be considered in a
gradation, or as a spiritual genealogy, in opposition to the endless
ones before mentioned, thus; that charity which is the end of the
commandment comes out of a pure heart, out of which proceeds a good
conscience, and from thence faith unfeigned. But the other way of
interpreting seems best.

[1 Timothy 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#006)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 1:6</span></span>

From which some having swerved,.... The apostle, in this verse and the
next, describes the persons he suspected of teaching other doctrines,
and of introducing fables and endless genealogies; they were such who
departed from the above things; they erred from the commandment, or law,
notwithstanding their great pretensions to a regard unto it; at least
they missed the mark, the end and design of it; they went astray from
that, and instead of promoting charity or love, created feuds,
contentions, and divisions in the churches; and were far from having a
pure heart, being filthy dreamers, and sensual persons, destitute of the
Spirit of God, and were such who put away a good conscience, and made
shipwreck of faith: such were Hymenaeus, Philetus, Alexander, and
others, of whom he also says, they

have turned aside to vain jangling; which he elsewhere calls empty talk,
and vain babblings, [Ti1 6:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1006.htm#020), from
the solid doctrines of the Gospel, and a solid way of handling them,
they turned to vain, idle, useless, and unprofitable subjects of
discourse, and to treating upon subjects in a vain, jejune, and empty
manner; entertaining their hearers with foolish and trifling questions
and answers to them about the law, and with strifes about words, which
were unserviceable and unedifying; they were unruly and vain talkers,
[Tit 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#010).

[1 Timothy 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#007)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 1:7</span></span>

Desiring to be teachers of the law,.... They were very fond of being
called Rabbi, Rabbi, and styled doctors of the law, and of being thought
to have skill in interpreting the law, and good talents in expounding
it, and preaching upon it; which was now most in vogue, and gained the
greatest applause, when the preaching of the Gospel was treated with
contempt, not only by the unbelieving Jews, but by judaizing Christians,
and carnal professors,

Understanding neither what they say, nor whereof they affirm: they did
not understand the law, the nature and end, the purity and spirituality,
and perfection of it, which they were so fond of teaching, and went into
many foolish and unlearned questions about it; see [Ti2
2:23](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#023), and which they as foolishly
answered: these are the ignorant and unlearned men, who, notwithstanding
their vain show of learning, and pretence to skill in interpreting the
law, wrested the Scriptures to their own destruction, and that of
others; they were ignorant of the things they talked of, and knew not by
what arguments to confirm them, and yet were very bold and confident in
their assertions: and generally speaking so it is, that those who can
prove least assert most, and that with the greatest assurance.

[1 Timothy 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#008)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 1:8</span></span>

But we know that the law is good,.... The apostle says this to prevent
an objection that might be made to him, that seeing he bore so hard on
such who were fond of being teachers of the law, he was himself against
the law, and the preaching and proper use of it; but this he would not
have concluded, for he and his fellow labourers in the ministry, and all
true believers know, from the Scriptures of truth, from the agreement of
the law with the Gospel, and from their own experience, that the law is
good, provided it be used in a lawful way, and to lawful purposes: and
this is to be understood not of the ceremonial law, which was now
disannulled, because of the weakness and unprofitableness of it, so that
there was no lawful use of that; but of the moral law, which must needs
be good, since the author of it is God, who is only good; and nothing
but good can come from him: the law, strictly moral, is a copy of his
nature, transcribed out of himself, as well as with his own hands; and
is a declaration of his will, and is stamped with his authority, and
therefore must be good: the matter of it is good, it contains good, yea,
great and excellent things; the matter of it is honestly and morally
good, as to love mercy, do justice, and walk humbly with God: and it is
pleasantly good to a regenerate man, who loves it, and delights in it
after the inner man, and serves it with his spirit; though the carnal
mind cannot be subject to it, but rejects it, and rebels against it: and
it is also profitably good; for though obedience to it is not profitable
to God, yet it is to men; and though eternal life is not obtained
hereby, nor any reward given for keeping it, yet in keeping it there is
a reward; and that peace is enjoyed, which the transgressors of it are
strangers to: it is good in the uses of it, both to sinners and to
saints. To sinners it is useful for the knowledge of sin, to convince of
it, and bring them to a sense of it, and concern for it, which is
effectually done, when the Spirit of God sets in with it, or brings this
commandment home to the heart; and if it has not this use, it is
sometimes a means of restraining men from sin, which is the use of civil
laws among men; and if it has not this, it is of use however to accuse
men rightly of sin, and to pronounce justly guilty before God for it, to
curse them as they deserve it, and to sentence to condemnation and
death: and to believers it is of use, though they are not under it as in
the hands of Moses, and as a covenant of works, and are freed from its
curse and condemnation, and under no obligation to seek for life and
righteousness by it; to them it is of use, to point out to them what is
the will of God, and what should be done, and not done; and it is a rule
of walk and conversation to them, as in the hands of Christ; and is as a
glass to them to behold their own deformity, the impurity of their
nature, the plague of their own hearts, and the imperfection of their
obedience; by which they see the insufficiency of their own
righteousness, how far they are from perfection, and what carnal
creatures they are, when compared with this law: and as this serves to
put them out of conceit with themselves, so it tends to make Christ and
his righteousness more lovely and valuable in their esteem; who has
wrought out a righteousness as broad and as long as the law is, and by
which it is magnified and made honourable, and has delivered them from
its curse and condemnation. And this law is good as it is holy, in its
author, nature, and use; and as it is just, requiring just things, and
doing that which is just, by acquitting those who are interested in
Christ's righteousness, and in condemning those that have no
righteousness; and as it is a spiritual and perfect law, which reaches
the spirit and soul of man, and is concerned with inward thoughts and
motions, as well as outward actions; and especially the end of it, the
fulfilling end of it is good, which is Jesus Christ, who was made under
it, came to fulfil it, and has answered all the demands of it: so that
it must be good, and which cannot be denied,

if a man use it lawfully; for if it is used in order to obtain life,
righteousness, and salvation by the works of it, or by obedience to it,
it is used unlawfully: for the law does not give life, nor can
righteousness come by it; nor are, or can men be saved by the works of
it; to use the law for such purposes, is to abuse it, as the false
teachers did, and make that which is good in itself, and in its proper
use, to do what is evil; namely, to obscure and frustrate the grace of
God, and make null and void the sufferings and death of Christ. A lawful
use of the law is to obey it, as in the hands of Christ, the King of
saints, and lawgiver in his church, from a principle of love to him, in
the exercise of faith on him, without any mercenary selfish views,
without trusting to, or depending on, what is done in obedience to it,
but with a view to the glory of God, to testify our subjection to
Christ, and our gratitude to him for favours received from him.

[1 Timothy 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#009)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 1:9</span></span>

Knowing this, that the law is not made for a righteous man,.... No man
is naturally righteous since Adam, excepting the man Christ Jesus: some
that are righteous in their own opinion, and in the esteem of others,
are not truly and really so; none are righteous, or can be justified in
the sight of God by the works of the law; those only are righteous men,
who are made so through the imputation of Christ's righteousness to
them: and such a righteous man is here intended, who believes in Christ
with the heart unto righteousness, who lays hold on Christ's
righteousness, and receives it by faith; in consequence of which he
lives soberly, righteously, and godly, though not without sin, since
there is no such just man upon earth. Now for such a man the law was not
made; which must be understood not of its original constitution and
make, for it was certainly made for, and given to Adam, who was a
righteous man, and was written upon his heart in a state of innocence;
and who had a positive law made also for him, and given to him as a
trial of his obedience to this: it was also delivered to the Israelites
on Mount Sinai, who were, many of them, at least, righteous men; and
besides all this, the law was made for Jesus Christ; he was the end, the
mark, and scope at which it aimed, and for whose sake it was given to
Israel, that he might be made under it, and fulfil it. Nor does this
expression deny all use of the law to a righteous man, which has been
pointed out on the preceding verse, but only removes an unlawful use,
and a wrong end of the law: it never was made with any such view as to
obtain righteousness by it; for, a righteous man, as Adam, in innocence,
and all that are justified by Christ's righteousness, need it not for
such a purpose, because they are already righteous; and sinners can
never attain to righteousness by it, since it cannot give life unto
them: it is made therefore not for the former with the view now
mentioned, but for the latter, and that both for the restraining of sin,
and punishing of sinners. The words , may be rendered, "the law does not
lie upon a righteous man", or against him. It does not lie as a weight
or burden on him; its precept does not lie on him, as a task to be
performed; nor does its penalty, the curse, lie on him as a punishment
to be bore by him: it does not lie upon him, nor against him, as an
accusing law, its mouth is stopped by the righteousness of Christ, by
which he is denominated a righteous man; nor as a terrifying law, and
bringing into bondage by its threats and menaces; nor as a rigorous law,
obliging to obedience in a forcible and compulsive way; seeing there is
no need of it, the righteous man delights in it, and cheerfully serves
it, and the love of Christ constrains him to obey it freely. And much
less does it lie on him, or against him as a cursing or condemning law,
since Christ has redeemed him from the curse of it,

But for the lawless and disobedient; by the "lawless" are meant, not the
Gentiles, which were without the written law, but such who have it, and
despise and reject it, and live not according to it, but transgress it:
and "the disobedient" design such who are not subject to it: who are
sons of Belial, children without the yoke; who cast the law of the Lord
behind their backs; who are not, nor can they be subject to it, without
the powerful and efficacious grace of God. Now the law lies upon, and
against such persons, as an accusing, terrifying, cursing, and
condemning law,

For the ungodly, and for sinners; by the "ungodly" are intended, such as
are without God in the world, who neither fear God, nor regard man, who
neglect and despise the worship of God, and say to him, depart from us,
[Job 21:14](../../../bib/kjv/job021.htm#014) and by "sinners" are
designed notorious ones, who are exceeding great sinners, always
sinning, making sin their constant business and employment; on and
against these the law lies:

for unholy and profane: such are unholy persons, who are destitute of
inward principles of truth and holiness, and who live unholy lives and
conversations; and "profane" persons are those who profane the name of
the Lord by cursing and swearing, and who profane his day, doctrines,
and ordinances, and live dissolute and profane lives, being abandoned to
all sin and wickedness; these three couples of wicked men, expressed in
general terms, seem to have respect greatly to the moral part of the
four precepts of the decalogue, as the following particulars do to the
other six:

for murderers of fathers, and murderers of mothers; though there is no
law that expressly mentions this, yet is beyond all doubt a breach both
of the fifth and sixth commands; and if cursing parents, and
disobedience to them, were punishable by the law with death, then much
more the murder of them; see [Lev 20:9](../../../bib/kjv/lev020.htm#009)
though the words will bear to be rendered, "for strikers of fathers, and
strikers of mothers"; and so the Syriac and Arabic versions render them,
and against this there was an express law, [Exo
21:15](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#015). According to the Pompeian law,
one guilty of parricide was to be sewed up in a sack with a dog, a cock,
a viper, and an ape, and cast into the sea, or into a river (h):

for manslayers, guilty of the murder of any man, which was always
punishable with death, and was a breach of the sixth command; see [Gen
9:6](../../../bib/kjv/gen009.htm#006).

\(h\) Pompon. Laetus de Leg. Rom. p. 156.

[1 Timothy 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#010)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 1:10</span></span>

For whoremongers,.... Fornicators and adulterers, who were transgressors
of the seventh command, [Exo 20:14](../../../bib/kjv/exo020.htm#014)
these God will judge, and such shall have their portion in the lake that
burns with fire and brimstone:

for them that defile themselves with mankind; who are guilty of sodomy;
such, according to the law, were to die, [Lev
18:22](../../../bib/kjv/lev018.htm#022) the wrath of God was revealed
from heaven in a very visible and remarkable manner against this
abomination, by raining fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah, and
upon the cities of the plain, who defiled themselves in this way:

for men stealers; who decoyed servants or free men, and stole them away,
and sold them for slaves; see the laws against this practice, and the
punishment such were liable to, in [Exo
21:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo021.htm#016). This practice was condemned by
the Flavian law among the Romans (i), and was not allowed of among the
Grecians (k); the death with which such were punished was strangling,
according to the Jews (l):

for liars; who speak what is false, against their own knowledge and
conscience, and with a design to deceive; who lie against their
neighbours, and act falsely and deceitfully in trade and merchandise, as
well as speak that which is not true; see [Lev
6:2](../../../bib/kjv/lev006.htm#002).

for perjured persons; who take a false oath on any account, and bear
false witness against their neighbour. Now upon, and against all, and
each of these, the law lies, as an accusing, threatening, and cursing
law:

and if there be any other thing that is contrary to sound doctrine; the
law lies against it, takes notice of it, charges with it, condemns and
punishes for it: by "sound doctrine" is meant the doctrine of the
Gospel, which is in itself pure and incorrupt, and is the cause of
soundness and health to others; it is health to the navel, and marrow to
the bones; its doctrines are the wholesome words of Christ, and by them
souls are nourished up unto eternal life; when the errors and heresies
of men are in themselves rotten and corrupt, and also eat as do a
canker. Here it may be observed, that there is an entire harmony and
agreement between the Gospel and the law, rightly understood and used;
what is contrary to the one, is also to the other; the Gospel no more
countenances sin than the law does; and whatever is repugnant to the
Gospel is liable to be punished by the law,

\(i\) Pompon. Laetus de Leg. Rom. p. 154. (k) Philostrat. Vit. Apollon.
l. 8. c. 3. (l) Misna Sanhedria, c. 10. sect. 1. & Maimon. Hilch.
Geniba, c. 9. sect. 1.

[1 Timothy 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#011)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 1:11</span></span>

According to the glorious Gospel of the blessed God,.... For no doctrine
is sound, but what is agreeable to that: this is a very great encomium
of the Gospel. The doctrine preached by the apostles was not only
Gospel, or good news, and glad tidings, but the Gospel of God; of which
he is the author, and which relates to his glory, the glory of all his
perfections; which reveals his purposes, shows his covenant, and
exhibits the blessings and promises of it; and is the Gospel of the
blessed God, who is blessed in himself, and is the fountain of
blessedness to others; and particularly he blesses his chosen ones with
spiritual blessings, and which are set forth and declared in the Gospel;
for which reason this epithet seems to be given to God here: and it is a
glorious one; it discovers the glory of God, of his wisdom, grace, and
love in the salvation of men; its doctrines of peace and pardon,
righteousness and salvation by Jesus Christ, are glorious ones; and so
are its promises, being great and precious, all yea and amen in Christ,
absolute, unconditional, unchangeable, and irreversible; its ordinances
also are glorious ones, being amiable and pleasant, and not grievous and
burdensome to believers; and it is glorious in its effects, being the
power of God unto salvation, the means of enlightening the blind, of
quickening the dead, of delivering men from bondage and servitude, of
turning men from sin and Satan to God, and of refreshing and comforting
distressed minds, and of reviving the spirits of drooping saints, of
establishing and strengthening them, and nourishing them up to eternal
life. The apostle adds,

which was committed to my trust: to distinguish this Gospel from
another, from that of the false teachers, which was an inglorious one,
and he had nothing to do with; and to show the excellency and worth of
it; it being valuable, was deserving of care and keeping, and was a
depositum the person intrusted with was faithfully and carefully to keep
and preserve.

[1 Timothy 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 1:12</span></span>

And I thank Jesus Christ our Lord, &c. l The subject matter of this
thanksgiving being the apostle's call to the ministry of the word, and
his furniture and fitness for it, shows, that while others were fond of
being teachers, and called doctors of the law, he esteemed it an high
honour and special favour bestowed upon him, that he was a preacher of
the Gospel; and that all his gifts and abilities for it were not of
himself, nor from men, but were owing to the free grace of God, and
favour of Christ; wherefore he gloried not in them, as if he had not
received them, but gives Christ the glory of them, and thanks to him for
them,

who hath enabled me; who gave him all his abilities for the preaching of
the Gospel, and all that strength to perform the various parts of labour
and service he was called unto, and all that firmness, resolution, and
fortitude of mind he was endued with, to bear and suffer what he did for
the sake of Christ and his Gospel,

For that he counted me faithful; not that he was so antecedent to the
grace and gifts bestowed on him by Christ, or that Christ foresaw that
he would be so, and therefore chose him for his service; but he counted
him faithful, having made him so by his grace, and thus he kept him;
faithfulness being a necessary requisite and qualification for a Gospel
minister, he having a great trust committed to him, being made a steward
of the manifold grace and mysteries of God:

putting me into the ministry. The ministry of the word, the work of the
ministry, or preaching of the Gospel, the dispensation or administration
of it to the sons of men; this he did not thrust himself into, nor take
this honour to, and of himself; nor was he put into it by men, but was
chosen to it of God, and called unto it by the Spirit, and was placed in
it by Christ himself, who in person appeared to him, and made a minister
of him; see [Rom 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/rom001.htm#001) [Act
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#002). The Arabic and Ethiopic versions
read, "his ministry", the ministry of Christ.

[1 Timothy 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#013)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 1:13</span></span>

Who was before a blasphemer,.... Of the name of Christ, contrary to
which he thought he ought to do many things; and he not only blasphemed
that name himself, calling him an impostor and a deceiver, but he
compelled others to blaspheme it also, [Act
26:9](../../../bib/kjv/act026.htm#009). This, as well as what follows,
is said, to illustrate the grace of God in his conversion, and call to
the ministry:

and a persecutor: for not content to speak evil of Christ, of his
person, people, truths, and ordinances, he acted against them; not only
breathed out against the disciples threatenings and slaughter, but did
many evil things to them, and destroyed them which called on the name of
Christ; persecuted Christ in his members, and them beyond measure, even
unto death, [Act 9:1](../../../bib/kjv/act009.htm#001).

And injurious; not barely using contumelious and reproachful words of
Christ, and his people, which is the sense of some versions, and seems
to be included in the first character; but using force and violence, and
doing injury, not only to the characters, but persons and properties of
the saints, making havoc of the church, haling men and women out of
their houses, and committing them to prison; and now it was that
Benjamin ravined as a wolf, the apostle being of that tribe; see [Act
8:3](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#003).

But I obtained mercy: the Vulgate Latin version reads, "the mercy of
God"; God had mercy on him, unasked and unsought for, as well as
unmerited; God had mercy on him when he was in the career of his sin,
and stopped him; and of his abundant mercy begat him again to a lively
hope of forgiveness and eternal life; and through his great love
quickened him, when dead in trespasses and sins; and according to the
multitude of his tender mercies, forgave and blotted out all his
iniquities; and put him openly among his children, his family and
household; and to all this added the grace of apostleship: he put him
into the ministry, and, of a blaspheming and injurious persecutor, made
him a laborious, faithful, and useful preacher of the Gospel,

Because I did it ignorantly in unbelief. This is said, not as an
extenuation of this sin, or as an excuse for himself; for this was not
the apostle's method, since in the next verse he calls himself the chief
of sinners; besides, ignorance is not an excuse but an aggravation of
sin, especially when there are means of knowledge, and these are not
attended to; and when persons are not open to conviction, and reject the
fullest evidence, which was the case here: nor can unbelief be pleaded
in such a man's favour, who heard what Stephen had to say; and though he
could not resist his wisdom, received not the truth spoken by him, but
consented to his death; moreover, all sins spring from ignorance, and
are aggravated by unbelief: but this phrase describes the apostle's
state and condition; he was a poor, blind, ignorant bigot, an
unbelieving and hardened creature, and so an object of mercy, pity, and
compassion; and he who has compassion on the ignorant, and them that are
out of the way, had compassion on him. He indeed did not know that Jesus
was the Christ, or that his followers were the true church of God; he
really thought he ought to do what he did, and that, in doing it, he did
God good service; he had a zeal, but not according to knowledge; and
therefore did not sin wilfully and maliciously against light, and
knowledge, and conscience, and so not the sin against the Holy Ghost; as
some of the Pharisees did, and therefore died without mercy, and were
not capable subjects of mercy, and proper objects of it; nor is it ever
extended to such: but this not being the case of the apostle, mercy was
of sovereign good will and pleasure vouchsafed to him; his ignorance and
unbelief were not a reason or cause of his obtaining mercy, which is
always shown in a sovereign way; but a reason, showing, that that was
mercy that was vouchsafed to him, since he was such an ignorant and
unbelieving creature. It is a good note of Beza's on the place, "en
merita preparationis quae profert apostolus"; "what works, merits,
previous qualifications and preparations were there in the apostle,
fitting him for the grace and mercy of God", seeing in the midst of his
sins, and in the full pursuit of them, the grace of God laid hold upon
him, and mercy was shown him? there is nothing between his being a
blasphemer, a persecutor, an injurious person, an ignorant unbeliever,
and his obtaining mercy.

[1 Timothy 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#014)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 1:14</span></span>

And the grace of our Lord was exceeding abundant,.... That is, the love
of Jehovah the Father; so the Ethiopic version reads, "the grace of
God"; of God the Father, since he is distinguished in the text from
Jesus Christ. God is abundant in grace and goodness; he is rich and
plenteous in mercy; there is an overflow of love in his heart to his
chosen people, and in conversion it flows out, and abounds and
superabounds; see [Rom 5:20](../../../bib/kjv/rom005.htm#020).

with faith and love which is in Christ Jesus; these are the effects of
the love and favour of God displayed in conversion, or which the grace
of God brings along with it, and implants in the soul at that time, as
it did in the apostle; for by "faith" is not meant the faithfulness of
God to his Son, and to his covenant, oath, and promise, which now began
visibly to be made good; nor the faith of the Gospel committed to the
apostle's trust, which was an high favour; but the grace of faith, which
is a pure gift of God, and a distinguishing instance of his grace; for
all men have it not, only his elect; and is a most precious and
excellent grace, and of great use and importance: it receives every
blessing from Christ, and gives him all the glory; through it much
peace, joy, and comfort are enjoyed here, and with it is connected
eternal life and salvation hereafter: and by "love" also is meant, not
the love with which God loves his people, for that is designed by the
grace of our Lord, though there is a very great display of that in
conversion, which is a time of love; but the internal grace of love,
even love to God, to Christ, and to his people, which the apostle was
before destitute of; but now instead of unbelief he had faith, and
instead of rage and madness against Christ, and the saints, his soul was
filled with love to both. The Arabic version reads, "with my faith, and
my love". The phrase, "which is in Christ Jesus", denotes either that
the spring of these graces is in Christ, and that they come from him, in
whom all fulness dwells; or that he is the object of them, in which they
centre, and on whom they are exercised, and particularly that love to
the saints was shown for his sake.

[1 Timothy 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#015)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 1:15</span></span>

This is a faithful saying, and worthy of all acceptation,.... This is
said, lest it should be thought strange, or scarcely credible, that so
great a sinner should be saved; as well as to give a summary of the
glorious Gospel the apostle was intrusted with; and in opposition to
fables, endless genealogies, and vain jangling, and contentions about
the law. The doctrine of Christ's coming into the world, and of
salvation by him, as it is the sum and substance of the Gospel, so it is
a "faithful saying"; in which the faithfulness of God is displayed to
himself, and the perfections of his nature, his holiness, justice, love,
grace, and mercy; to his law, which is magnified, and made honourable;
to his word of promise hereby fulfilled; and to his Son in carrying him
through the work: and the faithfulness of Christ is discovered herein,
both to his Father with whom, and to his friends for whom, he engaged to
obtain salvation; and the faithfulness of ministers is shown in
preaching it, and of other saints in professing it, and abiding by it:
it is a true saying, and not to be disputed or doubted of, but to be
believed most firmly; it is certain that God the Father sent his Son
into the world for this purpose; and Christ himself assures us, that he
came for this end; his carriage to sinners, and his actions, testified
the same; his works and miracles confirm it; and the numberless
instances of sinners saved by him evince the truth of it: and it is
"worthy of all acceptation"; or to be received by all sorts of persons,
learned, or unlearned, rich or poor, greater or lesser sinners; and to
be received in all ways, and in the best manner, as the word of God, and
not man; with heartiness and readiness, and with love, joy, and
gladness, and with meekness, faith, and fear, and by all means; for it
is entirely true, absolutely necessary, and suitable to the case of all,
and is to be highly valued and esteemed by those who do approve and
accept of it. It is the Christian Cabala, or the evangelical tradition,
delivered by the Father to Christ, by him to his apostles, and by them
to the saints, by whom it is cordially received. The apostle seems to
allude to the Cabala of the Jews, their oral law, which they say (m) was
delivered to Moses on Mount Sinai, and by him to Joshua; and by Joshua
to the elders; and by the elders to the prophets; and so from one to
another to his times: but here he suggests, that if they would have a
Cabala, here is one, that is firm, and true, and certain, and worthy to
be received, whereas the Jewish one was precarious, yea, false and
untrue. Indeed, sometimes the words of the prophets are so called by
them; so that passage in [Joe 2:13](../../../bib/kjv/joe002.htm#013) is
called "Cabala" (n), some thing delivered and received; upon which one
of their commentators (o) has these words,

"whatever a prophet commands the Israelites, makes known unto them, or
exhorts them to, is a Cabala.

And if a prophetic command or admonition, then surely: such an
evangelical doctrine, as follows, is entitled to this character,

that Christ Jesus came into the world to save sinners; Christ came into
the world, being sent by his Father, but not against his will, but with
his free consent: he came voluntarily in the fulness of time into this
sinful world, where he was ill treated; and this was not by local
motion, or change of place, but by assumption of nature; and the end of
it was, that he might be the Saviour of lost sinners, as all men are,
both by Adam's sin, and their own transgressions; though he came not to
save all, for then all would be saved, whereas they are not; and if he
came to save them, he must have then so far lost his end; but he came to
save sinners, of all sorts, even notorious sinners, the worst and chief
of sinners: and the apostle instances in himself,

of whom I am chief; or "first"; not that he was the first in time; Adam
was the first man that sinned, though Eve was before him in the
transgression: it is a most stupid notion, that some gave into from this
passage, as if the soul of Adam passed from one body to another, till it
came to Paul, and therefore he calls himself the first of sinners: but
his meaning is, that he was the first in quality, or the greatest and
chiefest of sinners, not only of those that are saved, but of all men,
Jews or Gentiles; and this he said not hyperbolically, nor out of
modesty, but from a real sense or apprehension he had of himself, and
his sins, which were made exceeding sinful to him; or he was the chief
of sinners, and exceeded all others in his way of sinning, in
blaspheming the name of Christ, and persecuting his saints, otherwise
his conversation was externally moral, and in his own, and in the
opinion of others, blameless: he was no fornicator, adulterer, thief,
extortioner, &c. but in the above things he went beyond all others, and
was a ringleader in them; and the remembrance of these sins abode with
him, and kept him humble all his days; he was always ready to
acknowledge them, and express his vileness and unworthiness on account
of them: hence he here says, not "of whom I was", but "of whom I am
chief". Now such sinners, and all sorts of sinners, Christ came to save
from all their sins, original and actual; from the law, its curse and
condemnation; from the bondage of Satan, the evil of the world, and
wrath to come, and from every enemy; and that, by his obedience,
sufferings, and death, by fulfilling the law, bearing its penalty,
offering himself a sacrifice for sin, thereby finishing it, making
reconciliation for it, and bringing in an everlasting righteousness: and
a great Saviour he is, and an only one; a full, suitable, able, and
willing Saviour; a Saviour of the soul, as well as of the body, and of
both with an everlasting salvation,

\(m\) Pirke Abot, c. 1. sect. 1. (n) Misn. Taanith, c. 2. sect. 1. (o)
Jarchi Misn. Taanith, c. 2. sect. 1.

[1 Timothy 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#016)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 1:16</span></span>

Howbeit, for this cause I obtained mercy,.... Though so great a sinner,
and even the chief of sinners:

that in me first Jesus Christ might show forth all longsuffering; not
that the apostle was the first that was converted upon Christ's coming
to save sinners; for there were many converted before him, and very
great sinners too, and he speaks of himself as one born out of due time;
unless it can be thought that he was the first of the persecutors of the
church, upon the death of Stephen, that was converted: but the word
"first" is not an "adverb" of time, but a "noun" expressing the
character of the apostle, as before; and the sense is, that in him, the
first or chief of sinners, Jesus Christ exhibited an instance of his
abundant longsuffering exercised towards his elect for their salvation;
he waiting in the midst of all their sins and rebellions to be gracious
to them; and of this, here was a full proof in the Apostle Paul: what
longsuffering and patience were showed, while he held the clothes of
them that stoned Stephen, when he made havoc and haled men and women to
prison, and persecuted them to death? and this was done,

for a pattern to them that should hereafter believe on him to life
everlasting; either to those of his fellow persecutors, or of others in
that age, who should be made sensible of their sins, and by this
instance and example of grace be encouraged to believe in Christ for
life and salvation; or to all awakened and convinced sinners then, and
in every age, who from hence may conceive hope of salvation in Christ
for themselves, though ever so great sinners; since such patience and
longsuffering were exercised towards, and such grace bestowed upon, one
that had been a sinner of the first rank and size, yea, the chief of
sinners: in him was delineated the grace of God, and in his conversion
it was painted in its most lively colours; and a just representation is
given of it, for the encouragement of the faith and hope of others in
Christ. Christ is here represented as the object of faith; and true
faith regards him, looks unto him, and deals with him for eternal life
and salvation. Our countryman, Mr. Mede, thinks that the sense is, that
the conversion of the Apostle Paul was a pattern of the conversion of
the Jews in the latter day; and his thought seems to be a very good one:
the apostle's conversion is a pledge and earnest of theirs, and showed
that God had not cast away all that people; and carries in it some
likeness and agreement with theirs: as his, theirs will be in the midst
of all their blindness and unbelief; and when they have filled up the
measure of their sins; and they will be a nation born at once, suddenly,
and by the immediate power and grace of God, without the ministry of the
word, which they will not hear: thus they will be converted as he was,
and become as hearty lovers and friends of the Gentile churches.

[1 Timothy 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#017)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">ti1 1:17</span></span>

Now unto the King eternal,.... This doxology, or ascription of glory to
God, on account of the grace bestowed upon the apostle, may be
considered, either as referring to all the three divine Persons, Father,
Son, and Spirit, who are the one and only God; and to whom all the
attributes of wisdom, power, eternity, immortality, or
incorruptibleness, and invisibility, belong; and who are jointly
concerned in the grace bestowed upon any of the sons of men. Or else to
God the Father, in agreement with a parallel place in [Rom
16:27](../../../bib/kjv/rom016.htm#027) who is the only true God, in
opposition to nominal and fictitious deities, though not to the
exclusion of the Son and Spirit; and to whom the several epithets here
used may be unquestionably given: he has shown his wisdom in the works
of creation, providence, and grace; he is the everlasting King, or the
King of ages, or of worlds; he is Maker of the worlds, and the Governor
of them throughout all ages and generations; he only has immortality,
and is the incorruptible God, and who is invisible, whose shape has
never been seen, nor his voice heard: or else this may be thought to
belong to Jesus Christ, since it is to him the apostle gives thanks for
putting him into the ministry; and from him he obtained mercy, and
received abundant grace; and he it was who came into the world to save
sinners, and who showed forth all longsuffering in him, see [Ti1
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#012), upon which the apostle breaks
out into this attribution of glory and honour, and which agrees with
[Jde 1:25](../../../bib/kjv/jde001.htm#025). And everything here said is
applicable to him; he is the eternal King, whose is the kingdom of
nature, providence, and grace; his throne is for ever and ever, and of
his kingdom and government there is no end; he is the "King of ages", as
the phrase may be rendered, and so his kingdom is called , "the kingdom
of all ages", [Psa 145:13](../../../bib/kjv/psa145.htm#013) and which
endures throughout all generations; and this distinguishes him from all
other kings. Scarce any king ever reigned an age, but Christ has
reigned, and will reign throughout all ages. No regard is here had, as
some have thought, to the Aeones of the Gnostics and Valentinians; but
rather the apostle adopts a phrase into his doxology, frequently used by
the Jews in their prayers, many of which begin after this manner,

"blessed art thou, O Lord our God, "the king of the age, or world", &c.

and , "Lord of all ages, or worlds", &c. (p). Other attributes and
epithets follow, as

immortal or "incorruptible". Christ is the living God, and the living
Redeemer; and though he died as man, he will die no more, but ever lives
to make intercession for his people, and to reign over them, and protect
them: who also may be said to be "invisible", who was so in his divine
nature, till manifest in the flesh; and now in his human nature he is
taken out of the sight of men, and is not to be beheld with bodily eyes
by men on earth: and he is

the only wise God; he is "the only God", so the Alexandrian copy, the
Syriac and Vulgate Latin versions, read; not to the exclusion of the
Father or Spirit, but in opposition to all false deities, or those who
are not by nature God: and he is the only wise God; who is wisdom
itself, and of himself; and is the fountain of wisdom, both natural and
spiritual, unto others; wherefore to him be

honour and glory for ever and ever, Amen. Christ is crowned with honour
and glory, and he is worthy of it; and it becomes all men to honour the
Son, as they do the Father: he is the brightness of his glory, and equal
to him; and the glory of deity, of all the divine perfections, and
works, and also worship, should be given him; as well as the glory of
salvation, and of all the grace the sons of men partake of; and that not
only now, but to all eternity,

\(p\) Seder Tephillot, fol. 2. 2. & 3. 2. & 37. 1, 2. Ed. Basil. fol. 2.
1, 2. & 3. 1. & 4. 1. & 5. 2. & passim, Ed. Amsterdam.

[1 Timothy 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">ti1 1:18</span></span>

This charge I commit unto thee, son Timothy,.... After a digression the
apostle had made concerning himself, his conversion, and call to the
ministry, he returns to his former subject, and original design, and
renews the charge he gave to Timothy; and which was not only an order to
charge others to teach no other doctrine than that of the Gospel; but
includes the charge of preaching it himself, and intends the glorious
Gospel of the blessed God committed to his trust, and the whole form of
sound words he had heard of him, and which he had charged him to keep
pure and incorrupt: and this was done,

according to the prophecies which went before on thee; by which are
meant, not the prophecies of the Old Testament, though of these Timothy
had a considerable share of knowledge from a child, and was hereby
greatly qualified to have such a charge committed to him; but then these
were not prophecies concerning him, but the Messiah, his person, office,
kingdom, and grace: nor are any particular revelations made unto the
Apostle Paul concerning Timothy intended, of which there is no account;
the revelations and visions he had, related not to men, and their
characters, but to doctrines; rather the testimonies of the brethren at
Lystra and Iconium, and the good reports they made of him to the
apostle, which promised and foreboded future usefulness, are designed;
though it seems best of all to understand these prophecies of such as
were delivered out by the prophets in the church, for such there were in
those times; who, when Timothy was a child, or a youth, foretold that he
would have great gifts bestowed upon him, and would be a very useful,
diligent, laborious, and successful preacher of the Gospel; and
therefore the apostle mentions these to stimulate him the more to the
discharge of his work, that he might answer the prophecies concerning
him: for he adds,

that thou by them mightest war a good warfare: that is, that in
consideration of the charge committed to him, and the prophecies that
went before of him, might be the more industrious to fulfil his
ministry, is signified by a warfare, in allusion to the service of the
Levites, which is so called, [Num 8:24](../../../bib/kjv/num008.htm#024)
with zeal and courage, faithfulness and integrity: for not that warfare
is intended, which is common to all believers; who being enlisted as
volunteers under Christ, the Captain of their salvation, and having on
the whole armour of God, fight against the world, the flesh, and the
devil; and are more than conquerors through him that has loved them: but
that warfare, which is peculiar to the ministers of the word; whose
business it is more especially to fight the good fight of faith, and as
good soldiers of Christ, to endure hardness for the sake of him, and his
Gospel; and who, besides the other enemies, have to do with false
teachers; and their warfare lies in publishing and defending the Gospel
of Christ, and in contending for it, and in the weakening of Satan's
kingdom, and enlarging the kingdom of Christ; and for which the weapons
of their warfare are peculiarly made, and are eminently succeeded; and
when they are used to such good purposes, by the ministers of the
Gospel, they war a good warfare.

[1 Timothy 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#019)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">ti1 1:19</span></span>

Holding faith, and a good conscience..... By "faith" is meant, not the
grace of faith, but the doctrine of faith, a sense in which it is often
used in this epistle; see [Ti1 3:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1003.htm#009) and
the "holding" of it does not intend a mere profession of it, and a
retaining of that without wavering, which is to be done by all
believers; but a holding it forth in the ministry of the word, in
opposition to a concealing or dropping it, or any part of it; and a
holding it fast, without wavering, and in opposition to a departure from
it or any cowardice about it and against all posers: to which must be
added, a good conscience; the conscience is not naturally good, but is
defiled by sin; and that is only good, which is sprinkled by the blood
of Christ, and thereby purged from dead works; the effect of which is an
holy, upright, and becoming conversation; and which seems to be chiefly
intended here, and particularly the upright conduct and behaviour of the
ministers of the Gospel, in the faithful discharge of their work and
office: see [Co2 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/co2001.htm#012).

Which some having put away; that is, a good conscience; and which does
not suppose that they once had one, since that may be put away which was
never had: the Jews, who blasphemed and contradicted, and never received
the word of God, are said to put it from them, [Act
13:46](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#046) where the same word is used as
here; and signifies to refuse or reject anything with detestation and
contempt: these men always had an abhorrence to a good conscience among
men, and to a good life and conversation, the evidence of it; and at
length threw off the mask, and dropped the faith they professed, as
being contrary to their evil conscience: though admitting it does
suppose they once had a good conscience, it must be understood not of a
conscience cleansed by the blood of Christ, but of a good conscience in
external show only, or in comparison of what they afterwards appeared to
have: and, besides, some men, destitute of the grace of God, may have a
good conscience in some sense, or with respect to some particular facts,
or to their general conduct and behaviour among men, as the Apostle Paul
had while unregenerate, [Act 23:1](../../../bib/kjv/act023.htm#001) and
which being acted against, or lost, is no instance of falling from the
true grace of God, which this passage is sometimes produced in proof of:

concerning faith have made shipwreck; which designs not the grace, but
the doctrine of faith, as before observed, which men may profess, and
fall off from, and entirely drop and lose. Though supposing faith as a
grace is meant, the phrase, "have made shipwreck of it", is not strong
enough to prove the total and final falling away of true believers,
could such be thought to be here meant; since persons may be
shipwrecked, and not lost, the Apostle Paul was thrice shipwrecked, and
each time saved; besides, as there is a true and unfeigned, so there is
a feigned and counterfeit faith, which may be in persons who have no
true grace, and may be shipwrecked, so as to be lost.

[1 Timothy 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#020)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">ti1 1:20</span></span>

Of whom is Hymenaeus and Alexander,.... The former of these is mentioned
in [Ti2 2:17](../../../bib/kjv/ti2002.htm#017) and that part of faith he
made shipwreck of, or erred in, was the doctrine of the resurrection of
the dead, whereby the faith of some nominal believers was overthrown;
and this was attended with the putting away of a good conscience, he
seemingly before had; for his profane and vain babblings increased to
more ungodliness: the latter seems to be the same with Alexander the
coppersmith, who did the apostle much evil, [Ti2
4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#014) and it may be is the same with
him who was at Ephesus when the apostle was, there, [Act
19:33](../../../bib/kjv/act019.htm#033) and where he might be now with
Hymenaeus, with whom he might agree in his erroneous opinions, and
therefore are particularly mentioned, Ephesus being the place where
Timothy now was. It seems by their names that they were both Greeks;
Alexander is a known name among the Greeks, since the times of Alexander
the great, and even became common among the Jews; see Gill on [Act
4:6](../../../bib/kjv/act004.htm#006), and Hymenaeus was a name among
the Grecians, from Hymen, the Heathen god of marriage: one of this name
is mentioned among those said to be raised from the dead by Aesculapius
(q); there was also a bishop of Jerusalem of this name (r),

Whom I have delivered to Satan; not by excommunication, which is the act
of a church, and not of a single person; but by an apostolical power he
had of delivering the bodies of men into the hands of Satan, by him to
be tortured and afflicted, in order to bring them to a sense of their
sins, and as a chastisement and correction for them, and a token of
God's displeasure at them; See Gill on [Co1
5:5](../../../bib/kjv/co1005.htm#005).

That they may learn not to blaspheme; or "that being chastised",
corrected, or disciplined, "they might not blaspheme", as they had
before done; either by words, contradicting, reviling, and scoffing at
the doctrine of the resurrection; or by their unbecoming lives and
conversations, giving themselves great liberty in sinning, supposing
there was no truth in that doctrine; whereby they not only blasphemed
the Christian religion themselves, but caused it to be evil spoken of by
others,

\(q\) Apollodorus de Orig. Deor. l. 3. p. 172. (r) Euseb. Eccl. Hist. l.
7. c. 14. 30.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 2](ti1002)

</div>
