<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1)  
  [Previous](th2003)  [Next](ti1001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 TIMOTHY

Timothy, to whom this epistle is written, was eminent for his early
piety and acquaintance with the sacred Scriptures; his mother was a
Jewess, and his father a Greek, which was the reason why he was not
circumcised in his infancy. Mention is made in the second epistle to him
of his mother Eunice, and grandmother Lois, as believers, and of his
knowledge of the Scriptures from a child: this excellent person the
apostle meeting with at Lystra, and having a good report of him from the
brethren there, he chose him to be his companion in his travels, and to
assist him in the spread of the Gospel; and knowing that it would be
very disagreeable to the Jews to hear the word of God from the lips of
an uncircumcised person, he took him and circumcised him, becoming all
things to all, that he might gain some. This being done, he went along
with him into several parts, and he made great use of him, in preaching
the word, planting churches, and writing epistles; he sent him to
various places with messages from him, to Corinth, Philippi, and
Thessalonica; and now had left him at Ephesus, where he besought him to
abide for a while; for that he was the bishop, pastor, or overseer of
that church is not likely, since his residence here was not constant,
and was afterwards called away from hence by the apostle, who desired
his stay there, under whom, and by whose directions, he acted while
there; and seeing that this church had elders, bishops, or overseers,
whom the Holy Ghost had set over them, whom the apostle called to him at
Miletus, and gave them some advice and instructions. The design of
Timothy's continuance there was to check growing errors and heresies,
and to take care of, and preserve the discipline of God's house; and to
charge him with these things was the design of this epistle; in which he
teaches him how to behave himself in the church of God, by taking heed
to his doctrine and conversation; and gives rules relating to the
qualifications of bishops and deacons, and to the care of widows, and
with regard to church censures, and the becoming walk and conversation
of all sorts of persons of every office, age, sex, rank, and order. This
epistle is thought to be written about the year 55.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 1](ti1001)

</div>
