<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[1 Timothy Index](ti1.md)  
  [Previous](ti1003)  [Next](ti1005.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [1 Timothy Chapter 4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md)

[1 Timothy](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">ti1 4:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO 1 TIMOTHY 4

In this chapter the apostle foretells a dreadful apostasy which should
happen in the last times, the particulars of which he gives; and on
occasion of one branch of it, discourses of Christian liberty in eating
all sorts of food fit for use; and delivers out exhortations to Timothy
to various duties relating to himself, his doctrine, and his charge. The
prophecy is in [Ti1 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md), the author of
this prophecy is the Spirit of God; the manner in which it was delivered
was very clear and express; the time when it should be fulfilled, the
last days; the thing itself, a departure of some from the faith; the
means whereby it would come about are, some giving heed to seducing
spirits, and doctrines of devils, and the hypocrisy and hardened
consciences of others, who would forbid marriage, and order an
abstinence from certain meats; the evil of which last is exposed by
their being the creatures of God, and by their being made for this
purpose to be received with thankfulness by all believers, and who know
the truth: and the reasons why they should be received and used follow;
because they are all good, as they are the creatures of God; and because
there is nothing to be refused, provided it be received with a thankful
heart; and because every creature is sanctified by the word of God, and
prayer, [Ti1 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004.md). And then Timothy is
exhorted to put the brethren in mind of those things, by which he would
show himself to be a faithful minister of Christ, and well instructed in
the doctrines of the Gospel, [Ti1 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006.md),
and to reject things profane and fabulous, but use himself to internal
and powerful godliness, since outward worship signifies little, but the
former has the promise of this, and the other world annexed to it; which
is a true saying, and to be depended on, [Ti1
4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007.md) and which is confirmed from the
practice and experience of the apostles, and therefore should be taught
with authority, [Ti1 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010.md). And then
the apostle gives Timothy some advice, which being taken, would prevent
his being despised, on account of his youth; as with respect to his life
and conversation, so to behave as to be a pattern to others, [Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md), and with respect to the exercise
of his ministry, to make use of such means, as reading and meditation,
that his profiting might be manifest to all, [Ti1
4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013.md) and with respect to the doctrines
he preached, to abide by them, whereby he would be a means of saving
himself, and others, [Ti1 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016.md).

[1 Timothy 4:1](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">ti1 4:1</span></span>

Now the Spirit speaketh expressly,.... The prophecy hereafter mentioned
was not an human conjecture, but, as all true prophecy, it came from the
Spirit of God, who spoke or delivered it; either in the prophets of the
Old Testament, who, as they spoke of the Gospel dispensation, so of the
defection that should be in it; and particularly of antichrist, and of
the apostasy through him, which is what is here intended, especially in
Daniel's prophecies, under the names of the little horn, and vile
person, [Dan 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#001.md) and [Dan
11:1](../../../bib/kjv/dan011.htm#001.md), or in the Lord Jesus Christ, who
foretold that false prophets would arise and deceive many; or in some of
the prophets in the Christian church, such as Agabus, and others, who
might in so many words foretell this thing; or rather in the apostle
himself, at this time, since this prophecy was delivered not in dark
sayings, in an enigmatical way, in an obscure manner, as prophecies
generally were, but in plain language, and easy to be understood, and
wanted no interpreter to unriddle it; and seeing that it is nowhere to
be found in so many express words elsewhere: and moreover, the apostle
does not say the Spirit "hath spoken", but the Spirit "speaketh"; then,
at the time of the writing of these words, in and by him. The prediction
follows,

that in the latter times some should depart from the faith; that is,
from the doctrine of faith, notwithstanding it is indisputably the great
mystery of godliness, as it is called in the latter part of the
preceding chapter; for from the true grace of faith there can be no
final and total apostasy, such as is here designed; for that can never
be lost. It is of an incorruptible nature, and therefore more precious
than gold that perishes; Christ is the author and finisher of it; his
prevalent mediation is concerned for it; it is a gift of special grace,
and is without repentance; it springs from electing grace, and is
secured by it; and between that and salvation there is an inseparable
connection; it may indeed decline, be very low, and lie dormant, as to
its acts and exercise, but not be lost: there is a temporary faith, and
a persuasion of truth, or a mere assent to it, which may be departed
from, but not that faith which works by love: here it intends a
profession of faith, which being made, should be dropped by some; or
rather the doctrine of faith, which some would embrace, and then err
concerning, or entirely quit, and wholly apostatize from. And they are
said to be some, and these many, as they are elsewhere represented,
though not all; for the elect cannot be finally and totally deceived;
the foundation of election stands sure amidst the greatest apostasy; and
there are always a few names that are not defiled with corrupt
principles and practices; Christ always had some witnesses for the truth
in the darkest times: and now this defection was to be "in the latter
times"; either of the apostolic age, which John, the last of the
apostles, lived to see; and therefore he calls it the last time, or
hour, in which were many antichrists, [Jo1
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/jo1002.htm#018.md). And indeed in the Apostle Paul's
time the mystery of iniquity began to work, which brought on this
general defection; though here it has regard to some later times under
the Gospel dispensation; to the time when the man of sin, and the son of
perdition, was revealed, and when all the world wondered after the
beast: and indeed, such will be the degeneracy in the last days of all,
that when the son of man comes, as the grace, so the doctrine of faith
will be scarcely to be found in the world: the means by which this
apostasy will obtain and prevail will be through men's

giving heed to seducing spirits; either to doctrines which are of a
deceiving nature; or to men who profess to have the Spirit of God, and
have not, but are evil men and seducers, deceiving, and being deceived;
that lie in wait to deceive, and handle the word of God deceitfully; and
by attending on the ministry of such persons, through hearing them, and
conversing with them, the defection was to begin and spread; and
therefore such should be carefully avoided, and their ministry shunned;
nor should they be received, nor bid God speed.

And doctrines of devils; such as are devised by devils, as all damnable
doctrines be; and all lying ones, for the devil is the father of them;
and as are all the false doctrines introduced by antichrist, for his
coming was after the working of Satan; and particularly those doctrines
of his concerning worshipping of angels, and saints departed, may be
called the doctrines of devils, or of "demons"; being much the same with
the demon worship among the Heathens, of which the devil was the
inventor: unless by doctrines of devils should be meant the doctrines of
men, who for their cunning and sophistry, for their lies and hypocrisy,
for their malice, and murdering of the souls of men, are comparable to
devils.

[1 Timothy 4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">ti1 4:2</span></span>

Speaking lies in hypocrisy,.... Or "through the hypocrisy of those that
speak lies"; for the apostle is still speaking of the means by which the
apostasy should rise, and get ground; and it should be by the means of
persons that should deliver lying or false doctrine under the colour of
truth, and make great pretensions to religion and holiness, which would
greatly take with men, and captivate and lead them aside: and this
plainly points at the abettors of antichrist, the Romish priests, who
deliver out the lying doctrines of merit, purgatory, invocation of
saints, fastings, pilgrimages, &c. and the fabulous legends of saints,
and the lying wonders and miracles done by them, and all under a show of
godliness, and the promoting of religion and holiness:

having their conscience seared with a hot iron; which exactly describes
the above mentioned persons, whose consciences are cauterized and
hardened, and past feeling; and have no regard to what they say or do,
make no conscience of anything, but under a cloak of sanctity commit the
most shocking impieties; and are men of the most infamous characters,
and of the most enormous and scandalous lives and conversations; so that
the metaphor may be taken either from the searing of flesh with an iron,
or cauterizing it, whereby it grows callous and hard; or from the
stigmas or marks which used to be put on malefactors, or such who have
been guilty of notorious crimes.

[1 Timothy 4:3](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">ti1 4:3</span></span>

Forbidding to marry,.... Which points out not the Encratites,
Montanists, and Manichees, who spoke against marriage; but the Papists,
who forbid it to their priests under a pretence of purity and holiness,
and at the same time allow them to live in all manner of debauchery and
uncleanness; for these are the persons that forbid marriage in an
authoritative way, and in hypocrisy: for that phrase is to be joined to
all the sentences that follow it; as through the hypocrisy of those
whose consciences are seared; and through the hypocrisy of those that
forbid marriage to their priests, this being, by the common people,
taken as an instance of great purity and holiness, and hereby they are
drawn into the deception; as well as also through the hypocrisy of those
that command

to abstain from meats: not from some certain meats forbidden by the law
of Moses, as did some judaizing Christians; but from all meats at some
certain season of the year, as at what they call the Quadragesima or
Lent, and at some days in the week, as Wednesdays and Fridays; and this
all under an hypocritical pretence of holiness, and temperance, and
keeping under the body, and of mortification; when they are the greatest
pamperers of their bodies, and indulge themselves in all manner of
sensuality: the evil of this is exposed by the apostle, as follows,

which God hath created; and therefore must be good, and ought not to be
abstained from: and besides, the end of his creation of them is,

to be received: to be taken, and used, and eaten; and therefore it is
wicked to command men to abstain from them, and evil in those that do
it: and the manner in which they should be received is

with thanksgiving; since they are the creatures of God, and useful to
men, and men are unworthy of them, having forfeited them by sin; and
since they are the bounties of Providence, and a free use of them is
allowed; so far then should men be from abstaining from them, that they
ought to take them, and use them with all thankfulness: and especially
this should be done

of them which believe and know the truth: that is, who believe in
Christ, and know the truth of the Gospel, which frees from every yoke of
bondage, and from the burdensome rites, ceremonies, and inventions of
men; for these have the good creatures as the fruits of divine love,
through Christ the Mediator, and as blessings indeed; and who have the
best right, claim, and title to them through Christ, being in him heirs
of the world, and for whose sake all things are; and therefore these, as
they know how to use them, and not abuse them, are to receive them at
the hands of God, with thanksgiving, and not put them away, or abstain
from them under a pretence of religion and holiness.

[1 Timothy 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">ti1 4:4</span></span>

For every creature of God is good,.... For food; and should be taken and
used for that purpose, at all times, without distinction; even every
creature which is made for food, and which is easy to be discerned by
men:

and nothing to be refused; or rejected as common and unclean, or to be
abstained from at certain times:

if it be received with thanksgiving: if not, persons are very
ungrateful, and very unworthy of such favours; and it would be just in
God to withhold them from them; and this they may expect at his hands,
who reject them with contempt, or receive them with unthankfulness, or
abstain front them in a religious way he never enjoined.

[1 Timothy 4:5](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">ti1 4:5</span></span>

For it is sanctified,.... Or set apart for use, and may be lawfully used
at all times:

by the word of God; which declares that there is nothing in itself
common, or unclean, or unfit for use, and that nothing that goes into a
man defiles him; so that by virtue of this word of God, every creature
may be made use of, that is fit for food: or else this designs the word
of God, which gives a blessing to what is eaten; for it is not by bread
or meat only, but through the word of God commanding a blessing on what
is eaten, that man lives, [Mat 4:4](../../../bib/kjv/mat004.htm#004.md) and
therefore this blessing upon our food should be asked for: wherefore it
follows,

and prayer; this being used before eating for a blessing on the food,
and after it, in a way of thanksgiving for it, sanctifies every creature
of God, or gives men a free use of any, or all of them. So the
Israelites, when they had eaten, and were full, were to bless the Lord,
[Deu 8:10](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#010.md). And thus our Lord Jesus
Christ, at meals, used to take the food, and bless it or ask a blessing
on it, [Mat 14:19](../../../bib/kjv/mat014.htm#019.md). And so did the
Essenes among the Jews (h), and the Christians in Tertullian's (i) time;
and the practice is highly necessary and commendable, nor ought it to be
disused.

\(h\) Porphyr. de Abstinentia, l. 4. sect. 12. (i) Apolog. c. 39.

[1 Timothy 4:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">ti1 4:6</span></span>

If thou put the brethren in remembrance of these things,.... Either of
all the main and principal things already mentioned in the preceding
chapters; as that the end of the commandment is love; that Christ's
coming into the world to save the chief of sinners is a faithful saying,
and worthy of acceptation; that prayers should be made for all sorts of
men, for the reasons given; and that there is salvation for men and
women through the incarnate Son of God; that such and such are the
qualifications of elders and deacons; and that the incarnation of Christ
is, without controversy, the great mystery of godliness: or of the
things which are particularly hinted at in the prophecy delivered in the
beginning of this chapter; as that there should be a falling off from
the doctrine of faith in the latter days; that this should come to pass
through attending to erroneous spirits, and doctrines of "demons", and
through the lies of hypocritical, hardened, and infamous men; whose
particular dogmas, by which they might be known, would be, to forbid
marriage to certain persons, which is of divine institution and
honourable, and to order an abstinence from meats at certain times,
contrary to the will and providence of God. These the apostle would have
Timothy propose, and subject to consideration, and from time to time
refresh the memories of the saints with, who are apt, through negligence
and inattention, and the weakness of the natural faculty, to be
forgetful hearers of the word; that whenever such persons should arise,
they might be on their guard against them. It is one part of the
business of Gospel ministers to put the churches in mind of what they
have received and known, and are established in. By "the brethren" are
meant the members of the church at Ephesus; whom the apostle accounted
as brethren, being of the same family and household, and would have
Timothy reckon and use as such, and not as subjects and servants, to be
lorded over.

Thou shalt be a good minister of Jesus Christ; a minister of Jesus
Christ is one of his making, qualifying, calling, and sending; and who
makes Christ, the doctrines respecting his person and offices, his
grace, righteousness, and salvation, the subject of his ministry; and he
is a good one, who, besides having a good work of grace wrought in him,
has good gifts and abilities from Christ, and who makes a good use of
them, and freely and fully imparts them for the good of others; and
being employed in a good work, he abides in it, and nothing can deter or
remove him from it; and such an one was Timothy, and so would it be
manifest by doing what the apostle hints unto him; as well as he would
appear to be

nourished up in the words of faith, and of good doctrine: by which are
meant the truths of the Gospel, called the words of faith, because they
are things to be believed, hold forth the object of faith, Christ, and
are the means by which faith comes, and is increased: and good doctrine,
being the doctrine of the Scriptures, and of Christ, and of his
apostles, and according to godliness; and contain good things, which
make for the glory of the grace of God, and the comfort and welfare of
immortal souls. These are of a nourishing nature; they are the wholesome
and salutary words of Christ; they have in them milk for babes, and meat
for strong men; by which both grow and thrive, when error eats as does a
canker. So Philo the Jew (k) speaks of the soul, being "nourished with
sciences", and not with food and drink, which the body needs; and a
little after he says, you see the food of the soul what it is, it is the
continual word of God. Now Timothy, by discharging his work aright,
would show to the brethren, that as he had been nourished and trained
up, first under his religious parents, and then under the Apostle Paul;
so he still continued in the same truths, and to live and feed upon
them, and to be nourished by them: or the words may be rendered
actively,

nourishing; that is, either himself, as the Syriac version renders it,
or others; for though all nourishment comes from Christ the head, yet it
is ministered by joints and bands to the members; it is conveyed by the
means of the word and ordinances, ministered by the preachers of the
Gospel, who feed the church with knowledge, and with understanding; and
none but those who are nourished themselves are fit to be the nourishers
of others; and such an one was this evangelist: for it follows,

whereunto thou hast attained; he had arrived to a considerable degree of
knowledge of Gospel truths, and was still pursuing and following on to
know more of them, and was exhorted to continue in them, knowing of whom
he had learned them. All this is said by way of encouragement to him to
do as the apostle directs.

\(k\) Allegor. l. 2. p. 90, 92.

[1 Timothy 4:7](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">ti1 4:7</span></span>

But refuse profane and old wives' fables,.... Either Jewish ones, the
traditions of the elders; or those of the Gnostics, concerning God,
angels, and the creation of the world; or those doctrines of demons, and
which forbad marriage, and commanded abstinence from meats before
mentioned; which are called profane, because impious and ungodly, and
old wives' fables, because foolish and impertinent; and which were to be
rejected with abhorrence and contempt, in comparison of the words of
faith and good doctrine.

And exercise thyself rather unto godliness; either to the doctrines
which are according to godliness, and tend to godly edification, which
the above fables did not, study these, meditate on them, digest them,
and deliver them to others; or to a godly life and conversation,
exercise thyself, to have a conscience void of offence to God and men;
or to internal religion, inward godliness, the exercise of the graces of
faith, hope, love, fear, reverence, humility, &c. or rather to the
spiritual worship of God, according to his will, not in a formal, cold,
and customary way, but with the heart, in truth and sincerity, in faith,
and with fervency and purity.

[1 Timothy 4:8](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">ti1 4:8</span></span>

For bodily exercise profiteth little,.... Meaning not the exercise of
the body in the Olympic games, as by running, wrestling, &c. which
profited but little, for the obtaining of a corruptible crown at most;
though since a word is used here, and in the preceding verse, borrowed
from thence, there may be an allusion to it: much less exercise of the
body for health or recreation, as riding, walking, playing at any
innocent diversion; which profits but for a little time, as the Syriac
and Arabic versions read; and the latter renders the phrase "bodily
recreation": nor is the exercise of the body in the proper employment of
trade and business, to which a man is called, and which profits for the
support of life for a little while, intended; nor any methods made use
of for the mortification of the body, and the keeping of it under, as
watchings, fastings, lying on the ground, scourging, &c. but rather mere
formal external worship, as opposed to godliness, or spiritual worship.
There ought to be an exercise of the body, or a presenting of that in
religious worship before God; there should be an outward attendance on
the word and ordinances; but then, without internal godliness, this will
be of little advantage: it is indeed showing an outward regard to public
worship, and may be a means of keeping persons out of bad company, and
from doing evil things; but if this is trusted to, and depended on, it
will be of no avail to everlasting life; see [Luk
13:26](../../../bib/kjv/luk013.htm#026.md)

but godliness is profitable unto all things; to the health of the body,
and the welfare of the soul; to the things of this life, and of that
which is to come; to themselves and others, though not to God, or in a
way of merit:

having promise of the life that now is; of the continuance of it, of
length of days, of living long in the earth, and of enjoying all
necessary temporal good things, the mercies of life; for God has
promised to his spiritual worshippers, to them that fear him, and walk
uprightly, that their days shall be prolonged, that they shall want no
good thing, nor will he withhold any from them that is for their good,
that is proper and convenient for them:

and of that which is to come; even of eternal life; not that eternal
life is received or procured hereby; for it is the free gift of God, and
is not by any works of men, for otherwise it would not be by promise;
for its being by promise shows it to be of grace: there is nothing more
or less in it than this, that God promises glory to his own grace; for
internal godliness, which animates and maintains spiritual worship, is
of God, is of his own grace, and every part of it is a free gift of his,
as faith, hope, love, fear, &c.

[1 Timothy 4:9](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">ti1 4:9</span></span>

This is a faithful saying,.... A true one, and to be believed, that
godliness has such promises annexed to it; see [Pe1
3:10](../../../bib/kjv/pe1003.htm#010.md).

and worthy of all acceptation; by all godly persons, to encourage them
to the exercise of godliness.

[1 Timothy 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">ti1 4:10</span></span>

For therefore we both labour,.... Not in the word and doctrine, though
they did; nor in the exercise of internal godliness, though there is a
work in faith, and a labour in love; nor with their own hands, at their
trades and business, to support themselves, and others; but by enduring
hardships and afflictions, as stripes, imprisonment, weariness, pain,
watchings, fastings, hunger, thirst, cold, and nakedness; see [Co2
11:23](../../../bib/kjv/co2011.htm#023.md).

And suffer reproach; with patience and cheerfulness. The Alexandrian
copy, and another manuscript, read, "we strive"; or contend even to an
agony, combating with sin, Satan, and the world, with profane men, and
with false teachers; and to all this they were animated by the promises
made to godliness; and therefore they showed it by their practices, or
rather by their sufferings, that they believed it to be a true and
faithful saying; and which is further conferred by what follows:

because we trust in the living God; for the accomplishment of the said
promises, who has power, and therefore can, and is faithful, and
therefore will, make good what he has promised; and since it is life he
has promised, faith is the more encouraged to trust in him, since he is
the living God, in opposition to, and distinction from, lifeless idols;
he has life in himself, essentially, originally, and independently, and
is the author and giver of life, natural, spiritual, and eternal, unto
others. Wherefore there is good reason to trust in him for the
fulfilling of the promises of the present and future life, made unto
godliness.

Who is the Saviour of all men; in a providential way, giving them being
and breath, upholding them in their beings, preserving their lives, and
indulging them with the blessings and mercies of life; for that he is
the Saviour of all men, with a spiritual and everlasting salvation, is
not true in fact.

Specially of those that believe; whom though he saves with an eternal
salvation; yet not of this, but of a temporal salvation, are the words
to be understood: or as there is a general providence, which attends all
mankind, there is a special one which relates to the elect of God; these
are regarded in Providence, and are particularly saved and preserved
before conversion, in order to be called; and after conversion, after
they are brought to believe in Christ, they are preserved from many
enemies, and are delivered out of many afflictions and temptations; and
are the peculiar care and darlings of providence, being to God as the
apple of his eye: and there is a great deal of reason to believe this,
for if he is the Saviour of all men, then much more of them who are of
more worth, value, and esteem with him, than all the world beside; and
if they are saved by him with the greater salvation, then much more with
the less; and if he the common Saviour of all men, and especially of
saints, whom he saves both ways, then there is great reason to trust in
him for the fulfilment of the promises of life, temporal and eternal,
made to godliness, and godly persons. This epithet of God seems to be
taken out of [Psa 17:7](../../../bib/kjv/psa017.htm#007.md) where he is
called , "the Saviour of them that trust", or believe.

[1 Timothy 4:11](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">ti1 4:11</span></span>

These things command and teach. What are to be commanded, command, and
what are to be taught, teach; command to refuse and reject all profane
and fabulous doctrines, and exhort to the exercise of true godliness,
and teach the profitableness of that, and declare the promises made unto
it, and assert the truth and acceptableness of them; command, order, and
encourage believers to labour and suffer reproach for the sake of
Christ, and his Gospel, in hope of enjoying the said promises, and teach
them to trust in the God of their lives, and the Saviour of all men; and
whereas to this authoritative way of teaching, Timothy's youth might be
objected by himself, and others; it follows,

[1 Timothy 4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">ti1 4:12</span></span>

Let no man despise thy youth,.... Timothy was now a young man; some
think he was about three and twenty years of age; but he might be older,
and yet be so called. Saul is said to be a young man, when he held the
clothes of them that stoned Stephen, when he must be at least thirty
years of age, some say thirty five; since thirty years after that he
styles himself Paul the aged, when he must be sixty years of age and
upwards, [Act 7:58](../../../bib/kjv/act007.htm#058.md). Young men are
sometimes honoured by God with great gifts, for usefulness both in
church and state, as Samuel, David, Solomon, Daniel, and his companions:
nor should they be despised on account of their age, when they have
gifts suitable to their office, and behave well in it, but, on the
contrary, ought to be esteemed for their works' sake; and such should
take care that no man has an opportunity or reason to treat them with
contempt on that account: the apostle's sense is, either that Timothy,
being in office, should not suffer any man to use him contemptuously;
but exert his power and authority, and magnify his office, and not allow
men to trample upon him, or use him ill, though he was a young man;
which sense suits with the preceding words: or rather his meaning is,
that he would have him so conduct and behave himself, as he had taught
him to behave, in the house and church of God, and so fill up his place
and office, and live such an exemplary life and conversation, that there
might be no occasion for any to despise his age, or him, on the account
of it: and this agrees with what follows,

but be thou an example of the believers; the members of the church,
before called brethren, from their relation to one another, and here
believers, from their concern with Christ, the object of their faith; a
more honourable character cannot be given of men, though treated with
great contempt in this age of infidelity. The Mahometans would engross
this character to themselves, calling themselves the believers, and
reckoning all others infidels; but to them only it belongs, who believe
in Christ unto righteousness and life everlasting. Now sometimes young
men may be examples to older ones; and all that are in office in the
church, especially in the ministry, whether old or young, should be
ensamples to the flock, and that in the following things: "in word";
meaning either the word of truth, the doctrine of the Gospel; by
delivering that which is according to the rule of God's word, showing in
it uncorruptness, gravity, and sincerity, and by holding it fast; all
which may for the imitation of others, to receive the pure doctrine and
retain it: or rather this may respect common discourse; which should not
be corrupt, filthy, nor foolish; but should be always with grace,
Seasoned with salt, or should be grave and serious, wise and prudent,
pleasant, profitable, and edifying.

In conversation; in the family, church, and world; which should be as
becomes the Gospel of Christ, in all godliness and honesty, with
simplicity and godly sincerity; so as to adorn the doctrine of God our
Saviour, recommend it to others, stop the mouths of gainsayers, and
obtain a good report of them that are without.

In charity; in love to God, to Christ, and one another; without which,
if a man has the tongue of men and angels, or ever such great and
excellent gifts, he is nothing.

In spirit; in the exercise of spiritual gifts; in spiritual talk and
conversation; and in fervency of spirit, or true zeal for the honour of
God, the glory of the Redeemer, the spread of his Gospel, truths, and
ordinances, and the support of the same. This clause is wanting in the
Alexandrian and Claromontane copies, and in the Vulgate Latin, Syriac,
and Ethiopic versions.

In faith; in the exercise of the grace of faith; in holding fast the
profession of faith; and in retaining the doctrine of faith, with all
integrity, faithfulness, and constancy, standing fast in it, striving
and contending for it.

In purity; or chastity of body, in opposition to all impurity of the
flesh, by fornication, adultery, and the like; which was very proper to
be suggested to a young man: though this may also have respect to all
that is before said, as to purity of language, conversation, love, zeal,
and faith.

[1 Timothy 4:13](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">ti1 4:13</span></span>

Till I come,.... To Ephesus; where the apostle hoped to be shortly, but
was prevented; he afterwards came to Miletus, and sent for the elders of
Ephesus thither, when he took his final leave of them. He mentions this
circumstance, not as if Timothy was to attend to the following things no
longer, but to quicken him to an attendance to them from the
consideration of his being shortly with him.

Give attendance to reading; that is, of the Scriptures, which the Jews
call "reading". (l).

"Says R. Tanchum Bar Chanilai, for ever let a man divide his years or
life into three parts; one third (let him spend) in the Mikra, (the
Scriptures, and the reading of them,) another third in the Misna, and
the other third in the Talmud.''

And this is to be understood, not of the reading of the Scriptures in
public, for the advantage of others, a custom which obtained in the
Jewish synagogues; see [Act 13:15](../../../bib/kjv/act013.htm#015.md) but
in private, for his own use and service, that he might be more perfect,
and more thoroughly furnished to the work and office to which he was
called; for the Scriptures are the fund of spiritual knowledge, as well
as the test and standard of doctrine, out of which all must be fetched,
and by which it must be tried; and if Timothy, who had known the
Scriptures from a child, had been trained up in them, and was always
conversant with them, had need to give diligent attention to the reading
of them, then much more others: as also

to exhortation, to doctrine; as he was privately to read the Scriptures,
for his own benefit, he was publicly to expound them, or preach from
them, to the advantage of others; for these two, exhortation and
doctrine, are branches of the ministerial work, which reading furnishes
and qualifies for. "Exhortation" intends the stirring up of believers to
the exercise of grace, and the discharge of duty; and is a considerable
part of the work of the ministry, and on which a minister of Christ
should much insist; and it becomes the saints to suffer every word of
exhortation from them, and receive it kindly, [Ti2
4:2](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#002.md), [Rom
12:8](../../../bib/kjv/rom012.htm#008.md), [Heb
13:22](../../../bib/kjv/heb013.htm#022.md). The word signifies also
"consolation", and which is another branch of the ministry. Believers
are oftentimes disconsolate through the prevalence of corruptions, the
power of Satan's temptations, and the hidings of God's face, and need
comfort; when the ministers of the Gospel should be Barnabases, sons of
consolation, and should speak comfortably to them; for which they are
qualified by the God of all comfort, who comforts them in all their
tribulations, that they might be capable of speaking good and
comfortable words to others. "Doctrine" designs the teaching and
instructing of the church in the mysteries of the Gospel; opening and
explaining the truths of it; defending them against all opposers, and
refuting errors and heresies contrary to them. This is the evangelic
Talmud; and these three, "reading", "exhortation", and "doctrine", may
answer to the above three things the Jew advises men to divide their
time among, the Mikra, Misna, and Talmud: reading answers to the Mikra,
and indeed is no other; and exhortation to the Misna, or oral law; and
doctrine to the Talmud, and which also that word signifies: but the
apostle would have Timothy spend his time in, and give his attention to
that which might be truly beneficial to himself, and profitable unto
others.

\(l\) T. Bab. Avoda Zara, fol. 19. 2.

[1 Timothy 4:14](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">ti1 4:14</span></span>

Neglect not the gift that is in thee,.... What qualifies men for the
work of the ministry is a gift from God: it is not of nature, nor is it
mere natural abilities and capacity; nor is it any thing acquired, it is
not human learning, or the knowledge of languages, arts, and sciences;
nor is it special saving grace; for a man may have all these, and yet
not be apt to teach, or fit for the ministry; but it is a peculiar and
distinct gift, it is a gift of interpreting the Scriptures, and of
dispensing the mysteries of grace to the edification of others; which,
when it meets in a man with all the rest before mentioned, makes him
very considerable: and this gift is in a man; it is a treasure put into
earthen vessels, a good treasure in the heart, out of which a good
minister of Christ brings forth many good things, things new and old,
both for the delight and profit of men: and this gift is by no means to
be neglected; this talent should not be hid in the earth, or wrapped up
in a napkin; it should not lie dormant and useless, but should be
stirred up, cultivated, and improved, as it may by reading, meditation,
and prayer. And in order to enforce this exhortation on Timothy, the
apostle adds,

which was given thee by prophecy; that is, it was prophesied of before
hand, by some of the prophets in the church, that a very extraordinary
gift should be bestowed upon this young man, which would make him a very
useful person in the church of God; see [Ti1
1:18](../../../bib/kjv/ti1001.htm#018.md) and since it was now given, he
ought not therefore to neglect it: or it was given him, as some read it,
with prophecy, that he should use it, and it should be of great
advantage to many souls; or, together with this gift of preaching, he
had also a gift of foretelling things to come; or it may be, the words
may be better rendered, "for prophecy": that is, for preaching, for
prophesying is frequently used for preaching; see [Co1
13:2](../../../bib/kjv/co1013.htm#002.md) and then the sense is, that this
gift was given him to qualify him for the interpreting of the
Scriptures, the explaining of the prophecies of the Old Testament, and
for the preaching of the Gospel; and therefore he should not neglect it,
but use it for this purpose: and he adds, that it was given him

with the laying on of the hands of the presbytery; or "of the
eldership", or elders. So "eldership", is used by the Septuagint on [Exo
3:16](../../../bib/kjv/exo003.htm#016.md) for the elders of Israel. Now of
these elders Paul was one, [Ti2 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/ti2001.htm#006.md)
nor is it unusual to call the apostles elders; see [Pe1
5:1](../../../bib/kjv/pe1005.htm#001.md). Who joined with the apostle, in
the imposition of hands on Timothy, is not certain; I should think only
apostles, since here was a gift of the Holy Ghost came along with it;
and it was only through the laying on of the hands of the apostles that
the Holy Ghost was given. Philip, an evangelist, laid not hands on the
believing Samaritans; but Peter and John, apostles, were sent down from
Jerusalem to Samaria to do it, whereby many received the gifts of the
Holy Ghost, fitting them to take the care of those new converts, and to
spread the Gospel further in those parts, [Act
8:5](../../../bib/kjv/act008.htm#005.md). And since gifts have ceased being
conveyed this way, the rite of laying on of hands in ordinations seems
useless, and of no avail. The apostle in calling those that joined with
him, in putting hands on Timothy, the "presbytery or eldership", may
have some reference to , "the elders of the congregation", which laid
hands on the bullock for a sin offering, [Lev
4:15](../../../bib/kjv/lev004.htm#015.md) by whom some understand the great
sanhedrim (m); others (n), not all the elders, but some particular
persons, in number three; and so the ordination of a Rabbi was by three
(o); hence we read of , "imposition of hands by the elders" (p).

\(m\) Bartenora in Misn. Menachot, c. 9. sect. 3. (n) Siphri in Maimon.
in Misn. ib. c. 9. sect. 7. (o) Misn. Sanhedrin, c. 1. sect. 3. &
Maimon. & Bartenora in ib. (p) T. Hieros. Horayot, fol. 46. 2.

[1 Timothy 4:15](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">ti1 4:15</span></span>

Meditate on these things,.... Not only on those instructions, advices,
and exhortations, which the apostle had given him, throughout this
chapter, which might be very useful to him, often to think of, and
revolve in his mind, and seriously consider and reflect upon; but upon
the Scriptures, the reading of which he had recommended to him, and the
doctrines contained therein; it becomes every man not only to read, but
meditate on the word of God, and much more ministers of the Gospel. The
Scriptures should be read with care, and be industriously and
laboriously searched into, as men dig in mines for silver or golden ore;
and passages in it should be carefully compared together, the more
obscure with those that are more plain and easy; and the whole is to be
studied with great attention and application:

give thyself wholly to them: to the reading of the Scriptures,
meditation upon them, and preaching the doctrines contained in them,
clear of all secular affairs, or worldly business and employment. The
apostles threw off the branch of deaconship, or ministering to the poor,
that they might give themselves up wholly to the ministry of the word,
and prayer; and much more should worldly business be cast off, where the
circumstances of ministers and churches will admit of it; a Christian
soldier, or minister of the Gospel, ought not, if possible, to be
entangled with the affairs of this life; he finds enough to do without,
in the discharge of his ministerial function; and though the apostles
sometimes wrought with their own hands, yet it was not because they had
so much leisure from the ministry, or time on their hands, or because
they had not a power of forbearing working, but out of necessity, see
[Act 20:34](../../../bib/kjv/act020.htm#034.md), or these words may be
rendered,

be thou in these things; let thine heart be in them; for if a minister's
heart is not in his work, if he does not take delight in it, it will be
a slavery and drudgery to him; spend all the time and strength in them,
give thyself continually to them, and be always diligent and laborious
in them:

that thy profiting may appear to all; that it may be manifest to all
that attend the ministry of the word that there is an increase in gifts,
a growing in spiritual knowledge, an improvement of the talents
bestowed: or that this profiting or increase might appear in all things;
in every branch of the ministry, both in exhortation or consolation, and
in doctrine; or that it might be manifest among all; that is, all that
hear might receive some profit, might learn, and be comforted and
edified; faith might be increased, and the joy of it be furthered; and
all under the ministry visibly thrive and flourish.

[1 Timothy 4:16](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">ti1 4:16</span></span>

Take heed unto thyself,.... Not as a man, or a Christian only, but as a
minister; and as every minister should take heed to his life and
conversation, that it be exemplary, as in [Ti1
4:12](../../../bib/kjv/ti1004.htm#012.md) to his gifts, that they be not
lost, or neglected, but used and improved; to the errors and heresies
abroad, that he be not infected with them; and to his flock, which is
the other part of himself, that he feed it with knowledge and
understanding: and to thy doctrine: preached by him, that it be
according to the Scriptures, be the doctrine of Christ, and his
apostles, and according to godliness; that it tend to edification, and
is pure, incorrupt, and all of a piece; and that it be expressed in the
best manner, with all boldness and plainness; and that he defend it
against all opposition:

continue in them; or "with them"; the members of the church at Ephesus;
or rather in the doctrines of the Gospel; which should be done, though a
majority is against them; though rejected by the wise, learned, and
rich; though not to be comprehended by carnal reason; and though loaded
with reproach and scandal; and though persecuted, yea even unto death
for them:

for in doing this, thou shall both save thyself; a minister by taking
heed to himself, and doctrine, saves himself from the pollutions of the
world, from the errors and heresies of false teachers, from the blood of
all men, and from all just blame in his ministry.

And them that hear thee; by being an example to them in doctrine and
conversation, a minister is the means of saving and preserving those
that attend on him, from erroneous principles, and immoral practices;
and by faithfully preaching the Gospel to his hearers, he is
instrumental in their eternal salvation; for though Jesus Christ is the
only Saviour, the only efficient and procuring cause of salvation, yet
the ministers of the Gospel are instruments by which souls believe in
him, and so are saved; the word preached by them, being attended with
the Spirit of God, becomes the ingrafted word, which is able to save,
and is the power of God unto salvation; and nothing can more animate and
engage the ministers of the word to take heed to themselves and
doctrine, and abide therein, than this, of being the happy instruments
of converting sinners, and saving them from death; see

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: 1 Timothy Chapter 5](ti1005.md)

</div>
