<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index)   
[Titus Index](tit)  
  [Previous](ti2004)  [Next](tit001) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Titus Introduction](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

[Titus](../../../bib/kjv/tit001.htm#001)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">tit 0:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO TITUS

Titus, to whom this epistle is inscribed, was a Greek, an uncircumcised
Gentile, and so remained; nor did the apostle circumcise him, as he did
Timothy, when he became his companion; nor did the apostles at Jerusalem
oblige him to be circumcised, when Paul took him with Barnabas along
with him thither, [Gal 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/gal002.htm#001). He was a
man of great grace, and large gifts, and very dear to the apostle: he
calls him his brother, his partner, and fellow helper, and says he
walked in the same spirit, and in the same steps, [Co2
2:13](../../../bib/kjv/co2002.htm#013). He was employed by the apostle
much, and sent into various parts, on different occasions: he sent him
to Corinth, to finish there the collection for the poor saints at
Jerusalem, [Co2 8:6](../../../bib/kjv/co2008.htm#006) and to Dalmatia,
to know the state of the saints there, and to confirm them in the faith,
[Ti2 4:10](../../../bib/kjv/ti2004.htm#010). As he was a Greek, so his
name is a Greek name, yet used among the Romans, as Titus Vespasian, and
others (a); and among the Jews, so we read of R. Chijah bar ojyj,
"Titas" (b), and of R. Judah ben Titas (c): when and where this epistle
was written, is not very easy to determine; some think it was written
between the first and second time the apostle was in bonds at Rome; and
certain it is, that he was not in bonds when he wrote it, for he desires
Titus to meet him at Nicopolis, [Tit
3:19](../../../bib/kjv/tit003.htm#019) from whence some have supposed it
to be written, as the subscription shows; but others think it was wrote
much earlier, and when the apostle was at Ephesus, towards the close of
his three years stay there, before he went into Macedonia; but it seems
rather that it was written when he returned from Macedonia into Greece:
he left Titus at Crete, and staying in Greece three months, he intended
to have sailed to Syria, but was prevented by the Jews lying in wait for
him, upon which he steered his course to Macedonia again; and as he was
going there, or when there, writes this letter to Titus, to come to him
at Nicopolis. The occasion of it was partly the judaizing preachers, and
false teachers, that got into that island, and were corrupting the
principles of the people; and partly the unbecoming conversation and
practices of some professors of religion: and whereas the apostle had
left Titus in Crete, to finish what he had begun, and to put the
churches in order, and see that they had proper officers, particularly
pastors over them, that they might be taken care of, both with respect
to doctrine and practice; the design of this epistle is to lay before
Titus the several qualifications of a pastor, which might be instruction
to him, and to the churches, in the choice and ordination of them; and
to stir him up to zeal and diligence in refuting false teachers, and
dealing with heretics; and to put him upon exhorting the saints to the
discharge of their duty, in every branch of it, from the best
principles, by arguments taken from the grace of God, and the doctrines
of it. This epistle is supposed to be written about the year 55.

\(a\) Vid. Martial. Epigram. l. 1. ep. 18. l. 7. ep. 48. (b) T. Hieros.
Trumot, c. 8. fol. 45. 3. (c) T. Hieros. Trumot Biccurim, fol. 65. 4. &
Succa, fol. 55. 4.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Titus Chapter 1](tit001)

</div>
