<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac006)  [Next](zac008.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 7](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#001.md)

[Zechariah](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_000">zac 7:0</span></span>

INTRODUCTION TO ZECHARIAH 7

This chapter treats concerning the nature and use of certain fasts kept
by the Jews, on account of the destruction of the temple, and other
things; and concerning the message of the former prophets to them, and
the effects of it. The occasion of the former was an embassy sent by the
Jews to the priests and prophets, to know whether they should continue
the fast of the fifth month; upon which the prophet was sent by the Lord
unto them. The time of the prophecy is noted, [Zac
7:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#001.md). An account of the embassy is
given, of the persons that were sent, and to whom, and upon what
account, [Zac 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#002.md). The answer of the
Lord to it by the prophet, showing the usefulness of fasts to him, and
putting them upon hearkening to his voice by the former prophets, when
Jerusalem was in great prosperity, [Zac
7:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#004.md) and then they are exhorted by him,
in the ministry of the present prophet, to acts of righteousness,
several species of which are mentioned; and which were the same they had
been exhorted to by the former prophets, but had neglected, and hardened
their hearts against all exhortations and instructions, [Zac
7:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#008.md) and were the reason of their
captivity and desolation, [Zac 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#013.md).

[Zechariah 7:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 7:1</span></span>

And it came to pass, in the fourth year of King Darius,.... Near two
years after the foundation of the temple was laid, [Hag
2:10](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#010.md) and near two years before it was
finished, [Ezr 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#015.md) when the work was
going forward, and there was a great deal of reason to believe it would
be completed:

that the word of the Lord came unto Zechariah, in the fourth day of the
ninth month, even in Chisleu: which answers to part of our October, and
part of November.

[Zechariah 7:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 7:2</span></span>

When they had sent unto the house of God,.... It is, in the Hebrew text,
"when he sent Bethel"; which some, as Kimchi observes, take to be the
name of a man that was sent along with those after mentioned; but the
Targum and the Septuagint render it, "when", or "after he had sent unto
Bethel": not the place so called in Jacob's time; but Jerusalem, where
the temple or house of God was now building; and it may be observed,
that the words are expressed in the singular number, "when he had sent"
(t); and not, as we render them, "when they had sent"; and agreeably, in
[Zac 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#003.md), it is said, "should I weep",
&c. as if these messengers were sent by a single person, and yet a body
of people is meant; and not the captives that remained in Babylon, as
most interpreters understand it; but the Jews that were returned from
thence, and were in Judea, as Junius and Tremellius observe; for to them
the answer is returned, and to them does the Lord by the prophet direct
his speech throughout the whole chapter. The persons sent were

Sherezer and Regemmelech, and their men; who these persons were is not
known; they were, no doubt, principal men of the people, by whom they
were sent, and the chief of the embassy, and had others with them
inferior to them: part of their business at Bethel, or the house of God,
was,

to pray before the Lord; that they might be directed aright, and have a
proper answer returned to the question they came with. The temple at
Jerusalem was the place where men used to go up to pray; see [Luk
18:10](../../../bib/kjv/luk018.htm#010.md).

\(t\) "cum misisset, sub. populus", Junius & Tremellius, Piscator,
Drusius, Tarnovius; "et misit", Pagninus, Montanus; "miserat autem sub".
Israel, Vatablus; "et miserat", Cocceius; "et misit Bethelum", i. e.
"urbem", Burkius.

[Zechariah 7:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 7:3</span></span>

And to speak unto the priests which were in the house of the Lord of
hosts,.... That ministered in the sanctuary, as the Targum explains it,
who offered sacrifices, &c. and who were to be consulted in matters of
religion, [Mal 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/mal002.htm#007.md),

and to the prophets; who were then in being, as Haggai, Zechariah and
Malachi:

saying, Should I weep in the fifth month; which is the month Ab, and
answers to July: now on the seventh day of this month, according to [Kg2
25:8](../../../bib/kjv/kg2025.htm#008.md), the temple was burnt by the
Chaldeans; and, according to [Jer
3:12](../../../bib/kjv/jer003.htm#012.md), it was on the tenth of this
month, which day was kept by the Jews as a day of fasting and
humiliation, in commemoration of it; and by the Misnic doctors (u)
afterwards was removed, and kept on the ninth day of the said month;
but, seeing the temple was in great forwardness of being rebuilt, the
question with those Jews was, whether they should continue any longer
mourning and fasting on that account:

separating myself: that is, from eating and drinking, and not taking the
lawful pleasures and recreations of life:

as I have done these so many years? for the space of seventy years, as
in [Zac 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#005.md).

\(u\) Misn. Taanith, c. 4. sect. 7, 8. T. Bab. Taanith, fol. 29. 1.

[Zechariah 7:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 7:4</span></span>

Then came the word of the Lord of hosts unto me, saying. Upon the
sending of this embassy, and upon putting this question.

[Zechariah 7:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 7:5</span></span>

Speak unto all the people of the land,.... Of Judea, who had sent these
men on this errand, and whom they represented, and in whose name they
spake:

and to the priests; who were consulted on this occasion:

saying, When ye fasted and mourned in the fifth; on the seventh or tenth
day of the fifth month Ab, on account of the temple being burnt by
Nebuchadnezzar:

and seventh month; the month Tisri, which answers to September; on the
third day of this month a fast was kept on account of the murder of
Gedaliah, [Jer 41:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer041.htm#001.md) though Kimchi says
he was slain on the first day of the month; but, because that was a
feast day, keeping a day for a fast on this occasion was fixed on the
day following:

even those seventy years; of their captivity, during which they kept the
above fasts. The Jews say (w) there was no fast of the congregation, or
public fast, kept in Babylon, but on the ninth of Ab, or the fifth month
only; and if so, other fasts here, and in [Zac
8:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac008.htm#019.md), must be private ones. These
seventy years are to be reckoned from the nineteenth of Nebuchadnezzar,
when the city was destroyed, to the second or fourth of Darius:

did ye at all fast unto me, even to me? the fast they kept was not
according to the command of God, but an appointment of theirs; nor was
it directed to his glory; nor was it any profit or advantage to him; and
therefore it was nothing to him whether they fasted or not; see [Isa
58:3](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#003.md).

\(w\) T. Bab. Pesachim, fol. 54. 2.

[Zechariah 7:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 7:6</span></span>

And when ye did eat, and when ye did drink,.... Either at common meals,
or at their festivals:

did not ye eat for yourselves, and drink for yourselves? merely and only
for their own refreshment and pleasure, and not for the glory of God;
though that ought to be the principal end in eating and drinking, [Co1
10:31](../../../bib/kjv/co1010.htm#031.md).

[Zechariah 7:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 7:7</span></span>

Should ye not hear the words which the Lord hath cried by the former
prophets,.... As Hosea, Isaiah, Jeremiah, and others; suggesting that it
would have been much better for them to have regarded the exhortations
and instructions which the Lord sent them by his servants, which would
have prevented their captivity; and so would have had no occasion of
fasting and mourning: for those prophecies were delivered out

when Jerusalem was inhabited, and in prosperity, and the cities thereof
round about her; when Jerusalem, and the cities about it, were full of
people, and enjoyed all the blessings of life in great plenty; and which
would have continued, had they attended to the exhortations, cautions,
and warnings given them:

when men inhabited the south and the plain? the land of Judea, as the
Misnic (x) doctors say, was divided into three parts; the mountainous
part, the plain, and the valley. Jerusalem was in the mountainous part,
and these are the other two; and not only those parts of the land which
were hilly, and those cities that were encompassed with mountains, were
in safety and prosperity; but those also that were in the champaign
country, and in the low valleys. The "south" was that part of the land
of Canaan formerly inhabited by the Amalekites, and which they invaded
when David was at Ziklag, [Num 13:29](../../../bib/kjv/num013.htm#029.md).
Sometimes it was called Negeb, as here; and sometimes Daroma, as
frequently in the Jewish writings; in which Judea is often called the
south, with respect to Galilee; for they distinguish between the
inhabitants of Galilee and the inhabitants of the south country: and
say, a disciple might intercalate the year for Galilee, but not for the
south, i.e. Judea. It reached from Eleutheropolis to the south of the
land, eighteen or twenty miles: it was distinguished by the Jews (y)
into upper and nether Daroma, or south country: the upper consisted of
the hilly part of it; the nether of the plain; and by Jerom (z) mention
is made of interior Daroma, by which there should be an exterior one.
The "plain", or "Sephela", was all the champaign country, near to
Eleutherepolis, to the north and west; and so the above writer (a) says
it was called in his times: now each of these were well inhabited;
Daroma, or the southern part; hence it is frequent, in Jewish writings
(b), to read of such a Rabbi of Daroma, or the south, as R. Jacob, R.
Simlai, and others; and of the elders of the south (c); and so Jerom
speaks of Eremmon, and Duma, large villages, in his days, in Daroma or
the south; the one sixteen, the other seventeen miles from
Eleutheropolis; and of Ether, Jether, and Jethan, one of which was
eighteen, and another twenty miles from it (d); and in the Apocrypha:

"Simon also set up Adida in Sephela, and made it strong with gates and
bars.'' (1 Maccabees 12:38)

mention is made of Adida in Sephela, fortified, by Simon; and in which
also were various other places well stored with inhabitants. This
expresses the happy and safe state the Jews were in before their
captivity, and in which they would have remained, had they hearkened to
the words of the Lord.

\(x\) Misn. Sheviith, c. 9. sect. 2. (y) T. Hieros. Maaaser Sheni, fol.
56. 3. & Sanhedrin, fol. 18. 4. (z) De locis Hebr. fol. 91. C. & 92. I.
(a) Ibid. fol. 94. M. (b) T. Hieros. Beracot, fol. 2. 2. & 11. 4. &
Succah, fol. 53. 4. (c) T. Hieros. Erubin, fol. 23. 3. (d) Ut supra,
fol. 90. K. & 91. C. & 92. I.

[Zechariah 7:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 7:8</span></span>

And the word of the Lord came unto Zechariah, saying. Giving him orders
to repeat what the former prophets had said, and to urge the same things
on the people which they had before rejected, the rejection of which had
issued in their ruin.

[Zechariah 7:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 7:9</span></span>

Thus speaketh the Lord of hosts, saying,.... The same things as he had
before; for the things following are ever in force, and always to be
attended to, and to be regarded and preferred before anything merely
ritual and ceremonial; and especially before the traditions and
commandments of men, of which nature the above fasts were:

Execute true judgment; or, "judge judgment (e) of truth"; this is
addressed to the judges of the people, that when any cause came before
them between man and man, that they would judge righteously, according
to the law of God; and, without respect to persons, pass sentence as the
truth of the case required:

and show mercy and compassion every man to his brother; whether in want
of food, raiment, or in whatsoever distress, whether of body or mind;
which is much more acceptable to God than any legal sacrifices, or
outward abstinences and humiliations, [Hos
6:6](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#006.md).

\(e\) "judicium veritatis", Montanus, Calvin, Cocceius, Burkius; "jus
veritatis", Junius & Tremellius, Tarnovius.

[Zechariah 7:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 7:10</span></span>

And oppress not the widow, nor the fatherless, the stranger, nor the
poor,.... Such as have no husband to provide for them, nor father and
mother to care for them, and are in a strange land, where they have no
friends or acquaintance, and are poor, and can not help themselves. Laws
of this kind were frequently inculcated among the Jews; see [Deu
24:14](../../../bib/kjv/deu024.htm#014.md),

and let none of you imagine evil against his brother in your heart;
thoughts of evil are sinful, and forbidden by the law of God, as well as
actions, which agrees with our Lord's sense of the law, [Mat
5:22](../../../bib/kjv/mat005.htm#022.md), see [Lev
19:17](../../../bib/kjv/lev019.htm#017.md).

[Zechariah 7:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 7:11</span></span>

But they refused to hearken,..... That is, the Jews, before the
captivity, refusal to give heed to the above exhortations, and obey the
voice of God in them:

and pulled away the shoulder; from serving the Lord, and supporting his
interest: or "they gave", or presented, "a rebellious shoulder" (f); a
refractory one, that slides back, like a backsliding or refractory
heifer, that will not admit of the yoke, [Hos
4:16](../../../bib/kjv/hos004.htm#016.md) so these could not bear the yoke
of the law, nor the burden of duty; nor suffer the words of exhortation,
or receive the admonitions given them:

and stopped their ears, that they should not hear; like the deaf adder,
[Psa 58:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa058.htm#004.md) they would not hear, and
pretended they could not; which was an instance of contempt to the
speakers.

\(f\) "scapulam aversam", Pagninus; "deflectentem", Montanus;
"rebellem", Munster, Tigurine version; "refractarium", Junius &
Tremellius, Piscator; so Ben Melech.

[Zechariah 7:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 7:12</span></span>

Yea, they made their hearts as an adamant stone,.... The word here used
is translated a "diamond" in [Jer 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer017.htm#001.md)
and it is said to be harder than a flint, [Eze
3:9](../../../bib/kjv/eze003.htm#009). The Jewish writers say (g.md) it is
a worm like a barley corn, so strong as to cut the hardest stones in
pieces; Moses (they say) used it in hewing the stones for the two tables
of the law, and in fitting the precious stones in the ephod; and Solomon
in cutting the stones for the building of the temple; and is so hard
that it cannot be broken by iron: and as hard is naturally the heart of
man, and which becomes more so by sinning, and obstinate persisting in
it, that nothing can remove the hardness of it but the powerful and
efficacious grace of God: as hard as the adamant is, it is to be
softened by the blood of a goat, as naturalists says (h); so the blood
of Christ sprinkled on the heart, and a sense of forgiveness of sin by
it, will soften the hardest heart:

lest they should hear the law, and the words which the Lord of hosts
hath seat in his Spirit by the former prophets; the words of reproof,
admonition, caution, and exhortation, which Jeremiah and others were
sent to deliver to them, under the influence of the Spirit of God:

therefore came a great wrath from the Lord of hosts; which brought the
Chaldeans upon them, who carried them captive into Babylon.

\(g\) Misn. Sota, c. 9. sect. 12. Pirke Abot. c. 5. sect. 5. & Maimon. &
Bartenora in ib. Kimchi in 1 Reg. vi. 7. Jarchi in Isa. v. 6. (h)
Pausan. Arcadica, sive l. 8. p. 485. Plin. Nat. Hist. l. 37. c. 4.

[Zechariah 7:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 7:13</span></span>

Therefore it is come to pass, that as he cried,.... The Lord by the
former prophets called them to repentance and obedience:

and they would not hear; his words, nor obey his voice:

so they cried: when they were besieged in Jerusalem, and were carried
captive into Babylon:

and I would not hear, saith the Lord of hosts; so as to deliver them out
of the hands of their enemies; see [Pro
1:24](../../../bib/kjv/pro001.htm#024.md).

[Zechariah 7:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac007.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 7:14</span></span>

But I scattered them with a whirlwind,.... Denoting the fierceness of
his wrath, and the strength of his fury, seen in their dispersion:

among all the nations whom they knew not; such as the Babylonians,
Medes, and Persians, people before unknown to the Jews:

thus the land was desolate after them; that is, the land of Judea was
destitute of inhabitants, or had but few remaining in it, after the Jews
were carried captive into Babylon; for the rest, after the death of
Gedaliah, fled into Egypt:

that no man passed through, nor returned; neither from Egypt, nor from
Babylon, until the seventy years of captivity were ended; nor indeed did
any from other nations pass through and fro, or settle in it, during
this time, that we have any account of:

for they laid the pleasant land desolate; either the Israelites by their
iniquities, which were the cause of it; or the Babylonians, as the
instruments of God's vengeance. This pleasant land is the land of
Canaan, a land flowing with milk and honey; the glory of all lands, for
its great fruitfulness, and delightful situation; and especially for
being the seat of the divine Majesty, and where his people dwelt, and
where his temple was, and he was worshipped; see [Eze
20:6](../../../bib/kjv/eze020.htm#006.md) [Deu
8:7](../../../bib/kjv/deu008.htm#007.md).

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 8](zac008.md)

</div>
