<div class="filenav">

[![](../../../cdshop/ithlogo.png)](../../../index.md)  
[Intangible Textual Heritage](../../../index)  [Bible](../../index.md) 
[Bible Commentary](../index)  [Index](index.md)   
[Zechariah Index](zac.md)  
  [Previous](zac000)  [Next](zac002.md) 

</div>

------------------------------------------------------------------------

*Exposition of the Old and New Testament*, by John Gill, \[1746-63\], at
Intangible Textual Heritage

------------------------------------------------------------------------

### [Zechariah Chapter 1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

INTRODUCTION TO ZECHARIAH 1

In this chapter, after the account of the prophet, and the time of the
prophecy by him, are an exhortation of the people of the Jews to
repentance; the vision of a rider upon a red horse, and the intercession
of the angel of the Lord for Jerusalem; and another vision of the
enemies of the Jews, and of their deliverers. In [Zac
1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md) is the general inscription of the
book; in which an account is given of the time of its writing, and of
the writer of it: then follows the exhortation to repentance, enforced
from the wrath of God, which came upon their fathers for not hearkening
to the Lord, and turning from their evil ways; and from the advantage
that would be received thereby, the Lord would return to them; and from
the certain accomplishment of the divine word; for, though both their
fathers and prophets died, the word of the Lord had its sure effect,
[Zac 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#002.md) and next the vision of the
rider on the red horse is presented; the year, month, day, and night, in
which it was seen, are mentioned, [Zac
1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007.md) and the rider is described by his
form, a man; by the horse he rode upon, a red one; by the place he stood
in among the myrtle trees in the bottom; and by his attendants behind,
red horses, speckled and white, [Zac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008.md). The interpretation of which last
is given to the prophet by the angel, by the man among the myrtle trees,
and by the answer of them to the angel of the Lord themselves, [Zac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009.md). After which the angel is
represented as making intercession for Jerusalem, who is answered by
good and comfortable words, [Zac 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012.md)
upon which the prophet is bid to publish the jealousy of the Lord for
Jerusalem; his displeasure at the heathens for afflicting them; his
promise to return to the Jews, that the temple and city of Jerusalem
should be rebuilt, and other cities of Judea, which should enjoy great
prosperity, [Zac 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014.md) and the chapter
is concluded with a vision of four horns, signifying the enemies of
Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem; and of four carpenters that should destroy
them, [Zac 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018.md).

[Zechariah 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_001">zac 1:1</span></span>

In the eighth month,.... The month Marchesvan, called the month Bul, in
[Kg1 6:38](../../../bib/kjv/kg1006.htm#038.md) which answers to part of our
October, and part of November: this was but two months from the first
prophecy of Haggai, [Hag 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag001.htm#001.md) and but a
few days after his second, [Hag 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#001.md) so
near were the prophecies of these two prophets together:

in the second year of Darius: king of Persia; not Darius the Mede, but
Darius the son of Hystaspes:

came the word of the Lord unto Zechariah; that is, "the word of prophecy
from before the Lord", as the Targum paraphrases it; which came to him,
either in a dream, or in a vision, or by an impulse on his mind; who is
described by his descent, the son of Barachias; mention is made of this
name in [Mat 23:35](../../../bib/kjv/mat023.htm#035.md). It signifies "the
blessed of the Lord", and is the same with Eulogius or Benedictus:

the son of Iddo the prophet: the word "prophet", as Kimchi observes,
belongs to Zechariah; not but that his grandfather Iddo might be a
prophet too; and the same writer takes notice, that in the Midrash
mention is made of Iddo the prophet; and so there is an Iddo that is
called the seer and the prophet in [Ch2
9:29](../../../bib/kjv/ch2009.htm#029.md) but whether the same with this is
not certain. The name is by some thought to be the same with Firmicus,
Statius, Robertus:

saying; as follows:

[Zechariah 1:2](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#002.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_002">zac 1:2</span></span>

The Lord hath been sore displeased with your fathers. Who lived before
and at the time of the destruction of the city of Jerusalem, and which
was manifest by their captivity; all which were occasioned by their
sins, with which they provoked the Lord to sore displeasure against
them; and this is mentioned as a caution to their children, that they
might not follow their example, and incur the like displeasure.

[Zechariah 1:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#003.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_003">zac 1:3</span></span>

Therefore say thou unto them,.... This is an order from the Lord to
Zechariah, to say unto them, in the name of the Lord:

thus saith the Lord of hosts; of the hosts above and below, of angels
and of men, of heaven and earth, and all that is therein: this is said,
that the greater regard might be had to his words:

turn ye unto me, saith the Lord of hosts; by repentance, and
acknowledgment of former sins; by reformation for the future; by
attending to the worship and service of God, and seeking to glorify him.
So the Targum, "return to my worship": this is not the condition of what
follows, but what follows is the motive and encouragement to this:

and I will turn unto you, saith the Lord of hosts; to dwell among them,
manifest himself unto and protect them. Three times the phrase, "the
Lord of hosts", is used in this verse: it may be with respect to the
three Persons in the Godhead, Father, Son, and Spirit; who manifest
themselves unto, and take up their abode with, such as love the Lord,
and keep his commandments; see [Joh
14:21](../../../bib/kjv/joh014.htm#021.md).

[Zechariah 1:4](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#004.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_004">zac 1:4</span></span>

Be ye not as your fathers,.... Who lived before the captivity, and
misused the prophets and messengers of the Lord, and despised his word,
and fell into gross idolatry; the evil examples of parents and ancestors
are not to be followed:

unto whom the former prophets have cried: such as Hosea, Isaiah,
Jeremiah, and others:

saying, thus saith the Lord of hosts, Turn now from your evil ways, and
from your evil doings; by their "evil ways" may be meant their
idolatrous worship; and by their "evil doings" their immoralities; or,
by both, their wicked lives and conversations, both before God and men;
from whence they were exhorted by the former prophets to turn, and to
reform; even "now", at that present time they prophesied to them,
immediately, lest destruction come upon them:

but they did not hear, nor hearken unto me, saith the Lord; speaking by
his prophets, who were sent by him, and came and spoke in his name; so
that not hearing them was not hearing him who sent them, and whom they
represented.

[Zechariah 1:5](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#005.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_005">zac 1:5</span></span>

Your fathers, where are they?.... They are not in the land of the
living; they perished by the sword of the Chaldeans, or died in
captivity:

and the prophets, do they live for ever? meaning either the false
prophets, as Hananiah and Shemaiah, [Jer
28:17](../../../bib/kjv/jer028.htm#017.md) or the true prophets of the
Lord; and the words may be considered as a prevention of an objection
the people might make, taken from their prophets dying in common with
their fathers; and so the Targum paraphrases them, "and if you should
say, the prophets, do they live for ever?" which is followed by Jarchi,
and embraced by many interpreters: the answer is, it is true they died;
but then their words live, and have had their full accomplishment.

[Zechariah 1:6](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#006.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_006">zac 1:6</span></span>

But my words and my statutes, which I commanded my servants the
prophets,.... That is, the predictions which he ordered his prophets to
declare in his name, that their fathers should die by the sword, or
famine, or pestilence, or be carried captive, which he purposed in
himself, and threatened them with:

did they not take hold of your fathers? overtake them, seize upon them,
and have their accomplishment in them? not one thing has failed, or come
short of being fulfilled, of all that was determined, or said should be
done:

and they returned and said; that is, as many of them as perished not,
but were carried captive; at least many of them, who either were
thoroughly converted, and turned from their evil, or however in
appearance: and who were obliged to own,

Like as the Lord of hosts thought to do unto us, according to our ways,
and according to our doing, so hath he dealt with us: as he purposed, so
he performed, and that with great justice and equity, being what their
evil ways and doings righteously deserved; see [Isa
14:24](../../../bib/kjv/isa014.htm#024.md).

[Zechariah 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_007">zac 1:7</span></span>

Upon the four and twentieth day of the eleventh month, which is the
month Sebat,.... Called Sabat in the Septuagint version, and in the
Apocrypha:

"Now Simon was visiting the cities that were in the country, and taking
care for the good ordering of them; at which time he came down himself
to Jericho with his sons, Mattathias and Judas, in the hundred
threescore and seventeenth year, in the eleventh month, called Sabat:''
(1 Maccabees 16:14)

It is said by the Jews (g) to be the beginning of the months of the year
for trees, of which they bring the first fruits. It answers to part of
our January, and part of February. This is the first time that the name
of a month is mentioned by any of the prophets; this prophet prophesying
after the captivity in Babylon; from whence the Jews (h) say the names
of months came along with the returning captives, as well as the names
of angels; and we nowhere meet with them but in the books of Ezra,
Nehemiah, and Esther, all wrote after that time; for before they used
only to say, the first, second, or third month, &c.; for, as for Abib,
Zif, Bul, and Ethanira, mentioned in [Exo
13:4](../../../bib/kjv/exo013.htm#004.md), they are thought to be
appellatives, and not proper names; though it may be observed that the
books of Kings are said by the Jews (i) to be written by Jeremiah; more
likely by several prophets, and at last brought into the order in which
they now stand by Ezra, according to Huetius (k); and which may be
thought probable enough; and, if so, the above names may be reckoned
proper names of months; and the original of them may be accounted for as
before. There were two fasts appointed by the Jews in this month; one on
the tenth day of it, for the death of the elders which succeeded Joshua,
[Jdg 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/jdg002.htm#007.md) and another on the twenty
third, on account of the Israelites making war with the Benjaminites, in
revenge of what was done to the wife of the Levite, [Jdg
19:1](../../../bib/kjv/jdg019.htm#001) (l.md). This prophecy, and the
visions following to the end of the sixth chapter, were three months
after the former prophecy, or more, if that was on the first day of the
eighth month; and just two months after the foundation of the temple was
laid, [Hag 2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#018.md), "in the second year
of Darius", &c. See Gill on [Zac 1:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#001.md).

\(g\) Targum Sheni in Esth. iii. 7. (h) T. Hieros. Roshhashanah, fol.
56. 4. Bereshit Rabba, sect. 48. fol. 48. 4. (i) T. Bab. Bava Bathra,
fol. 15. 1. (k) Demonstr. Evangel. prop. 4. p. 203. (l) Vid. Reland.
Jud. Antiqu. par. 4. c. 13. p. 261.

[Zechariah 1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_008">zac 1:8</span></span>

I saw by night,.... Or, "that night" (m); the night of the twenty fourth
of Sebat; a proper and usual time for visions; and it may denote the
obscurity of the vision, as it was in some respects to the prophet; and
the state of the church at this time, it being a night season with it,
and in a low estate; and the care that the Lord, who is Israel's Keeper,
has of them in such seasons, being in the midst of them:

and behold! this is prefixed to the vision, to denote the wonderfulness
of it, and to excite attention to it; there being something in it not
only amazing, but of moment and importance:

a man riding upon a red horse; not any mere "man", as Alexander on his
Bucephalus, as Abarbinel interprets it; and so Arias Montanus, as
Sanctius on the place observes; though the time this vision refers to,
and the state of the Jews then, will not admit of such an
interpretation; for at this time all the earth was still and at rest,
there were no wars in it, [Zac 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011.md)
which agrees not with the times of Alexander, and of his reign, which
was wholly spent in war; and the whole world in a manner was involved in
it by him; but best agrees with the times of Cyrus and Darius, after
they had subdued the Babylonian monarchy: besides, the Jews were now in
a very low estate, like a grove of myrtle trees in a bottom, plain, or
valley; and not only surrounded and overtopped by other states and
kingdoms, which were greatly superior to them; but oppressed by their
enemies, who hindered them in the rebuilding of their city and temple;
whereas this was not their case in the times of Alexander, when they
were in better circumstances, and which were two hundred years after
this; nor was he so very beneficial and serviceable to the Jews, as to
be represented, in such a vision, as in the midst of them, for their
relief and protection; but an angel of the Lord is here meant, as this
man is expressly called, [Zac 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011.md) and
not a created angel; for he is distinguished from the angel that talked
with the prophet, [Zac 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009.md). The Jews,
as Jerom relates, think that the Angel Michael is meant, by whom they
understand a created angel; for otherwise, if they took him to be, as he
is, the Son of God, the Archangel, the Head of principalities, who is,
as his name signifies, like unto God, and equal to him, it would not be
amiss: and it is usual for a divine Person to be called the Angel of the
Lord, as was he that called to Abraham when sacrificing his son, and to
Moses out of the bush; and who went before the Israelites in the
wilderness, and who is called the Angel of God's presence, and the
messenger and Angel of the covenant; and the ancient Jews themselves own
that a divine Person is here meant; for, on quoting these words, "I saw
a man", &c. they say (n), there is no man but the holy blessed God; as
it is said, "the Lord is a man of war, the Lord is his name"; and though
he is distinguished from the Lord of hosts, [Zac
1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012.md), the reason of this (or otherwise
it is the title of this angel also, see [Hos
12:4](../../../bib/kjv/hos012.htm#004),.md) is because he here appears in
the form of a man; and because of his office as an intercessor and
advocate for his people, [Zac 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012.md) a
character which well agrees with Christ, who is the advocate with the
Father for his saints, and whoever lives to make intercession for them,
and is always heard and answered with good and comfortable words: and he
is called a "man"; not that he is a mere man, or was really man when
this vision was seen; but he then appeared in a human form, because he
should become man, and quickly would be, as it was purposed, prophesied,
and agreed he should be: and he is represented as "riding", to denote
his majesty and glory as a king, or as a general of an army, in which he
rode prosperously; see [Psa 45:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa045.htm#004.md) as
also his readiness, swiftness, and haste he made to help and save his
people; as the people of the Jews, in this their present time of
distress, being opposed and hindered in building their city, in
particular; so, in general, all his people, in whatsoever case or
circumstances they may be: thus riding, when ascribed to a divine
Person, is an emblem of haste and quick dispatch, to assist and relieve
the distressed; see [Deu 33:26](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#026.md) so
Christ, who here appears as a man, was ready and forward, in the council
and covenant of grace, to agree to become man, and be the surety of his
people, and die in their place and stead, in order to save them: his
frequent appearances in a human form, before his incarnation, show how
willing and ready he was really to assume the human nature; and as soon
as the time appointed for it was up, he tarried not; when the fulness of
time was come, God sent him, and he came at once, and immediately; and
as soon as possible he went about the business he came upon, took
delight and pleasure in it, was constant at it till he had finished it;
and even his sufferings and death, which were disagreeable to nature,
considered in themselves, were wished and longed for, and cheerfully
submitted to by him: and he is quick in all his motions to help his
people in all their times of need; nor can any difficulties prevent him
giving an early and speedy relief; he comes to them leaping on the
mountains, and skipping on the hills; and at the last day he will come
quickly to put them into the possession of salvation he has wrought out
for them; and will be a swift witness for them, and against wicked men
that hate them, and oppose them: and he is upon a "red horse",
signifying either his incarnation, and his bloody sufferings and death;
and his taking peace from the earth when on it, not intentionally, but
eventually, through the wickedness of men; see [Rev
6:4](../../../bib/kjv/rev006.htm#004.md) or his indignation against his
enemies, and his wrath and vengeance upon them, and the destruction of
them; and may have a particular reference to those who opposed the
building of the temple; see [Isa 63:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa063.htm#001.md),

and he stood among the myrtle trees which were in the bottom: by the
"myrtle trees" may be meant the Israelites, as Kimchi interprets it; and
that either as in Babylon, which he supposes is designed by "the
bottom"; agreeably to the Targum, which paraphrases the words, "and he
stood among the myrtle trees which are in Babylon"; or rather, as now
returned to their own land; and so may denote the low estate and
condition in which they were when they began to rebuild the temple,
being feeble, and opposed by their enemies, mightier than they; but yet,
inasmuch as the Lord was in the midst of them, they had encouragement to
go on in the work, as is suggested in [Hag
2:3](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#003.md), though the saints and people of
God in general may be here meant by the "myrtle trees"; and the ancient
Jews (o) interpret them of the righteous, saying, there are no myrtle
trees but the righteous; and give this as a reason why Esther was called
Hadassah, [Est 2:7](../../../bib/kjv/est002.htm#007.md) which signifies a
myrtle tree, because this is the name of the righteous (p); and these
may fitly be compared to such trees for their goodliness and beauty to
look at, for their sweet and fragrant smell, for their verdure and
greenness, and for their flourishing in valleys and watery places (q),
signified here by "the bottom"; all which is true of the saints, who are
pleasant plants, comely through Christ's comeliness; whose graces, when
in exercise, send forth a sweet smell; whose prayers are odours, and
whose good works are acceptable, being done in faith; whose leaves never
wither, and who flourish much, being planted by the river of divine
love; and in whom the grace of God ever remains, and they persevere in
grace to the end: these may be said to be "in the bottom"; or in a low
estate; not only before conversion, but after; when corruptions prevail,
temptations are strong, grace is weak; God hides his face, Christ is
absent, and the Spirit withdraws his influences; and so it is true of
the church in general, when under persecution, or pestered with false
teachers, and when the life and power of religion are almost gone; and
yet even then Christ stands in the midst of them, to sympathize with
them, and as ready to help and assist them, to deliver them out of their
troubles, to protect them from their enemies, and to restore them to
their former state and condition. A grove of myrtle trees in a plain, in
which they delight, being dark and shady, is thought by some to be an
emblem of this world, in which there is a mixture of good and bad men;
and of the care of Providence over human affairs, consulting the good of
man, especially the raising up of the church of God out of a low estate
by Christ, and his apostles, and other ministers of the word, performing
their offices, according to the different abilities and gifts God has
bestowed upon them (r):

and behind him were there red horses, speckled and white; that is, with
riders on them. Some (s) Jewish writers interpret this vision of the
four kingdoms; and understand by the red horse with the man upon it, in
the former clause, the Babylonian monarchy, of which Nebuchadnezzar was
the head; and, by these three sorts here, the Medes, Greeks, and Romans,
by inverting the order of them; they interpreting the white horses with
the riders on them of the Medes and Persians; who were kind to the Jews,
and under whom they were dismissed from their captivity, and their
temple rebuilt: the speckled, or those of different colours, the
Macedonians or Grecians; some of which were friends, and kind and
benevolent to the Jews; and others cruel persecutors of them; and the
red, the Romans, who were bloody, and slew multitudes of them, and
destroyed their city and temple: but others, as Jerom observes, who
relates the above sense, keep the order of the text, and explain the
particulars of it thus; the red horse on which the man rode, and the red
horses behind him, of the Assyrians and Chaldeans, who were sanguine;
the one carried away the ten tribes under Shalmaneser; and the other the
two tribes of Judah and Benjamin, burning the city of Jerusalem, and
laying waste the temple; the speckled, or those of various colours, the
Medes and Persians; some of whom were mild and gentle, as Cyrus, and
Darius the son of Hystaspes, and Ahasuerus, whom the Greeks call
Artaxerxes, under whom was the history of Esther; and others were cruel,
as Cambyses, &c.: those who think that Alexander the great is meant on
the red horse suppose that those that succeeded him are meant by the
other horses of various colours; namely, the Lagidae and the Seleucidae,
or the kings of Egypt and Syria, who were sometimes very fierce and
furious, and sometimes very friendly to the Jews; at least different
kings, and at different times: but it seems better to interpret them of
saints, the godly and faithful followers of Christ; not only the godly
among the Jews, who were made as his goodly horse in the battle, [Zac
10:3](../../../bib/kjv/zac010.htm#003.md) but the church and people of God
in general, who are compared to a company of horses in Pharaoh's
chariot, [Sol 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/sol001.htm#009.md), for their strength,
courage, serviceableness, and the value Christ has them: thus, as he is
elsewhere represented as riding on a white horse, under the Gospel
dispensation, as the general of an army, and mighty conqueror; so the
armies of heaven that follow him on white horses, and clothed in white,
are the called, and faithful, and chosen, [Rev
17:14](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#014.md) and some of these being
described by red horses, with riders on them, may signify, such who have
been called to shed their blood, and lay down their lives, for Christ
and his Gospel, and their profession of it, even the martyrs of Jesus;
and others by speckled horses, or of various colours, may intend such
professors of religion, who, though not called to die for Christ, yet
suffer persecution in various ways, both by reproach and affliction; and
whose lives may be a chequered work of comforts and troubles, of
prosperity and adversity: and others by white horses may point at such
who are not only clothed with fine linen, clean and white, the
righteousness of the saints; and who are more than conquerors through
Christ, who has loved them, which are characters common to all saints;
but who enjoy a great deal of liberty, peace, and prosperity, all their
days. Some (t) restrain this to the apostles of Christ, and succeeding
ministers of the word; and observe, that as horses carry men and other
things into the various parts of the world, so the ministers of the
Gospel bear the name of Christ, and carry his Gospel into the whole
world; and as horses do not go into any part of it of themselves, but as
they are directed by their masters, so the Gospel ministers are sent
under the direction of Christ, some here, and some there; and as horses
going through towns and villages are mostly annoyed by the barking of
dogs, which yet they regard not, so as to stop their speed; thus
likewise faithful preachers are followed with the calumnies of wicked
men, with their scoffs and jeers, reproaches and persecutions; but none
of these things move them, or cause them to desist from their work; and
as Christ the Son of God stood among these horses, so he is, and has
promised to be, with his ministering servants unto the end of the world;
and as they are like horses, docile and laborious, so the various
colours of these may have respect to them; some of whom are called to
resist even unto blood; and others to various trials; as well as they
have different gifts, and are of different usefulness, and all of them
at last victorious over their enemies; and are under Christ their Head,
and are ready to do his will in whatsoever he directs them; though the
more commonly received opinion is, that angels are designed, and as it
seems from [Zac 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#010.md) compared with
[Zac 6:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac006.htm#001.md) see also [Kg2
2:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg2002.htm#011.md) signified by horses, for their
strength, courage, swiftness, serviceableness, and disposition for war;
and these different colours may represent the different state and
condition of the nations with whom they were concerned, and to whom they
were sent, as cruel or kind, to the people of God; and their different
employments and services, both to help the saints, and render vengeance
to their enemies; and the various offices they perform, with respect to
Christ and his people, in things temporal and spiritual; and the place
and situation of these horses being "behind" Christ may denote his
superiority over them: he is superior to all monarchs and monarchies,
kingdoms and states; he is King of kings, and Lord of lords; the
kingdoms of this world are his, and he is the Governor among the
nations; they are all behind and under him, and disposed of by him at
his pleasure; and he can restrain them, when he thinks fit, from doing
any harm to his people: he is superior to all men, even the best and
greatest; he is the Head of the church, and King of saints; and it is
their business, and even their honour and privilege, to follow him
whithersoever he goes: and he is superior to angels, has a more
excellent name and nature than they, is the Creator and Maker of them,
and is worshipped by them; and even, as Mediator, is in a greater
office, and in a higher place, at the right hand of God, than they are;
they are at his beck and command, and at hand to be sent forth on all
occasions to do his business, to minister for him, and to his people;
they are his servants, and devoted to his service, and are ready to do
his pleasure.

\(m\) "hac nocte", Drusius. (n) T. Bab. Sanhedrin, fol. 93. 1. Pesikta
Rabbati apud Yalkut Simeoni, par. 2. fol. 85. 4. (o) T. Bab. Sanhedrin,
fol. 93. 1. (p) T. Bab. Megilla, fol. 13. 1. (q) "----Et amantes littora
myrtos." Virgil. Georgic. l. 4. (r) Vid. Levin. Lemnii Herb. Bibl.
Explicat. c. 39. p. 108. (s) In Abendana, Not. in Miclol Yophi in loc.
(t) Vid. Frantzii Hist. Animal. Sacr. par. 1. c. 12. p. 130, 131.

[Zechariah 1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_009">zac 1:9</span></span>

Then said I, O my Lord,.... These are the words of the Prophet Zechariah
to the angel that showed him this vision:

what are these? what is the meaning of this vision? particularly who are
meant by the horses, red, speckled, and white, and those upon them?

And the angel that talked with me; who seems to be different from the
Angel of the Lord, the man among the myrtle trees, [Zac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008.md) he was one of the ministering
spirits; see [Rev 17:1](../../../bib/kjv/rev017.htm#001.md),

said unto me, I will show thee what these be; that is, give an
interpretation of the vision, and point out the persons intended by the
horses.

[Zechariah 1:10](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#010.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_010">zac 1:10</span></span>

And the man that stood among the myrtle trees answered and said,.... And
so prevented the angel from giving the account he was about to give; and
who was more capable of it, and which to do was great condescension in
him, and was doing the prophet a singular honour:

these are they whom the Lord hath sent to walk to and fro through the
earth; which is a description of the angels, the ministering spirits
sent forth by God to take their tour throughout the earth; not to do
mischief, as Satan does; but to do good to kingdoms, nations, and men in
general, and to the heirs of salvation in particular; for which they are
commissioned and empowered of God; see [Heb
1:14](../../../bib/kjv/heb001.htm#014.md).

[Zechariah 1:11](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#011.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_011">zac 1:11</span></span>

And they answered the Angel of the Lord, that stood among the myrtle
trees, and said,.... That is, the ministering angels, signified by the
red horses, speckled, and white, replied to what the Angel of the Lord
had said concerning them; or rather agreed to and confirmed his account
of them; or else gave up the account of their tour through the earth,
with their observations upon the state of it:

We have walked to and fro through the earth; according to their mission
and commission:

and, behold, all the earth sitteth still, and is at rest; was free from
wars, as it was in the reign of Darius; though the people of the Jews
were infested with enemies, who gave them trouble, and hindered all they
could the rebuilding of the temple; wherefore it follows:

[Zechariah 1:12](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#012.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_012">zac 1:12</span></span>

Then the Angel of the Lord answered and said,.... The same that was
among the myrtle trees in the bottom, [Zac
1:8](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#008.md),

O Lord of hosts, how long wilt thou not have mercy on Jerusalem, and on
the cities of Judah; which were fallen to ruin, and had lain waste for
many years. These words are expressive of the intercession of Christ on
the behalf of the people of the Jews, his professing people, both with
respect to their temporal and spiritual good:

against which thou hast had indignation these threescore and ten years?
the time of the Babylonish captivity, which lasted such a term of time,
and which was a token of the divine displeasure with them; but to be
reckoned, not from Jeconiah's captivity, to the deliverance from it by
Cyrus, as it is reckoned, [Jer 25:1](../../../bib/kjv/jer025.htm#001.md)
[Dan 9:2](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#002.md) but from the taking of
Jerusalem, and the destruction of the temple under Zedekiah, to the
rebuilding of the temple under Darius Hystaspis, in whose second year
Zechariah now prophesied, [Zac 1:7](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#007.md),
which was a space of seventy years.

[Zechariah 1:13](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#013.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_013">zac 1:13</span></span>

And the Lord answered the angel that talked with me,.... See [Zac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009.md) what was the effect of Christ's
intercession for the people of the Jews, was communicated to a
ministering angel, and by him to the Prophet Zechariah:

with good words, and comfortable words; such as would be for the good
and comfort of God's people, as follows; see [Isa
40:1](../../../bib/kjv/isa040.htm#001.md).

[Zechariah 1:14](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#014.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_014">zac 1:14</span></span>

So the angel that communed with me,.... Having an order from the other
Angel, or the Lord of hosts:

said unto me, Cry thou; proclaim, publish, declare in the hearing of the
people, for their comfort and encouragement. The Targum renders it,
"prophesy":

saying, Thus saith the Lord of hosts, I am jealous for Jerusalem, and
for Zion, with a great jealousy; which is expressive of his conjugal
affection for his church and people, his zeal for their good, and his
indignation at their enemies, and of the vengeance he would execute on
them.

[Zechariah 1:15](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#015.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_015">zac 1:15</span></span>

And I am very sore displeased with the heathen that are at ease,.... The
Chaldeans and Persians, and other nations, enemies of the Jews, who were
now free from war, and enjoyed great prosperity, when the state and
condition of the Jews was very low and discouraging:

for I was but a little displeased: that is, with his people the Jews,
for their ingratitude, idolatry, and immorality; and which displeasure
he showed by suffering them to be carried into captivity; see [Isa
54:8](../../../bib/kjv/isa054.htm#008.md),

and they helped forward the affliction; that is, the heathens, among
whom the Jews were carried captive; they added to their affliction; they
oppressed them more than they ought to have done, and more than was
agreeable to the will of God and right in his sight; and they insulted
them in their misery, and rejoiced over them. The word in the Arabic
language, signifies to "abound" (u); and the meaning is, that they
abounded in bringing evil upon the people of the Jews; they multiplied
their afflictions and distresses.

\(u\) "abundavit, multiplicavit", Golius, col. 1705. Castel. col. 2721.
"Jazar, cum punctato, exuberavit, abundavit, multus fuit", Schindler.
Lex. Pentaglot. col. 1307.

[Zechariah 1:16](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#016.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_016">zac 1:16</span></span>

Therefore thus saith the Lord, I am returned to Jerusalem with
mercies,.... Having returned the people of the Jews from their captivity
to Jerusalem, in which he had shown abundant mercy to them:

my house shall be built in it, saith the Lord of hosts; meaning the
temple where he dwelt and was worshipped; the foundation of which had
been laid two months before this prophecy was delivered, [Hag
2:18](../../../bib/kjv/hag002.htm#018.md) and which should be raised up and
finished, notwithstanding all the opposition of the enemy, and the
discouragements of the people:

and a line shall be stretched forth upon Jerusalem; to measure with it,
and build by it, the wall, streets, and houses of Jerusalem. The meaning
is, that not only the temple should be built, but the city likewise, and
that in great order, and with great exactness and symmetry; see [Zac
2:1](../../../bib/kjv/zac002.htm#001.md). The Targum paraphrases it, "upon
the building of the walls of Jerusalem".

[Zechariah 1:17](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#017.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_017">zac 1:17</span></span>

Cry yet, saying,.... That is, "prophesy again", as the Targum
paraphrases it; publish and declare openly before all:

Thus saith the Lord of hosts, My cities through prosperity shall yet be
spread abroad; or, according to the Targum, "the cities of my people
shall be yet filled with good"; and so the Septuagint and Vulgate Latin
versions, "my cities shall yet flow with good things"; with all temporal
prosperity and happiness; which was fulfilled in the times of Nehemiah,
Zerubbabel, and the Maccabees; and especially in the times of the
Messiah, when, in a spiritual sense, they were filled with good; with
him who is goodness itself, and with all blessings of grace in him; and
with the good news and glad tidings of the everlasting Gospel preached
by him and his apostles; or, the meaning is, through the increase of
men, and the affluence of all temporal mercies, not only the city of
Jerusalem, but other cities of Judea, called the Lord's, because of his
peculiar regard unto them, should be enlarged, and be spread here and
there; or rather, abound with plenty of all good things, as the word in
the Arabic (w) language signifies:

and the Lord shall yet comfort Zion, and shall yet choose Jerusalem; for
his habitation, building again the city and temple in it: according to
Capellus, though the temple was finished in the sixth year of Darius,
[Ezr 6:15](../../../bib/kjv/ezr006.htm#015.md) yet the rebuilding of
Jerusalem was not till seventy years after; namely, in the twentieth
year of Artaxerxes Longimanus, in which Nehemiah was sent to rebuild it,
[Neh 2:1](../../../bib/kjv/neh002.htm#001.md) for Darius reigned thirty six
years; Xerxes, who succeeded him, reigned twenty years; and in the
twentieth of Artaxerxes the walls of Jerusalem were rebuilt by Nehemiah;
so that from the finishing of the temple are to be reckoned thirty years
of the remainder of the reign of Darius, twenty years of Xerxes, and as
many of Artaxerxes; and he observes that the seventieth number thrice
occurs in the restoration of the Jews, not without mystery, as it should
seem: from the Babylonish captivity under Jeconiah, to the putting an
end to it by Cyrus, were seventy years; from the taking of Jerusalem and
the destruction of the temple under Zedekiah, to the rebuilding of it
under Darius Hystaspis, were also seventy years; then from the
rebuilding of the temple to the rebuilding of Jerusalem under Artaxerxes
Longimanus were likewise seventy years; so that the walls of Jerusalem
lay in ruins twice seventy years, that is, one hundred and forty years;
and it may be further observed, that from the decree granted to Nehemiah
in the twentieth year of Artaxerxes, seven weeks, or forty nine years,
are allowed in Daniel's prophecy for the finishing that event; namely,
the building again the walls and streets of Jerusalem in troublesome
times, [Dan 9:25](../../../bib/kjv/dan009.htm#025.md) which carries the
completion of this affair so many years further; which, when effected,
would be a comfort to Zion, the inhabitants of it, and all that wished
well unto it; and be a proof and evidence of God's choice of it for his
worship and service; and, especially, this was fulfilled by bringing
into Jerusalem, and the temple there, the messenger of the covenant, the
Messiah, the Consolation of Israel; and this may have a further
reference to the latter day, when the people of the Jews shall be
converted, and all Israel shall be saved; which will be the consolation
of them, and show that God has chosen them, and not cast them off.

\(w\) Vid. Schultens, Origines Hebr. l. 1. c. 4. sect. 4. p. 116.

[Zechariah 1:18](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#018.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_018">zac 1:18</span></span>

Then I lifted up mine eyes,.... To behold another vision which follows:

and saw, and behold four horns; either iron ones, such as Zedekiah the
son of Chenaanah made to push the Syrians with, [Kg1
22:11](../../../bib/kjv/kg1022.htm#011.md) or horns of beasts, as the horns
of unicorns, to which the horns of Joseph are compared, [Deu
33:17](../../../bib/kjv/deu033.htm#017.md) and signify kingdoms or kings,
and these very powerful and mighty; and so the Targum interprets them of
"four kingdoms"; and which Kimchi and Abarbinel understand of the four
monarchies, Babylonian, Persian, Grecian, and Roman; so ten horns, in
[Dan 7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md) design ten kings or
kingdoms; unless rather, seeing these horns were such who had already
distressed and scattered Judah, Israel, and Jerusalem; and two of the
above monarchies were not yet in being, the Grecian and Roman, when this
vision was seen; and one of those that were, were friends to the Jews,
as the Persians; they may in general signify all the enemies of the Jews
that were round about them, on the four corners of them; as the Syrians,
Assyrians, and Babylonians, on the north; the Ammonites and Moabites on
the east; the Edomites and Egyptians on the south; and the Philistines
on the west; as Junius thinks. Cocceius interprets them of four kings,
Shalmaneser, Nebuchadnezzar, Xerxes, and Artaxerxes the first, called
Longimanus; and may be applied to the antichristian states, Pagan and
Papal, in the various parts of the world, called horns, [Dan
7:24](../../../bib/kjv/dan007.htm#024.md).

[Zechariah 1:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#019.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_019">zac 1:19</span></span>

And I said unto the angel that talked with me,.... [Zac
1:9](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#009.md),

What be these? that is, who do these horns signify? and what or whom do
they represent?

and he answered me, These are the horns which have scattered Judah,
Israel, and Jerusalem; which may design the distresses, vexations, and
captivities of the people of Israel by their enemies, as by the
Moabites, Ammonites, &c. in the times of the judges; and the captivity
of the ten tribes of Israel by Shalmaneser; and of the two tribes of
Benjamin and Judah, and of the destruction of Jerusalem, by
Nebuchadnezzar; when they were ventilated or fanned, as the word (x)
signifies, and so scattered abroad; see [Jer
6:11](../../../bib/kjv/jer006.htm#011.md) and also their troubles in the
times of the Medes and Persians, under Cambyses, until this second year
of Darius; and may likewise have reference prophetically to their after
troubles and captivity by the Romans; and to Rome Pagan, which
persecuted and scattered the churches of Christ and people of God in the
several parts of the world; and the antichristian states, the
persecutors of the same.

\(x\) "quae ventilaverunt", V. L. Pagninus, Montanus, Vatablus, Drusius,
Cocceius.

[Zechariah 1:20](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#020.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_020">zac 1:20</span></span>

And the Lord showed me four carpenters. To saw and cut in pieces the
four horns; or rather "four blacksmiths" (y); these horns were horns of
iron; so the word is rendered a "smith" in [Sa1
13:19](../../../bib/kjv/sa1013.htm#019.md) and indeed it signifies both a
worker in wood and a worker in iron; and who are sometimes distinguished
by what they work in, whether wood or iron; see [Isa
44:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa044.htm#012). The Jews say (z.md) these four
carpenters are Messiah ben David, Messiah ben Ephraim, Elijah, and the
priest of righteousness; or, as elsewhere (a), Elijah, the King Messiah,
Melchizedek, and he that was anointed for war; though Kimchi much better
interprets them of the kings, the princes above, who preside over
kingdoms, that is, the angels; and so Jerom and Theodoret; who have been
sometimes employed in the destruction of the enemies of God's people, or
in preventing them doing the mischief they otherwise would; and even the
several monarchies themselves have been the means of destroying each
other; so the Babylonians were destroyed by the Medes and Persians; the
Persians by the Grecians; the Grecians by the Romans; and the Romans by
the Goths, Hunns, Vandals, &c. in the western part of the empire; and by
the Saracens and Turks in the eastern part of it: and they may be
applied to the apostles of Christ, who were chiefly mechanics, mean and
illiterate persons, yet workmen in the Gospel, that need not to be
ashamed; and who were sent by Christ into the four parts of the world,
to spread his Gospel, set up his interest, and pull down the kingdom of
Satan: and since the Jews make the Messiah himself one of these
carpenters, they have no reason to upbraid or be offended at Jesus our
Messiah being a carpenter, and a carpenter's son, as in [Mat
13:55](../../../bib/kjv/mat013.htm#055.md) and Kimchi owns that their
ancient Rabbins explain this verse of the days of the Messiah.

\(y\) "fabros ferrarios", Pembellus, Sanctius, Burkius. (z) T. Bab.
Succa, fol. 52. 2. (a) Shirhashirim Rabba, fol. 11. 4. Vid. Bemidbar
Rabba, sect. 14. fol. 111. 4.

[Zechariah 1:21](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#021.md)

<span class="margnote"><span id="an_021">zac 1:21</span></span>

Then said I, What come these to do?.... That is, these four carpenters;
for, being artificers or workmen, as the Targum renders the word, the
prophet concluded there was some work for them to do:

And he spake, saying; meaning the angel that talked with him, and
interpreted the visions to him:

These are the horns which have scattered Judah; not that the carpenters
were the horns, for these two are distinct from, and opposite to, one
another. The words should rather be rendered, "these horns which have
scattered Judah", as before said, [Zac
1:19](../../../bib/kjv/zac001.htm#019.md),

so that no man did lift up his head; or, as the Targum paraphrases it,
"did not suffer" (a man) "to go with an erect stature"; but, through
oppression, sorrow, and misery, was obliged to stoop, and bow, and hang
down his head:

but these are come to fray them; these carpenters are come to frighten
the horns, to put terror into those kings and kingdoms;

to cast out the horns of the Gentiles; to destroy their kingdoms, and
take away their power from them:

which lifted up their horns over the land of Judah to scatter it: who
make use of their power, and do harm to the people of Israel, and
triumph and insult over them; see [Psa
75:4](../../../bib/kjv/psa075.htm#004.md) all which may be applied to the
ministers of the Gospel, who are workmen; and whose business it is to
fight or terrify the horns, wicked men, even men in power, the enemies
of Christ's church and people; by their preaching, which has made a
Felix to tremble; by their prayers, which they have been more afraid of
than an army of men, as Mary queen of Scots said of the prayers of John
Knox; and by their good lives and conversations, which made Herod stand
in fear of John the Baptist; nay, even they have been a terror to the
devil himself, and have been the means of casting him, and his
principalities and powers, out of the Gentile world, and out of both the
bodies and souls of men; and of casting down the strong holds of sin,
and of breaking in pieces the kingdom and interest of Satan, and of
building up the churches of Christ; the work of these spiritual
carpenters is to cut down men, comparable to strong, sturdy, and lofty
trees, for the pride and haughtiness of their hearts, the stiffness and
stubbornness of their wills, and for their show of goodliness and
beauty: this is done by the ministry of the word, the cutting doctrines
of it, accompanied with the Spirit and power of God; as it is said, "I
have hewed them by the prophets, I have slain them by, the words of my
mouth", [Hos 6:5](../../../bib/kjv/hos006.htm#005.md) whereas, when before,
they grew up and stood on their own bottom, their morality, civility,
and works of righteousness; now they are cut down, and die to all these
things, as to any hope of salvation by them; and then, as the carpenter
smooths and planes a timber he has hewed, and fitly frames it together,
and joints it in, and lays it on a good foundation; so do Gospel
ministers, as instruments in the hands of God, after hewing and cutting
work through the ministration of the law, the killing letter, and which
works wrath; speak comfortably to such souls, by directing them to the
blood and righteousness of Christ for pardon of sin and justification of
life; and ministerially lay them in the spiritual building, the church;
or advise and exhort them to submit to the ordinances of Christ, and
join themselves to Gospel churches; and, above all things, instruct them
to build on Christ, the sure foundation in Zion; and ministerially lay
him as the alone foundation to build upon for life and salvation, and
not upon any works of righteousness done by them; and put them upon
walking according to the line and rule of the divine word, in matters of
worship, discipline, and conversation: and as there were in the first
times of the Gospel many such builders, and have been more or less
since; so there will be many more in the latter day, who will be very
successfully employed in building, repairing, and beautifying the church
of God; see [Isa 58:12](../../../bib/kjv/isa058.htm#012.md). Some by the
four carpenters understand Zerubbabel, Joshua, Ezra, and Nehemiah; and
so, by the four horns, those that opposed them in building the city and
temple, as Rehum, Shimshai, Sanballat, and Tobiah; but these seem too
inferior governors to be signified by horns; nor did they do what is
here ascribed to them; rather their nations, Samaritans, Arabians,
Ammonites, and Philistines, are meant.

<div class="filenav">

------------------------------------------------------------------------

[Next: Zechariah Chapter 2](zac002.md)

</div>
